=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.12.20034
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.12.20034
creationDate: D:20190613155958+09'00'
modDate: D:20190613160113+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
6 – 8 July 2019 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 20 
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
14 June 2019 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum VI 
Funding proposal package for FP112 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled “Addressing Climate Vulnerability in the Water Sector 
(ACWA) in the Marshall Islands”; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page b 
3 
83 
84 
86 
99 
106 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Secretariat’s assessment 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory 
Panel's assessment 
Gender documentation 
109

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme Title: Addressing Climate Vulnerability in the Water Sector (ACWA)
in the Marshall Islands 
Country/Region: Republic of Marshall Islands 
Accredited Entity: UNDP 
Date of Submission: 23 April 2019

=== PAGE 4 ===
Contents 
 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
 
Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 
 
Section C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
Section F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
Section G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
Section I 
ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
 
• 
Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document. 
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“[FP]-[Agency Short Name]-[Date]-[Serial Number]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 78 
 
 
 
A 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / programme title 
Addressing Climate Vulnerability in the Water Sector 
(ACWA) in the Marshall Islands 
A.1.2. Project or programme 
Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region                     
Republic of Marshall Islands 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies) 
Office of Environmental Planning and Policy 
Coordination 
A.1.5. Accredited entity 
United Nations Development Programme 
A.1.5.a. Access modality 
☐  Direct 
☒  International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary 
Executing Entity:   
United Nations Development Programme 
Beneficiary:  
• 
Outer atoll and island communities (approx. 15,572 
direct beneficiaries, including 7,630 women) 
• 
Population of RMI (55,226) will benefit indirectly 
through capacity building and integration of water 
management into national governance framework. 
• 
National and local government: 
o 
Office of Chief Secretary 
o 
Environment Protection Agency 
o 
National Disaster Management Office 
o 
Office of Environmental Planning and Policy 
Coordination 
o 
Local governments (24 in total) 
• 
NGOs/CBOs (WUTMI and others) 
 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD) 
☐  Micro (≤10) 
☐  Medium (50<x≤250)  
☒ Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus 
☐  Mitigation 
☒  Adaptation ☐  Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission 
22 Jun 2018 / 12 April 2019/ 23 April 2019 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details 
Contact person, position 
Jose Padilla 
Organization 
UNDP 
Email address 
Jose.padilla@undp.org  
Telephone number 
+66 2 304 9100 ext 2730 
Mailing address 
3rd Floor UN Service Building, Rajdamnern Nok Ave, 
Phranakorn, Bangkok 10200, Thailand  
 
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from: 
☐ 
Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ 
Low emission transport  
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)   
☐ 
Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)

=== PAGE 6 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 2 OF 78 
 
 
 
A 
☐ 
Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.) 
 
Increased resilience of: 
☒ 
Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.) 
☒ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.) 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.) 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
 
☐ 
 
 
 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words) 
1. The project supports the Government of Republic of the Marshall Islands (GoRMI) in adapting to increasing climate 
risks, particularly more frequent and extreme droughts, which impact the country’s drinking water supply.  
Communities and the households in RMI primarily rely on a single water resource and supply system, which makes 
them highly vulnerable to risks of water shortages and drought.  Despite previous water related investments, the 
people of RMI still do not have year-round access to safe freshwater supply for drinking, cooking hygiene and 
sanitation, particularly under droughts lengthened through climate change impacts.   
2. The proposed intervention aims to increase resilience of water resources for drinking and hygiene purposes in RMI.  
This will be done by: 
• 
Improving household and community rainwater harvesting and storage structures to increase resilience of water 
supply in all outer islands and atolls accounting for approximately 28% of RMI’s population, including 7,630 (49%) 
women, currently at risk  
• 
Securing groundwater resources from contamination due to inundation caused by wave overtopping of seawater. 
• 
Strengthening the technical capacities of national and subnational institutions and key stakeholders to integrated 
climate change risks into water governance processes so that management of climate change risks are coordinated, 
effective, participatory, equitable, and sustained over the long-term when risks are expected to worsen. 
3. The project aligns with GoRMI’s key climate change policies and strategies and has been developed through extensive 
consultation with government, Non-Government Organisations (NGOs), Community-Based Organisations (CBOs) and 
beneficiary communities. The proposed project is aligned with RMI’s NDC and country work programme to the GCF.  
The NDA has issued a letter of no-objection and the proposed project is aligned with the work programme of the AE 
(UNDP) selected by the NDA.  
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone 
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) 
12 Jun 2019 
Expected financial close (if applicable) 
TBD (Date of agreement on the FAA between UNDP and GCF) 
Estimated implementation start and end date 
Start: 15/11/2019 
End:  14/11/2026 
Project/programme lifespan 
7 years project delivery; outcome lifespan - 25 years

=== PAGE 7 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 78 
 
 
B 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme 
4. The Government of the Republic of Marshall Islands requests grant financing for this project.  This particular GCF 
financing instrument is requested due to the nature of the investment proposed by the project.  GCF funds are sought to 
cover the additional cost of ensuring the necessary additional water supply capacity is in place given the additional days 
of drought expected as a result of climate change.  
5. RMI, as with many small island developing states, had little if anything to do with causing climate change, but is left to 
now cope with the consequences of global climate change. Reflecting upon the fact that the RMI government does not 
have the resources to cover the additional investment required due to climate change given the economic and financial 
limitations of the country (i.e. low scope for private sector development, ending of the US compact grant funding in 
2023), resources from the GCF is sought.  Considering the geographic and population dispersion, traditional public 
water supply systems are unviable in the outer islands and atolls. This makes the reliance on a revenue generating 
water supply system, which perhaps could have entailed the use of non-grant financing, also not possible.   
6. Rainwater harvesting at the household and community levels constitute the most cost effective and viable options for 
water supply, complemented by limited desalination (in extreme situations) which is far more expensive.  Therefore, in 
the context of RMI, the traditional public-sector responsibility is transferred to private households.  Both capital 
expenditures (capex) and operational expenditures (opex) for water supply fall on the households and communities of 
the outer islands and atolls.   
7. The additional investment required to ensure the necessary water resources taking into account climate change 
impacts is USD 18,631,216.  This is the amount requested from GCF in the form of grant financing.  The project also 
leverages co-financing of USD 6,116,092 (cash) provided by the GoRMI to meet baseline water requirements.   
Table 1: Financial Elements per project outputs 
 
Output 
Activity 
GCF funding 
amount 
(USD) 
Co-financing 
funding 
amount 
(USD) 
Amount             
(for entire 
project) (USD) 
Output 1: 
Implementation of 
optimal mix of 
interventions to ensure 
climate resilient water 
security in outer atolls 
and islands of RMI 
Activity 1.1. Improve existing rainwater 
harvesting systems for community 
buildings and households in outer 
islands and atolls for usage during 
increasing frequency and periods of 
drought 
3,691,950 
2,667,564 
6,359,514 
Activity 1.2. Provide additional 
rainwater harvesting systems and 
increase of storage capacity for 
communities in outer islands and atolls 
for usage during increasing frequency 
and periods of drought 
7,523,785 
2,893,919 
10,417,704 
Output 1 Sub Total 
11,215,735 
5,561,483  
16,777,218 
Output 2:  
Optimization of 
alternative water 
sources to reduce 
reliance on harvested 
rainwater in the 
context of reduced 
rainfall 
Activity 2.1. Protect groundwater wells 
from more frequent climate change 
induced storm surges and 
contaminations 
1,227,247 
0 
1,227,247 
Activity 2.2. Enhance women and 
youth’s leadership through best 
practices and community awareness 
1,468,881 
0 
1,468,881

=== PAGE 8 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 78 
 
 
B 
programmes on efficient usage (demand 
management) of rainwater 
Output 2 Sub Total 
2,696,128  
0  
2,696,128  
Output 3:  
Climate change induced 
drought preparedness 
and response measures 
implemented in outer 
atolls and islands1 
Activity 3.1. Update national-level 
contingency plans and Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs) for climate 
change induced drought response 
1,502,330 
0 
1,502,330 
Activity 3.2. Develop and implement 
community-level drought contingency 
planning in outer islands and atolls  
2,481,996 
0 
2,481,996 
Output 3 Sub Total 
3,984,326  
0  
3,984,326  
Project Management Cost  
735,027 
554,609 
1,289,636 
Total Project Financing 
18,631,216 
6,116,092 
24,747,308 
 
8. A breakdown of cost/budget by expenditure type (project staff and consultants, travel, goods, works, services, etc.) and 
disbursement schedule in project confirmation (term sheet) is included in Annex V. 
9. Post project implementation (i.e. year-8 onwards) the GoRMI has also committed to cover costs of USD 13,972,060 in 
the form of grant and in-kind for a period of 18 years covering the useful life the water assets developed by the project 
(i.e. 25-year project lifespan including the 7-year project period). During this period the following expenditure will be 
utilized towards O&M including costs for i) general maintenance of water assets; ii) Sustenance capex; and iii) Full 
replacement of specific water assets and components that have a shorter life than the total project lifecycle period of 25 
years. The table below summarizes the financing structure for the 25-year project lifespan. 
25-year Project 
Budget 
0 - 7 years 
8 - 25 Years 
Total 
GCF 
GRMI 
GCF 
GRMI 
GCF 
RMI 
Capital Costs 
18,173,560 
5,844,047 
- 
7,084,315 
18,173,560 
12,928,362 
Sustenance CAPEX 
- 
- 
- 
1,562,701 
- 
1,562,701 
O&M Costs 
457,656 
272,045 
- 
5,325,044 
457,656 
5,597,090 
Total 
18,631,216 
6,116,092 
0 
13,972,060 
18,631,216 
20,088,153 
 
 
B.2. Project Financing Information 
 
Financial Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing 
(a) = (b) + (c) 
$24.747 
million USD 
($) 
 
                                                             
1 Existing activities being undertaken by the Government of RMI meet baseline disaster preparedness, so no co-funding is included 
in Output 3.

=== PAGE 9 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 78 
 
 
B 
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient 
 
(i) Senior Loans 
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans 
(iii) Equity 
(iv) Guarantees 
(v) Reimbursable 
grants * 
(vi) Grants * 
 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
 
$18.631 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
million USD 
($) 
(  )  years 
(  )  years 
 
 
 
 
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR 
 
 
 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1 for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E. 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi) 
$18.631 
million USD 
($) 
 
(c) Co-
financing to 
recipient 
 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Name of 
Institution 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Grant 
 
6.116 
 
million USD 
($) 
 
RMI 
Government  
 
  
  
Options 
 
Lead financing institution: N/A 
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co-financing institution. 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable) 
N/A  
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable) 
10. Not applicable

=== PAGE 10 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 78 
 
 
C 
C.1. Strategic Context 
Geographic location/context 
11. The Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI) is a small island developing state (SIDS) consisting of 29 coral atolls and 5 
single islands (refer Annex IX for map).  The nation is a large-ocean state, with a total land area of only 182 km2, spread 
across over 2 million km2 of ocean.  There are 24 inhabited atolls and islands, which are mostly remote and lie merely 2 
m above sea level on average.  There are no rivers, streams or lakes in RMI and the number of small surface ponds is 
very limited. 
12. The RMI is particularly vulnerable to climate change.  With its climate influenced by large ocean-atmosphere 
interactions such as trade winds, El Niño, monsoons and tropical cyclones, and with populations and infrastructure 
concentrated in small low-lying islands and atolls largest of which is only 16 km2, any rise in sea-level, changes in 
weather patterns or extreme events have significant and profound effects on settlements, living conditions and the 
economy. 
13. The hydro-geophysical features of the country significantly contribute to its high vulnerabilities to natural disasters and 
climate change.  Although not RMI is not located within the core cyclone belt (refer Annex IIa), its geographic location is 
such that it is heavily influenced by storms, king tides, sea level rise, El Nino, reduced annual rainfall and temperature 
rise contributing to reduction of water security for the residents of RMI. 
14. Droughts and storm waves are the main extreme events that impact RMI. Historical data show a decreasing trend of 
rainfall quantities, with drought risk respectively increasing. Periods of drought are a common occurrence after an El 
Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO).  The atolls and islands located 10°N and further north receive less than 1,250 mm 
(50 inches), while the atolls and islands located further south of 7°N receive more than 2,500 mm (100 inches) of rain 
annually. 
15. Increasing sea level rise and decreasing rainfall characterize2 RMI’s vulnerability to climate change in relation to 
freshwater supply (refer discussion on ‘Observed Climate Changes’ and ‘Climate Projections’ below).  These climate 
change impacts are likely to exacerbate the risks of freshwater shortages in RMI, challenging the ability of the 
Marshallese people to have access to safe freshwater resources year-round. 
Populations/socioeconomics 
16. As of 2017, RMI has an estimated population of over 55,000 spread across 24 of the 29 atolls.  Nearly 75% of this 
population lives in the two urban centers of Majuro (approximately 27,000) and Ebeye (approximately 11,000).  RMI is 
a high human development and a lower middle-income country with a 2016 per capita income of USD 3,665, yet the 
country fails in indicators such as under-5 mortality and infant mortality rates compared to other countries of similar 
income.3   Approximately 20% of population of RMI has been reported to be living on less than USD 1 a day.4  
17. Given its small and sparsely distributed land and population size, RMI’s economy is small and fragile.  Since its 
independence in 1990, RMI’s revenues depend heavily on resources provided by the United States under the Compact 
of Free Association (Compact), the current Compact is scheduled to expire in 20235.  The remaining income of the 
country is derived from the service sector accounting for nearly 70% of the GDP, royalties from the fisheries sector and 
small-scale handicrafts and mostly subsistence agriculture. Industry is limited to the processing of coconut products 
and tuna. 
18. Due to the limited land and significant distances between islands and atolls, the cost of economic activity is high and 
economies of scale are hard to achieve.  Similarly, the cost of providing of government services are high and constrained 
by logistical challenges.  Responding to the impact of drought is logistically complex and expensive.  The estimated cost 
of responding to the severe drought in 2015-2016 was reported to be approximately USD 1.3 million with total post-
disaster recovery estimated at USD 3 million6 – nearly 4.5% of the country’s GDP of USD 115 million.  The United States 
Government is reported to have provided USD 5.5 million for drought relief to the Marshall Islands during the previous 
significant drought in 20137.  With climate change projections for RMI indicating that droughts are to become longer, 
                                                             
2 Historic data shows a decreasing trend of rainfall quantities, with drought risk respectively increasing. Historic observation data 
indicate that the sea level has risen near Majuro by about 7mm (0.3 inches) per year since 1993. This is larger than the global average of 
2.8–3.6 mm (0.11– 0.14 inches) per year.   In the future, sea level is projected to continue to rise.    
3 Source. The World Bank, 2016 
4 Government of RMI.  2007. Republic of the Marshall Islands National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Management 
5 The RMI will continue to receive annually declining grants averaging US$45 million (26 precent of GDP as of FY2012) until FY2023. 1 A 
Compact Trust Fund (CTF) is being built up to provide funding from FY2024 onwards.  The fiscal year runs from October to September. 
Source: IMF 2014. IMF Country Report No. 14/26. RMI. Staff Report for the 2013 Article IV Consultation. 
6 RMI 2017 PDNA 
7 Personal communication with USAID funded Climate Ready Program

=== PAGE 11 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 78 
 
 
C 
more severe and more frequent, without a long-term solution, RMI will continue to spend scarce public financing on 
disaster response.  
19. Given this context, a cost-effective and practical investment will be required to promote increased capacity for water 
harvesting and storage, along with promotion of efficient use of water in RMI during times of severe drought.  Investing 
in a long-term adaptation response to the expectation of increased incidence of drought now will result in significant 
savings in the future and support climate resilient socio-economic development of the RMI.  
Observed climate changes 
20. The atolls and islands located 10°N and further north receive less than 1,250 mm (approximately 50 inches), while the 
atolls and islands located further south of 7°N receive more than 2,500 mm (approximately 100 inches) of rain 
annually. 
21. The rainfall data for Majuro from 1965-2016 reveals periods of very low rainfall and drought in 1965, 1970, 1977, 
1983, 1992,1998, 2001, 2007/08, 2012/13 and 2015/16 (Figure C1.1).  These dry periods on Majuro for the most part 
reflect broad drought events that encompassed the entire region, and correlate with the El Niño events.  Droughts 
generally occur in the first four to six months of the year following an El Niño.  Following severe El Niño events, rainfall 
can be reduced by as much as 80% (Polhemus (2017).  The dry season begins earlier and ends much later than normal.  
 
Figure C1.1 historic annual average rainfall and mean temperature for Majuro 
 
22. Polhemus (2017) observes that severe droughts are occurring more frequently than previously estimated by 
researchers.  He indicates that during the droughts of 1982/83, 1992 and 1995, rainfall at both Kwajalein and Majuro 
for the period from January through May was only 13% of the long-term averages for each location.  In addition, during 
the 2015/16 drought total rainfall at Majuro from October 2015 to July 2016 was the driest 10-month period in the 62-
year historical record at that station.  He postulates “that the recurrence interval of severe meteorological drought at 
Majuro seems to be closer to 10-15 years, in close track with ENSO cycles”8. 
23. Based on data from two rainfall recording stations operational since 1945 and 1955, the rainfall in RMI overall has 
steadily declined over the last 45-years.  The 2013 National Climate Assessment, notes a trend of less rainfall in the 
Marshall Islands over the same period of 7.5mm and 10mm less of monthly rainfall per decade for these two stations. 
This trend is supported by data from newer stations with shorter periods of record showing that rainfall decreases 
across the RMI as one moves from south to north, and from east to west, with the northwestern atolls being the driest. 
                                                             
8 Dan A. Polhemus (2017), Drought in the U. S. – Affiliated Pacific Islands: A Multi-Level Assessment. Pacific Islands Fish & Wildlife Office 
U. S. Fish & Wildlife Service

=== PAGE 12 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 78 
 
 
C 
There has also been a decrease in the number of very wet days since 1953.  The remaining annual, seasonal and 
extreme rainfall trends at Majuro and Kwajalein show little change.  
24. Based on this rainfall data the national maximum and median number of days with little or no rain are 132 days and 11 
days, respectively.  During the 2015/2016 drought which had the lowest recorded average dry season rainfall, more 
than 52 rural communities across 13 local government jurisdictions were estimated to have experienced more than 100 
days of drought days with acute water shortages.  However, considering the geographical expanse of the country, the 
stressors across the islands vary greatly.  For example, during this same drought, the numbers of days communities 
experienced acute water shortage ranged from 175 days in the Ujae atoll to 0 in the Kili atoll.  
25. Warming trends are also evident in both annual and half-year mean air temperatures based on the data from Majuro 
and Kwajalein stations, with mean temperatures showing a statistically significant upward trend.  Warming trends are 
also evident in extreme daily temperatures with the number of warm days increasing and cool nights decreasing at both 
stations. These warming trends can correlate to higher evaporation from surface water storage structures.  
26. Historic observation data indicate that the sea level has risen near Majuro by about 7mm (0.3 inch) per year since 1993.  
This is larger than the global average of 2.8–3.6 mm (0.11– 0.14 inch) per year.  Furthermore, king tides (very high 
spring tides that typically occur between November to March – not the result of storm surge) are a common 
phenomenon in RMI and the consistent inundation from tides and tidal/storm surge flooding compromises 
groundwater as a potential drinking and cooking water source. 
Climate projections 
27. The climate modeling exercise conducted specifically for this project (see Annex II Feasibility Study – Annex 22) uses 
data from seven existing weather stations.  These sites were used for hydroclimate projection analysis (rainfall, drought 
and aridity) and extrapolated for seven corresponding climate regions considering the significant geographic spread of 
the country.  The key impact of climate change on the RMI, as modelled to 2045, is likely to be higher rainfall but with 
longer and more intense dry periods.  Modelling conducted for the development of this proposal indicates that 
increases in frequency and duration of droughts are very likely across RMI. 
28. Wet season (May-October), dry season (November-April) and annual average rainfall is projected to increase over the 
course of the 21st century.  Most models simulate little change (-5% to 5%) in rainfall by 2030, however by 2090 the 
majority simulate an increase (>5%) in wet season, dry season and annual rainfall.  In fact, approximately one third of 
models simulate a large increase (>15%) in rainfall under the higher (i.e. A1B medium and A2 high) emissions 
scenarios, for the dry season in the northern Marshall Islands and on both a seasonal and annual basis in the south. 
29. Changes in drought were analyzed in terms of drought frequency (% change in frequency of 20-day droughts, 30-day 
droughts and 60-day droughts), the average duration of typical but impactful (e.g., roughly once in five or six years) 
droughts, as well as aridity (which accounts for the increasing evaporative demand of the atmosphere in a warming 
climate).  It is well known that droughts in the RMI are driven by basin-scale interannual climate fluctuations due to the 
quasi-periodic El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) cycle.  However, the analysis focused on changes in drought 
characteristics (be they frequency or duration) that are entirely due to anthropogenic climate change including its 
influence on ENSO and hence drought.9 
30. The analysis confirmed that the projected changes in drought frequency are not uniform across the RMI and depend on 
duration of drought being considered.  It was found that a minimum no-rain threshold of 30 days is a more appropriate 
representation of a “once in 5-years drought” for southern islands of RMI, while 60 days is a more appropriate 
representation of a “once in 5-years drought” for the northern islands.  These typical durations were considered as part 
of baseline considerations for these regions against the projected anthropogenic factors of extending droughts due to 
climate change factors.  Across RMI, these droughts (30 days in the southern islands and 60 days in the northern 
islands) can be referred to as ‘typical but impactful droughts’, which occur on average once in 6 years between the 
present and 2035 and once in 5 years between 2035 and 2045.  The analysis further shows that increases in drought 
frequency (of either duration, at either time horizon) cannot be ruled out at the 95% confidence level at almost all sites.  
For example, only for one sight was there high confidence that drought events of 30 days in duration will not increase 
(at either 2035 or 2045).  Furthermore, drought projections at 2035 are in general more severe than for the 2045-time 
horizon in drought frequency and duration.  
31. For this proposed project, the salient data is the projected changes (days) in drought duration for time horizons of 2035 
and 2045 for each RMI climate region.  The greatest increase in drought duration within 95% confidence limits provides 
                                                             
9 Changes in drought frequency were analyzed with the following two key assumptions or parameters: (1) any daily rainfall less than 3 
mm was effectively zero, and (2) any period of 30 or 60 consecutive days with effectively zero rain may be considered a drought event

=== PAGE 13 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 78 
 
 
C 
the basis for the interventions proposed by this project.  Table C1.1 superimposes climate change-induced increases in 
drought days with current baseline drought days to suggest longest droughts within 95% confidence limits.  This is 
further corroborated by observed drought durations based on existing data.  
Table C1.1.  Baseline vs climate change induced droughts 
Climate 
Region 
Baseline Drought 
Length Days (Climate 
Model)* 
Baseline Drought 
Length 
Observed** 
Projected 
Additional days 
of Drought 
2025-35 or 
2035-45*** 
Projected 
Drought 
Length up to 
2045 
Observed 
Length of 
2015/16 
Drought 
1 
60 
90 
20 
110 
134 
2 
60 
90 
30 
120 
143 
3 
60 
70 
30 
100 
100 
4 
60 
60 
58 
118 
128 
5 
30 
40 
17 
57 
120 
6 
30 
40 
27 
67 
93 
7 
30 
40 
19 
59 
91 
* Analysis based on Climate Model data for years 2005 to 2015. 
** Analysis of rainfall data completed by UNDP based on information provided by RMI Weather Office. 
*** the higher of the projected values either in 2025 to 2035 or 2035 to 2045 periods are chosen. 
 
32. The most significant influence on mean sea-level variability over most of the Pacific region is due to ENSO (NIWA 
2016).  Sea level is projected to continue to rise in RMI based on modelling of three emission scenarios (low, medium 
and high).  Estimated increases range from 3 to 16cm (Y2030) to 22 to 62cm (Y2090).  Increases in sea level, and hence 
increased water depths over the fringing reef flats, will also result in larger wave conditions reaching the shoreline.  As 
both wave run-up and overwashing of the coastal berm or coastal defences by waves can be extremely sensitive to 
small changes in water levels and wave conditions reaching the shoreline, even very small changes in sea-level rise may 
have a significant impact on the frequency and volume of inundation of the immediate coastal margins. 
33. Rising sea level also has the potential to exacerbate the impacts of very high tides (known as king tides), which have 
historically damaged infrastructure, particularly in urban centres.  King tides are already having a significant impact on 
inundation of land areas in RMI.  For the outer atolls and islands, one of the major impacts of king tides is their potential 
to flood unprotected wells and thereby contaminate groundwater with salt.  Long-term sea-level rise will continue to 
push sea levels higher resulting in high tide levels increasingly exceeding what may be presently considered a king-tide 
level.  Data from Kiribati shows that 3-4% of all high tides are presently considered a king tide, by 2030, 8-16% of all 
high tides would be considered king tides, by 2050, 12-29% of all high tides, and by 2090 potentially over 90% of all 
high tides could exceed what is presently considered a king tide.  Although there is no specific similar data for RMI, 
given the higher than global average sea level rise in RMI, its low elevation and vulnerability to storm surge, it is 
reasonable to, given the higher than global average sea level rise in RMI, its low elevation and vulnerability to storm 
surge, it is reasonable to expect that the changes in king tides in Kiribati would be similar in RMI. 
Water sources, availability and related issues 
34. For the outer islands and atolls, where approximately 28% of RMI’s population live, the main source of potable water is 
rainwater accessed from household and community rainwater harvesting systems.  Whereas these systems provide 
adequate supply during times of sufficient rainfall, when the number of consecutive days with little or no rain exceeds a 
threshold, the harvesting and/or storage capacity is insufficient to meet even basic needs.   
35. Water surveys conducted in 2013 in 11 atolls and islands10 reported that 89% of households had rainwater-harvesting 
systems typically with one tank of either 4,542 L or 5,678 L capacity.  For a household of average 6 members11, at a 
water consumption level of 20 L per person per day12, the two household rainwater tank sizes can supply water for one 
household for 37 (4,542L) to 47 (5,678L) days under conditions of little or no rain, if the RWH systems (gutters and 
downpipes) are well maintained so that the tank is full at the beginning of the dry spell.  However, infrastructure 
surveys done as part of the project development phase found that many of the RWH systems (particularly gutters and 
downpipes) were in poor condition (refer to Annex II Feasibility Study).   
36. Besides household rainwater harvesting systems, community RWH systems are available and utilized in the outer atolls 
and islands in public, commercial, or community buildings.  Many of these community RWH systems are attached to 
                                                             
10 Ailuk, Aur, Ebadon, Lae, Lib, Maloelap, Mejatto, Ujae, Utrik, Wotho, and Wotje.  Source. 2013 Wash Survey. 
11 Average household size in outer islands and atolls calculated from 2011 Census was 6 for the outer islands and atolls, 7 for urban 
atolls, and 7 for the national average. 
12 WHO and SDG minimum standard to provide for drinking, cooking and basic hygiene

=== PAGE 14 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 78 
 
 
C 
large roof areas but most only have one 5,678 L tank.  This provides insufficient storage for rainfall capture which leads 
to surplus water overflowing from the tank.  As discussed in the preceding sections, drought durations are projected to 
lengthen exacerbating the water shortages already felt by the communities in RMI. 
37. Access to sanitation facilities, which are primarily water flushing toilets connected to buried septic tanks, has been 
increasing in the Marshall Islands. Waste from septic tanks are not collected; a new tank is installed once the current 
tank is full. Based from WHO and UNICEF statistics as of 2015, 77% of the population have access to improved 
sanitation facilities, 12% to shared facilities, 4% to other unimproved facilities. Only 7% practice open defecation 
(during non-drought periods).  The same report noted an urban-rural divide with 84% and 56% having access to 
improved sanitation, respectively.  
38. Sanitation infrastructure within the Outer Atolls, encompassing toilet and hand washing facilities for communities, 
schools and public buildings do not meet basic standards (as per UNICEF guidelines), which more apparent when 
considering WASH and equity of access. Flushing primarily in HH systems uses rainwater or from wells, while in 
schools, salt water flushing systems have been installed. During drought (2015/2016) almost all toilet facilities were 
compromised.  Sanitation kits were provided as part of national drought response as referenced in the PDNA report 
from the 2015/16 DRR response.  
39. It is recognized that the benefits from improved water systems are optimized when considerations for sanitation are 
simultaneously addressed. In the context of the Marshall Islands and this climate adaptation project an integrated 
approach is necessary that will encompass both the shift from the use of rainwater for flushing to groundwater 
(through wells) and sea water and also expanded use of waterless toilets. Interventions to address sanitation are 
discussed in various parts for the funding proposal and in the section on ‘Selected Adaptation Solution’.   
40. Due to RMI’s unique geography, other options for safe freshwater resources are limited, this leads to socio-economic 
drought conditions where communities only have access to water from disaster response services or to relocate to 
either Majuro or Ebeye (which are serviced by public water systems). 
41. Groundwater from the freshwater lenses underlying the atolls and islands provides a secondary source of water, 
however, with increasing sea-level, tidal heights and storm surges, groundwater quality is compromised, especially 
during droughts.   
42. There are some stationary desalinated seawater reverse osmosis (RO) systems in some community centers and small 
mobile RO systems that are deployed by the government during extreme drought.  Desalination units are costly to 
operate, maintain and deploy. 
Challenges in responding to water shortages 
43. Droughts mostly impact the availability of potable water for communities living in the Marshall Islands.  Over the last 
50 years, RMI has experienced ten significant droughts with the last two (in 2013 and 2016) costing the government 
more than USD 10 million in response and recovery costs (refer Annex II- Feasibility Study section 1.3.1).  The 
challenge of responding to water shortages are exacerbated by the remoteness of the outer atolls and islands, the 
difficulty and high cost of transport between atolls, limited sources of available freshwater, weak water governance and 
government and community capacity deficiencies. 
44. Depending upon the status of sanitation access, RMI will utilise the CWCs as conduits for promoting existing (and 
future) WASH initiatives as well as repeating surveys to enable the impact of the project on sanitation and health to be 
monitored.  Improved and ongoing information collection on the status of sanitation and WASH practices throughout 
the outer islands will help focus both government and community actions to where they are most needed and can have 
the greatest impact. 
45. Overall, the RMI continues to be poorly equipped to deal with drought outside of the major population centers at 
Majuro and Ebeye, and periodic social disruptions from drought can be expected to continue into the foreseeable 
future. 
Overall problem that project seeks to address 
46. The country faces worsening droughts, and coastal inundation (which can contaminate groundwater resources) as a 
result of climate change, resulting in particular water shortages that have significant economic and social impacts.  In 
the rural areas of RMI there are no water networks or significant water storages for communities to fall back upon.  
These communities need to have a reliable, safe freshwater supply sufficient to see them through the projected future 
drought periods.   
47. Furthermore, there are limited national water governance and coordination mechanisms or accountability frameworks 
to support water resilience.  Therefore, capacity building and the development of robust governance structures at local

=== PAGE 15 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 78 
 
 
C 
and national levels is required.  Strengthening integrated water security is an urgent climate change adaptation priority 
for RMI.   
National/sector policies and strategies 
48. Climate change resilience and water security are key priorities for RMI, and critical to achieving various government 
policies and strategies for sustainable and equitable development.  GoRMI has put in place national and sector policies 
in this respect. 
49. The RMI Water and Sanitation Policy and Proposed Action Plan, which was formalized as a legal instrument through the 
National Environmental Protection (Amendment) Act in 2016, serves as the foundational framework for climate-resilient 
water sector development at the national and subnational levels.  The RMI Environmental Protection Authority now has 
a legal mandate as the national authority for integrated water resource management. 
50. Other key climate change policies and strategies include: Strategic Development Plan “Vision 2018”; National Strategic 
Plan (2015-2017); National Climate Change Policy Framework (2011); The Joint National Action Plan for Climate 
Change Adaptation and Disaster Management; and the National Gender Mainstreaming Policy and Strategic Plan of 
Action for 2015-2019.   
51. The above strategies and policies can provide the mechanisms to help RMI to achieve climate change resilience in terms 
of water security, however many of them are relatively new and yet to be effectively implemented.  There is a need for 
technical capacity building within local and national governments, along with support for the development of the 
processes and procedures that will enable successful application of the new policies and strategies using gender equity 
and social inclusion (GESI) mainstreaming approaches. 
52. The project has a high-level of buy-in from the Government of RMI, reflected by a significant financial contribution to 
the project and an explicit long-term commitment to institutional change towards more sustainable water governance, 
including the formation of Community Water Committees, supported by local councils, which will provide long-term 
operation and maintenance structures. 
 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
53. Increasing climate risks, particularly droughts which are becoming more frequent and extreme, impact RMI’s drinking 
water supply.  The proposed project will implement the most cost-effective mix of interventions to bridge the gap 
between current water supply capacity and the capacity needed to supply at least 20 litres per capita per day (lpcd) 
year round, including during drought events aggravated in frequency and duration by climate change. 
54. The following sections first outline the current baseline with respect to household water availability and describe the 
projected demand – supply gap by 2045 under current climate and weather conditions.  It is then discussed how the 
impacts of climate change will further widen this gap.  The alternatives to close the gap and the proposed project 
interventions are described.  
Baseline Scenario 
Freshwater Resources 
55. The types of freshwater resources available in the rural communities of RMI are: 
• 
Rainwater accessed through household and community rainwater harvesting systems 
• 
Groundwater resources are available in many of the outer atolls and islands, although information regarding their 
specific locations, available volume, and quality are limited.  Based on survey results, groundwater is normally used 
for washing, cleaning, and/or for sanitation, while in times are prolonged drought groundwater is also often used 
for drinking and cooking even though water quality may be poor.   
• 
Alternative and experimental systems are available at ad-hoc bases in limited atolls – includes desalination and 
distillation. 
Rainwater Harvesting and Storage  
56. In the outer atolls and islands of RMI, where approximately 28% of RMI’s population lives, dependence on rainwater as 
the primary source for drinking water is high; it was estimated at 98% in 2011, which is higher than in urban areas.  As

=== PAGE 16 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 78 
 
 
C 
discussed in the previous section, water surveys conducted in 2013 in 11 atolls and islands13 reported that 89% of 
households had rainwater-harvesting systems of at least one tank storage.  For the average household14, at a water 
consumption level of 20 lpcd15, the larger size rainwater tanks (5,678L) could last up to 47 days.   
57. Approximately 79%16 of community buildings in the outer atolls and islands have community rainwater harvesting 
systems, especially in upgraded public schools, health centers, police centers, churches, and recreation or community 
centers.  However, many systems are in poor condition, with installation, maintenance and efficiency challenges, similar 
to household systems.   
58. Based on surveys undertaken in 2013 and 2016, household and community RWH systems typically have: 
• 
Corrugated sheet roof, normally around 54m2 for households and 100m2 to more than 400m2 for community 
buildings, typically in good condition 
• 
75mm-100mm guttering system providing less than 50% coverage of the roof area and often poorly installed, or in 
poor condition (the poor condition leads to low catchment efficiency and subsequent water loss/overflow) 
• 
No first flush or mosquito guard systems 
• 
At least one to two plastic (PVC) storage tanks (4,542L and/or 5,678L), although some households have no tank at 
all 
• 
Low RWH efficiency (the % coverage multiplied by the % catchment efficiency) – typically 20% for household 
systems and 35% for community RWH systems 
• 
Poor maintenance, resulting in poor system performance. 
Concrete Tanks 
59. In RMI, many atolls and islands have underground or partially underground concrete structures used to store water, 
with some built in the 1940s during World War II.  These concrete tanks are ageing and while most are left unutilised 
due to poor condition, lack of nearby roofing surface to capture water, or being located too far away from settlements 
or too close to the sea making the stored water too brackish, some are still in use today connected to rainwater 
harvesting systems of households and community buildings.  During the infrastructure surveys in 2013 and 2016, 23 
large concrete tanks across 12 atolls and islands ranging in volume from 11m³17 to 453m³ were recorded as still being 
in use and attached to buildings with a roof area greater than 100m2.  The concrete tank volumes are included in the 
baseline storage in the relevant communities with a total recorded volume from the infrastructure survey data of 
1,254m³. 
60. With both household and community systems, the current and planned water storage capacity on average is 1,300L per 
capita in the rural communities of the islands and atolls of RMI.  This capacity is adequate to provide 20 lpcd for 47 
consecutive days (assuming 6 people per household) without rain if the preceding wet-season rainfall was normal, and 
the rainwater harvesting systems are in good repair and efficiently functioning.  However, surveys of RWH systems 
indicated that most systems are not operating at an optimal status and are inefficient and therefore the combined 
household and community systems often supplied the community with only 30 days supply. 
61. The Marshall Islands Red Cross Society (MIRCS) and the International Federation of Red Cross (IFRC) have 
implemented a rainwater harvesting improvement program in the atolls/islands of Likiep, Mejit and Namu in response 
to the 2013 drought.  Existing rainwater harvesting systems were improved, hygiene and education in schools and 
communities promoted, and community catchments were built.  At the household level, GoRMI with support from 
international donors have an active rainwater harvesting tank program serving remote island communities, where 
households now have a water tank of over 3,785L (1,000 gallon) capacity.  Additional provision of rainwater harvesting 
systems in boarding high schools located in Jaluit, Wotje and Kwajalein, was planned to commence in 2017 as part of 
the GIZ-Climate Change in the Pacific Island Region (CCPR) program.  Moreover, as a response to the 2016 El Niño 
drought event, IOM and MIRCS, with funding by the New Zealand Embassy, piloted a program aimed at improving 
rainwater harvesting systems in the outer islands of RMI.  However, funding was only sufficient to cover 50% of the 136 
selected households in Wotho, Ujae and Lae atolls.  
                                                             
13 Ailuk, Aur, Ebadon, Lae, Lib, Maloelap, Mejatto, Ujae, Utrik, Wotho, and Wotje.  Source. 2013 Wash Survey. 
14 Average household size in outer islands and atolls calculated from 2011 Census was 6 for the outer islands and atolls, 7 for urban 
atolls, and 7 for the national average. 
15WHO and SDG minimum standard to provide for drinking, cooking and basic hygiene 
16 Based on 2011 RMI Census 
17 One m3 is equivalent to 1000L

=== PAGE 17 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 78 
 
 
C 
62. Despite these past and ongoing initiatives, existing rainwater catchment systems and tanks are insufficient for 
providing water security, particularly in the face of climate change.  With projected climate change-induced increases in 
the variability of rainfall, the current RWH systems will be inadequate to meet future water demand and to maintain 
sufficient supplies for prolonged drought events. 
Groundwater 
63. Groundwater serves as an important source of non-potable water. Fresh groundwater in the outer atolls exists as 
freshwater lenses that float atop deeper, saline groundwater. The availability of fresh groundwater depends on island 
size and rainfall, and diminishes during droughts. Groundwater quality ranges from moderate to extremely saline 
(depending upon the season, tide, location and depth of the well), however there is limited data on quality and quantity 
of groundwater in most locations.  Based on testing performed by EPA at a few of the atolls (Ebon, Jaluit and Namdrik) 
during the 2016 disaster response more than 50% of the wells tested did not meet the required drinking water 
standard (EPA set TDS > 500 mg/L). 
64. Groundwater is collected from wells owned by households or communities. The water is accessed by buckets (or in 
some cases hand pumps) which often restricts access by the mobility challenged people within the community. People 
tend to use collected groundwater for bathing, washing laundry, and watering animals and garden crops, and only use it 
as a backup source for drinking during droughts. Excessive use and extraction of groundwater, which occur during the 
dry season and drought times, have resulted in saltwater intrusion and increase the salinity of groundwater resources. 
65. Some wells are protected (having a 100mm concrete apron and an access cover), while others are open (unprotected) 
and therefore at risk from surface contamination. King tides and inundation of seawater of the atolls can also adversely 
impact the quality of groundwater and are expected to be more frequent due to sea level rise and the height of the 
current groundwater water well design may be too low to adequately protect it from future submersion and 
subsequent inundation.   
Desalination Systems 
66. In recent years, as a measure to manage the frequent water shortages during dry season, both mobile and stationary 
desalination systems with varying water production capacities and technologies have been deployed in selected outer 
atolls and islands with different degrees of success in terms of its installation, operation, maintenance, effectiveness and 
sustainability. 
67. Three of the driest atolls in the north of RMI as well as one island in the south have stationary desalination systems 
powered by renewable energy (solar and wind) installed in late 2010 (Utrik), 2015 (Kili) and 2017 (Enewetak).  All of 
these units operate year-round with freshwater production of approximately 13,627L per day (3,600 gallons) at Utrik 
and 21,198L per day (5,600 gallons) for Kili and Enewetak each providing baseline water needs to the community.  
They are operated approximately 10 hours each day.  There is a diesel-powered reverse osmosis unit on Rongelap; it is 
rated for 22,700L (6000 gallons) per day and was installed in 2009, purchased by the US Department of the Interior.  
Local residents operate and maintain the system costing in the order of $10, 000 yearly.  This cost does not include 
diesel.  
68. The communities are facing financial difficulties in supporting operations and maintenance costs of the desalination 
systems and are dependent on grant funding from external donors.  They are also depending on future capital 
investment from external donors to support expected major repairs through the life-cycle of these assets e.g. battery 
replacements, major breakdowns, etc.  This is not a long-term sustainable approach.  Additional smaller desalination 
units (3) will be installed by IOM at the three high schools on Wotje, Ebeye (Gugeegu) and Jaluit to support emergency 
supply during drought strictly to service the staff and students and will not be able to provide additional water to the 
surrounding communities. 
69. In 2014 and 2015, with grant funding and technical support from the Government of Japan’s Pacific Environment 
Community Fund, the RMI government installed stationary solar-powered reverse osmosis (RO) units in 15 public 
schools18 with 567-1,135L (150–300 gallons) per day capacity.  These units were designed to only be used during the 
dry season and as drought emergency response, however during the project design period the majority were found to 
be non-operational due to breakdown and lack of spare parts.   
70. In addition, through funding from the Global Environment Facility (GEF) Special Climate Change Fund in partnership 
with the Pacific Regional Environment Program and UNDP, seven solar distillation systems, with capacity of 4L per day, 
                                                             
18 Public schools in: Jaluit Atoll, Mejit Island. Ailuk Atoll, Likeip Atoll, Wotje Atoll, Maloelap Atoll, Aur Atoll, Majuro (Rairok), Santo Island, 
Mejatto Island, Wotho Atoll, Ujae, Lae Atoll, Lib Island and Namu Atoll (Majkin)

=== PAGE 18 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 78 
 
 
C 
were installed in 2014/15 in 4 atolls and islands19.  It was noted that during the development of this GCF project 
proposal, none of these units were still operational. 
71. Due to difficulties and inadequacies related to the operation and maintenance of desalination units, they may not be 
viable options for drought relief.  Most of the systems to date were unable to provide emergency water supply to the 
schools and health clinics and communities in which they were placed during the 2016 drought.  In response, the 
government of RMI has identified several key success factors critical to the use of desalination as a viable water supply 
option in the outer atolls and islands including on-site training by the supplier, development of standard operating 
procedures, well-defined and accepted roles and responsibilities for O&M and adequate budget allocations for the 
lifetime of the system.  Nevertheless, systemic issues will remain with the use of desalination in remote islands of RMI 
including high capital and O&M costs, securing of precise spare parts and technical capacity for O&M.  
Water supply coverage 
72. RMI has two major urban areas at Majuro (Capital City) on Majuro Atoll and Ebeye on Kwajalein Atoll.  Both of these 
communities have water utilities that operate and manage the water and sanitation facilities for the community 
members in their service area.  The two water utilities are Majuro Water and Sewer Company (MWSC) and Kwajalein 
Atoll Joint Utility Resources (KAJUR) respectively.  The remaining communities in the Outer Atolls and communities not 
connected to the MWSC or KAJUR service area do not have the benefit of a managed system of collection and 
distribution water and sanitations services.   
73. In urban RMI, increasing access, reliability and service levels of the piped water systems can provide significant water 
security improvements to residents living in their service areas by serving as a primary or secondary freshwater 
resource.  Both MWSC and KAJUR have master plans that aim to upgrade and improve their networks to provide 
greater resilience for urban areas against drought and other climate change impacts.   
74. In rural RMI or outer atolls and islands, water security solutions depend on improving existing systems as well as better 
utilizing available resources through a more participatory and holistic, water resource management approach.  
Water Governance 
75. RMI recently embarked on strengthening their institutions, with a strong recognition and awareness of the critical role 
it plays in strengthening water resilience at the national, subnational, and community levels.  An overarching national 
institution for water governance was recently formalized through the Water and Sanitation Policy and National 
Environmental Protection Act amendment, which now officially designates EPA as the national authority to coordinate 
and oversee RMI’s water governance under the purview of the Chief Secretary’s Office.   
76. Formal stakeholders and institutions related to water governance at the sub-national level is less established, in terms 
of its number of personnel available and clear understanding of coordinated responsibilities.  As a result, there tends to 
be a disconnect between community-based water governance and national-level water governance mechanisms.  As the 
majority of people in RMI rely on freshwater harvested through their household RWH systems as their primary source 
of water for drinking and cooking, formalization and/or enhancing the understanding of the subnational water 
governance mechanisms is important for strengthening water resilience. 
Existing Extreme Weather Coping Strategies 
Areas serviced by water utilities 
77. During droughts, people from outer atolls often migrate to the two urban centres where there are public water 
reticulation systems run by water utilities. Migration increases the strain on these water supply systems.   
78. MWSC and KAJUR have operating procedures for periods of drought.  In the urban areas serviced by water utilities, 
water distribution to customers will be reduced to 4 hours one day per week (day varies depending upon area) when 
total storage falls below 50%, and the weather forecast is for no rain. 
79. During the 2016 drought, 21 temporary water collection points were installed at various locations across Majuro. 
Water was supplied from a 75,700 L/d (20,000 gpd) RO unit at the College of the Marshall Islands and delivered daily 
by trucks operated by the MWSC and Majuro Atoll Local Government.  Water points were open for limited hours and 
were subject to long lines. 
80. In Ebeye, some residents, especially during water shortage times, travel to the Kwajalein U.S. military base, 4 miles (6 
kms) south of Ebeye, to fill their containers free of charge and carry them back home on ferries. 
Reliance on neighbors or community tanks 
                                                             
19 Health Centers of Mejit, Ailuk (Ailuk and Enejelar), Likiep (Likiep and Jebal), Wotje (Wotje and Wodmej)

=== PAGE 19 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 78 
 
 
C 
81. Households who do not have tanks, or whose tanks are empty may get water from family and/or neighbors whose 
tanks are not empty. Alternatively, community tanks at churches, schools, health clinics or government buildings, etc 
may be used to provide household water. Women and children are often sent to collect water. 
Mobile Desalination 
82. MWSC currently has 54 RO desalination units, each with a design capacity of 1360 L (360 gallons) per day, which can be 
deployed as needed during drought.  However, it was determined that the actual capacity of the mobile ROs is 453L/d. 
The mobile RO units potentially provide sufficient water for about 140 people assuming a water need of 10 lpcd to 
cover drinking, cooking and basic hygiene, or for 600 people assuming a water need of 2.3 lpcd covering only 
drinking/cooking needs.20  
83. The units come complete with solar panels and batteries allowing them to run on a 24-hour basis. Deployment is 
normally by a team of technicians, utilising a charter flight, who set up the unit in situ and handover the unit to locally 
trained residents with oversight by the local Council. After the drought emergency has passed, the desalination unit is 
picked up and brought back to Majuro for maintenance and storage. 
Bottled water 
84. Where available, water may be purchased from shops (bottled or fill containers). These shops are not typically present 
in the smaller rural communities and bottled water is generally only available on the outer atolls and islands when 
provided by emergency relief teams.  Purchasing water (if available) is very expensive and therefore least favoured and 
not viable for longer periods.  Considering the typical income of <$1/day in the outer atolls purchasing bottled water by 
residents is not a sustainable solution. 
Groundwater 
85. During drought periods, when the community and household water tanks are empty, groundwater is the primary 
source for all water requirements.  During prolonged droughts, groundwater resources that are still providing suitable 
water for drinking are identified, communicated and shared by the community. The normal practice is to not boil their 
water prior to consumption, aggravating the incidences of contaminated water borne ailments. 
Water Supply Benchmarking to Selected Pacific SIDS 
86. It is useful to compare water supply provision in RMI to other SIDS. The Pacific Water and Wastewater Association 
(PWWA) benchmarks the water providers in the Pacific Region21.  Unfortunately, data is only available for areas that 
are serviced by water utilities.  In the Pacific SIDS of Kiribati, Tuvalu, Solomon Islands and Nauru, the following levels of 
water provision are provided: 
Country 
Population 
Served (%) 
Water Per 
Person (lpcd) 
 
Comments 
Marshall Islands 
74% 
27 (38 
planned22) 
Provision only in Majuro and Kwajalein. 
Rural areas rely on rainwater harvesting, some groundwater 
and in a few locations, desalination water 
Kiribati 
43% 
2 (60 lpcd 
planned 23) 
Provision of water only to capital town. Rural areas rely on 
rainwater harvesting 
Solomon Islands 
19% 
130 
Provision of water only to capital and provincial towns. Rural 
areas rely on rainwater harvesting 
Tuvalu 
50% 
5 
Public Works tanker distribution of rainwater & desalination 
water 
Nauru 
98% 
16 
Desalination water 
                                                             
20 This volume of water meets the requirements for short duration (<2 weeks) water availability based on WHO Guideline and Sphere 
Standard 
21 http://www.pwwa.ws/index.php?page=Benchmarking2  
22 Majuro’s daily water consumption level planned for in the Majuro within Drought Management Plan 
23 South Tarawa Master Plan target

=== PAGE 20 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 78 
 
 
C 
 
87. There are a number of national and international guidelines for the quantity of safe water required per capita per day 
to ensure access to sufficient water needed for maintenance of health and well-being.  The WHO and SDG24 suggest that 
20 lpcd is sufficient daily water to support drinking, cooking and personal hygiene for durations of three months or 
more (i.e. not short-term emergencies).   
88. This benchmarking demonstrates that current water provision by the two water authorities in RMI is consistent with 
other Pacific SIDS.  The planned supply level of 38 lpcd (for MWSC) is adequate under normal conditions, however with 
an increasing duration, frequency and intensity in droughts due to climate change, the vulnerability of the water supply 
system reaches a point where supply during climatic extremes is no longer possible.  This situation is only worse on the 
outer atolls where storage volumes are less. 
89. Without this proposed project and GCF interventions, the existing water supply to approximately 28% of people in RMI 
will be compromised by climate change impacts during dry periods and after storm-surge/inundation events. 
Baseline Investments 
90. Various projects and initiatives to enhance water resilience in RMI are being implemented, ongoing or planned.  Many 
of these initiatives are focused on water resource management and drought risk management, while institutional 
capacity building initiatives are still very limited.  Annex II (Feasibility Study) contains details of the various projects, 
the following provides a brief overview of projects relevant to water security for the outer atolls and islands of RMI: 
Project Title 
Period 
(Funding) 
Main interventions and location 
Japan Grassroots Grant 
 
1997 to on-
going 
(approx. 
$1.5M) 
Grass Root Grants: Water Tank Truck for Enewetak Atoll, 
Two 20,000 Gallon Cisterns at Woja and Bouj (Ailinglaplap Atoll), One 
50,000 Gallon Cistern at Mejit 
 
Government of Japan Non-Project 
Grant Aid  
2009 to on-
going 
Solar electrical systems connected to MEC  
3 diesel powered desalination units 13200 Gal/day   
Equipment for water quality test kits 
GIZ – Adapting to Climate Change 
and Sustainable Energy Project 
 
2016-2017 
($800k) 
 
Enhancing RWH systems at the three boarding schools. (Jaluit, Wotje and 
Kwajalein (Gugeegue)) 
 
Public Works - Public Schools and 
Atoll Health Care Centre Upgrades 
2016 - 
ongoing 
($1.9 M) 
Replacement and upgrade of school infrastructure and health facility - 30 
new tanks were installed in 2017 (size ranging from 47 to 189 m³) in 27 
communities in 17 atolls with a total installed capacity of 2,744 m³. 
The need for additional catchment concrete tanks was determined based 
on PDNA analysis from last drought 2015.  
Desalination 
US Government for Agriculture 
Department of Enewetak   
2007 
(Approx. $30k) 
Enewetak - 2000 Gal per day unit diesel driven desalination unit.  . 
 
US Department of Interior   
2010 
($30K) 
Utrik - 2 X 1800 Gal/day units plus storage tanks (one running at one 
time) – producing 1000 G/day.   
US DOI Funded  
2015 
($500K) 
Kili - Purchase and installation of Solar and Wind powered RO system with 
storage tankage.  
Pacific Environment Community 
Fund (PEC) (2011-2016).   
2014/2015 
($4 million) 
Multiple atolls - Purchase and installation of 15 photo-voltaic powered RO 
systems (300 Gal per day capacity) to be installed at schools. 
US Foreign Disaster Assistance 
(OFDA), Australia DFAT and IOM  
2016/2017 
(part of 
$3.3M) 
3 diesels powered desalination units for high schools on Jaluit, Wotje and 
Kwajalein. Each RO provides 800 gallons per day.  
Reverse Osmosis Units and Disaster 
assistance for Northern  
2013 TO 2014 
($5.5M) 
Emergency Assistance and provision of Reverse Osmosis Units to alleviate 
immediate and medium-term effects of the drought in the Northern 
Islands. 
Water Governance 
The Strengthening Water Security 
of Vulnerable Island States 
2016 – 2018 
($1M) 
Suite of practical measures (water security toolkit) to strengthen drinking 
water security in the Cook Islands, Kiribati, RMI, Tokelau and Tuvalu. 
Capacity Building 
                                                             
24 WHO Technical Note No. 9, WHO/SEARO Technical Notes: Minimum Water Quantity needed for domestic uses

=== PAGE 21 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 78 
 
 
C 
 
91. Ongoing and past initiatives relating to the attainment of water security through improvement of rainwater catchment 
systems, storage and alternate technologies (e.g desalination), institutional and community capacity building have not 
been fully scaled to all the outer atolls.  With climate change-induced projected increases in variability of rainfall, the 
current efficiency rate of the infrastructure to capture and store rainfall will be inadequate to meet future water 
demand and to maintain sufficient supplies for prolonged drought events (refer Annex II - Feasibility Study). 
Gap Analysis 
Water Resource Management 
92. Water shortages occur in RMI because access to safe freshwater resources is largely dependent on rainwater.  In many 
communities in both urban and outer atolls and islands of RMI, households rely primarily, and often solely, on their 
household and community RWH systems.  Moreover, the efficiency of the harvesting systems is very low at 20% for 
households and 35% for community buildings resulting in very low rainwater capture. 
93. Efforts have been implemented and are underway in RMI to reduce this vulnerability to drought by expanding the 
freshwater resource options. The availability of options and strategies for freshwater supply vary from urban and rural 
Marshallese populations.  The urban areas of Majuro and Kwajalein atolls are within the service area of the public water 
utility companies – MWSC and KAJUR, respectively.  Rural areas in RMI include all the remaining local government 
jurisdictions in the outer atolls and islands as well as communities in Majuro and Kwajalein atolls that are not within 
the service areas of the public utility companies. 
Urban Areas (Majuro and Kwajalein) 
94. In urban RMI, increasing access, reliability and service levels of the piped water systems can provide significant water 
security improvements to residents living in their service areas by serving as a primary or secondary freshwater 
resource.  While the piped water system upgrade is already in implementation in KAJUR, MWSC is still in the planning 
phase.  For MWSC, gaps remain in identifying financial resources to implement the Master Plan, which was finalized in 
July 2017. 
Outer Atolls 
95. Although various initiatives have been implemented in the outer atolls of RMI to improve water security options, 
remaining gaps exist as described below: 
• 
Poor operation and maintenance.  Some successful initiatives to train communities in operations and maintenance 
of RWH systems have been trialed in selected atolls and islands, but there is a significant gap in scaling this up to 
other local government jurisdictions and communities. 
• 
Lack of trained technicians for operation and maintenance of desalination units outside of major urban centres. 
Finances for operation (e.g. fuel and spares) also often lacking. 
• 
Household RWH tanks in rural RMI.  Most households surveyed have at least 1 if not 2 tanks.  The exact gap for the 
number and conditions of the household RWH systems and tanks, needs to be assessed per community as this 
information is not available and has been extrapolated based on available information during the project 
development phase.  
• 
Community RWH and storage - gaps in storage capacities to fully utilize the roof catchments exist.  In some 
communities, there is a gap and need to construct roofing for RW capture, along with additional tanks for storage.  
Reduced Vulnerability of the Pacific 
Island Country Villages Livelihoods 
to the Effects of Climate Change 
2015 
 
Improving the capacity of the Pacific Island Countries’ National 
Meteorological Services  
 
RMI Drought Response Project 
2013 
($300K) 
ADB's Asia Pacific Disaster Response Fund in response to Northern Island 
Drought - consisted of activities relating to the provision of life preserving 
services for communities. 
RMI Pacific Resilience Project 
(PREP) Phase II 
Under 
Development 
($36M) 
Institutional Strengthening early warning and preparedness, 
Strengthening coastline resilience, Contingency Emergency Response and 
Project Management Support 
University of the South Pacific - 
European Union Global Climate 
Change Alliance Programme 
2007-2017 
($8M) 
 
Formal and informal trainings to community members on the impacts of 
climate change and variability in outer islands and atolls of RMI 
Climate Adaptation, Disaster Risk 
Reduction and Education  
2012 
($500K) 
This project aims to build the resilience of vulnerable communities in the 
RMI to natural hazards, particularly those that are climate induced.

=== PAGE 22 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 78 
 
 
C 
The exact gaps for the number and condition of the community RWH systems and tanks need to be confirmed as 
these were extrapolated for communities without infrastructure survey data 
• 
Groundwater data available for outer atolls is very limited in terms of defining location, water quality and water 
lens quantity parameters. 
• 
Under the National Water and Sanitation Policy, the importance of developing a comprehensive strategy and 
methodology for groundwater monitoring is elaborated; however, gaps remain in terms of identifying the financial 
and technical resources for implementation. 
• 
Gap in sanitation facilities and hand washing stations suitable for the community needs.  Rainfed flushing systems 
are inoperable during drought. 
• 
The proposed GEF-funded “Managing Coastal Aquifers in Southern Pacific SIDS” project will build on better 
understanding of the existing aquifer systems but does not include components to build protection of well systems 
from contamination.  
• 
Gap in understanding of the triggers and atoll, and community-specific practices for employing conservation 
measures based on each type of drought forecasted. 
• 
Development of educational and awareness communication materials along with Standard Operating Procedures to 
assist communities to manage non-essential water use and to monitor RWH systems for proper function are 
lacking.  
• 
Low-cost, low-technology and self-sufficient alternative options for freshwater resources (e.g. HOOP Solar 
Distillation System) lacking.  To date systems trialed have insufficient capacity or have failed for a variety of 
reasons. 
Targeted Communities 
96. As indicated above, the two primary urban areas, Majuro and Kwajalein, both have existing water utilities (MWSC and 
KAJUR).  These utilities provide water to the communities in their areas and both have Master Plans for future 
enhancement and expansion of their systems, hence are not being considered under this project.  Therefore, it is the 
outer atolls and islands that will be targeted by this project. 
97. A total of 77 rural communities across 23 atolls and islands will be targeted by the project (Table C2.1).  This covers all 
communities of 5 households or more across all atolls, with the exclusion of the areas covered by existing water 
authorities (MWSC – Majuro and KAJUR – Kwajalein).  Atoll profiles, with maps showing locations of the 77 
communities and tabling the proposed infrastructure at each, are appended to the Feasibility Study (Annex IIa and IIb). 
Table C2.1.  Target atolls/islands and number of communities 
Atoll/Island 
Largest 
rural 
community 
Number of 
target 
communities 
(>= 5 HH ) 
Atoll/Island 
Largest 
rural 
community 
Number of 
target 
communities 
(>= 5 HH ) 
Ailinglaplap 
Woja 
10 
 
Likiep 
Likiep 
3 
Ailuk 
Ailuk 
2 
 
Majuro 
Aenkan 
1 
Arno 
Arno 
12 
 
Maloelap 
Tarawa 
5 
Aur 
Aur 
2 
 
Mejit 
Mejit 
1 
Ebon 
Toka 
6 
 
Mili 
Mili 
6 
Enewetak 
Enewetak 
1 
 
Namdrik 
Namdrik 
1 
Jabat 
Jabat 
1 
 
Namu 
Majkin 
4 
Jaluit 
Jabwor 
6 
 
Rongelap 
Rongelap 
1 
Kili 
Kili 
0 
 
Ujae 
Ujae 
1 
Kwajalein 
Santo 
6 
 
Utrik 
Utrik 
1 
Lae 
Lae 
2 
 
Wotho 
Wotho 
1 
Lib 
Lib 
1 
 
Wotje 
Wotje 
3

=== PAGE 23 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 78 
 
 
C 
Key Barriers to Achieving Water Security and Climate Resilience 
98. The adaptation alternative is that the climate resilience and water security of the outer atoll communities of RMI is 
secured through improved harvesting and storage of rainwater, supplemented by other sources, along with improved 
water resource management. 
99. The key barriers that Marshallese people living in outer atolls and islands are facing include: 
• 
Insufficient water infrastructure, not resilient to prolonged drought, leading to lack of and chronic shortage of safe 
freshwater for people living in the low-lying atolls and islands. 
The frequent water shortages in the outer atolls and islands are caused by a combination of inefficient water 
infrastructure unable to meet the minimum demand of 20 lpcd, and insufficient and often one-off water-related 
investments, financed through time-bound projects. Water investments in RMI to date have been allocated 
reactively after a drought event, rather than strategically placing investments to avoid or mitigate shortages during 
droughts and/or to holistically strengthen and improve the freshwater resource system in which communities rely 
on during drought and non-drought times.  
During the 2015/2016 drought, estimated drought days of water shortage experiences by communities under the 
baseline/status quo (existing and planned25) water infrastructure conditions ranged from zero (0) days in Kili to 
175 days in Ujae. More than 52 rural communities across 13 local government jurisdictions were estimated to have 
experienced more than 100 days of drought during this period.  The majority of current initiatives are meant to 
respond to an immediate crisis (drought) with limited scope for building infrastructure or enhancing governance 
systems to ensure long-term water security and resilience.  
• 
Insufficient rainwater catchment systems for current storage capacity due to rainfall variability. 
Low efficiency of rainwater harvesting systems, including poor sizing of gutters, downspouts, brackets and fittings, 
which are poorly installed, are unable to capture the maximum rainfall.  A key recommendation from the IOM pilot 
of RWH improvements was to use higher-end guttering, droppers and downpipes rather than those that are 
currently readily available in RMI.  Projected reductions in rainfall for both wet and dry periods (modelled for 2035 
and 2045) will exacerbate the need for assuring rainwater harvesting efficiencies and water storage capacities are 
maintained at a high level. 
Water storage capacities for households and community buildings are insufficient to capture the maximum water 
that could be harvested, with water extra water being lost once tanks are full.  Surveys of households (past 
assessments and during the design of this project) indicate that most households now have one, if not two tanks.  
Several initiatives are ongoing at the community level to improve and expand rainwater harvesting storage. 
However, gaps remain to further expand storage capacities through improving underutilized community storages 
(i.e. leakage reduction) and adding additional storage tanks to fully utilize the roof catchments. In some 
communities, there is a possible gap and opportunity to construct additional roofing for RW capture, along with 
new tanks for storage. 
• 
Open groundwater wells susceptible to contamination by wave overtopping, especially during king tides. 
Storm surges and king tides have been documented as causing widespread damage in the Marshall Islands, Kiribati, 
Vanuatu and the Federal State of Micronesia (FSM)26.  In March 2014, RMI declared a state of emergency following 
tidal surges causing inundation to communities on low-lying atolls of RMI.  The outcome of the event resulted in 
damage to agriculture and water harvesting infrastructure, contamination of community tanks, nearly 80% of 
sanitation facilities being affected, 70 damaged homes in the capital of Majuro and 160 displaced people.  Damage 
to the outer islands was even more severe.  Based on predictions for Kiribati, RMI can expect a significant increase 
in the frequency of king tides (currently 3%-5% of high tides) as a result of climate change where 90% of normal 
high tides will have the same classification as king tides by 2090. 
Limited information is currently available in terms of location of wells, its quality, quantity and usage of 
groundwater.  Some initiatives have been implemented where groundwater quality have been tested.  Data 
availability is inconsistent in terms of methodology, parameters measured, locations, and frequency, especially in 
the rural areas of RMI.  Groundwater resources can potentially serve as critical alternative to freshwater resources 
especially in times of low precipitation in the norther atolls and islands. 
                                                             
25 Planned interventions reviewed and incorporated into the calculation of number of days where community RWH systems are empty 
(or drought days). 
26 https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/linked-documents/E-Pacific-Risks-Vulnerabilities-Climate-Change.pdf

=== PAGE 24 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 78 
 
 
C 
• 
Limited access and availability, and systemizing knowledge of alternative sources of water for household and 
community usage. 
During periods of drought, the incidence of diarrhea and of water-borne disease is heightened as alternative 
sources of water for drinking, cooking, and bathing purposes is limited, or absent and communities resort to water 
of lower quality.  The EPA has increased the water quality testing in recent years, however it has not been 
programmatic or consistent due to costs and logistics.  Nonetheless, samples revealed a high percentage of 
households located in outer atolls and islands with contaminated water catchments.27  The EPA, as part of the 
NDMO validation team, performs spot water quality testing of stored water and groundwater at communities when 
possible water shortages are declared.  They also note the quantity of stored water and report this to the OCS to 
support declaration of emergency measures. 
Information available to the communities in outer atolls and islands on water conservation practices and 
community-specific water demand management, including the encouragement of sustainable operations and 
maintenance practices, is also limited. There are few campaigns for water conservation and virtually no promotion 
of water efficient appliances. 
• 
Limited participation and empowerment of women and youth in efficient water management practices 
Women in RMI generally manage household tasks including care of childcare, the elderly, gardens and small 
livestock so are heavily impacted by water security issues. However, historically they have limited engagement in 
water and sanitation decision-making at community or island level and limited exposure to water and sanitation 
awareness training. Organizations such as WUTMI provide strong on-the-ground support for grassroots level 
awareness campaigns, however, due to lack of financial resources, such efforts are often project-based. This project 
recommends building on best practices, such as community participation in all steps in upgrading water systems, 
improving drinking water, and the establishment of Community-based Water Committees (CWCs). Women’s active 
and equitable participation on CWCs is critical support the decision-making in community specific water safety 
planning. 
• 
Unsustainable and ineffective operation and maintenance practices 
Operations and maintenance costs, especially for stationary reverse osmosis systems, are often funded through 
grants and/or by external providers (for limited periods).  This is not a sustainable solution. 
Programmatic and financially sustainable long-term sources of funding to support operations and maintenance of 
households and community rainwater harvesting systems has not been supported. Improper maintenance of 
rainwater harvesting systems, often leads to contamination of drinking water and illness.  
Rainwater harvesting systems are often uncovered and unprotected against contamination or vectors such as 
mosquitos.  As already noted, there is no comprehensive program of monitoring RWH systems condition, quality or 
quantity of stored water or groundwater quality.  Outer atolls and island communities are responsible for the 
operation and maintenance of their RWH and storage systems.  There are no SOPs in place and knowledge and 
capacity is often lacking resulting in ad hoc and inconsistent practices.  Residents in the rural communities need 
training in basic carpentry to enable them to maintain and repair RWH systems (especially gutters and downpipes) 
to capture rainwater from the full roof area.  Training is also needed in repair of non-operational or leaking cement 
rainwater storage tanks. 
As a response to disaster, training on operation and maintenance of the mobile desalination systems has been 
provided to community members by MWSC technical staff. However, due to in and out-migration, training needs to 
be repeated. Small-scale desalination systems, including the Hoop systems are often dysfunctional due to poor 
maintenance practices, no regular follow-ups and refresher training, and lack of funds for spare parts. Moreover, 
during the implementation of disaster response, community members were supplied with rainwater harvesting 
systems and storage tanks, but there was limited training on installation, use and major/minor repairs. 
Adaptation Options 
100. 
There have been various initiatives implemented in RMI (Table C2.2), some of which can be considered as a 
suitable model to be scaled up by the proposed project.  
Table C2.2 Adaptation options considered 
                                                             
27 Integrated Water Resources Management. Republic of the Marshall Islands. Diagnostic Report. March 2007

=== PAGE 25 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 78 
 
 
C 
Technology Option 
Water Source 
Lessons Learned 
Household  rainwater 
harvesting system 
Rainwater  
Utilization of 150mm diameter gutter and downpipes for the RWH systems 
ensures improved performance.  Higher-end guttering, droppers and 
downspouts should be used rather than those readily available for purchase 
in RMI.  Training and awareness of proper operations and maintenance 
practice 
Community rainwater 
harvesting system 
Rainwater 
Provision on larger catchments connected to community buildings – 
Improved150mm piping for the gutters of the RWH systems.  Higher-end 
guttering, droppers and downspouts should be used rather than those 
readily available for purchase in RMI.  Greater understanding of capacity 
requirements for community. 
Groundwater infiltration 
galleries 
Groundwater 
Protection from contamination, improved performance and understanding 
of water lens thickness and capacity. 
Groundwater wells 
Groundwater 
Water quality testing improvements, capacity of water lens, alternate source 
of water for washing, cleaning and for agriculture.  Needs protection from 
contamination and inundations, requires consistent maintenance. 
Groundwater wells with 
pumps (hand pumps, 
solar pumps, Hydraulic 
Ram Pumps) 
Groundwater 
Good efficient use of groundwater resource. More efficient than using bucket 
and rope – ensures protection from contamination. 
Desalination: Solar 
distillation (solar water 
purifiers) 
Sea water or 
brackish  
groundwater 
System not installed optimally and has to establish clear lines of ownership 
for maintenance and supportive funding.  Need ongoing maintenance even 
when not required during the wet season.  All units are not working and not 
supported – clearly currently not an effective solution.  Large farms of solar 
panels would be required to support 20 lpcd for the community – not 
feasible for total solution. 
Desalination: Reverse 
Osmosis units – mobile 
Sea water or 
brackish  
groundwater 
Ideal for disaster response and not suitable to meet long term water security 
needs – requires common warehouse to optimally store and maintain the 
units.  Requires consistent training and upkeep. 
Desalination: Reverse 
Osmosis units – 
stationary 
Sea water or 
brackish  
groundwater 
Good source of quality water.  Costly to maintain and operate, requiring 
considerable technical skills to support for optimal operation.  Community 
requires external support to provide funding – perhaps not a sustainable 
solution. 
Hoop system (hybrid 
mini poly tunnel) 
Air moisture – 
condensation units 
Limited capacity to provide water source.  Can be used for awareness 
training – education. 
 
Selected Adaptation Solution 
101. 
The proposed GCF project will address and overcome the barriers described earlier by strengthening community 
resilience and bridging the water gap, by providing the minimal quantity of 20 lpcd for the rural communities of RMI28.  
102. 
This will be achieved through three interlinked Outputs, namely: 
• 
Output 1: Implementation of optimal mix of interventions to ensure climate resilient water security in outer atolls 
and islands of RMI 
• 
Output 2: Optimization of alternative water sources to reduce reliance on harvested rainwater in the context of 
reduced rainfall 
                                                             
28 The urban centers of Majuro and Ebeye are not covered as these are served by water utilities.

=== PAGE 26 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 78 
 
 
C 
• 
Output 3: Climate change induced drought preparedness and response measures implemented in outer atolls and 
islands. 
103. 
These outputs were developed as a direct response to the key barriers and gaps described earlier, previous 
experience in RMI, and through technical and economic assessments of the adaptation options (refer Annex II - 
Feasibility Study and Section E6 below). 
104. 
It is the combination of all three Outputs that will lead to achieving communities in the outer atolls and islands 
having a reliable, safe freshwater supply and the necessary water governance and coordination mechanisms sufficient 
to see them through the projected future drought periods.  All three Outputs are critical for achieving the urgent climate 
change adaptation priority of strengthening integrated water security for RMI. 
Rainwater Harvesting and Storage  
105. 
The primary focus of the project will be the improvement and expansion of rainwater harvesting systems and 
storage capacity to an adequate level to supply at least 20 lpcd in the rural communities of the outer islands and atolls 
of RMI through longer drought events triggered by climate change.  
106. 
The current and planned29 water storage capacity is on average 1,300L per capita in the rural communities.  This 
capacity is adequate to supply 20L per person for 70 consecutive days without rain (baseline drought) (Annex II 
Feasibility Study provides details of baseline).  However, to cope with the droughts projected to increase in length at 
varying degrees across the climate regions of RMI, the project will invest in increasing storage capacity per capita so 
that the gap between baseline storage and storage required to cope with climate change induced droughts is closed.  
This will be done by installing new storage tanks at the community level.   
107. 
Figure C2.1 below provides an overview on available water resources at the onset of a drought, as well as the water 
requirements for the baseline and climate change-induced drought.  Further, it also shows the water supply-demand 
gap to meet the defined water security target of 20 lpcd for each of these drought events.  The baseline versus climate-
induced water supply gaps form the basis for co-financing versus GCF financing respectively.   
108. 
Some communities have sufficient water to meet the baseline and climate change-induced water requirements; 
others barely have enough to cover a few days of even the baseline drought.  As such, the climate change induced water 
availability gap is overall smaller than the climate change-induced water requirement.  This is due to the fact that some 
communities have water supplies which can meet the baseline and the climate change induced water requirements, 
thus reducing the total volume.  Likewise, the baseline water availability gap is larger than expected if just subtracting 
the existing water availability from the baseline water requirement – as some of the existing water is used by 
communities with excess water supplies to meet the climate change induced drought.  This demonstrates the 
importance of a community-based assessment of the water availability gap.   
                                                             
29 Planned storage capacity refers water storage that was under development by the RMI government or other development partners at 
the time of proposal development. This would be functional within the next 2-3 years.

=== PAGE 27 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 78 
 
 
C 
 
Figure C2.1. Overview of water availability and drought water requirements by 2045 across 24 target islands/ atolls 
109. 
Rainwater harvesting systems will be improved on 2,529 household buildings.  As for community buildings, the 
project will provide funds to local governments to improve existing rainwater harvesting systems and additional 
storage tanks in 158 existing community buildings and construct 121 new community rainwater harvesting system 
structures with corresponding new storage tanks.  
Groundwater and Sanitation 
110. 
The importance of rehabilitating and protecting groundwater wells, as a complementary water source has been 
demonstrated during previous drought events. While the direct impact on augmented water supplies from these 
measures is difficult to quantify due to lack of data on groundwater quality and quantity across islands/atolls, 
recognizing the importance of groundwater in supplementing minimum drinking water quality requirements for 
washing, watering of household gardens, during drought events, and the measures and steps to improve knowledge on 
groundwater have been incorporated in project interventions. The project will install covers and raise sidewalls to 
protect 2,586 groundwater wells identified within the 77 target communities.  
111. 
While sanitation is not funded by the GCF as it is development related, it is nonetheless included here to emphasize 
its importance in this proposed project, particularly in relation to groundwater, both as a receptor of pollution and 
possible source of water for flush toilets to reduce demand from rainwater.  Improvements in sanitation will be 
supported through other projects such as the GEF/UNDP project “Managing Coastal Aquifers in Selected Pacific SIDS” 
(MCAP) which will include interventions that will protect groundwater resources, from pollution sources, in several 
outer islands, including improvements in sanitation. Further, the completed GEF/UNDP Integrated Water Resources 
Management Project and the follow-up ongoing Pacific Islands Regional Ridge-to-Reef Program, which includes 
interventions in the Laura Village in Majuro atoll to address waste management to protect the freshwater lens. This 
could provide lessons useful in the other atolls.  The Master Plans from Majuro and Kwajalein (Ebeye) will fully address 
the sanitation requirements for the MWSC and KAJUR service areas. 
Institutional Capacity Building 
112. 
The project will empower national and subnational institutions and stakeholders to champion water governance 
for efforts to be coordinated, effective, participatory, equitable, and sustainable.  This will occur at the:  
• 
National Level – through supporting and strengthening the implementation of existing policies  
o 
Support EPA to implement monitoring, reporting, accountability, and sustainability of National Water and 
Sanitation Policy. 
o 
Strengthen OCS/NDMO’s coordination capacity to manage water related disaster risks

=== PAGE 28 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 78 
 
 
C 
o 
Develop comprehensive National Water Safety Plans in line with the Community Water Safety Plans, 
National WASH Policy, National Environmental Protection Act, Joint National Action Plan for Climate 
Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Management (JNAP), National Disaster Management Plan, and other 
relevant policies 
o 
Establish a comprehensive national database for water resources in RMI that will be updated, and 
sustained.   
o 
Ensure comprehensive knowledge management and communication program is established supported 
with forums and training to nurture the next generation of water leaders and experts. 
• 
Community Level – by supporting establishment of Community Based Water Committees (CWC’s) 
o 
Develop and foster ownership and buy-in for sustainable operation and maintenance practices 
Develop and utilize best practice SOP’s for RWH and monitoring and managing groundwater resources. 
113. 
Long-term sustainability will be enhanced by the proposed institutional capacity building.  Community Water 
Committees will be formed in each of the 77 communities.  The CWCs will manage and enforce, through the local 
community government, long-term asset maintenance practices and support of the installed infrastructure.  In addition, 
over the 25-year life cycle of the project, the national government has budgeted replacement of assets as part of their 
operations and maintenance commitment. (Annex IIa Section 10.1.3 describes the institutional arrangements). 
 
Project Against Baseline Summary 
114. 
Generally in a normal year, dry season lasts for 2 to 4 months with an average of 10 consecutive days without rain.  
In a dry year with the dry season lasting up to 5 months, days without rain range from 10 to 90 days.  Therefore, water 
security can be significantly enhanced throughout RMI if people can have access to adequate volume of safe freshwater 
resources during this time, such that emergency drought response can be avoided. 
115. 
The project is designed to address critical shortfalls in water availability and water supply management in the outer 
atolls and islands.  Specifically, the project focuses on: creating a paradigm shift in water governance and institutional 
capacity (both government and community), management of household and community rainwater harvesting systems, 
water storage capacity, and groundwater management and protection. 
116. 
The project will deliver the following results: 
• 
Improving water security through providing access to safe freshwater resources year-round for at least 15,572 
people (2017 estimated population in the outer atolls or communities not connected to reticulated systems in 
Majuro and Kwajalein – 28% of RMI’s population), including 7630 (49%) women.  
• 
Improving water resilience by securing groundwater resources from contamination from inundation of seawater. 
• 
Empowering national and subnational institutions & stakeholders to champion water governance for efforts to be 
coordinated, effective, participatory, equitable, and sustainable.  
C.3 Project Description 
Output 1: Implementation of optimal mix of interventions to ensure climate resilient water security in outer atolls 
and islands of RMI 
117. 
To assess the most cost-effective sequence of water supply augmentation measures and to ensure water security by 
2045, a cost curve methodology was used (refer to Annex II for additional details on the methodology).  The water 
security target to be achieved for baseline drought (unrelated to climate change) requires an additional 11,302 m3 of 
water, whereas for climate change induced drought periods, it requires, on top of baseline needs, a further addition of 
9,161 m3 of water.   
118. 
In order to close the water supply-demand gap, and to ensure the water security target is met, three types of 
interventions were identified: 
1. Improvement of household rainwater harvesting systems 
2. Improvement of community building rainwater harvesting systems and construction of new storage tanks  
3. Construction of new community-based roof structures in combination with new storage tanks

=== PAGE 29 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 78 
 
 
C 
119. 
Under this output, the GCF funds will co-finance, the improvement of rainwater harvesting structures on 
community and household buildings and increased community building water storage capacity.  The project will invest 
in sufficient capacity to provide each resident with at least 20 liters of water per day throughout the projected drought 
length for the specific climate region.  The proportional cost totaling 4.21 million USD of improving the rainwater 
harvesting systems and storage capacity to meet the water needs for a baseline drought will be borne by the 
Government of RMI.  The additional cost of 5.21 million USD for developing the further capacity required for additional 
drought days attributable to climate change will constitute the GCF co-financing.  
120. 
While O&M for the assets developed has been envisaged to be community or owner driven GCF resources will be 
used for initiate enabling activities for effective O&M to be carried out. Accordingly, GCF finance would be used to 
develop O&M plans, related SOPs and limited initial capital refurbishment in the form of provisions for materials and 
spare parts required for general maintenance to extend the asset lifecycle. The beneficiaries would be responsible for 
the operations and maintenance of livelihood assets and technologies promoted. Acceptance of a tiered operations and 
maintenance (O&M) system has been documented (FS- Annex IIa):  
• 
Tier 1: Beneficiary Households and Community Building Owners/Management 
• 
Tier 2: Community Water Committees (CWC) or equivalent representative 
• 
Tier 3: Mayors and Community Leaders (Chiefs) – Mayor Council 
• 
Tier 4: OCS and NDMO/ National Government 
121. 
During the project period, as part of setting up of the O&M systems labour shall be provided by the individual 
households and beneficiary community owners/operators while GCF and GoRMI resources to the tune of USD 
729,701will be utilized for the provisioning of material and spares parts required for demonstrating and establishing 
general O&M practices in year 5-7 of the project period. Of this USD 457,656 will be provided by the GCF and USD 
272,045 will be funded by the GoRMI (refer annex XIIIb for O&M details) 
 
Activity 1.1  Improve existing rainwater harvesting systems for community buildings and households in outer islands and 
atolls for usage during increasing frequency and periods of drought 
 
122. 
The proposed activity will upgrade existing rooftop rainwater harvesting systems on 158 community buildings and 
2,529 households in 77communities across the 24 local government jurisdictions.  The targeted community buildings 
include schools, churches, community halls, police stations, youth centers, airport terminal buildings, copra houses, 
Marshall Islands Marine Resource Authority (MIMRA) buildings and other buildings owned by the public sector or civil 
society that have more than 100 m2 of roof area. 
123. 
On average, only 50% of the roof area of households and community buildings is connected with guttering system, 
and the overall average efficiency of rainwater harvesting systems is only 20% for households and 35% for community 
buildings, leading to significant loss of rainwater between the roof and the tank.  This activity will install new 
components to areas of the roof that are not connected, and will upgrade existing components to reduce 
leakage/overflow and increase quantity of the water that is harvested.  It is expected that these improvements to 
connection, gutters and downspout will increase the efficiency of rainwater harvesting systems to least 70% for 
households and at least 80% for community buildings. 
124. 
The systems currently in use vary in guttering systems and downpipes size ranging from 75mm to 100mm in 
diameter resulting in overflow and higher O&M costs. The project will replace these with 150mm diameter gutters and 
downpipes.  Furthermore, this activity will cover expenditures required to upgrade and refurbish rooftop rainwater 
catchment systems including gutters, downpipes, debris traps, first flush systems, filters, storage and access points.  
Local workers will be contracted by the project to implement the works, with emphasis on engaging both women and 
men. 
 
Activity 1.2. Provide additional rainwater harvesting systems and increase of storage capacity for communities in outer 
islands and atolls for usage during increasing frequency and periods of drought 
 
125. 
This activity will focus on providing additional rainwater harvesting catchments (roofs) and upgrading community 
level storage quality and capacity as the primary source of water during prolonged droughts.  The GCF resources will be

=== PAGE 30 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 78 
 
 
C 
used to supplement RMI government funding to improve the efficiency of utilization of existing community building 
catchment systems and construct additional roof systems to close the water gap.  Local government will provide 
resources, with in-kind support from the community to cover the investment required under baseline climate 
conditions.  The in-kind contributions are important to both keep investments working to meet household baseline 
requirements, and to increase the sense of ownership by communities and thus improve long-term sustainability of the 
project.  The additional investment required by the GCF is for increased harvesting and storage capacity required due 
to climate change impacts. 
126. 
Nearly all the community buildings that will be covered by the project currently have at least one 4.5m3 (1,200 
gallon) or 5.6 m3 (1,500 gallon) storage tank.  However, the current 35% RWH system efficiency leads to water loss 
from roofs, gutters and downpipes before reaching the tanks, while tanks that are too small to store the volume of 
water harvested during high rainfall events results in significant water loss from tank overflow.  Furthermore, most 
tanks in community buildings do not have first flush diverters or mosquito guard systems.  General practice on first 
seasonal rainfall was to divert the feed away from the storage system to overflow onto the ground resulting in further 
water losses.  The project will install an additional of 50m3 of storage capacity for the targeted community buildings 
and improve the RWH system to ensure it is functioning at 80% efficiency post project intervention.  Table C3.1 
summarises the project impacts on community RWH systems. 
Table C3.1.  Project Impact on Community Rainwater Harvesting and Storage Systems 
Pre-project context 
Intended post project context 
Average of 50% of roof area used for RWH 
100% of roof area used for RWH  
Currently at average 35% efficiency due to poor 
condition  
Efficiency improved to at least 80% 
100mm guttering systems 
150mm diameter gutters 
100mm diameter downpipes 
150mm diameter downpipes 
One 4.5m3 (1,200 gallon) or 5.7m3 (1,500 gallon) 
tanks 
Most without first flush diverters or mosquito 
guards.  
Minimum of 50m3 of storage capacity installed 
First flush diverter installed 
Insect screens installed 
 
127. 
Based on a technical and cost assessment considering high transportation costs (see Annex II) the proposed project 
will use flat pack tank systems - structural panels and a base made of either galvanized steel or High-Density 
Polyethylene (HDPE) with aluminum or steel structural components and food grade polypropylene liner.  
128. 
Finally, this output will support market creation and will establish long term procurement agreements with a local 
provider that provides maintenance supplies, ensuring cost efficient agreements that may be applicable beyond the 
scale of the project. 
 
Output 2: Optimization of alternative water sources to reduce reliance on harvested rainwater in the context of 
reduced rainfall 
129. 
Activities through this output are focused on optimizing alternative water sources to reduce the burden on potable 
water supplies, and the establishment of a network of national and regional specialists on climate change through 
formal and informal trainings, and awareness raising on climate change adaptation.  GCF funds will be used to protect 
2586 household and community groundwater wells and provide training for women and youth as part of best practice 
and community awareness programmes. 
Activity 2.1. Protect groundwater wells from more frequent climate change induced storm surges and contaminations 
130. 
The project will protect 2,586 household and community groundwater wells identified within the 77 target rural 
communities, located in 24 local government jurisdictions and vulnerable to contamination from sea swells and high 
tides.  The importance of groundwater as complementary water source for non-potable water uses was demonstrated

=== PAGE 31 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 78 
 
 
C 
during previous drought events and is highly relevant for building additional resilience.  Its importance lies in meeting 
non-potable water demand, and reducing the pressure of drinking water supplies.  
131. 
The proposed project will fund the protection of wells from surface pollution by lining the well for the full depth 
and to at least 0.6 m above the ground to form a head wall around the outer rim of the well.  A concrete slab will be 
constructed on the ground surface, extending for 2 m around the well which will also serve to seal any fissures between 
the well lining and the walls of the excavated hole, preventing seawater from seeping into the well along the outer 
casing.  This activity will also invest in well covers to further prevent contaminants from entering the well.  
132. 
The investment per well is determined by its current status and its importance to the community.  The importance 
to the community range from household wells used mainly for washing, to large community wells that are used for 
drinking, cooking and/or washing and serve an important water resilience function.  Community members have 
advised that in times of need and prolonged drought, households wells are shared and used by the community.  
Activity 2.2. Enhance women and youth’s leadership through best practices and community awareness programmes on 
efficient usage (demand management) of rainwater 
133. 
In order to enhance the value of the GCF investment and create a pathway to scale nationally and regionally, this 
output will create opportunities for learning exchanges and will facilitate inter-island exchanges on best practices in 
climate change risk reduction on water resources, including water security and conservation of water resources.  Inter-
island exchanges will be facilitated via a number of pathways:  locations that have demonstrated success in developing 
and implementing Water Safety Plans will be used as ‘model villages/atolls’, lessons learned will be shared through 
visits to/from ‘model villages’; CWCs will be coordinated nationally, therefore they provide a pathway for exchange of 
learnings between islands; periodic reviews of plans such as disaster SOPs, Water Safety Plans, O&M SOPs and Demand 
Management will provide opportunities to identify successes and failures which can then be shared (locally and 
nationally); NGOs and community networks (particularly women and youth) will be another mechanism for inter-
island exchanges of learnings.  
134. 
Training programs include the development of Water Safety Plans, which will be focused on training women and 
children who are generally responsible to collect water, cleaning and general household in the usage of water based on 
water quality and available quantity etc, RWH systems operation and maintenance, Demand Management, Disaster 
SOPs and drought preparedness.  Focus of training will be related to water conservation and prioritization practices 
especially relating to WASH requirements.  It is emphasized that sanitation will be provided paramount emphasis. 
Trainings will serve to increase coping capacities, and reduce hardships faced by communities in times of disaster and 
water scarcity.  Given that as of 2016, approximately 60% of the population was estimated to be less than 24 years old, 
with 19% under 14 years old, women and youth have been selected as target group.  The  University of South Pacific 
campus in the Marshall Islands will provide formal and informal education to women and youth on climate change 
adaptation and water demand management. This activity will be undertaken in partnership with the Marshall Islands 
Red Cross Society, WUTMI, the National Youth Congress, and existing women and youth networks.  
135. 
Building on the USP-European Union Global Climate Change Alliance (USP EUGCCA) project, youth expertise in 
water demand management will be developed through a Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction certification 
programme part of a non-formal course of study at the University of the South Pacific.  Women and youth engaged in 
learning exchange visits will also gather practical management skills, such as project management, written and oral 
presentation, reporting, monitoring and evaluation of project, conflict management, etc.  
Output 3 Climate change induced drought preparedness and response measures implemented in outer atolls and 
islands 
136. 
Existing activities being undertaken by the Government of RMI meet baseline needs, however this is inadequate to 
deal with the increasing demands caused by climate change.  Through this output, GCF will support the effectiveness of 
RMI institutions responsible for drought early warning and preparedness, by strengthening institutional coordination 
and accountability mechanisms between government departments to initiate drought preparedness and coordinate 
response.  This output will prepare a system and technology roadmap for outer island communications, and upgrade 
communications systems in remote locations and train people to use them.  The project will also support local 
governments and Community-based Water Committees to mobilize resources and to develop and implement 
contingency plans in anticipation of and in response to droughts.  
Activity 3.1. Update national-level contingency plans and Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for climate change induced 
drought response

=== PAGE 32 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 78 
 
 
C 
137. 
This activity will support the Office of Chief Secretary (OCS), National Disaster Management Office (NDMO), 
Municipal Governments, Weather Service Office, Ministry of Finance, Environmental Protection Authority, Ministry of 
Internal Affairs, Community and Nongovernmental Organizations and development partners, and private sector to 
develop systems to coordinate early warning and disaster response.  
138. 
The Project will strengthen the capacity of NDMO housed within OCS, to implement its mandate to lead 
coordination efforts for drought preparedness and response.  This activity will also support the NDMO to expand their 
subnational disaster management and coordination efforts through the appointment of community disaster focal points 
within the existing Mayoral committees and disaster management plan development.  NDMO will play an active role in 
the Community-based Water Committee establishment and Water Safety Plan development and implementation 
process.  
139. 
The project will also support the development of SOPs for drought early warning and response.  The EPA and the 
CSO will be responsible for the SOPs in coordination with the NDMO.  The SOPs will indicate in a comprehensive 
manner, the specific actions required to be taken by various Ministries and Departments of the RMI Government in 
responding to droughts within the context of their overall disaster management strategies and JNAP.  The private 
sector will be engaged in the development of the SOPs so that their skills and resources can be capitalised upon.  The 
SOPs will provide, in a concise and convenient form, a list of major executive actions involved in responding to drought 
and necessary measures for preparedness, response and relief required to be taken.  
140. 
Training programs for drought risk management and contingency planning at institutional level will be provided to 
improve the entire cycle of activities required to develop plans that are practical, result-oriented, simple, participatory, 
realistic and supported by preparedness actions.  It will ensure that NDMO and partners are prepared to respond to 
anticipated droughts and have the systems and tools to respond in a timely manner during drought.  This training will 
target functional level staff of the NDMO, other government departments, volunteers, NGOs the UN, intergovernmental 
bodies and the private sector. 
141. 
The training will aid participants in the understanding of the need for contingency planning, how to develop plans, 
quality and accountability, resource mobilization, vulnerability and capacity assessment, risk analysis and how to 
activate the plan.  The training will also enable the participants to update and evaluate the drought contingency plan 
once implemented.  
142. 
The proposed activity will furthermore invest in technical assistance, and will facilitate workshops to update RMI 
drought contingency plans and develop SOPs within the overall context of national disaster preparedness so that 
drought plans are mainstreamed into national emergency processes.  This will include the development of drought 
scenarios, technical audit and improvement of the internal management structure, human resources, assessment, 
logistics, communications, resource mobilization and mobilization of media and information channels.  The SOPs for 
droughts will be developed and tested through training and simulation.  Budgets will be allocated, and a monitoring 
and evaluation process will be set up.  Moreover, this activity will update the national-level water safety plans for 
effective risk management for improvements in documenting and monitoring climate change triggers, in addition to 
defining better mechanisms for more efficient and timely communication of issues that trigger national or atoll level 
actions to support vulnerable communities level. (Annex IIa, Sections 11.3 and 11.4). 
Activity 3.2. Develop and implement community-level drought contingency planning in outer islands and atolls 
143. 
Community-based Water Committees (CWCs) will be developed in the 77 communities and will be organized on an 
atoll basis building on ongoing community-based natural resource planning initiatives.  With stakeholder involvement 
and coordination with community leaders and designated representatives of CWCs, the proposed activity will provide 
training and formulate SOPs to develop and implement drought contingency plans when a drought warning is issued.  
These contingency plans will define goals and objectives, such as targets for reduced consumption, priority of use 
(especially in the case of WASH)  etc based on an assessment of all existing and potential water supply sources during 
episodes of extreme drought.  The project will also train and provide required technology to develop and implement 
these plans using the management strategies, templates, and statistics assembled during the assessment process.  
Considering that the length, severity and frequency of drought conditions are projected to increase by 2045, the GCF 
co-financing of this activity is justified.  
144. 
The water harvested at the community level will be communal by definition.  Therefore, to ensure the sustainable 
management, operation and maintenance of the harvesting and storage systems and the equitable distribution of the 
water resource, the project will provide training to CWCs to conduct simple water balance assessments and access 
plans for community water resources defining rights of access and exclusion.  Considering that in most cases

=== PAGE 33 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 78 
 
 
C 
communally harvested water will be most critical during extreme drought events, the investment of GCF funds meet 
the climate additionality requirements.  
145. 
CWCs will play a critical role in the planning, coordination, implementation, and monitoring of the proposed 
community-based water security and water resilience initiatives.  The project will strengthen 77 Community-based 
Water Committees (CWCs) and enhance their capacities to develop, implement, operate, monitor, and maintain drought 
SOPs - the governing framework for the water investments, in line with the National Water and Sanitation Policy.  The 
CWCs will represent the area population and include women and men landowners, water users, traditional leaders, 
local government, and national authorities.  
146. 
The CWCs will build on existing structures that may exist in some of the communities, such as the disaster 
management committees and Reimaanlok’s natural resource management committees.  Traditional leaders will be 
engaged and involved, and play a significant role in providing the leadership, support, and credibility to the CWCs.  In 
the context of the project, these community-based organizations will have two significant tasks: 
a. 
The operation and maintenance (with government support and oversight) of community-based investments 
made by the project. This will include community water storage and community wells.  
b. 
The equitable and sustainable distribution of water during droughts, understanding of more vulnerable 
community member needs and WASH requirements. 
147. 
The project will provide technical assistance to the CWCs and to local governments to develop adaptive drought 
contingency plans to be pilot tested during the project implementation period.  The technical assistance will be in the 
context of local and international facilitators with best-practice examples from the region and elsewhere. The Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs) will be used by municipal government, community organizations and households (i.e. 
schools, churches, etc).  The SOPs will entail good practice guidelines for the operation, management, and monitoring of 
all water security investments (household and community rainwater harvesting systems improvements).  These 
guidelines will also take into consideration gender and social inclusion as well as environmental and social safeguard 
principles. 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity) 
148. 
The United Nations Development Program will execute this GCF project as per a request made by the Government 
of the Republic of the Marshall Islands.  A similar direct implementation modality by UNDP was requested by the GoRMI 
for a $3.93 million GEF-funded project launched in February 2018.  UNDP has extensive experience as the Executing 
Entity of climate change adaptation projects globally.   
149. 
UNDP’s experience in supporting Pacific SIDs has also been significant, and growing, delivering an average of 
approximately USD30 million per annum across 15 Pacific SIDs through 4 offices.  In partnership with national 
governments, UNDP support hard and soft investments at all levels, from communities to local and national government 
and regional entities in order to strengthen inclusive growth, better services, environmental sustainability, good 
governance, and security that are fundamental to building resilience and sustaining development results.  As a Global 
Environment Fund (GEF) agency and Adaptation Fund (AF) Multilateral Implementing Entity (MIE), UNDP has 
completed and ongoing initiatives related to enhancing climate change and disaster risk resilience in food, water, and 
energy sectors. 
150. 
In RMI, UNDP has a long history of successful partnerships with the Government in the area of governance 
strengthening, climate change, renewable energy, gender, and environmental/natural resource management, integrated 
water resource management, at both national and international levels.  At the regional level UNDP is also supporting 
RMI through regional projects, which are listed in the Feasibility Study.  Foremost is the abovementioned $3.93 million 
GEF-funded project “Reimaanlok – Looking to the Future: Strengthening natural resource management in atoll 
communities in the Republic of Marshall Islands employing integrated approaches (RMI R2R)”, which would synergize 
with this GCF-proposed project in 5 atolls.  Other projects include, but are not limited to, successful joint efforts in: 
Second National Communication (SNC), National Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans (NBSAPs), mainstreaming of 
environmental sustainability and sustainable development goals into national policies, planning frameworks and 
programs, and local governance strengthening.  In addition, UNDP, in collaboration with GEF Small Grants Programme 
(SGP), have been tackling community-based initiatives on sustainable farming, youth and women empowerment, waste 
management, environmental conservation, water resilience, and renewable energy. 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable)

=== PAGE 34 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 78 
 
 
C 
Not applicable 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable) 
151. 
No government licenses or permits will be required for Outputs 1 and 2 as both outputs will only result in 
increasing of water harvesting and storage capacity at the household and community level.  At the community level the 
proposed project will assist local governments install RWH systems in public building.  These local government entities 
will obtain any licenses or permits required.  Although unlikely, the EPA will advise if any impact assessments are 
required once designs have been finalised. 
152. 
For any activities related to procurement of services through UNDP, taxes are not applicable in accordance with the 
Standard Basic Assistance Agreement signed with RMI of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the 
United Nations provides inter alia that the United Nations and its subsidiary agencies are exempt from all direct taxes 
(except charges for utilities services) as well as from customs duties and charges of a similar nature in respect of 
articles imported or exported for official use. If the services are procured directly by RMI implementing partners, then 
national and state legislation will apply, including payment of taxes such as VAT according to the national or state rates, 
as applicable. 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements 
153. 
At the request from the Government of RMI and the GCF National Designated Authority, and taking into account the 
procurement burdens entailed by what this project seeks to do, the project will be implemented as per UNDP’s Direct 
Implementation Modality (DIM).  The official request from the Government is included in Annex XIIIh. UNDP will 
manage the grant co-financing from GoRMI through a Cost Sharing Agreement (CSA). This will be blended with the GCF 
grant during implementation.  
154. 
The GCF grant will be managed directly by UNDP through the Direct Implementation Modality arrangement. The 
co-financing from RMI will also be managed by UNDP through a Cost-Sharing Agreement. The contractual 
arrangements and funds flow (Fig. C7.1) will ensure seamless implementation of the project with respect to 
procurement, transport and installation of rainwater harvesting and storage systems that will simultaneously meet 
water requirements for baseline and climate-induced droughts. Part of the funds may be coursed through responsible 
parties using the appropriate instrument: Letters of Agreement for government entities; Responsible Party Agreement 
for non-government organizations; UN-to-UN Agreement for IOM. Activities that will benefit the communities may also 
be implemented directly by UNDP through the PMU. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
                                                                    
                                                                    
 
 
155. 
A Project Management Unit (PMU), comprised of a group of project-financed staff, located in Majuro, will be 
responsible for the execution of the proposed activities, in collaboration with other responsible parties such as the RMI 
Environmental Protection Agency, (EPA) the Office of the Chief Secretary (OCS) and other government agencies, 
international agencies (e.g., International Organization for Migration – IOM) and non-government partners.  The PMU, 
LOA /RPA/UN-to-UN Agreement   
Green Climate Fund  
(GCF) 
Responsible Parties 
Beneficiaries 
United Nations Development 
Program (UNDP) 
FAA 
Government of RMI 
Co-financing 
CSA

=== PAGE 35 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 78 
 
 
C 
under contract by UNDP, will be responsible for day to day activities outlined in this project document. The work of the 
PMU will be overseen by UNDP. Costs related to Project Execution (e.g. the costs of project management staff for the 
duration of the project; costs for project inception, Steering Committee and other stakeholder meetings; costs of 
independent external evaluations; and costs for monitoring/evaluation-related travel of project staff to the field sites) 
have been costed and budgeted in the Project Management Costs. 
156. 
Under the DIM arrangement, UNDP assumes the responsibility for mobilizing and applying effectively the required 
inputs to achieve the expected outputs.  UNDP assumes overall management responsibility and accountability for 
project implementation.  Accordingly, the PMU is subject to UNDP policies and procedures. 
157. 
At the same time, as Accredited Entity to GCF, UNDP provides a three – tier oversight and quality assurance role 
involving UNDP staff in Country Offices and at regional and headquarters levels. The quality assurance role supports 
the Project Board by carrying out objective and independent project oversight and monitoring functions. This role 
ensures appropriate project management milestones are managed and completed. Project Assurance must be 
independent of the Project Management function; the Project Board cannot delegate any of its quality assurance 
responsibilities to the Project Manager or other members of the PMU.  The project assurance role is covered by the 
accredited entity fee provided by the GCF. As an Accredited Entity to the GCF, UNDP is required to deliver GCF-specific 
oversight and quality assurance services including: (i) Day-to-day oversight supervision, (ii) Oversight of project 
completion, (iii) Oversight of project reporting. UNDP contracted personnel involved in project execution will not 
perform oversight functions. Throughout the lifetime of the project, the project assurance and execution roles of UNDP 
will be strictly separated. 
158. 
The proposed high level organizational structure along with a description of each key role is provided below: 
 
Figure C7.1  Project organization structure 
 
159. 
The project will be guided by a Project Board (PB) and implementation will be via the PMU.  The Project Board will 
be the highest decision-making and coordination body for the project and will have bi-annual regular meetings.  It will 
be responsible for making, by consensus, management decisions when guidance is required by the PMU.  Project Board 
decisions will be made in accordance with standards that shall ensure management for development results, best value 
for money, fairness, integrity, transparency and effective international competition.

=== PAGE 36 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 78 
 
 
C 
160. 
The Project Board will be co-chaired by UNDP Country Director or his/her designated representative and the Chief 
Secretary from OCS.  Furthermore, representatives the Office of Environmental Policy and Planning Coordination (NDA 
of GCF), Environmental Protection Authority (EPA), Women’s United Together Marshall Islands (WUTMI), the 
association of Mayors and others will also be members of the PB. 
161. 
UNDP also participates in the PB as ‘senior supplier’ to represent the interests of the parties which provide funding 
and/or technical expertise to the project (designing, developing, facilitating, procuring, implementing).  The senior 
supplier’s primary function within the Board is to provide guidance regarding the policies and procedures that govern 
the implementation of project activities as per UNDP and GCF standards (as outlined in the AMA and FAA that will be 
entered into following a Board decision on this project). The senior supplier role will have the authority to commit or 
acquire supplier resources required.  
162. 
The PMU, headed by a Project Manager will be set up to manage day-to-day financial disbursement and project 
implementation.  The Project Manager will implement the project, under guidance of the PB and day-to-day supervision 
by UNDP and OCS within the constraints laid down by the PB and as per the Annual Work Plan approved by the PB and 
reviewed by UNDP.  The PM’s prime responsibility is to ensure that the project produces the results specified in the 
project document, to the required standard of quality and within the specified constraints of time and cost.  The Project 
Manager will have a matrix reporting arrangement to the UNDP Pacific Office and the RMI Office of Chief Secretary. 
163. 
The PMU will comprise a group of project-financed staff.  The PMU will be located in Majuro with several key staff 
members located in the UNDP Pacific Office in Fiji due to logistical requirements.  The PMU will be responsible for 
supporting the Project Manager in carrying out day-to-day activities of the project, the overall operational and financial 
management, and liaison with relevant stakeholders for the project.  The PMU comprises of the following positions: 
Majuro- and field-based 
• 
Project Manager:  Responsible for the oversight of direct project activities and deliverables, reporting and financial 
oversight, as well as staff management and coordination of project goals 
• 
Finance and Admin Officer: Responsible for the financial management of the project including the overall budget 
expenditures according to the Project Document, advising the Government, PMU and UNDP on the need for budget 
revision and/or off-track activities, and presenting financial analysis at Project Board meetings. 
• 
Procurement Officer:  Oversee every procurement that takes place in the project including individual and 
institutional contracts. 
• 
Admin/Finance/Procurement Assistant: Provides backstopping support to the two officers. 
• 
Area Coordinators (2): Oversee the implementations of project activities in the communities by working closely 
with the field engineers and the site coordinators. 
• 
Field Engineers (2): Responsible for the design and roll-out and technical support for operations and maintenance 
of household and community rainwater harvesting systems and related interventions. 
• 
Community Engagement Specialists (2): Provide assistance to site coordinators in engaging communities and 
securing support for project activities.  
• 
Gender and Youth Specialist: Ensure that gender and youth concerns are fully addressed by the project by working 
closely with all project staff and with communities as needed. 
• 
Site Coordinators (70): Community-based staff working directly with communities in the implementation of project 
activities.    
Suva based Project Staff 
• 
Deputy Project Manager:  Responsible for assisting the PM in every aspect of project management but will 
specifically be responsible for liaison with UNDP Pacific Office and key stakeholders in the project. 
• 
Finance and Admin Officer:  Responsible for setting up and maintaining the project accounting system, monitor 
quarterly and activity-wise expenditures vis-à-vis Annual Work Plan, prepare budget revision, process payment 
requests, update financial plans, and prepare status reports and other financial reports. 
Consultants 
• 
Chief Technical Advisor:  Responsible for bringing in international best practices to the implementation of the 
project and train the technical personnel in the PMU.  The CTA will be an international staff under UNDP contract. 
CTA will be hired for the duration of the project on a part-time basis.  The CTA will be based in in Majuro.

=== PAGE 37 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 78 
 
 
C 
• 
Short-term consultants will be hired to support the PMU. 
Responsible Parties 
164. 
During implementation, UNDP will assess the engagement of project partners, including government departments 
such as EPA and OCS, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) for provision of specific services consistent 
with the Direct Implementation Modality.  IOM has a sub-regional office in Pohnpei and a sub-office in Majuro that have 
been implementing projects on water in RMI, FSM and other Pacific SIDS.  
 
Operational arrangements 
165. 
Annex II- Feasibility Study has documented acceptance of an operations and maintenance (O&M) system:  Tier 1: 
Beneficiary households and Community Building Owners/Management Tier 2: Community Water Committees (CWC) 
or equivalent representative Tier 3: Mayors and Community Leaders (Chiefs) – Mayor Council Tier 4: OCS and NDMO/ 
National Government.  Refer Section D2 – Exit Strategy and Annex II – Feasibility Study (Sections 8.5 and 12) for further 
details.

=== PAGE 38 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 78 
 
 
C 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation 
166. 
Below is a summary of the project implementation schedule.  A more detailed schedule showing milestones in Annex X. 
TASK 
YEAR 1 
YEAR 2 
YEAR 3 
YEAR 4 
YEAR 5 
YEAR 6 
YEAR 7 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Output 1.  Implementation of optimal mix of interventions to ensure climate resilient water security in outer atolls and islands of RMI 
Activity 1.1. Improve 
existing rainwater 
harvesting systems 
for community 
buildings and 
households in outer 
islands and atolls 
for usage during 
increasing 
frequency and 
periods of drought 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 1.2. Provide 
additional rainwater 
harvesting systems 
and increase of 
storage capacity for 
communities in 
outer islands and 
atolls for usage 
during increasing 
frequency and 
periods of drought 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 2. Optimization of alternative water sources to reduce reliance on harvested rainwater in the context of reduced rainfall 
Activity 2.1. Protect 
groundwater wells 
from more frequent 
climate change 
induced storm 
surges and 
contaminations 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X

=== PAGE 39 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 78 
 
 
C 
Activity 2.2. 
Enhance women 
and youth’s 
leadership through 
best practices and 
community 
awareness 
programmes on 
efficient usage 
(demand 
management) of 
rainwater r 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
Output 3 Climate change induced drought preparedness and response measures implemented in outer atolls and islands 
Activity 3.1. . 
Update national-
level contingency 
plans and Standard 
Operating 
Procedures (SOPs) 
for climate change 
induced drought 
response 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Activity 3.2.  
Develop and 
implement 
community-level 
drought contingency 
planning in outer 
islands and atolls 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
Project 
Management 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X

=== PAGE 40 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 78 
 
 
 
 
D 
                                                             
30 https://www.adb.org/countries/marshall-islands/economy 
31 RMI (2017) Post Disaster Needs Assessment of the 2015-2016 Drought 
32 ibid 
 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement 
 
 
167. 
GCF would be financing the additional costs of adaptation that occur as a result of climate change.  As indicated in 
section C1, climate projections indicate that both drought frequency and duration are likely to increase in the future 
due to climate change.  Therefore, RMI is required to increase investments in both drought preparedness and drought 
response.  Considering that the most significant impact of drought is the scarcity of potable water in the islands and 
atolls during the latter stages of prolonged drought, additional investments are required to increase the capacity for 
rainwater harvesting and storage at both the household and community levels.  Likewise, RMI is required to make 
considerable investments in contingent planning and preparedness for longer droughts that are likely to be more 
frequent.  
168. 
The Marshall Islands is among the 10 smallest states in the world, and it struggles with the challenges of a 
dispersed population and a remote location far from potential markets for the country’s goods and services.  RMI’s 
economy is highly dependent on external aid, as the base for private sector growth is limited by its small size, 
remoteness, and dispersion over a vast ocean area.  The ADB indicates that the country’s economy, after a drought 
induced contraction in 2014/15, has only had GDP growth of 1.9% in 2016, and a forecast GDP growth of 4% and 2.5% 
for 2017 and 2018 respectively30.  However, the RMI PDNA31 estimates that the impact of the drought was even more 
significant and potentially reduced GDP growth to as low as 1%.  Based on the PDNA the total cost of emergency 
response and recovery to the extreme drought experienced during the period was estimated at USD 3 million, with 1.3 
million needed for recovery efforts in 2016, and the remaining 1.7 million needed for implementation of activities in 
FY 2017 and FY 2018.  The estimated economic impact of the drought for the 2016 financial year was approximately 
USD 4.9 million, comprising USD 4 million in disruptions of national production flows and USD 882,400 in higher costs of 
production, and USD 9,100 worth of livestock.32  The disruptions in production include USD 2.9 million in gross 
production losses in the agriculture, education and industrial sectors, as well as gross production increases worth USD 1.1 
million in electricity, water and sanitation, and commerce.  The higher production costs include higher commercial sales – 
such as bottled water and higher transport costs.  These economic effects are equivalent to 3.4% of RMI’s gross domestic 
product (GDP) for FY 2015.33 
169. 
Current government income is heavily dependent on the Compact of Free Association Agreement between the 
United States and the RMI which specifies direct grants from the US government to RMI for a number of sectors 
including education, health, private and public-sector development and environment.  However, grants related to the 
agreement are scheduled to expire in 2023 as per the agreement signed in 2003 after which RMI is required to rely on 
other sources including returns of a Compact Trust Fund established in the context of the Agreement.  Multiple 
assessment of the Compact Trust Fund indicate that the returns are unlikely to be adequate to replace current 
payments under the Compact.34,35  Considering these factors, the IMF estimates that the RMI fiscal balance is likely to 
deteriorate to a sizable deficit in the medium term.  
170. 
Under these constraints, the RMI is faced with significant climate change adaptation expenditures.  Apart from 
drought, RMI is exposed to a variety of other disaster risks, including coastal hazards (e.g. wave-induced erosion and 
flooding linked to king tides and storm surge) and tropical storms.  RMI is not in a seismically active area, however the 
tectonic boundaries of the Pacific plate are extremely active seismic zones and can generate earthquakes and tsunamis 
capable of travelling great distances.  The Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative36 in 2011 
estimated the average annual loss related to cyclones and tsunami/earthquake, to be around 1.7 % of GDP (i.e. USD 3 
million per year) and estimated that in the next 50 years, RMI has a 50% chance of experiencing a loss exceeding 
USD53 million and a 10% chance of experiencing a loss exceeding USD 160 million37..  
171. 
Therefore, RMI has limited financial capacity to fund this range of critical climate related additional investments 
while also absorbing replacement costs due to damages and response costs during disasters.  Like most vulnerable 
SIDS, RMI requires all available resources to invest in climate change adaptation.  As indicated earlier, a number of 
development partners are already financing investments in a number of other sectors.  Therefore, GCF resources are 
critical for the water sector in this context.

=== PAGE 41 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 78 
 
 
 
 
D 
 
                                                             
33 ibid 
34 http://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2015/09/28/04/52/mcs100711#top 
35 http://pacificpolicy.org/2013/12/compact-2024-whats-ahead-for-marshall-islands-and-fsm/ 
36 http://pcrafi.spc.int/ 
37 http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/pt/598091467993177149/pdf/96746-BRI-Box391446B-PUBLIC-MarshallIslands.pdf 
D.2. Exit Strategy 
172. 
The proposed project has been designed in close consultation with and involvement of relevant government 
agencies and technical line departments, international agencies such as IOM and Red Cross, local NGOs, private sector, 
and community CBOs on the target atolls.  These consultations and discussions (detailed in Annex XIIId-1), combined 
with tried and tested models for improved and resilient water management that are detailed in the Feasibility Study 
(Annex II) provide the project with a sound approach and a set of interventions that meet adaptation priorities and 
intervention needs that will be implemented with strong community participation and engagement of local officials. 
Building on this foundation, the project ensures that the investments, as well as the results of the interventions, are 
sustained beyond the project period and in the longer-term through the following elements of project design and 
implementation. 
173. 
Approximately 66% of the proposed project investment will be to install and upgrade rooftop rainwater 
harvesting mechanisms and to increase water storage capacity at the household and community levels.  The household 
investments will be operated and maintained over the lifetime of the components by the private household as it is their 
private interest to do so.  The lifetime of the components used to upgrade or install rooftop water catchment units are 
10 years and the lifetime of the water storage tanks are 25 years and 20 years for tank linings as per the 
manufacturers’ specifications certified by independent assessments (see Annex II - Feasibility Study).  
174. 
Agreement on the mechanism for Operation and Maintenance has been documented in Annex XIIIb.  The plan 
reflects local ownership and commitment for the long-term sustainability of the project activities and outcomes.   
175. 
The community systems will be operated and maintained by the local government authorities through the CWCs, 
with a financial allocation from the RMI government.  Letters of financial commitment from the RMI government for 
the project period and post project until 2045 are in Annex IV.  The type of investments proposed are not technically 
complex, therefore the materials required for O&M will be readily available.  
176. 
To ensure the sustainable management of the harvesting and storage systems and the equitable distribution, 
operation and maintenance of the water resource, the project will provide training to CWCs to conduct simple water 
balance assessments and access plans for community water resources.  Women and youth will particularly be targeted 
for training.  Female trainers will be trained and empowered to ensure that women’s specific vulnerabilities to climate 
change and water management are addressed. 
177. 
The project will invest in strengthening capacity and existing institutions in charge of early warning, preparedness 
and response to hydro-meteorological hazards (e.g. National Disaster Management Office).  Technical operations staff 
will be trained to communicate and disseminate drought forecasts and mobilize government departments and 
ministries in disaster response.  The SOPs developed at both national level and at the community level can be further 
developed and adaptively managed by the beneficiaries.  
178. 
Developing simple and affordable technologies based on the needs of RMI offers a cost-effective solution to the 
problem.  This is the core to the project strategy.  Rainwater harvesting is a viable solution to meet water supply 
targets inexpensively.  Thus, it is prioritized by the project to make households water self-sufficient.

=== PAGE 42 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 78 
 
 
 
E 
 
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas 
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential 
179. 
The GCF paradigm shift objective that this project would contribute to is “A2.0 Increased resilience of health and 
well-being, and food and water security”.  There will be approximately 15,572 (2017) direct beneficiaries (28% of the 
population of RMI) (of which 49% are female) and the entire nation will be indirectly benefit; approximately 55,226 
(2017) indirect beneficiaries (of which 49% are female.  This will be achieved through improved water security to the 
communities of the outer atolls and islands.   
180. 
The projects potential in terms of economic, environmental, technical and gender/social inclusion impacts are 
outlined below: 
Economic impact Potential 
181. 
The proposed solutions have low operation and maintenance costs compared to other possible solutions eg 
desalination would require provision of power and considerably more maintenance.  Economic assessment 
determined that the proposed interventions are cost-effective (refer Annex XII).  Economic benefits include avoided 
costs associated with options such as desalination (eg O&M costs), avoided disaster response costs and improved 
productivity due to some of the reasons given below eg reduced time collecting water, ability to continue with some 
economic activities eg production of handicrafts, reduction in migration etc.  With approximately 20% of RMI 
population reported to be living on less than USD 1 a day, financially sustainable solutions, such as those provided by 
this project, are critical to achieving the GCF objective A7.0 Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to 
climate risks. 
182. 
The RMI government has committed to allocate funds to cover periodic operating and maintenance costs beyond 
the life of the project (refer Annex IV), further enhancing the long-term impact of this project. 
Environmental impact potential 
183. 
As noted above, RWH and storage solutions do not require significant ongoing energy inputs, and therefore 
provide a solution that allows adaptation to climate change without need for increased power supply (which on RMI 
typically requires burning of fossil fuels).  Furthermore, the solutions proposed in this project have low maintance 
requirements in terms of consumables and replacement parts thereby reducing environmental impacts associated 
with both manufacture and transportation. 
184. 
The protection of 2,586 wells will reduce contamination of groundwater, benefiting both people and island flora 
and fauna that utilise groundwater.  Environmental sustainability will be enhanced nationally through improved 
management of water resources, which will be achieved through capacity building government and community 
institutions. 
Technical impact potential 
185. 
The proposed RWH technologies are far from complex.  Nevertheless, the project includes technical training for 
Water Management Committees and government water managers.  Training activities will include:  skills building for 
installation, operation, monitoring of RWH systems; groundwater testing training; climate awareness; disaster 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) development; gender awareness, menstrual hygiene management etc.  Female 
trainers will be trained and empowered to ensure that women’s specific vulnerabilities to climate change and water 
management are addressed.  Seventy seven communities across 24 atolls will directly benefit, and the strengthened 
governance will indirectly benefit the entire nation. 
186. 
The proposed infrastructure has life cycles of up to 25 years to last until 2045 and can be operated and 
maintained with minimal technical skills.  The project funding covers O&M costs and sustenance capital up to this 
period.   
Gender/social inclusion impact potential 
187. 
The project is based on a participatory approach –both government and community involvement will be key to 
the project success and will build buy-in and ownership of solutions.  Water security may be measured as the increase 
in months where households have rainwater available to them for consumption.  Islands in targeted atolls will be

=== PAGE 43 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 78 
 
 
 
E 
more resilient in terms of water security during the prolonged droughts that expected to result from climate change 
impacts.  
188. 
The engineered tanks that will be sourced by the project will include all the appurtenances to ensure ease of 
operations and maintenance assuring optimal water quality. This will include screens to exclude insect vectors and 
aprons/drainage to prevent ponding, which should help reduce vector borne diseases. Improved water supply will 
provide safe drinking water year-round, reduce migration during droughts, improve productivity due to reduction in 
time lost while collecting water, reduce social tensions caused by severe water shortages, help reduce the incidence of 
water-stress related diseases (which have been noted to increase during droughts). 
189. 
Negative impacts on education are reduced as schools will have water, absenteeism due to sickness will be 
reduced and children will spend less time collecting water.  Women will have greater involvement in the management 
of water resources and will also spend less time collecting water during droughts.  
190. 
Equitable distribution of water supply during drought to meet WASH requirements will be practiced and water 
conservation measures awareness training shall be provided.  
191. 
The project will provide for women’s direct engagement in a community decision-making process through their 
inclusion on Community-based Water Committees to ensure they have a formal, public role in water management. 
Over time, this could lead to women’s increased engagement in broader political processes at community and island 
level. 
 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only) 
Annual 
Not applicable 
Lifetime 
Not applicable 
• 
Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by 
gender (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
• 
Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only) 
Total 
Approximately 15,572 (2017) direct 
beneficiaries (28% of the population of 
RMI) (of which 49% are female) 
Approximately 55,226 (2017) indirect 
beneficiaries (of which 49% are female) 
Percentage 
(%) 
100% - Direct and indirect beneficiaries 
represent the total population of RMI 
Other 
relevant 
indicators 
• 
Access to safe freshwater year-round 
• 
Number of groundwater wells protected 
• 
Reduction in water-related health impacts 
• 
Number of Community-Based Water Committees 
• 
SOPs developed  
• 
Number of people with strengthened capacity  
192. 
All rural38 communities across the 24 inhabited local government jurisdictions with 5 or more households 
(approximately 30 people or more people) were considered as target communities for the proposed interventions.  
On this basis, 77 communities are being targeted.  Populations were estimated using census data and national 
population estimates available in 5 year intervals for 2011-204539 (refer Annex II Feasibility Study Annex 2). 
                                                             
38 Rural communities include: Communities of Majuro Atoll that are located outside the service area of MWSC; communities of Kwajalein 
Atoll that are located outside the service area of KAJUR; and communities located in the local government jurisdictions of the other 22 
outer islands and atolls. 
39 2016 SPC Pacific Island Populations. Estimates and projections of demographic indicators for selected years. (PRISM)

=== PAGE 44 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 78 
 
 
 
E 
193. 
The total number of indirect beneficiaries include all the households of RMI as capacity building will result in 
improved water resource management and improved disaster preparedness (particularly to droughts) nationally. 
Comparison of project indicator values with similar projects 
194. 
One project that is similar, in a comparable context, is the IOM “Rainwater Harvesting Improvement Project” 
supported by the New Zealand Government.  This project aimed to pilot the improvement of rainwater harvesting 
systems at the household level in the outer islands of RMI.  A total of 68 households were targetted for improvements 
and the project achieved to benefit 94% of the target beneficiaries during implementation. 
195. 
Another similar project was the GIZ-funded “Improving Water Supply Resilience for the Outer Islands High 
School in the Republic of Marshall Islands”.  The project had the following objective:  To contribute to Goals 3 and 5 
of the JNAP and to WASH cluster objective 3 of the RMI Drought Response Plan, measurable against the following 
outcomes: 1) increased supply of potable for students, staff and neighbouring communities of Kwajalein Atoll High 
School (KAHS) and Northern Islands High School (NIHS) during times of drought and low rainfall by July 2018; and 
2) improved management of water resources at KAHS and NIHS by July 2018 
196. 
Parallels can also be drawn between the approved GCF Maldives project: “Supporting vulnerable communities in 
Maldives to manage climate change-induced water shortages”, which includes activities related to rainwater 
harvesting and integrated water management on low-lying atolls and islands.  The set of indicators for this project is 
in fact similar to the proposed Maldives GCF project, which is an indication that SIDS in the Pacific region are facing 
similar set of constraints/barriers. 
 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment 
 
 
197. 
There are a number of past and existing initiatives underway in RMI to address water security and resilience, 
however many have been one-off efforts financed through time-bound projects, often initiated through drought 
response rather than strategically placing investments to avoid or mitigate droughts and/or holistically strengthen 
and improve the freshwater resource systems on which communities rely.  Further, previous initiatives have often 
lacked sufficient capacity building elements for government and communities, or the legislative framework within 
which to focus efforts.  This project adopts a holistic approach to the integration of actions at various levels of 
community, local and national institutional to implement sustainable infrastructure aligns with the new National 
Environmental Protection Act and the National Water and Sanitation Policy. 
198. 
The proposed project supports the Government of RMI in adapting to increasing climate risks, particularly 
droughts which are becoming more frequent and extreme, which impact the country’s drinking water supply.  The 
climate modeling distinguished between non-climate-induced (baseline) drought and climate-induced droughts 
which formed the basis for climate additionality.  The project will both meet the water supply gap for both types of 
drought with the baseline drought requirements fully financed by government and the gap due to climate change will 
be supported by GCF.  The investments from both government and GCF will be implemented simultaneously. 
199. 
The project considered five sources of water - rainwater harvested by households, rainwater harvested by 
communities/municipalities, groundwater accessed through wells, desalinated seawater and demand management – 
to determine the optimal and cost-effective portfolio of sources to be developed by the proposed project.  This 
analysis used a marginal unit cost of water approach and determined the mix of investments to meet the water 
security objectives during droughts (Figure E2.1).  This economic assessment of potential supply side and demand-
side solutions informed the investments proposed by the project.

=== PAGE 45 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 78 
 
 
 
E 
 
Figure E2.1.  Example of cost curve methodology 
 
200. 
The optimisation of existing and addition of new water harvesting infrastructure and the expansion of water 
storage capacity sufficient to provide communities with a minimum of 20L per day per person during droughts and 
practically throughout the year is a paradigm shift as it will make communities self-reliant in terms of water supply.  
Operation and maintenance of the enhanced systems will be in the control of the households and the communities 
that will directly benefit, who in turn will be supported by the national Water Office newly established under the EPA. 
 
 
Figure E2.2 Theory of Change

=== PAGE 46 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 78 
 
 
 
E 
 
201. 
The establishment of a national Water Office, supported by community water committees, to manage water 
resources is an institutional paradigm shift for RMI.  This will provide integrated water management thoughout RMI.  
This in turn will enable RMI to be better prepared for disasters as a coordinated approach to water management, and 
in particular the reporting of stored water volumes, when coupled with forecasts will enable water managers to 
preempt likely shortages and assist the government to mobilise emergency resources to where they are most likely to 
be required. 
202. 
The increased protection of groundwater is a paradigm shift as groundwater has been shown to be a critical 
secondary water source and at present wells are unprotected and presently represent a means for contamination 
from climate change events (e.g. storm surge and king tides) to impact groundwater resources. 
203. 
The theory of change articulated below illustrates how each of the three outputs of the proposed project 
contribute to the long-term objective and how the resulting project impacts can be sustained to contribute to climate-
resilience in RMI.  Through integration of the specific elements described in the Exit Strategy into the project design 
and implementation, conditions are created that lead to sustained impacts and potential for scale up of the initial 
impact. 
204. 
The Theory of Change for the proposed project is shown in the diagram below (Figure E2.2).  It illustrates how 
the development of project outputs will lead to an outcome of strengthened capacity of the RMI government and 
communities to manage the water security impacts of climate change-induced droughts communities in the outer 
atolls and. In the longer-term, the outputs will lead to a fund level impact of a reduction of climate change related 
disaster risks for the region through enabling a new integrated water management paradigm that involves both 
communities and government institutions to better manage drought risks on RMI. 
 
205. 
Provisions have been made, through the Gender Analysis and Action Plan (Annex XIIIc), to ensure that gender 
mainstreaming approaches are applied throughout the project.

=== PAGE 47 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 78 
 
 
 
E 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale) 
206. 
The project will address the water needs of all rural40 communities across the 24 inhabited local government 
jurisdictions with 5 or more households and is national in its scope, therefore further scaling up and replication of the 
physical interventions within RMI is limited.  However the approach taken ie rigorous technical, financial, 
environmental/social analysis, including climate modelling, can be applied to other sectors within RMI.  Further, the 
physical interventions, being technically simple and cost effective, have considerable scope for application in other 
SIDS globally. 
207. 
The proposed project, through rigorous engineering, financial and economic analyses, shows rainwater 
harvesting and storage to be the most viable and cost-effective option to meet the drought water security needs of 
RMI atolls and islands.  This assessment methodology as well as the potential to use rainwater as a primary source of 
water can be replicated in a number of contexts across the world where climate change induced droughts impact on 
the availability of potable water and where options are limited due to constraints similar to those in the RMI.  
208. 
Whereas in many contexts considerably expensive solutions are promoted for climate change adaptation in 
general and for water supply in particular, this project will show that technologically simple, low cost and accessible 
technologies such as rainwater harvesting if well planned and implemented comprehensively, can solve intractable 
water scarcity related to climate change.  
209. 
Furthermore, the proposed project demonstrates that hardware development needs to be complimented by soft 
approaches such as capacity strengthening.  The development of RWH systems and the rehabilitation of groundwater 
wells can only be successful if the community is able to prepare for droughts by concomitantly reducing the 
consumption of water and using the available water rationally and equitably. 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning 
210. 
Implementation of concrete adaptation actions on the ground will constitute the primary learning experience, 
which will feed into all awareness, training and knowledge management actions facilitated and conducted by the 
project.  More specifically the project will design and deliver training programmes in water management, planning 
and budgeting, expenditure management and performance monitoring for relevant atoll and island councils and the 
Government of RMI. 
211. 
The development and training of CWCs will provide opportunities for knowledge sharing within and between 
island communities.  Women and youth will be targeted for training and engagement in CWCs. The CWCs will be 
instrumental in not only the operation and maintenance of the RWH systems and protected groundwater wells, but 
also in the broader education of communities to better manage water resources.  Many of the skills that will be 
developed by the CWCs will be transferable to other sectors. 
212. 
This project will show that technologically simple, low cost and accessible technologies such as rainwater 
harvesting if well planned and implemented comprehensively, can solve intractable water scarcity related to climate 
change.  Opportunities exist for RMI to share their experiences gained during the project with other SIDS, this will be 
facilitated through the support that will be provided by the UNDP office in Fiji that is also supporting other 
programmes in the region, as well as via other organisations and donors, such as SREP, Adaptation Network, World 
Bank etc.  Finally, project learnings can be shared via GCF e.g. through GCFs website and forums such as the 
Structured Dialogues.  
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
                                                             
40 Rural communities include: Communities of Majuro Atoll that are located outside the service area of MWSC; communities of Kwajalein 
Atoll that are located outside the service area of KAJUR; and communities located in the local government jurisdictions of the other 22 
outer islands and atolls.

=== PAGE 48 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 78 
 
 
 
E 
213. 
The scale of the proposed GCF project allows to address resilience in a systematic manner within a programmatic 
approach that combines national and local support and addresses local capacity including barriers 
214. 
Weak governance, such as the lack of effective mechanisms and institutions to provide guidance and to develop 
strategies for climate change adaptation and mainstreaming, has so far prevented the adoption of effective short and 
long-term solutions for climate change and disaster risk management in RMI.  The refinement of the JNAP framework 
and its operationalization, will provide the required structure to support the resilient development in all sectors.  This 
new structure will also support decision and policy-makers with comprehensive perspectives of climate related 
issues, and in turn allow them to take informed decisions. 
215. 
The project will support the development of capacity in climate change adaptation and disaster risk management, 
and build the capacity of institutions such as the NDMO and EPA.  This will be done through training, and a facilitated 
process to develop disaster management and response SOPs.  It will provide the required capacity (both human and 
materials) for effective collaboration mechanisms for disaster preparedness and response, and long-term strategy 
planning.  
216. 
The project will support regulatory management in the water sector that promotes decentralized approaches to 
island and atoll level solutions for self-sufficiency for water production and management. Enabling decentralized 
approaches through participation of households and decentralized authorities in decision-making around operation 
and maintenance, can promote inclusive development and representative governance. 
217. 
The implementation of the onground activities will also result in the strengthening of the market for rainwater 
harvesting and storage hardware.  The extent of the project investment across RMI atolls and islands, coupled with 
improved O&M practices, will result in an increase in demand for parts for maintenance.  The training provided to 
young people and by the practical training provided during project implementation will help provide potential 
resources for complimentarily SMEs for the service and maintenance of these systems.    
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
218. 
The project is in line with, and will contribute to the implementation of a number of regulatory frameworks and 
polices of RMI.  The project is fully aligned with the following overarching national policies and strategies, including: 
National Strategic Plan 2015 – 2017, Vision 2018 (2001), National Climate Change, Policy Framework (2011), RMI 
Climate Change Roadmap (2010) and the Joint National Action Plan for Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk 
Management (JNAP 2014-2018).  Furthermore, the project directly implements the objectives and outcomes outlined 
in RMI’s water sector policies and laws, including the National Water and Sanitation Policy (2014), and the National 
Environmental Protection Act 1984 (2016 amendment).  
219. 
Other relevant polices that the project contributes to advance include: EPA Public Water Supply Regulations, 
1994, Standard Hazard Mitigation Plan, 1994/2005, Disaster Risk Management National Action Plan 2008 – 2018, 
RMI National Emergency Response Plan (2010), the RMI Drought Contingency Plan (2010) and the National Gender 
Mainstreaming Policy. 
220. 
Additionally, the project supports RMI in achieving various commitments and efforts under international 
agreements and mechanisms.  Access to clean water is a basic human right and a universal development priority with 
great potential to improve health, life expectancy, education, food security and livelihoods.  Sustainable Development 
Goal (SDG) 6 is: “to ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all”.  The RMI 
Government has committed to achieving gender equity and social inclusion outcomes through ratification of 
numerous international and regional conventions including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the 
Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), the Convention on the Rights 
of the Child (CRC), the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the Beijing Platform for Action, the Revised Pacific 
Platform for Action for the Advancement of Women and Gender Equality and the 2012 Forum Leaders Gender 
Equality Declaration.  The ACWA project will allow RMI to make significant contributions in advancing these 
international priorities. 
 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential

=== PAGE 49 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 78 
 
 
 
E 
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive development impact 
Environmental co-benefits 
221. 
Reduced reliance on manufactured water (i.e. desalination) reduces energy usage and transportation impacts.  
Reduced consumption of bottled water results in less waste production – in particular, plastic waste which is 
particularly hard to deal with in SIDS. 
222. 
Protection of wells will reduce contamination of groundwater; this has environmental benefits as groundwater 
helps support island vegetation. 
223. 
Currently during periods of extreme drought, water is transported to remote islands and atolls of RMI by ship. 
With this project, this need will be avoided resulting in reduced greenhouse gas emissions from transportation.  The 
reduction in migration pressure will also reduce transportation impacts. 
Social co-benefits 
224. 
The provision of rainwater harvesting systems and water supply will result in a social co-benefit by reducing 
household and community disputes over access to, and use of limited water resources during drought conditions. 
This will result in reduced damages to social cohesion, and will diminish the pressure on households located in outer 
atolls and islands, especially women who are responsible for domestic tasks and during periods of drought, women 
take on a disproportionate burden collecting water from mobile desalination units that are deployed to affected 
communities. 
225. 
Disturbances in water supply, leading to water shocks and inadequate personal hygiene caused by drought, 
salination of aquifers, and consumption of contaminated groundwater are one of the main underlying factors 
contributing to vector/food/waterborne disease, diarrheal illness, skin and eye infections and other key climate and 
water-sensitive diseases. The provision of safe and clean potable water will result in decreased climate-sensitive 
disease, and will improve sanitation conditions, especially for women and girls living in outer atolls and islands of 
RMI. 
226. 
Improved water harvesting systems in community buildings, including schools is expected to have a positive 
impact of the school attendance rate. The provision of training programmes for women and youth will furthermore 
strengthen technical skills and knowledge on climate change and its impacts. The project will also improve the 
decision-making processes and capacities of local communities by reducing the barriers of access to water and 
efficient water management practices, and by improving water, and subsequently food security.  
227. 
Finally, migration from outer atolls and islands to urban areas of Majuro and Ebeye is expected to decrease, as 
households and communities will have access to water during periods of drought.  The project, by covering all 
communities in outer islands and atolls, will reduce the likelihood of climate-induced migration in search of better 
living conditions in water secure areas.  
Economic co-benefits 
228. 
The primary quantifiable economic benefits of the proposed project are the avoided disaster response cost, the 
reduced time spent collecting water during drought and the avoided costs related to sickness and exposure to 
untreated water for drinking and cooking purposes.  This in turn can lead to positive secondary impacts or co-benefit 
from improved productivity and long-term human development and wellbeing, which multiply the benefits of the 
initial investment.  
229. 
The project will result in the creation of a number of jobs both during project implementation (refer Figure C7.1) 
along with construction roles, and post-project roles associated with ongoing operations and management eg CWCs 
and service technicians. 
230. 
Additionally, as mentioned earlier, considering the scale of the investment, the project will develop the market for 
water and sanitation service delivery with knock-on impacts on the demand for technical and technology provision 
services and the employment multiplier that this ‘green industry’ could have.  Anecdotal evidence supports 
assumptions that addressing water shortages will be source of job and income generation.  
231. 
Another co-benefit mentioned earlier would be the stabilization of population in the outer islands, thereby 
creating alternative growth poles in the larger islands which would take pressure off Majuro and spread the benefits 
of growth more evenly, which will help to improve adaptive capacity for the population in the longer term.  These

=== PAGE 50 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 78 
 
 
 
E 
benefits are likely to manifest in the longer-term and will not be formally part of the results framework, though 
household surveys conducted for this investment will track trends. 
Gender co-benefits 
232. 
Improving water quality and supply at both community and household level will create more equitable access to 
water resources for vulnerable groups, including women, children and the elderly, and will improve health and 
education outcomes, enhance livelihoods, and reduce household and community level conflict caused by water 
shortages. 
233. 
Benefits will include: 
• 
Opportunities to generate additional income. Women and youth are more likely to respond to incentives that 
address their family’s basic needs, such as better health and nutrition, as a result of water security measures and 
the provision of 20 lpcd of potable water.   
• 
Women and youth from targeted communities will be trained in O&M and construction skills of household and 
rainwater harvesting systems, groundwater wells etc. This will enable women and young people living in rural 
areas who have limited employment opportunities to be actively engaged in designing, constructing, operating, 
maintaining and monitoring community water security investments, which will serve to build sustainability and 
increase employability; 
• 
Focus, through training and awareness on WASH will support more equitable distribution of water resources 
during drought. 
• 
Time-saving for women and youth as a result of lower hours in labour required for water management practices 
prior to the implementation of the project; 
• 
Contribution to improved self-esteem and empowerment of women and youth in the community; 
• 
Expanded involvement in public and project decision-making, and enhanced knowledge on climate change and 
efficient water practices as a result of formal and informal education programmes for women and youth; 
• 
Effectiveness of awareness raising on climate change adaptation and its adverse impacts on the water, and 
agriculture sector in outer atolls and islands of RMI. 
• 
New Standard Operating Procedures for household and community water security measures will be gender and 
age sensitive through the inclusion of GESI indicators. 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient 
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only) 
234. 
RMI is one of the most vulnerable countries to climate change given its high exposure and vulnerability to climate 
and disaster impacts. RMI is highly exposed to, and threatened by, sea level rise, extreme tidal events (such as king 
tides), as well as higher rainfall episodes with longer and more intense dry periods.  The estimated cost for adaptation 
is one of the highest in the world in terms of percent of GDP at 7.24% (ranked eighth in the world)41.  The average 
annual loss related to typhoons and tsunami/earthquake, was estimated to be around 1.7% of GDP (i.e. USD 3 million 
per year). In outer islands and atolls, 20% of the population lives on less than USD1 a day42.  This socio-economic 
                                                             
41 Nurse, L.A., R.F. McLean, J. Agard, L.P. Briguglio, V. Duvat-Magnan, N. Pelesikoti, E. Tompkins, and A. Webb, 2014: Small islands. In: 
Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change .Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and 
New York, NY, USA, pp. 1613-1654. / Tsyban, A., J. T. Everett, J. G. Titus, and others. World Oceans and Coastal Zones. Australian 
Government Publishing Service, Canberra, Australia, 1990. http://risingsea.net/papers/federal_reports/IPCC-far_wg_II_chapter_6.pdf.  
42 Source; Nurse, L.A., R.F. McLean, J. Agard, L.P. Briguglio, V. Duvat-Magnan, N. Pelesikoti, E. Tompkins, and A. Webb, 2014: Small islands. 
In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change .Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and 
New York, NY, USA, pp. 1613-1654. / Tsyban, A., J. T. Everett, J. G. Titus, and others. World Oceans and Coastal Zones. Australian 
Government Publishing Service, Canberra, Australia, 1990. http://risingsea.net/papers/federal_reports/IPCC-far_wg_II_chapter_6.pdf.

=== PAGE 51 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 78 
 
 
 
E 
vulnerability exacerbates the impacts of climate change making communities in RMI more susceptible to these natural 
hazard events given their limited adaptive capacities.   
235. 
In the remote atolls and islands of RMI, there is a lack of income-generating opportunities leading to high 
unemployment, financial hardship, factors providing incentives for urban migration from outer atolls and islands to 
Majuro, and international migration to the United States 
236. 
Despite the recognition of the importance of enhancing water security, resilience, and governance in order for 
RMI to achieve its sustainable development aspirations, the government faces constraints in addressing water 
challenges at the scale and urgency that is required, without external assistance, especially in the context of 
anticipated impacts of climate change.  The capital cost of proposed water investments will amount to USD 11,604 per 
household which is about 600% of the median household income in outer islands of RMI.  Given that the national 
economy of RMI faces high risk of debt distress as per IMF’s Debt Sustainability Analysis, it will be difficult for the 
Government to raise debt to finance the project.  Therefore, grant financing from the Green Climate Fund is the most 
suitable financial mechanisms for to fund RMI’s transformational change in the water sector. 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
237. 
RMI is a lower middle-income country with a 2016 per gross national income per capita income of USD 5,280 
(PPP) and nearly universal access to education and other services.43  However, considering the remoteness of the 
outlying islands, the country fails in indicators such as under-5 mortality and infant mortality rates compared to 
other countries of similar income.  Considering that RMI consists of a large number of small islands and atolls with 
only 180 km2 of land area spread over 1.9 million km2 of ocean, cost of economic activity is high, and economies of 
scale are hard to achieve.  The cost of providing of government services are high and constrained by logistical 
challenges.  
238. 
After almost four decades under US administration, the Marshall Islands gained independence in 1986.  However, 
under a Compact of Free Association with the United States, direct compact grants from the US account for nearly a 
quarter of the RMI GDP of USD 180 million.  The total official development assistance received in 2016 was USD 57 
million accounting for 32% of the national income.  The remaining income of the country is derived from the service 
sector accounting for nearly 70% of the GDP, royalties from the fisheries sector and small-scale handicrafts and 
mostly subsistence agriculture. Industry is limited to the processing of coconut products and tuna.  
239. 
As per assessments by the ADB44, GDP growth in FY2016 was 1.9% and a contraction of 0.4% in FY2015.  
Assessments by RMI PDNA suggest that the GDP growth in 2016 was even lower45.  The economy is projected to 
accelerate to 4% growth in 2017 due investments by the US in infrastructure and by a major water supply project in 
Ebeye funded by ADB, Australian DFAT and the Compact.  This growth is likely to slow to 2.5% in 2018 when these 
projects come to conclusion.  
240. 
Exports are low, and the non-diversified domestic economy has brought high dependence on imports, which are 
funded largely by the sale of offshore fishing rights and high levels of foreign aid.  Foreign aid funds support a very 
large public sector that dominates the economy. 
241. 
In fiscal year 2023 the US Compact grants are scheduled to expire. This requires the RMI to achieve long-term 
budgetary self-reliance and sustained growth the realization of which is severely hampered by significant challenges 
related to extreme weather-related events partially attributable to climate change.  The International Monetary Fund 
based on consultations held in the RMI in July 2016 “emphasized the need for continued efforts to mitigate climate 
change risks, including explicit budget provisions for adaptation costs”. 
242. 
Nearly 75% of the population of RMI lives in the two urban centers of Majuro (29,006 as of 2017)) and Ebeye 
(10,932 as of 2017).  Considering the limited economic opportunity and higher disaster vulnerability of the outlying 
island and atolls, these two centers have seen significant migration in recent years.  Migration is also accelerating 
from Marshall Islands to the United States given terms under the Compact that Marshallese citizens may work and 
study in the United States without a visa.  These forces of migration contribute to further decline of the outer island 
economy, therefore increasing further reducing the viability of public service provision.   
                                                             
43 Source: World Bank. Accessible here: https://data.worldbank.org/country/marshall-islands?view=chart  
44 https://www.adb.org/countries/marshall-islands/economy 
45 RMI (2017) PDNA

=== PAGE 52 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 78 
 
 
 
E 
243. 
Limited employment opportunities in terms of the number and variety of jobs are a key economic and social 
challenge in Republic of Marshall Islands, where the public sector provides a very high number of formal jobs. 
According to 2011 census data, unemployment is not high (4.7%), but there is a very low level of labor force (only 
12,924 out of 31,307of people aged 15 or older).  
Financial Needs:  
244. 
RMI faces budget deficits, substantial fiscal risks, and the expiration of the current Compact Grant Agreement 
with the United States in 2023.  Private sector development is limited by remoteness, small market size, public sector 
and state-owned enterprise (SOE) dominance in major sectors, in a combination of weak business climate and 
constraining growth, making fiscal sustainability challenging.  Household debt and debt service ratios are high, while 
the supervisory power and capacity of the Banking Commission is hindered by institutional and resource 
constraints46. 
245. 
Financial conditions regarding RMI’s macro-fiscal situation, revenue profile, expenditure profile, and debt make 
external grant financing for the proposed water investments critical for RMI are as below: 
• 
Overall fiscal balance has oscillated within a narrow range between -1.6 to 3.5% of GDP (except for the year 
FY2005 when it plunged to -22.3%).  This is despite the pursuit of major policy changes and reforms undertaken 
by the GoRMI especially impacting the revenue.  
• 
Fiscal position of GoRMI appears unrelated to the economic cycle.  As instances, the government ran surpluses 
during the financial crisis of FY2008-FY2009 period (when real GDP growth was negative), but ran deficits in 
FY2012 and FY2013 when conditions had improved. 
• 
The major source of tax revenue is income tax, accounting for US$11.8 million, or 39% of a total tax yield of USD 
30.9 million in FY2015.  This income tax, customs and other import duties which constitute second most 
significant category in terms of yield have not been buoyant sources of revenues for Government of RMI.  
• 
Undiversified base of non-tax revenues:  The collection from non-tax revenue sources of the GoRMI is around USD 
17.8 million in FY2015, of which more than 88% is consequent to fishing fees (i.e. royalties). 
• 
Diminishing but substantial dependence on grants:  though steadily declining especially since FY2010, 
dependency on grants is still significant which account for over 50% of its expected revenues in FY2015.  With 
regard to the grants from US (the single largest source), annual assistance to the RMI under the amended 
Compact has been diminishing since 2003. After the Compact grant period expires in 2023, the RMI is expected to 
complement domestic revenues with returns from the Compact Trust Fund, which receives annual savings from 
fiscal surpluses and contributions from development partners. 
• 
No major structural change in expenditure portfolio: Expenditures by economic item are dominated by wages 
and salaries and spending on goods and services accounting for around 70% of total expenditure of GoRMI.  
246. 
Declining nonetheless, significant indebtedness of the GoRMI: The ratio of central government debt to GDP has 
also improved and fallen from about 50% of GDP to 35% during the period but is still significant.  
Institutional needs: 
The GoRMI is facing significant institutional gaps in implementing the National Water and Sanitation Policy, as well as the 
National Environmental Protection act, including the following: 
• 
Limited coordination, reporting and accountability mechanisms, including limited institutions and 
stakeholders with formalized roles and responsibilities at the subnational and community level are some of 
the institutional needs of the GoRMI.  
• 
A disconnect between community-based and national level water coordinating mechanisms.  
• 
Limited information generated and shared for all types of water resources at all levels, limiting 
transparency and evidence-based participatory decision-making at all levels. 
• 
Limited accountability frameworks and participation at all levels of governance. 
                                                             
46 IMF 2014. IMF Country Report No. 14/26. RMI. Staff Report for the 2013 Article IV Consultation.

=== PAGE 53 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 78 
 
 
 
E 
• 
Limited effectiveness of water governance especially in terms of functioning institutions at the subnational 
level and coordination mechanisms with other sectors.   
• 
Stakeholders and institutions working on political (i.e. participatory decision-making process related to water 
resources and distribution), social (i.e. equitable access and distribution, including women, children and 
vulnerable groups) and economic (i.e. application of cost effective and efficient solutions) dimensions of water 
are still limited at all levels.   
 
E.5.  Country Ownership 
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs 
247. 
Climate change adaptation and water resilience is a key priority for RMI, and the country has developed a number 
of policies and plans to execute this commitment.  The proposed project is aligned with and directly delivers on these 
priorities outlined by RMI’s national development, climate change, water, and disaster risk management policy.  Major 
policy frameworks in RMI this proposed project is aligned with include: 
• 
Vision 2018 (2001) – is the first segment of RMI’s long-term Strategic Development Plan Framework 2003–2018 
and is the principal policy instrument guiding RMI’s sustainable development.  Climate change resilience and 
water sector improvements are part of three of its ten goals. 
• 
The National Strategic Plan (NSP) (2015 – 2017) – is the roadmap for development progress in anticipation of the 
he scheduled completion of the U.S. Compact Agreement in 2023.  Climate change and water resilience are 
highlighted as critical priorities in the NSP, particularly in achieving environment and climate change resiliency 
and infrastructure development. The water sector is positioned within the NSP as an important cross-cutting 
issue in promoting adaptation to climate change. 
• 
RMI Climate Change Roadmap 2010 – is the national framework for climate change and sustainable development 
and refers to the need for drought resiliency.  
• 
2011 National Climate Change Policy Framework (NCCPF) - presents five strategic goals that aim to provide a 
pathway to an integrated, whole-of-RMI response to climate change.  
• 
Joint National Action Plan on Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Management (JNAP) for RMI 
highlights water resilience in face of climate change is a key issue highlighted  
• 
Micronesia Challenge and Reimaanlok Action Plan – RMI’s conservation plan which aims to aims to effectively 
conserve 30% of near shore marine and 20% of terrestrial resources across Micronesia by 2020. It also maps the 
course of actions to be taken by Marshall Islands, to establish and manage community-based conservation areas.  
Testing of the quality and quantity of the groundwater is part of the Reimaanlok process’ household surveys 
(Reimaanlok steps 3-4).  
• 
The GEF-UNDP project “Reimaanlok – Looking to the Future: Strengthening natural resource management in atoll 
communities in the Republic of Marshall Islands employing integrated approaches (RMI R2R)”, which would 
synergize with this GCF-proposed project in 5 atolls“(RMI R2R)”, which would synergize with this GCF-proposed 
project in the 5 atolls. 
• 
National Water and Sanitation Policy and National Environmental Protection Act (Amendment) 2016 – provides a 
guideline and support the national and local governments in the formulation of water and sanitation laws, 
guidelines, strategies, investment plans, programs and projects, as well as a framework for the management of 
freshwater resources, water supply, safe disposal of excreta and wastewater and the promotion of hygienic 
behaviors.  The amended Act in 2016 also designated RMI Environmental Protection Authority (EPA) as the 
Water Office, who will monitor and implement the National Water and Sanitation Policy and the 5- year National 
Water and Sanitation Policy Action Plan. 
• 
The proposed GEF-funded regional project “Managing Coastal Aquifers in Selected Pacific SIDS” covering RMI, 
Palau and Tuvalu, which will improve the understanding, use, management and protection of coastal aquifers

=== PAGE 54 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 78 
 
 
 
E 
towards enhanced water security within the context of a changing climate. This project with potential funding of 
$5.24 million, over 30% of which will be for RMI, will directly complement this proposed GCF project. 
248. 
Furthermore, the project aligns with and delivers on key international goals and frameworks that RMI is 
committed to, including the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the Sendai 
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, and the Sustainable Development Goals (SGDs) – especially SDG6: 
Ensure access to water and sanitation for all, SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls, and 
SDG 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
249. 
The United Nations Development Program will execute this GCF project as per a request made by the Government 
of the Republic of the Marshall Islands. UNDP has extensive experience as the Executing Entity of climate change 
adaptation projects globally as has already been discussed in Section C4. 
250. 
As a UN agency, UNDP must comply with the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers (HACT) Framework, which 
represents a common operation framework for UN agencies’ transfer of cash to government and non-government 
implementing partners.  As part of this proposal development, UNDP commissioned HACT micro assessments to 
assess the RMI government’s control framework.  The HACT assessment provides a risk rating that can be used to 
help select the appropriate modality for an implementing partner.  The assessment for RMI resulted in ‘moderate’ risk 
for the assessed implementing partners.  UNDP will be the Executing Entity for this project as Direct Implementation 
Modality (DIM) was determined to be the most appropriate. 
251. 
Globally, UNDP works in nearly 170 countries and territories and it focuses on helping countries build and share 
solutions in three main areas of sustainable development: democratic governance and peacebuilding, and climate and 
disaster resilience, all of which contribute to the achievement of poverty eradication, reduction of inequalities and 
exclusion. Long-term capacity building of partner countries is a critical element of UNDP’s approach to work.  The 
proposed GCF project is in line with the underlying principles of UNDP’s mandate:  The project contributes to 
reducing the vulnerability of a SIDS to imminent climate risks while contributing to the capacity building of the nation 
at all levels. 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
252. 
Based on request received from RMI Government on June 2015, UNDP in partnership with Office of 
Environmental Planning and Policy Coordination (OEPPC), RMI’s National Designated Authority (NDA) for the Green 
Climate Fund (GCF), and stakeholders in RMI have worked towards the development of the proposed project.  Various 
stakeholders were consulted and participated in the developing of the project – including the President, national 
government representatives from various Ministries and Departments, Mayors, Senators, village chiefs, school 
teachers, health practitioners, school children, women and men’s group members, youth groups, public utility 
companies, shipping companies, civil society organizations, international agencies, universities, development 
partners, regional agencies, etc.  Meetings, workshops, surveys, focus-group discussions, and site observations were 
used as ways of capturing stakeholders’ perspectives, experience, and knowledge into the proposal design as well as 
keeping stakeholders informed of the proposal development process and progress. 
253. 
From May 2015 – February 2017, the Government of RMI in partnership with UNDP held 5 national stakeholder 
consultation meetings (including a broad stakeholder meeting on 9 Feb 2017).  Six technical assessments missions 
were made s largely supported by UNDP itself as well as other bilateral organizations notably the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs and Trade (MFAT) of New Zealand, USAID Adapt Asia-Pacific and Pacific Climate Ready projects, and the Korea 
Environmental Industry & Technology Institute (KEITI). The team of UNDP experts collaborated with thematic 
experts in the areas of gender, financial and economic sustainability, and water engineering contribute to the project 
design process in-country in RMI and remotely.  Thirty-three community visits were conducted where men and 
women’s group consultations were held and site surveys were conducted to assess the structural condition of the 
existing water infrastructure.  These community consultations and assessments implemented in partnership with 
Women’s United Together Marshall Islands (WUTMI) and Marshall Islands Organic Farmers Association (MIOFA).  
Some of the community consultations were conducted together with GIZ and SPC as part of their design and 
implementation of water initiatives in rural communities of RMI.  Government leaders (Senators and Ministers), 
Mayors and traditional leaders, government department staff (OCS, OEPPC, Ministry of Public Works, EPA, etc) also 
joined the community consultation missions.  Various regional, international, and civil society organizations also

=== PAGE 55 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 78 
 
 
 
E 
provided significant inputs and resources (in terms of their experts’ time and knowledge), which influenced 
significantly the project scope, implementation methods, coordination mechanisms, and activities.  These 
stakeholders include, but are not limited to: IOM, ADB, College of the Marshall Islands, IFRC/MIRSC,  Embassy of 
Japan/JICA, MFAT, Salvation Army, SPC, SPREP, US Navy / Seabees, World Bank, etc.  
254. 
Men, women, children, and all stakeholders were consulted.  For the community surveys conducted by MIOFA, 
WUTMI, and UNDP as part of the project design process in 36 communities across 22 local government jurisdictions, 
64% of respondents were women.  Summaries of the stakeholder consultations are contained in the Gender Analysis 
and Action Plan Annex XIIIc and Annex II Feasibility Study – Annexes 20 and 21 
255. 
A Project Validation Meeting was held on 10 March 2018 to appraise and provide feedback on the full proposal 
document (see Annex VII). 
 
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
256. 
A grant is deemed the most suitable form of GCF financing for two reasons: a) GoRMI’s ability to service a GCF 
loan from budget or capital market sources is severely constrained; and b) the project will not generate revenues.   
257. 
GCF funding will play a key role in relation to the evident gaps in current baseline water resource investments. 
Together with the co-financing being mobilized for the proposed project, GCF funds will enable the GoRMI to address 
the urgent climate adaptation needs in the outer atolls and islands’ most vulnerable areas, while also addressing the  
258. 
As discussed in Section E4.2, RMI’s revenues depend on the US Compact, which is due to expire in 2024.  RMI has 
been building a Compact Trust Fund to complement domestic revenues once the Compact ends, however it has been 
assessed to be insufficient to generate the returns to replace the Compact47.  The largest sources of domestic revenue 
are taxes on trade and consumption, a small percentage of income, closely followed by revenue from taxes on income 
and profits.  Remittances make up only 14.3%of GDP48.  Contributions from donors account for approximately 60% of 
the annual budget.  This provides context for the challenges the government will face in co-financing activities for 
future climate response infrastructure enhancements and disaster response activities after 2023.  
Selection of interventions 
259. 
Marginal Abatement Cost Curves (MACC) were used to assess the most cost-effective sequence of water supply 
augmentation measures to ensure water security by 2045 for targeted islands/ atolls (refer to Annex II –Feasibility). 
Five intervention categories were analysed:   
• 
Improvement of household rainwater harvesting structures (HH RWH)  
• 
Improvement of community building rainwater harvesting structures and increase in storage tanks (CB RWH) 
• 
Construction of new community-based roof structures in combination with a storage tank (new RWH roofs and 
tanks) 
• 
Rehabilitation of existing concrete storage tanks (concrete tank rehab) 
• 
Mobile reverse osmosis units (mobile ROs) 
260. 
The Feasibility Study also identified the importance of rehabilitating and protecting groundwater wells as 
groundwater is an important complementary water source for non-potable water uses.  However, uncertainty around 
groundwater quality meant it could not be considered as an additional, reliable drinking water source for the 
purposes of cost-curve analysis.   
261. 
The cost curve analysis includes the maximum possible number of beneficiaries and volumetric benefit for each 
intervention. The analysis of the possible interventions was conducted for each island/ atoll separately.  
262. 
Three categories of costs were considered for the entire project period of 26 years, starting with the 
implementation phase (2020-2045):  
                                                             
47 US Department of Interior – Trust Fund for the People of the Republic of Marshall Islands Financial Statements Sept 2015 
48 World Bank Group April 2017 - Migration and Development Brief 27

=== PAGE 56 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 78 
 
 
 
E 
• 
Capital expenditure  
• 
Sustenance expenditure  
• 
Operation and maintenance expenditure 
263. 
The costs were discounted at 10% to derive the net present value.  The unit costs for each intervention were 
based on the annual volumetric benefit from each intervention and the equivalent annual cost (EAC) of each 
intervention. Transportation costs were not included, as these would be similar per intervention. 
264. 
Based on the cost-curve analysis, the three most cost effective intervention types to meet the water security 
target were CB RWH improvement & storage; CB RWH roofs; and HH RWH improvement (Table E6.1.1).   
Table E6.1.1 Comparison of cost-effective ones and total possible interventions  
(cost effective interventions shaded). 
Intervention Type 
Max # interventions 
# Cost-effective 
interventions 
% included 
CB RWH Improvement & Storage  
155 
147 
95% 
CB RWH roofs 
445 
140 
31% 
HH RWH Improvement 
2,524 
1635* 
65% 
Concrete Tanks Rehabilitation  
23 
- 
0% 
Mobile RO  
54 
- 
0% 
* number of interventions has been increased from 1635 to 2248 for implementability, gender and social equity reasons 
265. 
The above-mentioned intervention mix, which is solely based on the criteria of cost-effectiveness, was re-
evaluated considering implementabilty, social and gender aspects.  Based on these criteria, it was decided to provide 
household Rainwater Harvesting Improvements to all target households with dysfunctional rainwater harvesting 
systems.  The remaining water supply demand gap, if any, will be closed by choosing the next most cost-effective 
intervention on each island/atoll. 
266. 
The MACC curve calculations resulted in household RWH improvements not being selected as a cost effective 
option for three atolls.  The proposal includes providing household RWH improvements for these three atolls since 
the households rely on rainwater for drinking and cooking and the household tanks will not fill without functioning 
gutters and downpipes (Enewetak has an RO unit, with an expected lifecycle to last the 25 year project period, but it 
does not provide the full target 20 lpcd, only 11 lpcd).  Household RWH systems have significant advantages over 
community RWH systems as they are available at the household level, therefore removing any equity or accessibility 
issues when compared to community RWH tanks. 
267. 
The budget to 2045 also includes for O&M and renewals for all household RWH improvements, ensuring their 
sustainability over the long term.  If household RWH improvements are not budgeted for over the long-term, the lack 
of maintenance and renewals is likely to lead to failure of the systems in these three atolls and 0% of the household 
storage available on the first day of a drought in 2045.  This is significant as the existing HH RWH storage is almost 
three times greater than the existing community storage in most atolls. 
268. 
Applying these principles to the results from the cost-effective approach the final intervention mix is shown in 
Table E61.2. 
Table E61.2.  Overview of final interventions to meet the water security target 
 (differentiated by baseline and climate induced drought) 
 
Total m3 
Interventions # 
# CC 
buildings 
# new roofs 
and tanks 
# HH 
Baseline Drought 
CC RWH Improvement & Storage  
3,204.89 
69 
CC RWH roofs 
1,364.36 
29 
Concrete Tanks Rehab  
-

=== PAGE 57 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 78 
 
 
 
E 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HH RWH Improvement 
6,733.05 
1,937 
Sub-total  
11,302.30 
Climate Change Additionality Drought  
CC RWH Improvement & Storage  
4,170.69 
89 
CC RWH roofs 
4,032.00 
92 
Concrete Tanks Rehab  
- 
HH RWH Improvement 
957.93 
311 
Sub-total  
9,160.62 
Total Baseline and Climate Change Additionality 
CC RWH Improvement & Storage  
7,375.59 
158 
CC RWH roofs 
5,396.37 
121 
Concrete Tanks Rehab  
- 
HH RWH Improvement 
7,690.97 
2,248 
Total   
20,462.93 
158 
121 
2,248 
Additional HH RWH for social equity  
345.28 
281 
Grand Total (incl. 100% HH RWH) 
20,808.21 
158 
121 
2,529 
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only) 
Not applicable 
E.6.3. Financial viability  
269. 
The financial viability of the project was assessed as part of the Economic and Financial Assessment, which is 
summarised in Section F1 and detailed in Annex XII.  Overall, it was concluded that the project yields a positive net 
present value when considering the same target criteria, i.e. 20 lpcd, for the baseline and the project outcome.   
270. 
Post-implementation of all interventions, the water assets developed will continue to have a useful life for 18 
years.  During this period the following expenditure is required: 
• 
USD 5,325,044 for operation and maintenance of water assets.  This includes the cost of spares and supplies 
required for general maintenance, the travel cost to undertake regular repairs and upkeep tasks, and the 
staff cost at Majuro for O&M supervision 
• 
USD 1,562,701 for sustenance capex, which includes reinvestment in certain sub-components or assets and 
major repairs of water assets estimated as 5% of capital cost once every 8 years required to optimize the 
assets lifespans. 
• 
USD 7,084,315 for full replacement of specific water assets and components that have a shorter life than the 
total project lifecycle period of 25 years 
271. 
The total cost to be incurred to ensure continued operation of the water assets is USD 13,972,060. 
272. 
The long-term financial viability of the project beyond the Fund intervention will depend on the ability to finance 
this continued operation and maintenance of water assets.  Good practice is to fully recover the cost of operation and 
maintenance through user fees.  As per IBNET standards for good practice in tariff setting, affordable water tariff has 
to be less than 2.5% of the annual household income.  The median household annual income in outer atolls is USD 
1,936.  Given this low household income level, it is difficult to achieve full cost recovery.  For full cost recovery, 
households in outer atolls will have to contribute up to 40% of their median annual income.  In order to just recover 
O&M costs, households will have to provide anywhere between 7% and 17% of their annual median income in a 
given year.  As this is considered unaffordable, the funding for O&M during post-implementation period (18 years) 
will be provided by the Government of RMI.  To this effect, the Government of RMI has issued a commitment letter 
(Annex IV).

=== PAGE 58 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 78 
 
 
 
E 
 
E.6.4. Application of best practices 
273. 
This project extracts and scales good practices and lessons learned from the various water security and resilience 
initiatives implemented in RMI and in similar small island developing states in the Pacific Region.  All water 
technologies and investments proposed are based on data collected and analyzed based on technical and cost 
effectiveness as well as ways as experiences of successes and failure based on political, logistical, cultural and 
behavioral contexts. 
274. 
Resilient Design Principles were defined through the Technical Feasibility Study process.  These 7 principles 
include:  Ownership, Redundancy, Effectiveness, Efficiency, Sustainability, Equity, and Coordination.  A comprehensive 
analysis of relevant water security and resilience options (mainly technologies where people indicated their interests 
in exploring during the consultations), were reviewed against the principles to analyze for their applicability as 
technologies to be included in the project design.  This analysis resulted in the Resiliency Scores. (Annex II Feasibility 
Study). 
275. 
The applicable technologies were then prioritized based on life-cycle cost-effectiveness calculation.  This process 
identified public reticulation system, household and community rainwater harvesting improvements as best practices 
for people in RMI to improve water security, and groundwater and concrete tank rehabilitations. 
276. 
An array of technologies was reviewed by intervention to determine the engineering and technical designs as 
well as implementation strategies including considerations for procurement methods, transportation frequency and 
channels.  Additional, the types of training, awareness raising and institutional support (i.e. support from Majuro, 
contractors, etc.) were also explored and incorporated into the project design based on lessons learned from past 
experiences.  These include technical training and community awareness raising required for constructions, operation 
and management, and monitoring and reporting (including oversight required to ensure environment, social, and 
gender considerations).  
277. 
The key technology innovation in the Project is the use of flat pack modular tanks for new community rainwater 
storage. This is seen as innovative as the existing rainwater storage tanks in RMI are either plastic or concrete.  Plastic 
tanks are a suitable option at the household level. Community buildings typically have a much larger roof catchment 
area than households and need larger storage tanks to optimize rainwater capture.  The existing large rainwater 
storage tanks in RMI are almost all concrete, possibly due to the historical construction of concrete tanks during the 
world wars.  Flat pack modular tanks are a modern alternative to concrete tanks and are considered to be the suitable 
option for the large-scale construction of new tanks throughout RMI.  Flat pack modular tanks offer a significant 
number of advantages over the plastic or concrete tanks (see Annex II - Feasibility Study).  
278. 
Cyclone resilience was a risk considered during the design process.  The costing and design for the flat pack 
modular tanks made of HDPE panels includes platypus anchors driven into the ground to provide additional anchor 
points to withstand equivalent wind speeds.  The tank design also meets the New Zealand Climatic and Seismic 
standards and ratings (i.e. open areas equivalent to cyclone wind speeds).  Similar installations have been constructed 
in Tahiti and Mala Mala, Fiji. 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
 
GCF core 
indicators 
Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only) 
Not applicable 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only) 
Not applicable

=== PAGE 59 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 78 
 
 
 
E 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme) 
Not applicable

=== PAGE 60 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 78 
 
 
 
F 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis 
Economic analysis 
279. 
The economic analysis of the proposal was conducted during the design phase, focusing on one major output, 
namely Output 1: ‘Implementation of optimal mix of interventions to ensure water security in outer atolls and islands of 
RMI’. As Output 2 (Optimization of alternative water sources to reduce reliance on harvested rainwater) and Output 3 
(Drought preparedness and response measures implemented in outer atolls and islands) are integral parts of the project 
to ensure water security of 20 lpcd in the Marshall Islands in times of climate change, the benefit streams from the 
three outputs cannot be assessed separately. Thus, the costs and benefits of each output are analysed conjointly.  
280. 
Addressing Climate Vulnerabilities in the Water Sector in RMI (ACWA) has four key benefit streams. Firstly, 
mobile and three stationary reverse osmosis (RO) units do not have to be further maintained, replaced and stored for 
a potential emergency relief mobilization during times of drought. Secondly, as water security is ensured, costly 
emergency operations to provide the absolute minimum of drinking water to outer islands/ atolls via mobile RO units 
and bottled water will no longer be required. Thirdly, the outbreak of drought-related diseases due to lack of water 
for WASH and resultant health treatment costs will be avoided. Lastly, no loss of productive labour will be caused by 
increased water collection time during droughts.   
281. 
The economic benefits that are valued in the economic analysis of the project are based on: 1) avoided costs of 
procuring, maintaining and storing additional mobile reverse osmosis (RO) units to provide emergency relief during 
times of drought; 2) avoided drought emergency response costs, including mobile RO unit deployment costs; and 3) 
avoided socio-economic drought related costs and losses.   
282. 
While the log frame and the budget distinguish between interventions required to ensure water security during 
baseline and climate-change induced droughts, the economic analysis considers these jointly. This is due to the fact 
that the benefits resulting from the project are difficult to segregate between the interventions targeted at the 
baseline and climate-change induced drought. For example, if the interventions targeted at the baseline drought were 
insufficiently implemented, the benefits of the interventions targeted at the climate-change induced drought would 
not materialise, as the interventions would be used to meet the needs for the baseline drought instead. Likewise,             
some disaster responses, such as the mobilization of mobile RO units, are required only once per drought event – 
regardless whether this drought is a baseline drought, or a climate-change induced drought. This would complicate 
the allocation of benefits. Seeing the targeted water security for RMI as a holistic and mutually dependent cause, these 
benefits will be assessed jointly over the project period.  
283. 
The benefits of this project occur when water security is ensured during a drought, when compared to the status 
quo. The report on Climate Change Projections for the Republic of Marshall Islands, which was conducted as part of this 
FP, illustrates the current (baseline) occurrence of drought over a period of 20, 30 and 60 days, distinguishing 
between the northern and southern islands/ atolls. A ‘typical but impactful drought’ occurring across all islands/ 
atolls in RMI is defined as a 30-day drought in the southern atolls and a 60-day drought in the northern atolls. It 
further predicts the change in frequency and duration of these drought events from 2035 onwards. It is defined that a 
benefit for an atoll/ island community arises when the project ensures water security for a community during a 
drought period, which goes beyond the water security provided by their existing water storage (status quo). For 
example, if a community facing a 30-day drought has sufficient storage for 10 days and the project ensures water 
security for the remaining 20 days, this community is per definition a beneficiary of this project.  An overview of the 
assumptions made can be seen in Table F1.2 below.

=== PAGE 61 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 78 
 
 
 
F 
Table F1.2.  Overview of assumptions on drought frequency and duration, as well as population affected  
 
Note: The highlighted cells indicate the composition for a ‘typical, but impactful drought’  
 
284. 
It needs to be noted that two alternative options can be considered for assessing the baseline against which 
benefits of the project are assessed, namely:  
• 
Baseline scenario 1: The Government of RMI provides 20 lpcd to the drought affected target population by 
deploying mobile RO units. Currently, of the existing 54 mobile RO units, 49 can only provide 4.2 lpcd during a 
typical but impactful drought by 2044 - thus additional mobile RO units would have to be procured to achieve 
this goal.50 As 20 lpcd would be provided in this baseline scenario – as it would in the project outcome - the 
economic analysis does not consider avoided socio-economic costs (benefit stream #3) to avoid double counting 
of benefits.  
• 
Baseline scenario 2: The Government of RMI continues providing 4.2 lpcd with the existing 54 mobile RO units to 
the drought affected target population and will not procure additional mobile RO units, which would be required 
to provide 20 lpcd during drought events, due to financial constraints. As only 4.2 lpcd are provided in this 
baseline scenario, socio-economic costs resulting from insufficient water supplies will be avoided as project 
outcome. Thus, these avoided socio-economic costs (benefit stream #3) are considered in the economic analysis. 
285. 
The economic benefits introduced above are based on the drought costs for the 2015/16 drought and on the 
existing water supply infrastructure. The 2015/16 drought is the only drought with detailed information on 
emergency response costs and an estimate on the drought-related socio-economic costs and losses. As future 
(modelled) drought events differ in duration and frequency, and the affected population differs with drought 
duration and population growth, the benefits are scaled accordingly, where adequate. Considering the 
implementation period, benefits are not accounted for droughts occurring in year 1 and 2 of the project and only 
partially at 1/3 for year 3 and 2/3 for year 4. From year 5 onwards benefits are fully accounted for.  
286. 
The avoided costs of maintaining and storing mobile reverse osmosis (RO) units (benefit stream 1) are based on 
current procurement costs, annual O&M, storage costs and capex costs for replacement of RO units after their lifetime 
within the project period.51 The number of mobile RO units differs between baseline scenario 1 and 2. For baseline 
scenario 2, the existing 54 RO units are considered. While these are not required to ensure water security for drought 
events within the 95th percentile predictions after project implementation, GoRMI wishes to maintain these in case of 
droughts beyond this prediction and other disasters. Thus, the benefits of avoided costs for not having to maintain 
the 54 mobile RO units are not considered. For baseline scenario 1, the number of RO units is scaled up across the 
project period depending on the severity of droughts and can be seen in the sheet ‘Output RMI’. 52 In this scenario the 
avoided costs are considered as benefit stream.  
287. 
The avoided drought emergency response costs (benefit stream 2) are divided into two key interventions. Firstly, 
the disaster response costs for outer islands incurred by NDMO and IOM for purely drinking water related relief 
support during the drought 2015/16 were scaled to account for future predicted drought events per affected person 
and day. Secondly, the avoided costs for deployment of mobile RO units in case of emergency is assessed on 
community basis and is subject to the existing communities’ water supply. For baseline scenario 1, mobile RO units

=== PAGE 62 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 78 
 
 
 
F 
will be deployed to a community if their existing water supplies are insufficient to provide 20 lpcd. For baseline 
scenario 2, mobile RO units will be deployed to a community if their existing water supplies are insufficient to 
provide 4.2 lpcd.  
288. 
The avoided socio-economic drought-related costs and losses (benefit stream 3) are composed of two key 
impacts, as described above, and are based on the Post Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) of the 2015/16 drought 
conducted in February 2017. The PDNA determined the number of drought-related diseases occurring due to lack of 
water for WASH and determined the respective treatment costs.53 To transfer this information to future drought 
events, the number of new cases per drought day and the respective treatment costs per case are determined. 
Further, the PDNA quantifies the loss in productive labour due to increased water collection time by assuming a 
minimum wage of USD 2/ hour. To apply these estimates to future drought events, the per capita value per drought 
day of the affected population was derived. As these negative effects are avoided when having sufficient water 
available (20 lpcd) this benefit stream is only considered for baseline scenario 2.  
289. 
As mentioned above the cost-benefit analysis was performed considering two baseline scenarios to provide a 
more differentiated assessment.  The economic analysis indicates that for baseline scenario 1, the net present value is 
positive, and the expected economic internal rate of return is 12%, which exceeds 10%, the economic opportunity 
cost of capital. Sensitivity testing of the main assumptions, i.e. total project budget, the deployment costs for mobile 
RO units to drought affected islands/ atolls, and the frequency of a ‘typical, but impactful drought’ showed that NPV 
remains positive even if the total budget increases by 10% and the drought frequency of a ‘typical but impactful 
drought’ reduces by 15%.  The respective EIRRs are 10%, and 12%. However, the analysis is sensitive to the average 
avoided deployment costs for mobile RO units.  A cost reduction by 30% resulted in a negative NPV with the EIRR of 
8%.  
290. 
The economic analysis indicates that for baseline scenario 2, the net present value is negative, and the expected 
economic internal rate of return is 4%, which is below the economic opportunity cost of capital of 10%.  Sensitivity 
testing of the main assumptions, i.e. total project budget, the deployment costs for mobile RO units to drought 
affected islands/ atolls, and the frequency of a ‘typical, but impactful drought’ showed that NPV remains negative, 
unless the total project budget is reduced by 37%.  The resultant EIRR is 10%.  This can be explained by the fact that 
the assessed benefits mostly result from Output 1, while the costs are considered across all outputs.  The additional 
benefits from Output 2 and 3, such as a potential positive impact on food security during drought events, are difficult 
to quantity at this stage of the project, leading to an overall negative NPV.  
291. 
The project is expected to generate at least three additional benefit streams.  However, these are not easily 
quantifiable and in some cases confidence in the values may be low.  Firstly, the population of the outer islands/ atolls 
typically have house gardens or small agricultural areas in which they produce crops for their own consumption.  
During the drought, groundwater resources – where available – either became too saline to irrigate the crops or the 
groundwater had to be used to meet minimum drinking water requirements.  This led to a loss of harvest, which 
significantly affected food security and required food aid during and after the drought.  Given that little is known to 
date about the quantity and quality of groundwater, it is not possible to quantify the impact of protecting 
groundwater reserves (output 2) and reducing water demand from groundwater (output 1) on crop production – 
thus this benefit stream could not be quantified.  Secondly, the population from outer islands/ atolls – after 
                                                             
49 With the design capacity of the mobile RO units being 57 l/h and – as they are solar powered – assuming they can run 8 hours/day, their 
assumed actual capacity is 456 l/day. More information on the model can be found here:  
https://www.spectrawatermakers.com/us/us/11140-aquifer-360 
50 The assessment of the current capacity of existing RO units of supplying water to affected citizens, is based on the total water 
requirement for a typical but impactful drought by 2044 and has been validated with the total number of deployed mobile RO units during 
the drought events of 2013, 2015/16 and 2017. As this analysis assesses the situation of each community, and only considers water 
provision by mobile RO necessary for affected communities, i.e. those which do not have sufficient storage for the full drought period, total 
possible water supply provision is 4.2 lpcd instead of 1.6 lpcd which would consider a water supply provision for each and every citizen.  
Further information on the assessment can be found in sheet ‘Avoided RO deployment costs’ in the attached Excel file.  
51 Information provided by NDMO  
52 To allow for a conservative estimate, the design capacity of 1360 l/day of the RO was considered, rather than the reported actual 
capacity of 453 l/day (NDMO).  
53 Due to insufficient medical facilities and lack of medication in some islands/ atolls, the affected population was advised not to consult the 
medical center. Thus, it is likely that the total number of drought-related diseases was higher, allowing for a conservative estimate (PDNA, 
2017).

=== PAGE 63 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 78 
 
 
 
F 
completion of the project - do not have to migrate to the two urban centers, i.e. Majuro and Ebeye, in search for water, 
reducing the pressure from these urban centers to provide basic services to these temporary migrants.  Further, 
schooling for the migrant children is likely to be disrupted, thus this project avoids a future economic loss for these 
children due to an education loss.  As no exact data on the number of migrants and the resultant additional cost in 
previous droughts is known – as these mostly lived in informal settlements – this benefit could not be quantified. 
Thirdly, it can be assumed that the population of the outer island has a certain willingness to pay (WTP) for water 
security.  However, as no transferable WTP studies are available, and water bottles are usually not for sale in outer 
islands as a proxy, this benefit stream was left unquantified.  The implication of ignoring these additional benefits is 
that the estimates of the economic IRR and NPV are at the lower bound and provide conservative estimates of the 
value of the project. 
292. 
Overall, it can be concluded that the project yields a positive net present value when considering the same target 
criteria, i.e. 20 lpcd, for the baseline and the project outcome.  In this case (baseline scenario 1), the results are 
partially sensitive to scenarios where expected benefits/costs are assumed to be significantly lower than otherwise 
estimated in a baseline scenario.  When expecting that the Government of RMI will remain with its current status quo 
of supplying a maximum of 4.2 lpcd during drought events (baseline scenario 2), the project is expected to yield a 
negative net present value.  However, it needs to be noted that a number of benefits could only be assessed 
qualitatively and that their consideration would likely yield a positive net present value.    
293. 
The details of the economic analysis are presented in Annex XII of this proposal. 
 
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
294. 
There are no freshwater streams on any of the outer atolls/islands and only one island has a freshwater pond 
that is far from inhabited areas.  A list of the multiple water supply options to enhance water security was developed 
from those currently in use in RMI and those that have been used in other small island developing states (refer 
Section C2 and Annex II Feasibility Study - Section 7).  Lessons learned from other installations and best practices 
were examined and utilized in the comparison of the technology options.  The options broadly included rainwater 
harvesting, groundwater and desalination.  
295. 
The suite of water supply options was then assessed using a Multi-Criteria Assessment (MCA) (refer Annex II 
Feasibility Study) for the provision of safe drinking water against the criteria of resilience to baseline and climate 
change induced droughts, potential for environmental impacts, sustainability of operations and maintenance, social 
acceptability, proven local adaptability of the technology etc.  
296. 
Reverse Osmosis desalination units are the most resilient option to provide drinking water during a climate 
change induced drought, and small units can be made ready for deployment to where needed.  However existing 
installations in the remote outer atolls and islands have experienced significant issues with the spare parts supply 
chain, lack of local technical expertise for sustainable maintenance and an inability to secure long-term funding for 
operations and maintenance.  Simpler and lower cost desalination technologies (such as solar distillation) have been 
trialed in some local communities, but installations were found abandoned due to poor operations and maintenance 
(units were not maintained during the wet season, which led to clogging in the dry season).  Solar distillation units 
would also have a very large footprint requirement when scaled to provide 20 lpcd.  Developing groundwater sources 
to enhance water security was ruled out through the MCA process due to the increasing vulnerability of groundwater 
to climate change induced saline intrusion and the need to provide disinfection to ensure drinking water quality 
(existing groundwater sources are vulnerable to microbiological contamination). 
297. 
The shortlisted water supply options from the MCA process were rainwater harvesting at the household and 
community level and mobile RO units.  These options were carried forward to the cost effectiveness curve analysis, 
along with rehabilitation of existing concrete tanks for rainwater storage.  Rainwater harvesting was considered at 
the household level and at the community level to supply clusters of households.  Where there were insufficient 
existing community buildings for new tanks, a third rainwater harvesting option was included, new roof structures 
with associated rainwater harvesting systems and storage tanks.

=== PAGE 64 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 78 
 
 
 
F 
298. 
The water security target was set at a minimum of 20 litres of drinking water person per day for a year-round 
supply based on the WHO standard for dealing with long term drought periods.  This target provides for drinking, 
cooking and personal hygiene. 
299. 
The drought duration target was estimated for each of the seven weather station areas after assessment of 
baseline conditions and the prediction for the number of additional days of drought due to climate change over the 
planning horizon to 2045.  The baseline drought durations were estimated from assessment of available climate data 
(at least 18 years for the remote outer atoll weather stations and over 50 years for the two urban atoll weather 
stations). 
300. 
The baseline gap in water security was assessed from rainwater tank modelling of the total stored water 
available on the first day of a theoretical baseline drought under status quo conditions (assuming normal monthly 
rainfall prior to a drought along with existing household and community tank volume and existing RWH system 
condition and roof catchment area and RWH system efficiency from available infrastructure survey data and RMI 
wide assumptions for data gaps).  The baseline gap in water security is the water supply requirements for the 
baseline drought minus the existing water supply available on the first day of drought under status quo conditions. 
301. 
The gap in water security due to climate change additionality was assessed from rainwater tank modelling of the 
total stored water available on the first day of a theoretical drought in 2045 (assuming projected monthly rainfall in 
2045 prior to a drought along with improved RWH system condition and roof catchment area and RWH system 
efficiency). 
302. 
Marginal Abatement Cost Curves (MACC) were developed to assess the cost effectiveness of each of the 
shortlisted water supply options to address the baseline gap and climate change additionality gap in each outer 
atoll/island.  The most cost effective option in each outer atoll/island was typically the household rainwater 
harvesting improvements (baseline intervention as a development need not climate change additionality).  The next 
most cost effective option was typically new storage tanks at the community level either at existing buildings (with 
associated rainwater harvesting improvements for the connected buildings) or at new roof structures (where there 
are insufficient existing community buildings for new tanks to be connected).  The results varied by atoll. The MACC 
results by atoll/island were then distributed to each community in the atoll/island based on the community level 
water supply demand gap analysis for baseline and climate change additionality droughts. 
303. 
While the primary focus of this project is to improve water supply resilience to adapt to climate change, it is 
recognised that if combined with sanitation and hygiene initiatives, the water supply interventions will deliver 
substantially more development benefits.  To this end, this project will harmonize with other projects such as: the 
GEF-funded project “Managing Coastal Aquifers in Selected Pacific SIDS” which will include interventions that will 
protect groundwater resources in several outer islands, including improvements in sanitation; and the ongoing 
Pacific Islands Regional Ridge-to-Reef Program, which includes interventions in the Laura lens in Majuro atoll to 
address waste management issues, that can provide lessons useful in the other atolls. 
304. 
Details of background and technical assessments and methodology are contained in Annex II – Feasibility Study. 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations 
305. 
As part of the project development, environmental and social baseline conditions were identified (refer relevant 
thematic sections of ESMF).  The design of the project considered baseline conditions and the potential impacts that 
various options might have in terms of environmental and social impacts, including direct and indirect impacts. 
306. 
Based on environmental and social impact risk assessments, various mitigation strategies were developed that 
will be used to ensure that risks were managed and maintained at an acceptable level.  These are documented in the 
ESMF. 
307. 
This project has completed the UNDP social and environmental screening procedure (see SESP attached as Annex 
VIa).  This screening was undertaken to ensure this project complies with both UNDP and GCF Environmental and 
Social Standards.  UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standards were reviewed by the GCF accreditation panel and 
deemed sufficient to accredit UNDP to submit low and medium risk projects.

=== PAGE 65 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 78 
 
 
 
F 
308. 
The overall social and environmental risk category for this project is moderate.  Based on the findings of this 
assessment, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been developed for the project (see 
Annex VIb).   Specific project risks are listed in Section G below, together with appropriate mitigation measures. 
Environment and Social 
309. 
The ESMF provides a framework and guidance for further development of site or activity specific environmental 
and social work plans.  To ensure that the environmental and social objectives of the project and UNDP/GCF 
standards are met, the ESMF will be used by the project implementers to structure and control the environmental 
management safeguards that are required to avoid or mitigate adverse effects on the environment. 
310. 
As ACWA activities become better defined, the environmental and social management plans (ESMPs) specific to 
those activities can be developed, using the ESMF as a basis for risk assessment and mitigation strategies 
311. 
The project is likely to have some short-term, small-scale environmental impacts during implementation, but will 
ultimately have considerable, long-term environmental benefits (See Section E.3.1). 
312. 
Through delivery of the outputs, communities in RMI will be better equipped to deal with climate impacts such as 
droughts, king tides and sea level rides in terms of access to freshwater.  Communities will be empowered through 
the development of island/atoll specific integrated Water Safety Plans, the formation of Community Water 
Committees and strengthened national water management governance. 
313. 
Environmental impacts associated with the project are minimal due to the nature of the interventions, while 
social benefits are significant and can provide long-term improvements to the lives of communities in the target 
areas.  The project will also promote inclusion, particularly of women and vulnerable groups. 
314. 
Key considerations in minimising environmental and social impacts during the project are outlined in the ESMF, 
but include social inclusion and consultation, sediment and erosion control, and health and safety for workers and 
community.  Physical impacts will be primarily associated with construction and installation of equipment, such as 
rainwater tanks, groundwater wells and pumps.  These impacts will be relatively minor and of a temporary nature.  
315. 
The implementation of the ESMF will ensure that impacts are satisfactorily managed.  The ESMF identifies a suite 
of mitigation measures to minimise potential risks and impacts.  Monitoring of appropriate indicators will enable 
assessment of compliance. 
316. 
Furthermore, the project makes provision for a complaint’s register along with a two-tiered Grievance Redress 
Mechanism, appropriate for the project and consistent with the UNDP’s Stakeholder Response Mechanism: Overview 
and Guidance (2014) and World Bank Group Safeguards Policies.  The Grievance Redress Mechanism establishes 
goals and objectives along with eligibility requirements to make a complaint and/or grievance.  It has been designed 
that all parties will act in good faith throughout the process and more importantly, that is will be arbitrary in nature 
in trying to achieve mutually acceptable resolutions for all parties.  The Grievance Redress Mechanism also provides 
for the covering of costs for legitimate complaints or grievances so as individuals and/or groups are not 
disadvantaged by bring complaints to the attention of CSO and UNDP.  Finally, if complainants remain dissatisfied 
with the outcomes at the project level, the Grievance Redress Mechanism allows individuals and/or groups to also file 
a complaint with the Social and Environmental Compliance Unit within the Office of Anticorruption and Integrity 
within the UNDP or the appropriate RMI legal or judicial authority e.g., the Courts. 
Gender Considerations 
317. 
The project has been designed with adequate attention to gender and social inclusion considerations. The 
influence of Marshallese culture plays a central role in the way of life of the project beneficiaries, regardless of 
modernization. This provides for the distinct and different roles of men, women, and children in society, and this 
offers both significant strengths and challenges in relation to gender equality. In terms of how gender equality 
influences vulnerability to climate change and disasters, there are a range of factors that intersect with gender, such 
as age, disability status, and location in outer islands and atolls of RMI. 
318. 
The project has been designed to provide key entry points for gender-responsive and socially inclusive actions to 
be taken in each of its activity areas. These are set out in the annexed gender and social inclusion plan Annex XIIIc 
and include indicators to measure and track the progress of these actions at the activity level. The action plan links 
directly into the project log frame, and these two documents should be read together.  A Gender and Youth Specialist

=== PAGE 66 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 78 
 
 
 
F 
will be engaged during implementation to build the capacity of project staff and stakeholders for gender 
mainstreaming and monitoring and assist with implementation as needed. 
 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement 
319. 
The financial management and procurement of this project will be subject to UNDP financial rules and 
regulations available here: here. Further guidance is outlined in the financial resources management section of the 
UNDP Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures available at here .   UNDP has comprehensive 
procurement policies in place as outlined in the ‘Contracts and Procurement’ section of UNDP’s Programme and 
Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP).  The policies outline formal procurement standards and guidelines 
across each phase of the procurement process, and they apply to all procurements in UNDP.  See here: 
https://popp.undp.org/SitePages/POPPSubject.aspx?SBJID=211&Menu=BusinessUnit 
320. 
The project will be implemented following the Direct Implementation Modality (DIM) following UNDP POPP 
available here: 
https://popp.undp.org/_layouts/15/WopiFrame.aspx?sourcedoc=/UNDP_POPP_DOCUMENT_LIBRARY/Public/FRM_
Financial%20Management%20and%20Implementation%20Modality_Direct%20Implementation%20(DIM)%20Mod
ality.docx&action=default&DefaultItemOpen=1 . For project activities carried out by the government as a Responsible 
Party, fund transfer to the government shall follow DIM guidelines.  Funds will flow from GCF via UNDP as shown 
below: 
 
 
321. 
The GCF grant will be managed directly by UNDP through the Direct Implementation Modality arrangement. The 
co-financing from RMI will also be managed by UNDP through a Cost-Sharing Agreement. The contractual 
arrangements and funds flow (Fig. C7.1) will ensure seamless implementation of the project with respect to 
procurement, transport and installation of rainwater harvesting and storage systems that will simultaneously meet 
water requirements for baseline and climate-induced droughts. Part of the funds may be coursed through responsible 
parties using the appropriate instrument: Letters of Agreement for government entities; Responsible Party 
Agreement for non-government organizations; UN-to-UN Agreement for IOM. Activities that will benefit the 
communities may also be implemented directly by UNDP through the PMU. 
322. 
UNDP will ascertain the national capacities of the implementing partner by undertaking an evaluation of capacity 
following the Framework for Cash Transfers to Implementing Partners (part of the Harmonized Approach to Cash 
Transfers - HACT).  All projects will be audited following the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted above and 
applicable audit guidelines and policies.  
323. 
During implementation, UNDP will provide oversight and quality assurance in accordance with its policies and 
procedures, and any specific requirements in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and project confirmation to 
be agreed with the GCF.  This may include, but not limited to, monitoring missions, spot checks, facilitation and 
participation in project board meetings, quarterly progress and annual implementation reviews, and audits at project 
level on the resources received from UNDP.  
324. 
The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits, informed by and together 
with any specific requirements agreed in the AMA.  According to the current audit policies, UNDP will be appointing 
the auditors.  In UNDP scheduled audits are performed during the project cycle as per UNDP assurance/audit plans, 
on the basis of UNDP’s guidelines.  A scheduled audit is used to determine whether the funds were used for the

=== PAGE 67 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 78 
 
 
 
F 
appropriate purpose and in accordance with the work plan.  A scheduled audit can consist of a financial audit or an 
internal control audit.  
325. 
UNDP provides a variety of assurance activities which will comprise of (but not be limited to):  
• 
Periodic on-site reviews (spot checks) of the financial records of the project. These may be performed by 
qualified UNDP staff or third party service providers;  
• 
Programmatic monitoring of activities, which provides evidence regarding the status of project implementation 
and use of the GCF resources; and  
• 
Scheduled and special audits (financial or internal control) of the financial records. UNDP prepares and reports 
financial statements in full accordance with the International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS). Full 
compliance with IPSAS was achieved effective January 2012. IPSAS was mandated by General Assembly 
Resolution 60/283 and is considered best practice in accounting for public sector and not-for-profit 
organizations. 
326. 
A draft procurement plan (which will be further discussed and revised prior to UNDP Project Document 
signature) is provided in Annex XIIIa.

=== PAGE 68 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 78 
 
 
G 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures 
333. 
As noted above, a range of risks have been identified for the project.  The following table identifies some of the 
key risks and mitigation measures designed to minimise them. 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary 
327. 
A variety of risk factors that have been considered during the project development phase, many of which are 
magnified by RMI being a SIDS, including: remoteness of project country, remoteness and geographic dispersion of 
project sites, limited qualified/experienced local staff; and exposure to extreme weather events; and well as more 
generic environmental and social project risks. 
328. 
The Environmental and Social Risk Assessment discussed earlier has highlighted risks associated with the 
impact of the project on the environment and communities.  In addition, there are risks to the project 
implementation itself.  These need careful evaluation, monitoring and mitigation due to the inherent vulnerabilities 
of Small Island Developing States.  
329. 
Risk factors associated with the project implementation include mainly technical and operational, institutional, 
and social and environmental aspects (please refer to section F.3 for ESS assessment).  The risks related to technical 
and operational capacities may affect design and installation of the RWH systems, storage and well protection 
infrastructure.  Risks related to inadequate operation and maintenance of the water supply solutions can impede 
sustained water supply.  Other risks could be related to operational issues of delays in completion of the 
infrastructure or availability of sufficiently trained personnel to complete the installations.  Risks related to limited 
coordination amongst agencies and stakeholders can lead to inefficiencies in the implementation and impact of the 
project interventions.  Risks related to limited awareness and preparation of communities can impede adoption of 
the technologies, practices, and information advanced through the project.  Climate shocks can lead to a risk of 
damage to the project investments affecting implementation as well as sustained impact post-project.  Finally, there 
are environmental and social risks related to sediment control, noise, etc. that could affect communities targeted in 
the project.  These are detailed in Section F.3 as well as added in the table below. 
330. 
The proposed project includes several mitigation measures to address these risks.  The project will invest in 
local level mobilisation and technical capacity building for communities and officials to ensure adequate design and 
implementation of project solutions.  Project will implement tested O&M models for community management with 
clear guidelines and delineation of responsibilities at the outset and focus on building technical and financial 
capacity for sustained O&M.  Developing SOPs for maintenance and data sharing for EPA and NDMO will ensure that 
reliable water resource management information received by both the government and the community.  A sound 
implementation and project management framework will be established to overcome challenges of inter-sectoral 
coordination.  The project will continue engage and build capacity for various stakeholders at national level and sub-
national level.  The project support to coordinated planning and investments through integrated water management 
plans, SOPs, etc. will also build the capacity and mechanisms for sustained institutional coordination.  The risk of low 
commitment to and adoption of project solutions is mitigated through inclusive multi-stakeholder consultative 
approach to project design and implementation, investments in sensitization and capacity building, implementation 
of community-based management models for project investments, and support to financial viability and 
sustainability of the solutions.  Impact of climate shocks is mitigated through use of reliable forecasts for planning 
and operation of the infrastructure as well as incorporating design elements to increase the resilience of the 
investments to extreme events.  Finally, detailed ESMP plan (See Annex VI) is established to address environmental 
and social risks arising from the project. 
331. 
In summary, a variety of risks have been identified for the project.  Project risks have been assessed and are 
considered to be mainly low or moderate.  The proposed project builds on the successes of earlier projects and 
benefits from the lessons learned from previous efforts.  This, coupled with mitigation measures developed to 
minimise risks, will ensure that risks are managed to an acceptable level. 
332. 
In addition, the project has been formulated based on consultations at national and municipal level, and project 
design has been reviewed by stakeholders at all levels, including a sample of community representatives, creating 
buy-in.

=== PAGE 69 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 78 
 
 
G 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
Project Management and Procurement 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
International supply chains are long, expensive and 
prone to shipping delays.  
Country staff have little/negligible experience of 
international procurement procedures  
 
Technical and 
operational 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The international logistical and procurement issues will be mitigated through a combination of the provision of 
appropriate logistics and procurement support by UNDP staff (under DIM) to ensure supply chains and times are well 
understood, delivery contingency plans are prepared, and detailed procurement tasks and timeframes are incorporated 
and integrated into the project work plans. 
Risks can be further mitigated through use of carefully prepared pre-qualification criteria for suppliers, requiring 
demonstrable international experience of trans-Pacific Ocean product and material delivery and incentivizing suppliers 
to use reputable shipping agents, as well as scheduling deliveries to coincide with more convenient times of year (away 
from holiday periods and monsoon seasons). 
 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
Remoteness of Sites 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
The project sites are located across separate 
atolls/islands, dependent on inter-island transport. 
Transport delays could delay implementation. 
 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium (5.1-20% 
of project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The national logistical and access issues will be mitigated through a combination of ensuring the PMU has adequate 
access to national logistics expertise, the use of contingency planning, integration of logistical tasks and timeframes into 
the work plan and sympathetic scheduling of shipment arrivals. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
Limited Qualified Staff 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Limited in-country technical, managerial and 
procurement expertise in critical project areas 
 
Inappropriate or inadequate delegates at training 
workshops 
 
Conflicting demands on key governmental and non-
governmental staff 
 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium (5.1-20% 
of project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s)

=== PAGE 70 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 78 
 
 
G 
The risk relates across the project stakeholder groups, including governmental departments, non-governmental 
organisations– and reflects the limited on-island population size and exposure to alternative approaches other than 
business-as-usual. 
The risks will be mitigated through the following actions: 
• 
Adoption of DIM, with the RMI team being supported by UNDP Pacific Office in Fiji  
• 
Careful selection and deployment of appropriately experienced international technical advisors to support 
knowledge transfer; the Project Manager is intended to be internationally-recruited 
• 
Early political advocacy and public awareness raising to ensure ministerial, institutional and community 
support to project objectives 
• 
Careful pre-selection and vetting of training opportunities nominees 
• 
Use of Training-the-Trainer approaches to increase capacity outreach 
• 
Backstopping and buddying of local staff with national and international experts 
• 
Careful monitoring and assessment of project delivery 
• 
Development of locally delivered and institutionalised training programmes 
Adopting and monitoring the success of these approaches is expected to reduce the residual risk to low. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
Extreme Weather 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Extreme weather events restrict transportation and 
infrastructure construction activity periods and 
delay/limit inter-island access. 
 
Natural hazards damage and/or destroy pre-existing 
and or project activities, and create short-term response 
& recovery priorities for government and communities. 
Social and 
environmental 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Logistics to take into consideration optimal weather periods for shipping and construction.  The capital expenditures will 
be spread over 3 years to allow for adjustments due to weather disturbances. 
Design to incorporate likely weather conditions such that infrastructure can withstand extreme events. 
Scheduling to consider both weather risk (storm season) during implementation as well as early implementation of 
activities that can reduce risk of existing infrastructure being damaged eg early protection of groundwater wells may 
reduce likelihood of inundation. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
Community Ownership 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Communities not committed to effort required to 
strengthen capacity in adaptive management, preferring 
government hand-outs and infrastructure gifts. 
Social and 
environmental 
Medium (5.1-20% 
of project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The household RWH systems directly benefits households while community systems are shared.  It is expected that full 
cooperation will be provided by all beneficiaries. 
Early scheduling of public awareness campaigns to reach urban and rural population 
Community involvement in simple construction tasks and training/upskilling on more complex tasks.

=== PAGE 71 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 78 
 
 
G 
The residual risk can be reduced to low with careful and sustained engagement and communication with direct and 
indirect beneficiary communities. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
Political Interference 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Senior national, island and community political key 
stakeholders distracted by other priorities, projects and 
parliamentary cycles as well as shock events.  
 
Disengagement or hostility to project. 
Other 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Careful engagement with senior government representatives during the project design process. 
Transparent and accountable target community selection not influenced by local political preferences. 
Transparent and accountable project delivery decisions. 
Strong communication with government through well established and respected UNDP CO staff. 
Recognition of parliament annual cycle and necessity of timely inputs to governmental decision making bodies. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 7 
Inter-agency Coordination 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Limited coordination between government ministries, 
UNDP, communities, NGOs/CBOs, private sector and 
other stakeholders reduces the efficiency and 
effectiveness of implementation of project interventions. 
Technical and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Strong institutional and implementation arrangements for the project’s management framework will ensure effective 
coordination and collaboration between project partners. 
Project management units at the national level will facilitate constant dialogue between project partners and 
stakeholders.  This will be complemented by UNDP’s role as executing agency responsible for project oversight. In 
addition, co-management structures will promote coordination and collaboration between government officials and 
local communities for on-the-ground activities. The project will also build institutional capacities for coordination 
between various stakeholders. 
Moreover, project activities focus specifically on building capacities in various institutions.   
This mitigation measure is expected to adjust the risk level to “Low”. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 8 
Environmental Impacts 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Project activities result in collateral environmental 
degradation. 
Social and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework has been prepared for the project.  The ESMF considers 
environmental and social risks and outlines mechanisms for management and monitoring of potential risks.  The ESMF 
applies to all aspects of the project.

=== PAGE 72 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 78 
 
 
G 
Stakeholders are further empowered to take action in the event of collateral damage through the project Grievance 
Redress Mechanism, which is outlined in the ESMF. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 9 
Inequitable Representation 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Limited involvement and participation of women and 
other marginalized groups in project implementation. 
Social and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project has a strong focus on inclusion of women and socially marginalized groups within the planning and 
implementation of project activities. This inclusion began during the design of this project proposal, with numerous 
consultations targeting women and members of other vulnerable groups, including young people.  During project 
implementation, this consultation process will continue to guide implementation of project activities, with certain 
activities targeting women and other vulnerable groups as the primary beneficiaries, and youth training opportunities 
being open to youth from all social backgrounds. 
Furthermore, the ESMF outlines a Grievance Redress Mechanism that will be in place to enable any aggrieved 
stakeholder to utilise. 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon

=== PAGE 73 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 78 
 
 
 
H 
H.1. Logic Framework.  
 
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework under 
the Results Management Framework. 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level54 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Increased climate-resilient 
sustainable development  
Addressing Climate Vulnerabilities in the Water Sector (ACWA) in the Marshall Islands 
Increased climate resilient 
sustainable development 
The proposed project contributes to climate-resilient water resources development in RMI through the 
sustained impact of project measures. Overall, the project will contribute to the Fund level impact of 
Increased resilience of health and wellbeing, and food and water security.  
GCF funding will support an integrated approach to strengthening the water sector resilience in RMI 
through three inter-related outputs contributing to climate resilient water management.  The 
interventions will directly benefit approximately 15,572 people across the 24 inhabitated atolls and 
indirectly benefit the entire population of RMI (55,226 people) through capacity building and integration 
of water management into national governance framework. 
The proposed interventions aim to increase resilience of water resources for drinking and hygiene 
purposes in RMI.  This will be done by: 
• 
Improving household and community rainwater harvesting and storage structures to increase 
resilience of water supply in all outer islands and atolls accounting for approximately 28% of 
RMI’s population, including 7,630 (49%) women, currently at risk  
• 
Securing groundwater resources from contamination due to inundation caused by wave 
overtopping of seawater. 
• 
Strengthening the technical capacities of national and subnational institutions and key 
stakeholders to integrated climate change risks into water governance processes so that 
management of climate change risks are coordinated, effective, participatory, equitable, and 
sustained over the long-term when risks are expected to worsen. 
These components of the proposed project contribute to mainstream climate change adaptation into 
national planning and development, as envisaged under the RMI Water and Sanitation Policy and Action 
Plan (NEPA Amendment 2016) and other key climate change policies and strategies of the Government of 
RMI to enable climate change adaptation. 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term  
(if applicable) 
Final 
 
Fund-level impacts 
A2.0 Increased resilience 
of health and well-being, 
and food and water 
security 
A2.1 Number of males 
and females benefiting 
from improved health 
due to safe drinking 
water supply despite 
climate shocks and 
stresses   
Project 
baseline, mid-
term and end 
term surveys. 
 
 
<5% of 
populatio
n 
 
 
50% of 
population 
in targeted 
communiti
es (50 per 
cent of the 
beneficiary 
population 
100% 
target 
population 
with 
access to 
safe 
No major disaster 
occurs in the project 
locations that may 
delay the 
completion of the 
water infrastructure 
work. 
                                                             
54 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks available at the following link 
(Please note that some indicators are under refinement): http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf

=== PAGE 74 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 78 
 
 
 
H 
 
 
A2.2 Number of males 
and females with year-
round access to reliable 
water supply during 
prolonged drought.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As above 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As above 
 
to be 
women; 25 
per cent of 
all 
beneficiari
es to be 
youth)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As above 
 
drinking 
water 
 (50 per 
cent of the 
beneficiary 
population 
to be 
women; 25 
per cent of 
all 
beneficiari
es to be 
youth) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Households and 
communities are 
properly trained in 
the use and 
maintenance of 
water 
infrastructure.

=== PAGE 75 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 78 
 
 
 
H 
A3.0 Increased resilience 
of intrastructure and the 
built environment to 
climate change 
3.1 Value of 
infrastructure made 
more resilient to rapid-
onset events (e.g. floods, 
storm surges, 
heatwaves) and slow-
onset processes (e.g. sea 
level rise) 
 
 
3.2 Number of new 
infrastructure projects 
or physical assets 
strengthened or 
constructed to 
withstand conditions 
resulting from climate 
variability and change 
Project 
baseline, mid-
term and end 
term surveys. 
 
 
 
 
Sustained 
operation and 
maintenance 
created 
through the 
Project 
 
None 
 
 
 
 
 
 
None 
 
 
 
1293 
household
s and 79 
communit
y buildings 
made 
resilient55 
 
 
79 
buildings 
improved 
and 60 
new 
communit
y RWH 
systems 
installed 
2586 
household
s and158 
communit
y buildings 
made 
resilient  
 
 
RWH 
systems on 
158 
communit
y buildings 
improved 
and 121 
new 
communit
y RWH 
systems 
installed 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
55 Households will be able to have sufficient water supply for 90% of the projected droughts based on RCP 8.5 models

=== PAGE 76 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 78 
 
 
 
H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-
term (if 
applicable)  
Final 
Project/programme 
Outcomes 
Outcomes that contribute to Fund-level impacts 
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive 
capacity and reduced 
exposure to climate risks 
7:1: % of vulnerable 
households in targeted 
communities with 
improved access to 
water, and strategies to 
respond to climate 
variability in the outer 
atolls and islands of RMI 
Project 
baseline, mid-
term and end 
term surveys 
Gender 
sensitive field 
surveys in the 
23 local 
government 
jurisdictions 
0 
50% of 
househol
ds in 
targeted 
communi
ties have 
upgrade
d or new 
RWH and 
storage 
(the 
project 
will 
target 
49% 
female 
headed 
househol
ds) 
 
100% people, 
of households 
in targeted 
communities 
(the project 
will target 
49% female 
headed 
households) 
 
Infrastructure, 
adapted rural life 
activities and 
climate services 
are completed and 
implemented 
successfully in the 
23 local 
government 
jurisdictions 
Project/programme 
outputs 
Outputs that contribute to outcomes 
Output 1:  Implementation 
of optimal mix of 
interventions to ensure 
climate resilient water 
security in outer atolls and 
islands of RMI 
 
 
 
1.1 Extent of 
improvements in 
existing rainwater 
harvesting systems for 
existing HH and 
community buildings in 
outer islands and atolls 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of 
households, 
and 
community 
buildings with 
upgraded 
existing 
rooftop 
rainwater 
harvesting 
systems 
(surveys 
collected 
through 
CWCs) 
 
 
11,302 
m3 of 
water 
required 
to 
achieve 
the 
baseline 
drought, 
and an 
additiona
l 9,161 
m3 of 
climate 
change 
induced 
drought 
periods 
1265 
househol
ds RWH 
upgrades
, 79 
commun
ity 
buildings 
installed. 
 
 
 
 
 
Upgrading of 
RWH for 2,529 
households 
and 158 
community 
buildings 
(the project 
will target 
49% female 
headed 
households) 
 
 
 
 
No major disaster 
occurs in the 
project locations 
that may delay the 
implementation of 
water 
infrastructure at 
household and 
community level. 
 
Sufficient rainfall 
can be collected to 
help achieve water 
security.

=== PAGE 77 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 78 
 
 
 
H 
 
 
 
1.2 Additional (new) 
rainwater harvesting 
and storage systems for 
communities in outer 
islands and atolls 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of 
community 
buildings with 
improved 
efficiency of 
rainwater 
harvesting 
systems and 
increased 
storage 
capacity 
(surveys 
collected 
through 
CWCs) 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 new 
commun
ity 
roof/stor
age 
systems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
121 new 
community 
roof/storage 
systems 
installed 
 
 
Government and 
local authorities 
are willing to 
adjust existing 
planning 
instruments  
 
 
 
 
 
Output 2: Optimization of 
alternative water sources to 
reduce reliance on harvested 
rainwater in the context of 
reduced rainfall 
 
2.1 Number of protect 
groundwater wells 
from more frequent 
storm surges and 
contamination  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.2 Strengthened local 
capacities and 
enhanced women and 
youth’s leadership 
through best practices 
Project 
baseline, mid-
term and end 
term surveys, 
Mid-term 
review and 
terminal 
evaluation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project 
baseline, mid-
term and end 
term reviews, 
that includes 
results from 
assessment 
and 
monitoring 
systems 
created by the 
Project 
 
2,586 
househol
ds and 
communi
ty 
groundw
ater wells 
open to 
contamin
ation by 
seawater 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50% 
groundw
ater 
wells 
protec 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
>50% of 
training 
participa
nts who 
have 
adopted 
the best 
practices 
(disaggr
egated 
by 
gender) 
 
100% target 
wells 
households 
and 
community 
groundwater 
wells will be 
protected from 
storm surges 
and 
contamination 
in 77 target 
rural 
communities 
 
 
 
100% of 
training 
participants 
who have 
adopted the 
best practices 
(disaggregated 
by gender) 
 
No major disaster 
occurs in the 
project locations 
that may delay the 
implementation of 
groundwater wells 
protection at 
household and 
community level 
 
Sufficient interest 
and participation 
from community 
partners on 
training 
opportunities and 
workshops

=== PAGE 78 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 78 
 
 
 
H 
on reduced demand for 
rainwater 
 
Output 3: Climate change 
induced drought 
preparedness and response 
measures implemented in 
outer atolls and islands 
implemented in outer atolls 
and islands 
3.1 Updated national-
level contingency plans  
and national-level 
water safety plans, and 
develop Standard 
Operating Procedures 
(SOPs) for climate 
change induced 
drought response 
 
3.2 Number of 
developed and 
implemented 
community-level 
drought contingency 
planning in outer 
islands and atolls   
Project 
baseline, mid-
term and end 
term surveys, 
Mid-term 
review and 
terminal 
evaluation  
 
SOP 
developed and 
applied by 
local 
authorities 
with alert 
times that 
compare with 
international 
best practices  
 
Number of 
Community 
Water 
Committees 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
Trained 
CWCs 
have 
adopted 
contigen
cy plans 
 
 
100% of 
training CWCs 
who have 
adopted the 
contingency 
plans and 
SOPs  
 
77 
community-
based water 
committee 
(CWCs) with 
enhanced 
capacities to 
develop, 
implement, 
operate, 
maintain and 
monitor 
drought SOPs 
Sufficient local 
capacities exist 
with the relevant 
authorities to 
uptake additional 
mechanisms  
 
Willingness of 
communities and 
local partners to 
absorb knowledge 
specific to 
operation and 
maintenance of 
rainwater 
harvesting tanks. 
 
Activities 
Description 
Inputs 
Description 
Activity 1.1 Improve 
existing rainwater 
harvesting systems for 
community buildings and 
households in outer islands 
and atolls for usage during 
increasing frequency and 
periods of drought 
GCF funds will be used to improve 
existing rainwater harvesting systems for 
147 community buildings and 2,400 
households across the 24 local 
government jurisdictions.  An additional 
11,302 m3 of water will be provided to 
achieve the baseline drought, as well as 
9,161 m3 of water to meet the climate 
change induced drought.  
 
1.1.1. Improve 
existing rainwater 
harvesting systems 
for community 
buildings and 
households (HH) in 
the outer atolls and 
islands (the project 
will target 49% 
female headed  
households)  
 
1.1.2 Improve 
existing rainwater 
harvesting systems 
for community 
buildings (CB) and 
increase storage 
capacity in the outer 
atolls and islands. 
1.1.1 The activity will close the water 
gap by improving existing rainwater 
harvesting systems for community 
buildings and households and 
ensuring that 100% of the roofs are 
connected to rainwater harvesting 
systems, improving household 
systems to 70% of efficiency. 
Moreover, guttering systems will be 
replaced with 150mm gutters, and 
downpipes will be replaced with 
150mm downpipes. 
1.1.2 The activity will improve 
existing rainwater harvesting 
systems for community buildings 
and will install first flush diverter 
and insect screens, as well as will 
improve the efficiency of rainwater 
harvesting systems to 80%.

=== PAGE 79 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 78 
 
 
 
H 
Activity 1.2 Provide 
additional rainwater 
harvesting systems and 
increase of storage capacity 
for communities in outer 
islands and atolls for usage 
during increasing frequency 
and periods of drought  
This activity will improve the efficiency 
of rainwater harvesting at existing 
community buildings by upgrading 
community level storage quality and 
capacity, and by installing an additional 
of 50m3 of storage capacity for each 
community building, improving the RWH 
system efficiency at 80%.  The project 
ESMF, as it applies to Output 1, will be 
implemented and audited, including the 
monitoring of impacts. 
1.2.1. Build new roof 
catchment systems 
 
1.2.2. Build new 
storage tanks  
This activity will transform existing 
community building catchment 
systems to 100% utilization and will 
implement new storage capacity of 
50m3 per community tanks. 
Additional roof systems will be 
constructed to meet the community 
water demand and close the water 
gap. 
Activity 2.1. Protect 
groundwater wells from 
more frequent climate 
change induced storm 
surges and contaminations 
A total of 2,586 priority households and 
community groundwater wells in 78 
targeted rural communities will be 
protected from contamination from 
debris, sea swells and high tides, by lining 
the well for the full depth and to at least 
0.6m above the ground.  
2.1.1. Provide 
community water 
solutions for water 
vulnerable 
populations   
 
2.1.2. Adaptation of 
existing water 
infrastructure 
solutions in the 
region 
Groundwater wells will be covered 
against king tides and storm surges. 
Water access will be facilitated 
through the provision of fitted hand 
pumps. 
Existing water infrastructure will be 
climate proofed by raising the height 
of groundwater wells, and extending 
the surface concrete slab to 2m. 
Activity 2.2. Enhance women 
and youth’s leadership 
through best practices and 
community awareness 
programmes on efficient 
usage (demand 
management) of rainwater 
 
Documentation of water demand 
reduction options and best practices on 
efficient water management for women 
and youth will be promoted through the 
provision of formal and informal 
trainings on water management. 
Exchange visits will be facilitated in the 
23 atolls and islands of RMI, and 
certification programmes in the 
University of South Pacific will be 
secured for the best contestant.  
 
2.2.1  Facilitate inter-
island knowledge 
exchange visits with 
women and youth, 
sharing experience 
and practice on water 
conservation 
 
2.2.2  Certification 
programme for 
women and youth 
focused on climate 
change adaptation 
and disaster risk 
reduction 
 
A local university (USP) will provide 
formal and informal education to 
vulnerable women and youth on 
climate change adaptation and water 
demand management.  
 
Empowerment of and support to 
women-led and related associations 
to lead the restoration process to 
ensure sustainability of the 
restoration process.  
 
Lessons learned will be exchanged 
through use of ‘model villages’, 
formal structures (CWCs, local and 
national government) and 
community/NGO networks. 
 
Activity 3.1. Updated 
national-level contingency 
plans and national-level 
water safety plans, and 
develop Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOPs) for 
climate change induced 
drought response 
 
 
 
To support the Office of the Chief 
Secretary (OCS), the National Disaster 
Management Office (NDMO), and other 
national partners, national-level 
contingency plans and national-level 
water safety plans will be updated, and 
standard operating procedures (SOPs) 
for drought response will be developed. 
The SOPs will indicate the actions 
involved in responding to drought and 
the necessary measured for 
preparedness, response and relief.  
Training programs for drought 
management and contingency planning 
3.1.1.  Conduct 
training programs for 
drought risk 
management, water-
safety  and 
contingency planning 
at institutional level  
 
3.1.2. Implement 
SOPs for drought 
preparedness and 
response  
Training programmes will equip 
government officials with the 
required skills and knowledge to 
develop and activate contingency 
plans. Moreover, training 
programmes will enable participants 
to understand risk analysis, 
vulnerability and capacity 
assessment, resource mobilization 
and other.  
 
National-level drought contingency 
plans, water safety plans and SOPs

=== PAGE 80 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 78 
 
 
 
H 
 
at institutional level will take place, 
ensuring the NDMO and relevant 
partners are prepared to respond to 
anticipated droughts with the needed 
systems and tools in place.  
will be developed, including drought 
scenarios, technical audit and 
improved internal management 
systems, communications, resource 
mobilization etc. Through testing and 
simulation, the SOPs developed for 
drought will be tested.  
Activity 3.2. Develop and 
implement community-level 
drought contingency 
planning in outer islands 
and atolls 
 
Capacity building programme for 
drought risk management and 
contingency planning will be provided to 
Community-based Water Committees 
(CWCs). An assessment of existing and 
potential water supply during period of 
drought will be undertaken, and based on 
the findings, targets for reduced 
consumption and priority of use will be 
developed through contingency plans. 
Trainings will also include operation and 
maintenance of community water storage 
and community wells as well as any other 
water infrastructure provided through 
this project. Moreover, trainings will 
include water balance assessments and 
access plans for community water 
resources. 
3.1.3. Training for 
community-based 
water committees 
and local government 
representatives  
3.1.4. Training 
community members 
in operation and 
maintenance of 
rainwater harvesting 
systems (aiming for 
50 per cent women 
and 25 per cent youth 
beneficiaries) 
3.1.5. SOPs for 
drought contingency 
planning for rural 
communities and 
local government  
Technical assistance to community-
based water committees will be 
provided to develop drought 
contingency plans, and SOPs for 
drought early warning and response. 
 
Capacity building will be focused on 
operation and maintenance of water 
infrastructure provided through this 
project, with a focus on women and 
youth.  
 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
334. 
The project results as outlined in the project results framework will be monitored and reported annually and 
evaluated periodically during project implementation to ensure the project effectively achieves these results. 
335. 
Project-level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the UNDP POPP and the UNDP 
Evaluation Policy.  
336. 
The primary responsibility for day-to-day project monitoring and implementation rests with the Project Manager. 
The Project Manager will develop annual work plans to ensure the efficient implementation of the project.  The Project 
Manager will inform the Project Board and the UNDP Pacific Office of any delays or difficulties during implementation, 
including the implementation of the Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) plan, so that the appropriate support and 
corrective measures can be adopted.  The Project Manager will also ensure that all project staff maintain a high level of 
transparency, responsibility and accountability in monitoring and reporting project results.  
337. 
The UNDP Pacific Office in Fiji will support the Project Manager as needed, including through annual supervision 
missions.  The UNDP Pacific Office is responsible for complying with UNDP project-level M&E requirements as outlined 
in the UNDP POPP. Additional M&E, implementation quality assurance, and troubleshooting support will be provided by 
the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor as needed.  The project target groups and stakeholders including the NDA Focal 
Point will be involved as much as possible in project-level M&E. 
338. 
A project inception workshop will be held after the UNDP project document has been signed by all relevant parties 
to: a) re-orient project stakeholders to the project strategy and discuss any changes in the overall context that influence 
project implementation; b) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team, including reporting and 
communication lines and conflict resolution mechanisms; c) review the results framework, re-assess baselines as 
needed, and discuss reporting, monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities and finalize the M&E plan; d) 
review financial reporting procedures and mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual 
audit; e) plan and schedule Project Board meetings and finalize the first year annual work plan.  The Project Manager 
will prepare the inception report no later than one month after the inception workshop.  The final inception report will

=== PAGE 81 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 78 
 
 
 
H 
be cleared by the UNDP Pacific Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project 
Board. 
339. 
A project implementation report will be prepared for each year of project implementation.  The Project Manager, 
the UNDP Pacific Office, and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor will provide objective input to the annual PIR.  The 
Project Manager will ensure that the indicators included in the project results framework are monitored annually well 
in advance of the PIR submission deadline and will objectively report progress in the Development Objective tab of the 
PIR.  The annual PIR will be shared with the Project Board and other stakeholders.  The UNDP Pacific Office will 
coordinate the input of the NDA Focal Point and other stakeholders to the PIR.  The quality rating of the previous year’s 
PIR will be used to inform the preparation of the next PIR.  The final project PIR, along with the terminal evaluation 
report and corresponding management response, will serve as the final project report package.  
340. 
An independent mid-term review process will be undertaken and the findings and responses outlined in the 
management response will be incorporated as recommendations for enhanced implementation during the final half of 
the project’s duration.  The terms of reference, the review process and the final MTR report will follow the standard 
templates and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center.  The final MTR report will be cleared by the 
UNDP Pacific Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project Board.  The final 
MTR report will be available in English.  An independent terminal evaluation (TE) will take place no later than three 
months prior to operational closure of the project.  The terms of reference, the review process and the final TE report 
will follow the standard templates and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center.  The final TE report 
will be cleared by the UNDP Pacific Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project 
Board.  The TE report will be available in English.  The UNDP Pacific Office will include the planned project terminal 
evaluation in the UNDP Country Office evaluation plan, and will upload the final terminal evaluation report in English 
and the management response to the public UNDP Evaluation Resource Centre (ERC) (www.erc.undp.org).  The MTR 
and TE will be carried out by an independent evaluator.  The evaluation report prepared by the independent evaluator 
is then quality assessed and rated by the UNDP Independent Evaluation Office. 
341. 
The UNDP Pacific Office will retain all M&E records for this project for up to seven years after project financial 
closure in order to support ex-post evaluations.  A detailed M&E budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan will be 
included in the UNDP project document.  
342. 
UNDP will perform monitoring and reporting throughout the Reporting Period, including semi-annual reporting, in 
accordance with the AMA and Funded Activity Agreement (FAA).  UNDP has country presence (through the shared UN 
Field Office in Majuro) and capacity to perform such functions. In the event of any additional post-implementation 
obligations over and above the AMA, UNDP will discuss and agree these with the GCF Secretariat in in the final year of 
the project and will prepare a post-implementation monitoring plan and budget for approval by the GCF Board as 
necessary.

=== PAGE 82 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 78 
 
 
 
I 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents. 
I. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS FOR FUNDING PROPOSAL 
☒ 
NDA No-objection Letter (Annex I) 
☒ 
Feasibility Study (Annex II) 
☐ 
Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (Annex III) – Not 
             Applicable 
☒ 
Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co-financing commitment  (Annex IV) 
☒ 
Project/Programme Confirmation/Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, 
 
etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement, Annex I (Annex V) 
☒ 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment/Social and Environmental Screening Template 
             (Annex VIa) 
☒ 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) (Annex VIb) 
  
☒ 
Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (Annex VII) 
☐ 
Evaluation Report of the baseline project (Annex VIII) – Not Applicable 
☒ 
Map indicating the location of the project/programme ( Annex IX) 
Additional information 
☒ 
Timetable of project/programme implementation (Annex X) 
☒ 
Project/ programme confirmation (Annex XI) 
☒ 
Economic analysis (Summary; Annex XIIa) 
☒ 
Economic analysis (Excel calculations; Annex XIIb) 
☒ 
Procurement plan (Annex XIIIa) 
☒ 
Operations and Maintenance Plan (Annex XIIIb) 
☒ 
 Gender Assessment and Action Plan (Annex XIIIc) 
☒ 
 Stakeholder Consultation Report (Annex XIIId-1) 
☒ 
 Stakeholder Engagement Plan (Annex XIIId-2) 
☒ 
 Detailed budget and work plan (Annex XIIIe) 
☒  
HACT Assessment (Annex XIIIf)- Not Applicable for DIM  
☒ 
 Project activities and responsibilities (Annex XIIIg) 
☒ 
Any other relevant document for submission (Official request for DIM from RMI Gov)-Annex XIIIh 
☒ 
Any other relevant document for submission (GCF AE Fee Request)-Annex XIIIi 
 ☒  
Response to GCF Comments on Proposal (Annex XIV) 
☒ 
UNDP Endorsement Letter (Annex XV)

=== PAGE 83 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 84 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or 
programme title 
Addressing Climate Vulnerability in the Water Sector (ACWA) in the 
Marshall Islands 
Existence of 
subproject(s) to 
be identified 
after GCF Board 
approval 
No 
Sector (public 
or private) 
Public 
Accredited 
entity 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Environmental 
and social 
safeguards 
(ESS) category 
Category B 
Location – 
specific 
location(s) of 
project or target 
country or 
location(s) of 
programme 
24 tolls and islands in the Republic of Marshall Islands (RMI): 
Ailinglaplap, Ailuk, Arno, Aur, Ebon, Enewetak, Jabat, Jaluit, Kili, 
Kwajalein, Lae, Lib, Likiep, Majuro, Maloelap, Mejit, Mili, Namdrik, Namu, 
Rongelap, Ujae, Utrik, Wotho, Wotje 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website 
Tuesday, April 9, 2019 
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
English 
Explanation on 
language 
RMI has two official languages, Marshallese and English 
Link to disclosure http://www.pacific.undp.org/content/pacific/en/home/library/rsd/rmi
-environmental-social-management-plan.html
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
A simplified ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website 
Tuesday, April 9, 2019 
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
English 
Explanation on 
language 
RMI has two official languages, Marshallese and English 
Link to disclosure http://www.pacific.undp.org/content/pacific/en/home/library/rsd/rmi
-environmental-social-management-plan.html
Other link(s) 
N/A

=== PAGE 85 ===
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a category B project is 
contained in the Environmental and Social Management Plan 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
[__] 
Explanation on 
language 
[__] 
Link to disclosure [__] 
Other link(s) 
[__] 
Remarks 
[__] 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosur
e on accredited 
entity’s website 
Social and Environmental Screening Template 
Tuesday, April 9, 2019  
 
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
English 
Explanation on 
language 
RMI has two official languages, Marshallese and English 
Link to disclosure http://www.pacific.undp.org/content/pacific/en/home/library/rsd/rmi
-environmental-social-management-plan.html
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Tuesday, April 9, 2019 
Place 
UNDP Website 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of 
accredited 
entity’s Board 
meeting 
N/A 
Date of GCF’s 
Board meeting 
Saturday, July 6, 2019 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 86 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 86 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP112 
Proposal name: 
Addressing Climate Vulnerability in the Water Sector (ACWA) in 
the Marshall Islands 
Accredited entity: 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Country/(ies): 
The Marshall Islands 
Project/programme size: 
Small 
I.
Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths 
Points of caution 
Clear climate rationale: existential threat to 
habitability of the nation’s outer islands due 
to sea level rise (which increases the risk of 
overtopping events that destroy the islands’ 
freshwater aquifer lenses) and lengthening 
droughts that will exhaust the islands’ 
present rainwater storage capacity. 
The project operation and maintenance costs 
may be relatively low compared with other 
technologies (such as desalination) but 
affordability will still be a challenge. The 
Government of the Marshall Islands has 
committed to cover periodic operation and 
maintenance costs beyond the life of the 
project. 
The project’s direct beneficiaries (15,572 
people, 49% female) represent 28% of the 
country’s total population. 
The water supply infrastructure on the outer 
islands has become derelict due to lack of 
maintenance. The project must seek to 
understand why this has happened and 
incentivize users to sustain the new 
rainwater harvesting systems. 
Rainwater harvesting systems are a robust 
technology and relatively simple to operate. 
The project is coordinated with the Marshall 
Islands’ National Water and Sanitation Policy, 
but does not directly address sanitation, 
although it is linked to other donor-funded 
initiatives that are directly supporting 
improvements in sanitation.  
Country ownership is high, and well aligned 
with national priorities.  
Per beneficiary cost (USD 1,227 per direct 
beneficiary from GCF funds) is high, but not 
unusually so for a Small Island Developing 
State. 
The capacity of the community water 
committees to sustain the rainwater 
harvesting systems will be enhanced. 
The economic returns of the project are 
relatively low. 
2.
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XIII, titled “List of proposed
conditions and recommendations”.

=== PAGE 87 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 87 
 
 
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment 
2.1 
Project background 
3. 
The project supports the Government of the Marshall Islands in its efforts to adapt to 
increasing climate risks, including more frequent and extreme droughts, and sea level rise 
increasing the risk of wave overtopping events, which impact the country’s drinking water 
supply stored largely in freshwater aquifers (i.e. groundwater). 
4. 
The Marshall Islands is particularly vulnerable to climate change. Its climate is 
influenced by large ocean-atmosphere interactions, such as trade winds, monsoons and tropical 
cyclones. Further, its populations and infrastructure are concentrated in small, low-lying islands 
and atolls (the largest of which is only 16 square kilometres) so that any rise in sea level, 
changes in weather patterns or extreme events have significant and profound effects on 
settlements, living conditions and the economy. 
5. 
The hydro-geophysical features of the country significantly contribute to its high 
vulnerability to natural disasters and climate change. Droughts and storm waves are the main 
extreme events that impact the Marshall Islands. Historical data show a decreasing trend of 
rainfall quantities, with a consequential increase in drought risk.  
6. 
Increasing sea level rise and decreasing rainfall characterize the Marshall Islands’ 
vulnerability to climate change in relation to freshwater supply. These climate change impacts 
are likely to exacerbate the risks of freshwater shortages in the Marshall Islands, challenging the 
ability of the Marshallese people to have access to safe, fresh water all year round. 
7. 
Options for safe, fresh water are limited. With increasing sea level, tidal heights and 
storm surges, groundwater quality will be compromised ever more frequently. Desalination 
units are costly to operate, maintain and deploy. In practice this limits their application (at 
scale) to more densely populated urban islands, such as Majuro and Ebeye. 
8. 
The primary focus of the project will be the improvement and expansion of rainwater 
harvesting systems and storage capacity to supply at least 20 litres per person per day in 77 
rural communities on 23 of the outer islands and atolls of the Marshall Islands. 
9. 
Rainwater harvesting systems will be improved on 2,529 household buildings, 
additional storage tanks will be added to 158 existing community buildings and 121 new 
community rainwater harvesting systems will be constructed. In addition, the project will 
provide sanitary protection (sidewalls and aprons) to 2,586 water wells, safeguarding water 
quality in the communities. 
2.1.1. 
Climate objective 
Adaptation 
10. 
The Marshall Islands consists of 24 inhabited atolls and islands, which are mostly 
remote and lie, on average, just 2 metres (m) above sea level. 
11. 
Climate change projections for the Marshall Islands indicate that droughts are to become 
longer, more severe and more frequent. Existing water sources and insufficient rainwater 
storage means that the Marshallese will be unable to access sufficient water supplies. 
12. 
Adaptation for human health and well-being, and food and water security: by providing 
access to a resilient supply of good quality water, this project will directly improve water 
security and positively impact human health and well-being.

=== PAGE 88 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 88 
 
 
13. 
Adaptation of infrastructure and built environment: the project provides infrastructure 
– upgraded rainwater collection and storage tanks, and protected wells – all designed to be fully 
climate change proof. 
Mitigation  
14. 
It is likely that there may be some mitigation benefits to the project, specifically 
greenhouse gas emissions may be avoided by: 
(a) 
Removing the need to run emergency desalination units during droughts and after 
storms; 
(b) 
Reducing the need to import water from Majuro/Ebeye to the outer islands/atolls by 
ship; and 
(c) 
Ensuring that households reduce their need to boil drinking water using kerosene or 
firewood. 
15. 
However, the accredited entity (AE) has elected not to claim mitigation co-benefits for 
this project. 
2.1.2. 
Financing information 
16. 
The AE has requested that the project be financed by a USD 18.6 million grant from GCF, 
which represents approximately 75 per cent of the total cost. Co-finance will be provided by the 
Government of the Marshall Islands (USD 6.11 million).  
17. 
To meet operating expenditures, the project will require a government water supply 
subsidy from the eighth year until the twenty-fifth year of operation amounting to USD 13.972 
million. The Ministry of Finance has formally committed to allocate this funding.  
2.1.3. 
Environmental and social safeguards  
18. 
The project has been classified by the AE as category C for indigenous peoples and 
category C for involuntary resettlement. The Marshallese are a single indigenous ethnic group 
and the project beneficiaries are not considered to be a distinct and vulnerable indigenous 
people.  
19. 
The project will not have involuntary resettlement impacts. Building owners who wish 
to participate in the programme will need to allocate a small amount of space to fit new or 
renovated rainwater tanks. 
20. 
There is a risk of health impacts if the rainwater tanks are not maintained satisfactorily, 
and mosquitoes can breed in stagnant water. Algae growth also occurs if rainwater tanks are 
not cleaned regularly. Algae can carry toxins that are harmful to animals, humans and plants. 
These issues can be addressed through using appropriately designed tanks, and regular 
cleaning and maintenance, which can be ensured by the community-based water committees. 
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis 
Component 1: Implementation of optimal mix of interventions to ensure climate resilient water 
security in the outer atolls and islands of the Marshall Islands (total cost: USD 16.77 million; GCF 
cost: USD 11.21 million, or 66.8 per cent) 
21. 
This component will improve existing rainwater harvesting systems for community 
buildings and households in the outer islands and atolls to provide water during increasingly 
frequent periods of drought. It will also build new rainwater harvesting systems on community 
buildings.

=== PAGE 89 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 89 
 
 
22. 
The primary focus of the project will be the improvement and expansion of rainwater 
harvesting systems and storage capacity to an adequate level to supply at least 20 litres per 
person per day in the rural communities of the outer islands and atolls of the Marshall Islands 
throughout longer drought events triggered by climate change. 
23. 
The project has considered alternative water supply sources, but it did not find any that 
are suitable for the specific context of the Marshall Islands’ outer islands. Groundwater sources 
are very limited on these islands, restricted to a shallow lens of fresh water that can be lost by 
rising sea levels and overtopping events. Desalination plants are difficult to operate and 
maintain on small islands because they need inputs of energy and spare parts to continue 
functioning, so they are only really viable in more densely populated areas where economies of 
scale enable costs to be recovered. Shipping in desalinated water, or bottled water, is 
prohibitively expensive. 
24. 
It is noted that the 20 litres per day allowance (during a 70-day drought) is well below 
the 50 litres per day in guidelines published by the World Health Organization. This project will 
provide the communities with an emergency survival-level water supply during the most 
extreme droughts. Nevertheless, it may enable habitation of the outer islands to continue in 
cases where otherwise that might not be possible. 
25. 
The proposed activity will upgrade existing rooftop rainwater harvesting systems on 
158 community buildings and 2,529 households in 77 communities; and 121 new community 
roof/storage systems will be installed. Improvements to guttering and downpipes aim to 
increase the efficiency of the rainwater systems from 35 per cent today up to 80 per cent. First 
flush diverters and insect screens will reduce the environmental and health risks to the 
communities. 
Component 2: Optimization of alternative water sources to reduce reliance on harvested rainwater 
in the context of reduced rainfall; and enhancing women and youth leadership (total cost/GCF cost: 
USD 2.69 million, or 100 per cent) 
26. 
This component will protect 2,586 priority household and community groundwater 
wells that are vulnerable to contamination from sea swells and high tides. Groundwater is 
recognized as a complementary water source for non-potable water uses. Protecting these 
sources will build resilience to droughts by reducing the pressure on drinking water supplies.  
27. 
It will fund the protection of wells from surface pollution by lining the well for the full 
depth and to at least 0.6 m above the ground to form a head wall around the outer rim of the 
well. A concrete slab will be constructed on the ground surface, extending for 2 m around the 
well. 
28. 
It should be noted that while these works help protect the wells and provide better 
sanitary conditions for users, they do not protect the water wells from salinization (caused by 
rising sea levels, high tides and storm events). They should be viewed as complementary to 
component 1 and not a substitution. 
29. 
Component 2 will also create opportunities for learning exchanges and facilitate inter-
island exchanges on best practices in climate change risk reduction for water resources, 
including water security and conservation of water resources. It is hoped that this will 
accelerate lasting change, lessons learned and wider implementation of these measures in 
similar environments for new projects. 
30. 
Given that approximately 60 per cent of the population is less than 24 years old, women 
and youth have been selected as the target group. This activity will be undertaken in 
partnership with the Marshall Islands Red Cross Society, Women’s United Together Marshall 
Islands (WUTMI), the National Youth Congress, and existing women and youth networks.

=== PAGE 90 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 90 
 
 
Component 3: Climate change induced drought preparedness and response measures implemented 
in outer atolls and islands (total cost/GCF cost: USD 3.98 million, or 100 per cent) 
31. 
Component 3 will update national-level contingency plans and standard operating 
procedures for climate change induced drought response. It will support the Marshall Islands’ 
Office of Chief Secretary (OCS), the National Disaster Management Office, municipal 
governments, the Weather Service Office, the Ministry of Finance, the Environmental Protection 
Authority (EPA), the Ministry of Internal Affairs, community and non-governmental 
organizations and development partners, and the private sector to develop systems to 
coordinate early warning and disaster response.  
32. 
Training programmes for drought risk management and contingency planning at the 
institutional level will be provided to develop plans that are practical, results-oriented, simple, 
participatory, realistic and supported by preparedness actions. 
33. 
At the local level, component 3 will also develop and implement community-based 
drought contingency planning. These plans will define goals and objectives, such as targets for 
reduced consumption and priority of use, based on the assessment of all existing and potential 
local water supply sources during episodes of extreme drought. Community water committees 
will conduct simple water balance assessments and access plans for community water 
resources defining rights of access and exclusion. 
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria  
3.1 
Impact potential     
                                                                  Scale: High  
34. 
The project has a clear climate rationale. The vulnerability of the freshwater lenses to 
climate-induced seawater overtopping and prolonged drought events makes rainwater 
harvesting a necessary and cost-effective investment to ensure the continued availability of 
drinking water to residents of the outer islands and atolls. The funding proposal has high cross-
cutting impact potential. 
35. 
From an adaptation perspective, the funding proposal adequately substantiates the 
climate threat faced by the freshwater aquifer lenses and existing rainwater harvesting systems, 
which are currently the only freshwater sources in the Marshall Islands apart from a few mobile 
desalination plants used in emergency situations. The lenses face the threat of the seawater 
overtopping during storm surges (a result of rising sea levels combined with storm surges) and 
more prolonged droughts. These events have the potential of rendering the water lenses useless 
for extended periods. It is estimated that the water lenses may be unusable 20 per cent of the 
time. 
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential     
 
                                     Scale: Medium  
36. 
The project may have a useful contribution to testing the viability and cost-effectiveness 
of rainwater harvesting in Pacific Small Island Developing States (SIDS), many of which are low-
lying territories highly vulnerable to even modest sea level rises.  
37. 
The financial sustainability of the intervention is a relevant risk factor that needs to be 
well managed by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the Government of 
the Marshall Islands.  
38. 
UNDP is an active partner in the region and a key player in the eventual replication of 
the project in the Pacific SIDS. Several good opportunities and avenues for knowledge sharing

=== PAGE 91 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 91 
 
 
are identified, including the annual conferences of the Pacific Water and Wastewater 
Association and possible regional water sector events.  
39. 
The project does not identify any innovative financial mechanism that can contribute to 
facilitate replication. Such replication would likely continue to be subject to substantial donor 
investments to cover the high level of capital expenditures.  
3.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
       Scale: High 
40. 
The project’s main social and economic co-benefits are improved health and well-being, 
temporary construction jobs, and development of a market for rainwater harvesting equipment 
and services. In a small economy there will also be some economic benefit from the local 
spending generated by the project, although this effect is temporary and should not be 
overstated. 
3.4 
Needs of the recipient  
                                                     Scale: High  
41. 
The Marshall Islands is a highly climate vulnerable SIDS. With most of the country only 
about 2 m above sea level, its water resources and other assets are extremely exposed to sea 
level rise. Droughts and seawater overtopping are critical risks that can only be addressed with 
protected sources of safe and clean water. 
42. 
The Marshall Islands is a lower middle-income country with a per capita income of USD 
3,665 (2016). Approximately 20 per cent of the population of the Marshall Islands has been 
reported to be living on less than USD 1 per day. 
3.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
                           Scale: High 
43. 
The proposed project is aligned with and directly delivers on the priorities outlined by 
the national development, climate change, water and disaster risk management policies of the 
Marshall Islands.  
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
                    Scale: High  
44. 
In general, economic and financial returns in SIDS tend to be lower than in other 
countries due to relatively higher infrastructure costs and lower population densities, so 
assessments of cost-effectiveness need to consider that context. In the Marshall Islands, water 
utilities cannot viably operate commercially due to the geographic and population dispersion of 
the outer islands, which raises costs and decreases revenues. Therefore, grant financing is 
required to make the investment viable. 
45. 
The economic analysis provided by the AE shows acceptable cost-effectiveness. The 
economic analysis modelled two counterfactual scenarios to compare with the project 
investments. In the first scenario, it was assumed that, in the absence of the project, the 
Government would procure additional reverse osmosis units to continue to provide 20 litres 
per person per day in times of water shortage crisis up to 2044, which would avoid most health 
or socio-economic impacts. Compared with this scenario, the project results in an economic 
internal rate of return (EIRR) of 12 per cent over 25 years, which is slightly higher than the 
UNDP social discount rate of 10 per cent. The EIRR remains above the discount rate if costs 
were to increase by 10 per cent or if the time period were limited to 20 years. In the second 
scenario, it is assumed that no additional reverse osmosis units would be procured, leading to 
provision of only 4.2 litres per person per day and resulting in negative health and socio-

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 92 
 
 
economic impacts. Compared with this scenario, the project results in an EIRR of 4 per cent, 
which is below the social discount rate, indicate a negative net present value. However, the first 
scenario is considered more likely because the World Health Organization typically 
recommends 20 litres per person per day to meet basic needs, and a minimum of 7.5–15 litres 
per person per day in emergency situations. 
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
46. 
Environmental and social risk category: The AE has screened the project using its 
social and environmental screening procedure and has assigned the overall social and 
environmental risk category for this project to be moderate. The GCF Secretariat confirms the 
category B classification which is also within the AEs accreditation level. 
47. 
Safeguard instrument and information disclosure: The AE has developed an 
environmental and social management framework and management plan (ESMFMP) which 
provides guidance for executing entities to conduct environmental assessment and implement 
environmental management safeguards plans and ensure that the environmental and social 
objectives of the projects are met. 
48. 
The ESMFMP provides for the legal and institutional framework for environmental and 
social aspects including the applicable legislation, policies and regulations in the environmental 
impact assessment in the Marshall Islands. The ESMFMP also includes environmental 
procedures for developing site and activity-specific work plans, inspection, environmental 
incident reporting, review and auditing, development of corrective actions and reporting. It also 
provides the institutional arrangements including management structures and responsibilities. 
The ESMFMP will be disclosed on the AE and GCF’s website. 
49. 
Key environmental and social risks and impacts and mitigation measures: The 
project activities’ physical impacts will primarily be at the construction stage during the 
installation of equipment such as rainwater tanks, groundwater wells and pumps and are 
expected to be relatively minor and temporary. These include increase in noise and vibration 
levels, light intrusion if activities are conducted at night, potential for erosion and 
sedimentation, generation of solid and liquid waste and increase in dust particles. The ESMFMP 
provides for management measures to avoid, minimize and mitigate negative impacts of the 
interventions at each stage of the project cycle. Contractors are expected to prepare a site-
specific Construction Environmental Management Plan (CEMP) which is specifically focused on 
construction related issues which will be cleared by UNDP prior to the actual construction 
works. 
50. 
All project personnel are planned to attend an induction training that covers health, 
safety, environment and cultural requirements. The minor construction works pose minimal 
risks to workers and can be properly addressed by standard construction practices and use of 
personal protective equipment. The infrastructures also generate minimal risks and impacts to 
the health, safety and security of the public and beneficiary communities. 
51. 
No compulsory land acquisition and/or compensation is expected to be implemented as 
the interventions will be typically established in existing public facilities, such as schools, health 
centres, and churches. While project interventions will be undertaken on land that is privately 
owned and land use agreements have already been put in place, the AE must ensure that these 
are based on negotiated settlements that meets the requirements of GCF’s standards on land 
acquisition and involuntary resettlement. The project is not expected to impact biodiversity of 
flora and fauna as the structures will be located in already built-up areas. The AE’s due diligence

=== PAGE 93 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 93 
 
 
and consultations conducted also found that no indigenous people and/or ethnic minorities are 
known to live in the Marshall Islands. No cultural heritage is expected to be affected by the 
construction activities.  
52. 
Institutional arrangements: The ESMFMP provides for the institutional arrangements 
needed to implement the environmental and social safeguards of the project. This includes the 
involvement of the Office of Chief Secretary (OCS), who is responsible for the supervision of the 
EMSFMP. A project management unit (PMU) will be established to administer the day-to-day 
implementation of the EMSFMP and ensure implementation of the management measures by 
the contractors. The project will be administered by UNDP as the AE. 
53. 
Stakeholder engagement: The ESMFMP provides for public consultation and 
environmental and social disclosure procedures to allow for continual engagement of 
stakeholders throughout project implementation including the manner and timing of disclosure 
of the applicable safeguards reports. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan is also prepared. 
54. 
Grievance redress mechanism: The ESMFMP provides for the development of a 
grievance redress mechanism (GRM) and a complaints register to allow for resolution of 
complaints and/or grievances on terms that are mutually acceptable to all parties. The GRM will 
be made known to stakeholders during stakeholder engagement activities of the project. 
4.2 
Gender policy 
55. 
The AE has submitted a comprehensive gender assessment, which also looks at youth 
and other vulnerable groups; therefore, it complies with the operational guidelines of the GCF 
Gender Policy and Action Plan. The gender assessment also includes a gender action plan. 
56. 
The gender assessment provides information on the key priorities of the Marshall 
Islands on climate change resilience and water security while also illustrating various policies to 
address climate related issues. The national climate change policy framework also reinforces a 
human rights and gender and social inclusion approach. It further indicates that the Marshall 
Islands is committed to gender equality and women’s empowerment, although it recognizes the 
challenges of translating this commitment to tangible actions. The analysis of water, sanitation 
and hygiene clearly illustrates the challenges climate change induced shortages pose for 
children in schools and women, elderly, people with disabilities, and female heads of 
households. The assessment was done based on literature reviews and was also supported by 
the findings of community level consultations, which were done with women, men, students and 
youth. The community consultation illustrated that while water fetching is s a household 
responsibility with the whole family contributing, men and young boys having a bigger role at 
times of shortages in fetching water. Female heads of household will have to rely on family 
members, friends and neighbours for their drinking water. There is also an indication that 
women and children play roles in fetching water from desalination units, with children leaving 
school to help mothers as well as women spending more time fetching water than necessary. 
The gender assessment further indicates that during drought seasons the work burden for 
women increases, with responsibilities for taking care of the sick heightened during periods of 
shortages. Further, the use of water will be restricted during menses as there are cultural 
restrictions for women and girls around these times. Decisions on water usage, especially at the 
community level, is indicated to be made mostly by men, with women having a less visible role. 
The stakeholder consultation with women indicates that women are not happy that men make 
the decisions on water usage and want to have a role in the decision-making process. Water 
management for consumption has been highlighted as a major area that needs improvement in 
addition to access to facilities (such as toilets in schools, water supply at the community level, 
and at household levels, water collection, water safety, quality, treatment and management, 
sanitation and hygiene, among others). The stakeholder consultation was also used to prioritize

=== PAGE 94 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 94 
 
 
water and sanitation issues with proposed solutions that include the views of women and men. 
The key issues identified were the limited or low water storage facility, lack of water supply and 
quality of water, no access to water testing and treatment kits, lack of support from the EPA, an 
increase in waterborne diseases, a decrease in economic opportunities and incomes, and a lack 
of toilet facilities.  
57. 
The AE, based on the gender analysis, is expecting to see improvements in water quality 
and supply through investments in new and upgraded climate proof water infrastructure, 
ensuring target communities (women, men and youth) have the knowledge and ability to use 
water resources wisely as well as involve women and youth in decision-making processes at all 
levels. Further, the AE seeks to improve the country’s compliance with international water 
security standards and international goals and targets regarding gender equality and social 
inclusion. Going forward, the AE will target 49 per cent female headed households as its 
beneficiaries, and 50 per cent women getting access to information and installation activities, 
with 25 per cent of youth as beneficiary of the project; these are a few of the outcomes the AE 
aspires to achieve.  
58. 
The AE has committed to having two gender and youth specialists who will be the lead 
persons responsible for implementation of the action plan. At the same time, responsibility rests 
with the entire project team to ensure that all activities mainstream gender and youth issues. 
59. 
The action plan includes baseline sex disaggregated targets, indicators and budgets. It 
includes activities that are aimed at addressing the challenges faced by communities with an 
emphasis on women, female heads and youth, including specific targets for female youth. The 
action plan also includes a timeline for each of the activities. The gender action plan’s targets 
and indicators are aligned to the indicators and targets of the logic framework of the funding 
proposal.  
4.3 
Risks 
4.3.1. 
Overall programme assessment (medium risk): 
60. 
The funding proposal requests a GCF grant of USD 19.1 million accounting for 76 per 
cent of the total project cost. The Government of the Marshall Islands is co-financing USD 6.1 
million and there is no co-financing from the AE. 
61. 
The capital cost of proposed water investments will amount to USD 11,605 per 
household which is about 600 per cent of the annual household income in the outer islands of 
the country. As a SIDS, the country’s estimated cost for adaptation is one of the highest in the 
world in terms of percentage of gross domestic product, at 7.24 per cent (ranked eighth in the 
world). The Marshall Islands faces high risk of debt distress as per the International Monetary 
Fund’s Debt Sustainability Analysis; it would be difficult for the Government to raise debt 
financing for the project. These factors support the grant financing proposed by AE. However, 
for the long-term sustainability of the project, continued support from the Government for the 
O&M cost is necessary.  
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(low risk): 
62. 
UNDP (the AE) has an extensive track record of working with governments in the 15 
Pacific SIDS, delivering an average of USD 30 million per annum in the region. UNDP provides an 
oversight and quality assurance role involving staff in country, regional and headquarter offices. 
The AE has a long history of partnership with the Government of the Marshall Islands in the 
areas of climate change, integrated water management and natural resource management. The 
AE is also acting as an executing entity (EE) and will be responsible for the day-to-day activities

=== PAGE 95 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 95 
 
 
proposed in this project. The funding proposal mentions that, throughout the lifetime of the 
project, the project assurance and execution roles of UNDP will be strictly separated. 
63. 
As an EE, UNDP will receive and manage the grant from the Government of the Marshall 
Islands under a cost-sharing agreement to be signed. The grant from GCF and the Government 
of the Marshall Islands will be blended during the implementation.  
4.3.3. 
Programme-specific execution risks (medium risk):  
64. 
International and national logistics: the funding proposal identified the risk of delays in 
project implementation caused by international logistical and procurement issues as well as 
national logistical challenges. The staff of the implementing partners lack experience in 
international procurement processes, and shipping schedules are prone to delay. These risks 
can be mitigated by the direct implementation modality of the AE, in which the AE handles the 
procurement process. In addition, the funding proposal also identified that, due to the 
remoteness and geographic dispersion of project sites, travel of relevant project personnel and 
transport are often postponed at the national level. The AE stated that it will combine the outer 
islands into three clusters based on geographic proximity to achieve cost efficiencies in 
organizing transport of personnel and goods. 
65. 
Operation and maintenance (O&M) challenge: the funding proposal states that existing 
equipment funded by other grants/external providers is currently operating at 33 per cent of its 
capacity, because of the high cost and inadequacies related to the O&M of the equipment. The 
AE mentioned that the O&M challenge will be addressed through tested O&M models. The 
project will create community water committees for each outer island with support at the local 
government level, with clear guidelines and delineation of responsibilities focusing on building 
technical and financial capacity for sustainable O&M. For cost recovery of O&M, households are 
expected to provide between 7 and 17 per cent of their annual median income per year, while 
the affordable water tariff has to be less than 2.5 per cent of income based on International 
Benchmarking Network standards. As this is considered to be unaffordable, the Government of 
the Marshall Islands will provide the funding for O&M for the post-implementation period (18 
years). However, it is recommended that a contribution from households/water users for 
(partial) O&M cost recovery be considered to enhance the ownership. The AE mentioned that it 
will support an exploration of feasible mechanisms, including contributions through the 
community water committees to augment the O&M funding provided by the Government. 
66. 
Extreme weather events: the AE has identified the risk of natural hazards restricting 
inter-island access and installation activities. Extreme weather events may also damage and 
destroy ongoing project activities. This will create short-term response and recovery priorities 
for the Government and communities. The AE has suggested that the risks can be mitigated by 
spreading capital expenditure over three years, which will allow for adjustments in case of 
weather disturbances. The implementation plan and scheduling are designed to consider the 
likelihood of extreme weather conditions. 
67. 
Economic viability: the AE has provided an economic analysis with two baseline 
scenarios over 25 years. The benefits are calculated in the form of avoided costs: costs of 
procuring and managing additional mobile desalination units; avoided drought emergency 
response costs; and avoided socioeconomic drought-related costs. While baseline scenario 1 
results in an EIRR of 12 per cent, scenario 2 is expected to yield a negative net present value 
(EIRR 4 per cent). The AE stated that additional benefits are not included in the project because 
of difficulties in quantification and lack of data/studies. The long-term viability of the project 
after implementation will depend on the commitment and capacity of the Government/water 
users to finance the O&M of the project assets.  
4.3.4. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk):

=== PAGE 96 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 96 
 
 
68. 
In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio risk remains non-
material and within the risk appetite in terms of concentration level, results area or single 
proposal. 
4.3.5. 
Compliance risk (medium risk): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
69. 
Several reviews of the Marshall Island’s financial sector by the Financial Action Task 
Force and other reviewing entities have identified deficiencies in the laws of the Marshall 
Islands regarding the prevention of money laundering and countering the financing of 
terrorism. Based on those findings, Compliance assigns a “medium” risk to the proposal. 
4.3.6. 
Conclusion  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
70. 
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision. 
Summary risk assessment 
Rationale 
Overall programme 
Medium 
While the project may have some 
procurement and logistical challenges, 
the accredited entity’s direct implement 
modality is expected to mitigate these.  
The project success will depend on 
continued support from the 
Government in financing operations and 
maintenance of the water assets after 
the project implementation.  
Accredited entity/executing 
entity capability 
Low 
Project-specific execution 
Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  
Low 
Compliance 
Medium 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
71. 
The EE (UNDP) will execute the GCF project under the Direct Implementation Modality 
as requested by the Government of the Marshall Islands.  
72. 
UNDP assumes overall management responsibility and accountability for project 
implementation. Accordingly, the PMU is subject to UNDP policies and procedures. At the same 
time, as AE, UNDP will provide a three-tier oversight and quality assurance role involving UNDP 
staff in country offices and at regional and headquarters levels. In addition, independent of the 
project management function, UNDP will undertake the project assurance role that is covered 
by the AE fee to deliver GCF-specific oversight and quality assurance services including: (i) day-
to-day oversight supervision; (ii) oversight of project completion; and (iii) oversight of project 
reporting. 
73. 
The project will be guided by a project board (PB) and implementation will be via the 
PMU, which will be contracted by UNDP to be responsible for day-to-day activities. The work of 
the PMU will be overseen by UNDP. Headed by a project manager, the PMU will be set up to 
manage day-to-day financial disbursement and project implementation. The PMU will 
implement the project, under guidance of the PB and day-to-day supervision by UNDP and OCS 
within the constraints laid down by the PB and as per an annual workplan approved by the PB 
and reviewed by UNDP. The project manager’s main responsibility is to ensure that the project 
produces the results specified in the project document, to the required standard of quality and 
within the specified constraints of time and cost.  
74. 
The PMU will comprise a group of project-financed staff who will support the project 
manager in the overall operational and financial management of the project, and liaise with 
relevant stakeholders. During implementation, UNDP will assess the engagement of project 
partners, including government departments (such as EPA and OCS), and the International 
Organization for Migration for provision of specific services consistent with the Direct

=== PAGE 97 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 97 
 
 
Implementation Modality under the Framework for Cash Transfers to Implementing Partners 
(part of the harmonized approach to cash transfers). 
75. 
The financial management, audit and procurement functions of this project will be 
subject to UNDP financial rules and regulations and guidance outlined in the financial resources 
management section of the UNDP Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures.  
76. 
UNDP will perform monitoring and reporting throughout the reporting period, including 
semi-annual reporting, in accordance with the accreditation master agreement and the funded 
activity agreement. 
77. 
It is recommended that the AE address the outstanding minor comments in relation to 
the budget and budget notes, the term sheet and the AE fee budget.  
78. 
This draft assessment summary is subject to change depending on the response of the 
AE.  
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
79. 
The proposal addresses adaptation impact on two result areas: (i) most vulnerable 
people and communities, and (ii) health and well-being, food and water security. The proposal 
also has the expected number of direct and indirect beneficiaries at 15,572 and 55,226, 
respectively. 
80. 
Regarding the logical framework, the revised funding proposal adequately reflected 
comments provided by the Secretariat in response to the previous version at the impact, 
outcome and output level. Furthermore, it elaborated on the interventions for paradigm shift 
objectives to mainstream climate change adaptation into national planning and development. 
81. 
In response to the Secretariat’s request for clarification on the roles and responsibilities 
of the project implementing partners and responsible parties, the AE confirmed that annual 
periodic reviews will be conducted where the relevant inputs from all responsible parties will 
be sought by the PMU. 
4.6 
Legal assessment 
82. 
The accreditation master agreement was signed with the AE on 5 August 2016, and it 
became effective on 23 November 2016. 
83. 
The AE has provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project. 
84. 
The proposed project will be implemented in the Marshall Islands, a country in which 
GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is 
not protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, the risks of which need to be 
further assessed. The Secretariat submitted a draft of the privileges and immunities agreement 
and a background note to the national designated authority on 7 April 2016 and again on 17 
February 2017. No response on the draft agreement has been received so far. 
85. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have 
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or 
investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with relevant privileges 
and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by GCF are made only after 
the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in the country 
or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities.

=== PAGE 98 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 98 
 
 
4.7 
List of proposed conditions (including legal) 
86. 
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and  
(b) 
Completion of legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat.

=== PAGE 99 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 99 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP112 
Proposal name: 
Addressing Climate Vulnerability in the Water Sector (ACWA) in 
the Marshall Islands 
Accredited entity: 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Project/programme size: 
Small 
I.
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1.1 
Impact potential 
   Scale: High 
1.1.1. 
Adaptation impact 
1.
The project seeks to enhance water security in the Marshall Islands, mainly through the
improvement and expansion of individual and communal rainwater harvesting (RWH) systems
and the protection of existing groundwater wells to avoid contamination from sea swells and
high tides. Project activities focus on the rural communities of the outer islands and atolls,
where the vulnerability to drought is exacerbated by remoteness and weaker infrastructure.
2.
RWH infrastructure activities include 2,529 household systems and 158 communal
systems improved by the replacement of the existing 75 millimetre (mm) and 100 mm gutters,
downpipes and connections with wider 150 mm ones and the addition of first flush debris trap
systems. Communal RWH systems would also receive additional storage tanks.1 The project
plans for 121 new communal RWH systems, consisting of 200 m2 roofs and 50 m3 tanks, will be
constructed across the 77 target communities.2 The independent Technical Advisory Panel
(iTAP) requested the proponent to submit the calculations for rooftop surface and water tank
volume calculations for the new communal RWH systems (which were not submitted in the
proposal). The proponent submitted these calculations for each zone of influence. The TAP
reviewed these calculations and concluded that the design proposed is consistent with the
average amount of rainfall, available rooftop surface and proposed water storage tank volume.
3.
Activities to protect wells consist of infrastructure works to protect 2,586 household
and community groundwater wells, which play a key role as complementary water sources for
non-potable uses, increasing drought resiliency.
4.
Concerning institutional strengthening, the project would deliver training programmes
to support governmental institutions, community-based water committees and the private
sector in developing, implementing, operating, monitoring, and maintaining drought
contingency plans, standard operating procedures and early warning systems.
5.
The project would also provide training to women and youth on efficient use of
rainwater, and would create mechanisms for inter-island knowledge exchange.
6.
Direct beneficiaries, defined as the whole population of the targeted communities, who
would benefit from improved household or communal RWH systems and protected
groundwater wells, are estimated at approximately 15,600. The entire population of the
1 Funding proposal, paragraphs 122 to 124. 
2 Feasibility study, annex IIb, pages 134 and 171.

=== PAGE 100 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 100 
 
 
country, approximately 55,000 people, would indirectly benefit from the strengthened 
institutional capacity of governmental agencies.3 
7. 
If the improved and new RWH systems are maintained and operated adequately, the 
systems would be able to provide 20 litres per capita per day of rainwater for almost 100 days 
without rain. This is 40 per cent more capacity than that needed for the assumed average 
baseline drought (with no climate change), and it is consistent with the climate change drought 
projections described in the feasibility study.4 The total storage capacity of the target 
communities, currently estimated at almost 10,000 cubic metres (m3), would reach 
approximately 30,000 m3 after project implementation.5 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
             Scale: Medium 
1.2.1. 
Innovation 
8. 
Individual and communal RWH systems already exist and have been used in the 
Marshall Islands. The innovative aspect of the project resides in the integrated approach, which 
combines improvement and expansion of RWH systems, well protection, awareness-raising on 
the demand side, and institutional strengthening at local and national levels. 
1.2.2. 
Potential for knowledge and learning 
8. 
Activity 2.1 would include the development of mechanisms for inter-island knowledge 
exchange. However, these mechanisms are not described in the proposal. 
9. 
Training programmes would be focused on women and youth, and include the 
development of Water Safety Plans, RWH systems operation and maintenance, demand 
management, sanitation and hygiene, disaster standard operating procedures and drought 
preparedness. This activity will be undertaken in partnership with the Marshall Islands Red 
Cross Society, Women United Together Marshall Islands, the National Youth Congress, and 
existing women and youth networks.6 
1.2.3. 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
10. 
Concerning sustainability, the operation and maintenance of individual RWH systems 
would be the responsibility of private households.7 Communal RWH systems would be operated 
and maintained by the community-based water committees, with funds provided by the 
government. The government submitted a co-financing commitment letter that includes the 
allocation of funds to cover operation and maintenance (O&M) from year 7 to year 25. The low 
average annual income in the outer atolls would make it unaffordable to set a tariff to recover 
even O&M costs. 
11. 
Institutional strengthening and trainings in general would also support long-term 
sustainability. 
1.2.4. 
Scalability and replicability 
12. 
As the project already covers almost the entire rural population of the country, and 
urban centres are supplied by water utilities, there is little room for scaling up within the 
                                                          
3 Funding proposal, paragraph 178. 
4 Feasibility study, annex IIa, page 34. 
5 Funding proposal, Figure C2.1. 
6 Funding proposal, paragraph 133. 
7 Excluding renewals, which would be covered by the government.

=== PAGE 101 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 101 
 
 
Marshall Islands. However, there is a moderate potential for replication on other small island 
developing States within similar contexts. 
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
        Scale: High 
1.3.1. 
Environmental co-benefits 
13. 
The project would generate a reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by reducing energy 
consumption for: (1) desalination; (2) transportation of water to remote atolls; and (3) inter-
island transportation of inhabitants of outer atolls who migrate during droughts due to 
insufficient water availability. 
14. 
Other environmental gains include avoided production of plastic waste from bottled 
water and reduced contamination of groundwater through groundwater well protection works. 
1.3.2. 
Social co-benefits 
15. 
Enhanced availability of water for drinking and hygiene purposes would improve health 
standards of the population, especially during drought periods, reducing the incidence of food- 
and waterborne diseases. 
16. 
Communal RWH systems at public schools would improve attendance. 
1.3.3. 
Economic co-benefits 
17. 
Improved health would reduce health-care expenses and impact positively on 
productivity and long-term human development. The stabilization of outer atolls due to reduced 
migration would create opportunities for social and economic development of these atolls and 
take pressure off the two main urban centres. 
18. 
Besides the job opportunities that would arise through implementation of the project, it 
is expected that given the scale of the investments, the project would indirectly promote the 
development of RWH and sanitation services, mostly related to maintenance of RWH systems 
and the installation and maintenance of sanitation systems. 
19. 
The reduced dependence on water desalination units would reduce the overall costs of 
water supply on the Marshall Islands. 
1.3.4. 
Gender-sensitive development impact 
20. 
The project would have greater benefits for women, since they are usually responsible 
for domestic hygiene and for collecting water from communal RWH systems or from mobile 
desalination units during droughts. Also for this reason, Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for All 
trainings would be focused on women and youth.  
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
1.4.1. 
Vulnerability of the country, vulnerable groups and gender aspects 
21. 
The vulnerability of the Marshall Islands to climate change effects is adequately 
described in the proposal. 
22. 
Water security on the Marshall Islands, which is the sole focus of this project, is highly 
susceptible to climate change. The islands have no rivers, streams or lakes; the only sources of 
surface freshwater are a limited number of small ponds, which usually have poor water quality.  
23. 
Groundwater is moderately to extremely saline, depending on the season, tide, location 
and depth of the well. Information regarding specific locations, available volume, and quality of

=== PAGE 102 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 102 
 
 
groundwater is limited. Groundwater is normally used for washing, cleaning and sanitation, and 
during droughts is also used for drinking and cooking. Groundwater represents less than 2 per 
cent of the water supply in rural communities. Groundwater lenses with moderate salinity are 
threatened by the risk of sea-level rise and reduced precipitation. 
24. 
Historical data shows a decreasing trend for rainfall volumes, and an increasing drought 
risk. The proposal includes a specific “Report on Climate Change Projections”, focused on 
precipitation and drought, presented as annex 22 of the feasibility study.8 
25. 
Being a low-lying island nation with no major points of elevation above two metres, it is 
highly vulnerable to potential sea level rise. 
26. 
The project targets rural communities of the outer atolls and islands, which are the most 
vulnerable groups in relation to water security. 
1.4.2. 
Economic and social development 
27. 
With a per capita gross national income of USD 4,840, the country is classified as “upper 
middle income”.9 Despite the relatively high gross national income, data show high inequality: 
the national poverty rate is almost 40 per cent, and it reaches 60 per cent for the outer atolls.10 
28. 
Due to its small size and remoteness, the development of economic activities is 
significantly limited. 
29. 
The Marshall Islands gained independence from the United States of America in 1986, 
and the country remained an “associated state” under a Compact of Free Association. Direct 
grants from the United States of America account for nearly a quarter of the gross domestic 
product of USD 180 million. Approximately 30 per cent of the national income comprises 
international assistance. The remaining income of the country is generated by royalties from the 
fisheries sector, small-scale handicrafts, and processing of coconut products and tuna. 
30. 
Access to education and other services is nearly universal. However, the country fails in 
indicators such as under-5 mortality and infant mortality rates compared to other countries of 
similar income.11 
1.4.3. 
Absence of alternative sources of financing 
31. 
The financial situation of the country, including current indebtedness, is clearly 
explained in the proposal, and demonstrates that the Marshall Islands’ financial resources are 
very limited and highly dependent on international grants. 
1.4.4. 
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity 
32. 
Institutional needs, which are recognized and addressed in the proposal, include limited 
coordination, reporting and accountability mechanisms, lack of formalized roles and 
responsibilities at the subnational and community level, insufficient information generation and 
sharing for all types of water resources at all levels, and poor water governance in general. 
33. 
In this regard, the project would provide, through output 3, a series of capacity-building 
activities at national and subnational levels. 
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
                                                          
8 Feasibility study (annex IIb), page 158. 
9 Source: World Bank. Available at <https://data.worldbank.org/country/marshall-islands?view=chart>. 
10 Feasibility study (annex IIa), page 21. 
11 Funding proposal, paragraph 236.

=== PAGE 103 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 103 
 
 
1.5.1. 
Alignment with national climate strategy and policies 
34. 
 The project is aligned with national and regional policies and plans related to water 
security and climate change, which include: Vision 2018 (main policy instrument regarding 
sustainable development), National Strategic Plan 2015–2017, Marshall Islands Climate Change 
Roadmap 2010, National Climate Change Policy Framework, Joint National Action Plan on 
Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Management for the Marshall Islands, Micronesia 
Challenge and Reimaanlok Action Plan, National Water and Sanitation Policy and National 
Environmental Protection Act (Amendment) 2016. 
35. 
Concerning international goals and frameworks, the project is in line with the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk 
Reduction 2015−2030, and the Sustainable Development Goals. 
36. 
The proposed project would also synergize with the joint project of the Global 
Environment Facility and United Nations Development Programme titled “Reimaanlok – 
Looking to the Future: Strengthening natural resource management in atoll communities in the 
Republic of Marshall Islands employing integrated approaches”, and would be complemented by 
the proposed Global Environment Facility-funded regional project “Managing Coastal Aquifers 
in Selected Pacific SIDS” covering the Marshall Islands, Palau and Tuvalu, which would cover 
understanding, use, management and protection of coastal resources. 
1.5.2. 
Capacity of accredited entities or executing entities to deliver 
37. 
 The United Nations Development Programme would act as both accredited and 
executing entity, and it has sufficient experience in climate change adaptation projects globally 
and regionally, as described in the funding proposal. 
1.5.3. 
Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
38. 
Engagement with relevant stakeholders was adequately handled through meetings, 
workshops, surveys, focus-group discussions, and site observations. Consulted stakeholders 
include the President of the Marshall Islands, national government representatives from various 
Ministries and Departments, Mayors, Senators, village chiefs, school teachers, health 
practitioners, school children, women and men’s group members, youth groups, public utility 
companies, shipping companies, civil society organizations, international agencies, universities, 
development partners, and regional agencies.12 
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
          Scale: Medium to High 
1.6.1. 
Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
39. 
For the identification of the most cost-effective interventions to secure potable water 
availability during drought periods, the proponent used Marginal Abatement Cost Curves, which 
resulted in the selection of household and communal RWH system improvement, and 
construction of new communal RWH systems. Well protection was not considered in this 
evaluation due to the salinity and largely unknown quality of groundwater which render it, in 
most cases, unreliable as a drinking water source. 
40. 
This procedure identified approximately 1,600 cost-effective interventions on 
household RWH systems. However, a re-evaluation taking into account the ability to implement 
the project and its gender and social equity concluded that household RWH improvements 
would cover all households with dysfunctional systems, which was estimated at approximately 
2,500 households. 
                                                          
12 See Annex XIII (d-1)

=== PAGE 104 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 104 
 
 
41. 
The budget for output 1 includes two foreign field engineers during the first four years 
of the project13 who would be responsible for the design, installation and technical support for 
O&M of household and communal RWH systems and related interventions. At an assumed cost 
of USD 534/day, they would cost the project a total of USD 1.4 million. In the opinion of the 
iTAP, design, installation and O&M of RWH systems should be simple enough to be handled by 
local technicians. To ensure their capability for these tasks, local staff could receive training 
prior to project implementation. Besides reducing project costs,14 having trained local 
technicians would significantly support country ownership and post-project sustainability. In 
response to this comment from TAP, the accredited entity indicated that the foreign engineers 
will also perform surveying and design activities that would require an engineering degree. The 
accredited entity presented terms of reference for these engineers, which, in the opinion of TAP, 
could be handled by junior engineers or technicians. 
1.6.2. 
Amount of co-financing 
42. 
The Government of the Marshall Islands would co-finance 24 per cent of total project 
costs by providing USD 6.1 million. The GCF/Marshall Islands co-financing ratio is 3:1. Besides 
this, the Government co-financing letter includes a commitment to provide extra post-project 
financing for USD 14 million in the form of grant and in-kind, to be delivered from the eighth to 
the twenty-fifth year, which would be used for O&M and asset renewal. However, the method 
for the estimation of post-project costs is not described in the proposal. 
1.6.3. 
Financial viability 
43. 
The need for grant financing is best illustrated by the fact that approximately 60 per 
cent of the annual budget of the Marshall Islands comes from contributions from donors. Also, 
the project would not generate direct revenues. 
44. 
The economic benefits considered for the economic analysis comprise the following:  
(a) 
Avoided costs of maintenance and storage of mobile reverse osmosis units and 
procurement of new units;  
(b) 
Avoided costs for deployment of mobile reverse osmosis units; and  
(c) 
Avoided socioeconomic drought-related costs and losses, including health costs and 
reduced productivity due to more time spent in collecting water.  
The analysis considered two baseline scenarios: (1) procurement of additional reverse osmosis 
units to be able to provide 20 litres per capita during droughts; and (2) provision of only 4.2 
litres per capita per day with existing reverse osmosis units.  
45. 
When considering baseline scenario 1, economic benefits of the project include avoided 
costs of procurement of additional reverse osmosis units to provide 20 litres per capita per day 
during droughts and maintenance and storage costs. In this case, net present value of the project 
is USD 2.09 million and the economic internal rate of return is 11 per cent. When considering 
baseline scenario 2, economic benefits include avoided costs of maintenance and storage of 
reverse osmosis units to provide 4.2 litres per capita per day during droughts and avoided 
socioeconomic costs (health and productivity). This case results on a negative net present value 
and an economic internal rate of return of 4 per cent. As suggested in the funding proposal, the 
reason for this may be the underestimation of economic benefits, as well as the non-inclusion of 
benefits from outputs 2 and 3, while the project cost includes all three outputs. 
                                                          
13 See annex XIIIe to the funding proposal titled “Detailed Budget”. It considers four engineers for six months per year 
each. For this reason, it is assumed they are foreign engineers. 
14 Local technicians should be significantly less expensive than foreign engineers.

=== PAGE 105 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 105 
 
 
1.6.4. 
Best practices 
46. 
The improvement of household RWH systems includes replacing all existing 75 mm and 
100 mm downpipes for new 150 mm ones. As per the rough calculations of the iTAP, two 100 
mm downpipes should be enough to drain the average household rooftop surface.15 The TAP 
requested the accredited entity to revise the catchment design to verify that the expected 
rainwater flow would actually demand installation of downpipes wider than 100 mm. The 
proponent described the data sources used for the design of the catchments, justifying the 
necessity for 150 mm gutters and downpipes. 
47. 
Flat pack modular tanks, which would be used on the new communal RWH systems, 
could be considered innovative, and present a series of advantages compared to traditional 
concrete tanks.16 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
48. 
The iTAP recommends this project for approval. 
49. 
The iTAP recommends the accredited entity to: 
(a) 
Review the cost of water tanks, considering other options for types of tanks that could 
result in a reduction of costs; and 
(b) 
Evaluate the actual needs and costs related to foreign engineers, trying to maximize the 
participation of trained local technicians. 
                                                          
15 Considering an average rooftop surface of 54 m2, 100 per cent connected to the RWH system, two downpipes (as in 
the project design) could deal with rains of up to 440 mm/hour. (As a reference: 500 mm in 24 hours is considered 
extreme torrential rain.) 
16 For more details see Feasibility Study (annex IIb), page 126.

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 106 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent 
Technical Advisory Panel's assessment (FP112) 
Proposal name: 
Addressing Climate Vulnerability in the Water Sector (ACWA) in the 
Marshall Islands 
Accredited entity: 
United Nations Development Programme 
Impact potential 
The high rating is noted. 
Paradigm shift potential 
Innovation 
An additional aspect of the innovation is the institutionalisation of monitoring and 
management of the RWH systems –local Community Water Committees (CWCs) will report 
on the status of island storages to a national agency, so that for the first time, RMI will have a 
national view of its domestic water supply.  Being able to monitor and therefore better 
manage water resources at a national level will be of significant benefit to RMI. 
Potential for Knowledge and Learning 
The full range of mechanisms will be employed, both formal and informal and building on 
ongoing initiatives. National and local government and community/NGO networks will be 
active partners. CWCs will be coordinated nationally, and therefore provide a ready pathway 
for exchange of learnings between islands.   
Project training and capacity building initiatives will bring representatives from various 
communities together and allow sharing of lessons learned.  Exchange visits between ‘Model’ 
atolls/villages other villages, which may be lagging, may be utilized.       
Finally, RMI has a relatively small population of closely related families, this results in rapid 
informal exchange of news and ideas between the islands.  The focus of the project on 
engaging with local communities, and particularly women and youth, will help to tap into this 
informal, but very powerful, network. Further details can be found in E.2.2 of the FP. 
Sustainable development potential 
The high rating is noted. 
Needs of the recipient 
The high rating is noted. 
Country ownership

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 107 
 
 
 
 
 
The high rating is noted. 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
The budget for Output 1 includes two foreign field-engineers during the first four years of the 
project, who would be responsible for the design, installation and technical support for O&M 
of household and communal RWH systems and related interventions. iTAP has indicated that 
the design, installation and O&M of RWH systems should be simple enough to be handled by 
local technicians. The field engineers will be required early in the project and considering the 
limited pool of local engineers, budgeting was for foreign engineers. It is to be noted that RMI 
national government agencies have been employing engineers from overseas in recognition 
of the constraint.  The budgeted daily rate is deemed appropriate as it includes the salary and 
cost of living at the work station (Majuro). Furthermore, the daily rate is within UNDP 
guidelines.  
Nonetheless, during procurement, UNDP will explore other staffing combinations that would 
meet the project needs and where possible provide improved project outcomes. This would 
include tapping the local pool of technical experts, if available.  
Amount of Co-financing 
The proposal documents the commitment by RMI government to provide approximately 
$14M in post-project funding for sustenance and O&M, made up of costs associated with: 
• 
Household improvements 
• 
Community rainwater tanks 
• 
Community RWH improvements/ building 
• 
Community roof catchments 
• 
Concrete tank liners 
• 
Ground water improvement sites 
The O&M financing, after the project period (years 8 - 25), has been calculated at atoll level 
and for each water asset category above, separately for baseline drought and climate change 
induced drought.  These costs include: regular maintenance of water assets (essential spares 
and supplies), sustenance (re-investment in sub-components and major repairs required to 
optimize asset life cycle – estimated at 5% of capital costs once every 8 years), asset 
replacement (after the assets have met their engineering design life cycle), and travel, 
transportation and installation labour costs.  Further details on O&M can be found in the FP 
Section E.6.3, Annex XIIIb (Operations & Maintenance plan) and FS Annex 19. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
ITAP Overall Comment #1:  Review the cost of water tanks, considering other options for types of 
tanks that could result in a reduction of costs.  
Several different types of tanks were considered during development of the Feasibility Study: 
moulded plastic tanks; concrete tanks; concrete block tanks; modular steel tanks with liner; 
modular HDPE; and timber tanks with liner. This is described in detail in Section 8.3.1 of 
Annex IIa.

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.06 
Page 108 
 
 
 
 
 
The modular flat packed tank option was selected for its durability, ease and speed of 
construction, life expectancy, potable water quality and transportability.  Shipping of large 
tanks to small communities in the outer atolls and islands is a major constraint as materials 
are likely to be offloaded on to small boats due to a lack of wharf infrastructure.  Flat packed 
tanks also offer the advantage of being able to be moved to different locations, if it becomes 
necessary. The project will approach the market with tenders to supply based on required 
performance specification (for example, warrantied for at least 20 years, suitable for storage 
of drinking water) rather than specific tank types, so that competitive market solutions can 
be presented.  
 
ITAP Overall comment 2: Evaluate the actual need and costs related to foreign engineers, trying 
to maximize the participation of trained local technicians. 
As clarified above in the response under Efficiency and Effectiveness, skilled field engineers 
are critical to the implementation of the project. The project will seek to procure appropriate 
skills locally before searching further afield. Furthermore, alternate staffing combinations 
that result in provision of appropriate skills, increased local content and/or cost savings will 
be considered.

=== PAGE 109 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL
1
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
Addressing Climate Vulnerability in the Water Sector (ACWA) in the Marshall Islands 
I. Introduction
This gender assessment aims to provide an overview of the gender situation in the Republic of Marshall 
Island (RMI) with a specific focus on the severe threat of water scarcity, identify gender issues that are 
relevant to the project, and to examine potential gender mainstreaming opportunities. The assessment 
was based upon available data from studies conducted by the Government of the Marshall Islands, 
donor agencies and multilateral development banks as well as extensive community consultations as 
part of the project design process as outlined below: 
•
Literature review: this analysis includes the results of a comprehensive literature review of
relevant CCA, disaster risk management, water security and gender equity and social inclusion
issues in RMI, benchmarked against regional and global standards as needed. This
assessment makes extensive reference to the results of the 2016 Post Disaster Needs
Assessment (PDNA)1 Gender Assessment, which enabled expansion and triangulation of data
gathered during the design process.
•
National level stakeholder consultations: conducted with 42 community representatives,
including relevant government agencies, civil society organisations and development partners
using individual interview and small focus group formats; 12 members of the “Cook House
Confidential” to discuss emerging water sanitation and hygiene (WASH) and menstruation
hygiene management (MHM) issues; 6 staff from the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MIA) to discuss
the Ministry’s plans and activities with respect to addressing climate change and water security
issues and to better understand the impacts of water shortages on women, youth, children, the
elderly and people with disabilities; 3 representatives from the National Training Council (NTC)
and the College of the Marshall Islands to discuss training options to build local capacity for
water infrastructure operations and maintenance (O&M), and 26 participants who attended the
National Stakeholder Workshop on 24 August 2016.
•
Community consultations: In total, the community consultation process involved 1,280
respondents which included 695 women, 132 female students, 385 men and 68 male
students in living in 22 Atolls, 36 Islands & 26 villages. A separate survey was conducted with
students in 18 elementary schools and 1 high school in targeted areas to augment findings of
the GIZ Climate Change Resilience Project design research on the adequacy of sanitation
systems in outer island boarding schools.
•
Site visits: to assess existing water infrastructure and technology as the basis for investment
plans; Analyze the operational environment including management and O&M capacity support
needed to ensure sustainability of new water resilience investments and Identify potential social
and environmental impacts as the basis for designing measures to prevent and/or mitigate
potential negative impacts and risks for vulnerable groups of people.
•
School consultations: discussions with a total of 200 students (132 female and 68 male) in
18 elementary schools and 1 high school in targeted areas. The purpose of these consultations
was to solicit the views of students on the adequacy of water and sanitation facilities at their
schools and the impacts this has on their education (attendance, performance and attitude) and
overall well-being, and to augment findings of the GIZ Climate Change Resilience Project
design research on the adequacy of sanitation systems in outer island boarding schools.
•
Engagement of local research team: with local NGOs, namely the Women United Together
Marshall Islands (WUTMI) and the Marshall Islands Organic Farmers Association (MIOFA)
1 Post Disaster Needs Assessment RMI 2016 (DRAFT REPORT, 23 September 2016). 
Gender documentation for FP112

=== PAGE 110 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
2
 
assisted with the community consultation process by gathering additional baseline 
information from outer atolls and islands not visited by the international design consultants.  
The project design team used a participatory bottom-up approach to ensure that proposed investments 
would directly respond to the identified needs and priorities of communities, households and vulnerable 
groups of people. When arranging village level consultations, the design team adhered to traditional 
protocols with respect to organising meetings and logistics by working through national and island level 
government officials and traditional leaders prior to making direct contact with communities. These 
officials arranged meetings in consultation with target communities and made introductions for the 
team. This methodology was selected as it closely aligns with Marshallese cultural systems of 
knowledge transmission.  
This assessment is primarily concerned with the impacts of “socio-economic droughts” which occur 
when physical water shortages start to affect the health, well-being, and quality of life of the people and 
when drought starts to affect the supply and demand of the production of goods and services in a given 
location.  
Theory of Change 
To tackle the root cause of current water insecurity in the Marshall Islands, the proposed project will 
transform how water investments are made in RMI from a reactive, drought response approach to a 
more holistic and integrated water resilience approach that is proactive, strategic, inclusive, participatory 
and evidence-based. In line with the RMI National Water and Sanitation Policy, the proposed project will 
have a specific focus on targeting services for the disadvantaged. Through improved water governance, 
integrated water management systems will be scaled where multiple freshwater resources and supply 
systems are implemented and sustained with strengthened financial and technical capacities for 
operation and maintenance, technical knowledge and skills for installation, operation, maintenance, and 
monitoring. 
Rights-based approach: 
Access to clean water is a basic human right and a universal development priority with 
great potential to improve health, life-expectancy, education, food security and 
livelihoods.  Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) #6 is: “to ensure availability and 
sustainable management of water and sanitation for all”. 
Gender Equity and Social Inclusion  
The term gender equity and social inclusion (or GESI) is used throughout this analysis in keeping with 
global, regional and national research which clearly demonstrates that the impacts of climate change 
are most acute for the poorest and most vulnerable members of any society. This includes women, 
children, the elderly and those with disabilities - especially when they are living in under-serviced areas 
and/or are isolated from planning and decision-making processes. Starting from this already exposed 
position, the impacts of climate change serve to magnify existing inequities and intensify associated 
risks. As such, this analysis considered the differential impacts of climate change and water security 
issues on vulnerable groups of people throughout the RMI in order to ensure that gender equality and 
social inclusion are fully mainstreamed in all aspects of the project design. In addition to mainstreaming, 
targeted interventions aimed at addressing specific vulnerabilities have been incorporated in the project 
design to ensure that men, women, boy, girls and people with disabilities will benefit equally from the 
suggested interventions.  
In addition, GESI terminology is important from a community buy-in perspective as there is often a high 
degree of resistance in the RMI (and other Pacific Islands) to any real discussion of gender issues – 
which are seen as “women’s issues”. As such, broadening the discussion to be inclusive of other 
vulnerable groups encourages communities to be more open-minded, encompassing and thoughtful 
about people’s unique vulnerabilities and perspectives. 
The GESI perspective is consistent with the RMI National Climate Change Policy Framework which 
reinforces a human-rights and GESI approach.

=== PAGE 111 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
3
 
“The needs of the most vulnerable groups [in our society] such as women, children, 
the elderly and those with special are given priority in emergency preparedness and 
response planning and implementation through the use gender sensitive climate 
change responses”. 
II. GESI in the Marshall Islands 
The purpose of this section is: i) to provide a summary of key gender equity and social inclusion factors 
in relation to demography, culture, economy and livelihoods, health, education, disabilities, domestic 
violence and climate change, and ii) to ensure that key RMI statistical data, climate change 
adaptation/disaster risk reduction policy and institutional arrangements are considered from a gender 
and social inclusion perspective. 
 
Table 1: Key RMI Development Statistics 
 
Source: RMI. 2011. Marshall Islands - Census of Population and Housing 2011 
Demography 
The RMI is an archipelago of 29 atolls and 5 islands located just north of the equator in the heart of the 
Pacific Ocean. The RMI is considered “small island developing state” (SIDS) but is also a “large-ocean 
state” given the country is spread over 750,000 square miles, with more than 2 million square kilometers 
of exclusive economic zone (EEZ). At the time of the last national census (2011) the RMI had a 
population of 53,158 people with population density varying markedly by atoll/ island.  
According to the 2011 census, the average Marshallese household comprised 7.2 members, however 
in urban areas 33 % of households have nine or more members compared with 25 % in rural areas. 
This population distribution pattern contributes to existing urban housing shortages and dense living 
conditions, with one quarter of all urban households using only one room for sleeping. An estimated of 
only 26 % of households in the Marshall Islands are headed by women and about 80% of these are in 
Majuro and Kwajalein. Women marry, on average, at 24 years compared with 26 years for men. 
The population of RMI is very young; in 2011 40% of the population was estimated to be 1 – 14 years 
of age with the median age of 21 years old, making RMI the second youngest population in the Pacific. 
In 2016, approximately 60% of the population was estimated to be less than 24 years old with 19% 
under 14 years old. This age structure means that when the young population eventually reaches 
reproductive age, the result will be a high population growth rate for some years to come with significant 
consequences on future demand for goods, services and natural resources, including fresh water. 
The population of the RMI has been steadily migrating from the outer atolls and islands to the two urban 
centers of Majuro and Kwajulein in search of better economic opportunities and services. As such, the 
urban population continues to grow resulting in depletion of the groundwater resources due to 
increasing water demand and pollution. Urbanization is also contributing to the decline of the outer 
island economy, thereby increasing the gap between rich and poor.

=== PAGE 112 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
4
 
Women and Culture  
Marshallese society is based on a system of exogamous matrilineal clans; traditionally, people lived in 
extended family groups of three or more generations. Each person belongs to his or her mother’s bwij, 
or lineage and has rights to use lineage land and other property. These lineage groups own most of the 
land in the Marshall Islands; land can only be “owned” by citizens. Most Marshallese have land rights 
on several atolls or islands. 
 
For thousands of years, the people of the Marshall Islands survived on thin stretches of land in a vast 
universe of ocean. Survival required knowledge, experience and access to critical land and sea 
resources. The importance of land to Marshall Islanders is not just about having a place to live; it is 
considered the essence of Marshallese life.  
 
The RMI is a matrilineal society, with children belonging to their mother’s lineage and having rights to 
use land owned by their lineage group. Traditionally, the succession of land rights gave women a 
position of great importance and influence in society. As such, women were traditionally the decision-
makers and owners of land resources. Modernization has served to change traditional land tenure 
practices in many ways and noted in the National Gender Mainstreaming Policy; 
This scenario is especially apparent in the male dominated world of infrastructure and maintenance, 
and in government agencies responsible for work in these sectors. A similar situation often exists in 
sub-national and community level decision-making forums where men typically dominate.  
In Marshallese custom, women are referred to as jined kibed. Translated, this means that a mother 
(jined) is the rudder (kibed) of a family - her well-being directly impacts family dynamics much like the 
rudder of a canoe. If the rudder is compromised, the canoe will become pelok, or drifting without 
direction. 
Women, Youth and the Economy 
According to the 2011 RMI National Census, there are a total of 12,647 people in the labor force, with 
51% of all men of working age engaged in either paid or unpaid work, compared to 28% of women of 
working age - which is 23% lower than the male equivalent. Men are more likely to work for wages or 
salaries than women, and women are more likely to be engaged in producing goods for sale with 30% 
of women working in craft and related occupations compared with 23% of men. The majority of women 
in the outer islands are involved in income-generating activities in goods production and processing and 
the cultural industry, with this income being essential for family survival.   
Female household heads have an average annual income of USD 4,503 compared with USD 7,913 for 
male headed households. While this 43% gap doesn’t reflect the income of other household members, 
it does point to the economic vulnerability of female headed households. Almost 40% of female 
household heads were not partnered or married compared with 10% of male headed households; 54 
% of these women are widowed; and 38 % are aged 50 years and older. 
Although the incidence of absolute poverty is low in the RMI, data indicates a high level of inequality, 
evidence of malnutrition in urban areas, and limited access to cash incomes in rural areas. The Global 
Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR, 2011) reported that 20% of the country’s 
population lived on less than US$1 a day. As a result, families have limited income to support 
themselves - especially given that the minimum wage is $2 per day. This creates immense challenges 
in accessing basic household supplies and services for many families. Child labor is also common in 
the RMI and there is no minimum salary for children who work on farms or engage in fishing activities.    
 
According to the 2015 Skills Demand Survey, about 38% of the working population was employed in 
the public sector and 39.7% in private sector enterprises.2 Whilst there is an almost equal share of male 
and female employees in the public sector, two-thirds of all jobs in the private sector are occupied by 
males. According to the 2011 Census, the majority of Marshallese workers were employed in the service 
                                               
2 Republic of the Marshall Islands Training Needs and Gaps Analysis. European Union: Pacific Technical and Vocational Education and 
Training Project. Prepared by Helene Jacot des Combes, August 2015.

=== PAGE 113 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
5
 
sector (72.7%), followed by industry (16.3%) and agriculture (11%). While there are a growing 
number of women in the public service, men dominate the most senior positions.  
                     Table 2: Unemployment Percentage by Gender, Age, and Education  
Age Group 
 
Total 
Male 
Female 
15-24 
58.5 
59.2 
57.8 
25-39 
31.4 
24.9 
39.1 
40-59 
17.7 
12.4 
25.7 
60+ 
3.1 
1.6 
5.6 
Education 
 
 
 
Primary or less 
37.8 
33.3 
44.2 
Some secondary 
41.9 
34.9 
49.9 
High school graduate 
28.2 
21.8 
35.8 
Some college or more 
16.3 
13.8 
19.6 
                              Source: RMI Government data 
Health Services 
The vast majority of health services in the RMI are provided by the government, with only a small 
number of private providers. There are two hospitals and 58 health centers in the Marshall Islands. 
Providing equitable access to affordable health care is a major challenge for the government. In 2012, 
94% of rural women and 79% of urban women reporting problems in accessing healthcare, regardless 
of age, number of children, education, or wealth quintile.3 
High population growth and crowded conditions in urban areas has caused the re-emergence and/or 
rise of certain non-communicable diseases (NCDs) such as tuberculosis and leprosy. Diabetes-related 
diseases and cancers are now the leading causes of death in the country, largely attributable to 
sedentary lifestyles and high intake of processed foods. RMI adults have one of the highest rates of 
diabetes in the world, with an estimated 28% of individuals over the age of 15 having Type 2 diabetes. 
For those older than 35, the figure is nearly 50%. Close to 75% of women and more than 50% of men 
in the RMI are overweight or obese4.  
Women living in the outer islands face additional health challenges if they require professional obstetric 
or gynecological care, which are only available in the urban centers. This is particularly a problem during 
times of water stress due to limited sanitation infrastructure and awareness of proper WASH practices5. 
Food poverty affects all levels of Marshallese society. The atolls are limited in the food crops that they 
can produce, and the low daily wage ensures that affordability of imported food for nutritious 
comprehensive diet in difficult to attain. The leading causes of morbidity in the RMI include child birth-
related conditions, pneumonia and diabetes. The major causes of infant mortality are sepsis, 
malnutrition, pneumonia, drowning and prematurity, while severe malnutrition, bacterial meningitis, 
gastroenteritis, and pneumonia accounted for most childhood mortality.6 Another area of concern is the 
low level of immunization coverage. 
Childbearing starts early in the Marshall Islands and is nearly universal for Marshallese girls and 
women. Although fertility rates have declined from 8.7 in 1964, the average fertility rate (FR) remains 
high at 4.1 births for woman of reproductive age. The rate of teenage pregnancy in RMI is one of the 
highest in the Pacific at 20.6% of live births. The rate of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) has also 
risen, which serves to threaten the health of young people as well as the nation as a whole.  
                                               
3 MIA, 2014. 
4 Draft PDNA Report, 23 Sept 2016 
5 IBID. 
6 EPPSO, 2012

=== PAGE 114 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
6
 
Another water-related health issue affecting women and adolescent girls is inadequate menstruation 
hygiene management (MHM). Recent research conducted by the “Cookhouse Confidential” (a 
consortium of women representing a wide range of state and non-state agencies concerned with gender 
issues in the RMI) identified cultural practices surrounding menstruation that effect women and girls 
particularly in times of drought and disaster.  
Access to Clean Water and Sanitation Facilities 
Access to water and sanitation are fundamental to human life and are now recognized as human rights 
by the UN General Assembly. Globally, the lack of access to clean and sufficient water contributes to 
death and illness; with children being particularly vulnerable. Access to safe water has proven crucial 
to reducing mortality and morbidity in children under five, especially the reduction of diarrheal diseases. 
As shown in Figure 1, most households on outer atolls and islands rely on rain water as their only source 
of drinking water, leaving them highly vulnerable to the effects of droughts. Figure 2 shows that only 
about 25% of outer island households have access to toilet facilities. As outlined in Section 4, 
community consultations indicate that this number may be even higher in some rural areas. 
Figure 1: Percentage of Population using Rainwater as Primary Source by Atoll islands 
 
Source: 2011 RMI Census of Population and Housing, EPPSO 
 
Gender Equity in Education 
The RMI Ministry of Education (MOE) oversees delivery of public education from Kindergarten through 
Grade 12. While a number of private schools also operate in the RMI, the vast majority of children 
attend public schools. 2011 Census figures indicate continuing concerns with educational outcomes. 
For example, 28.6 % of people aged 25 or older had started but not completed high school. School 
enrolment figures also show that significant numbers of school-age children are not in school (20 % of 
children aged 5-9 and 62 % of youth 15-24)7.  
Table 3: RMI Education Statistics 
                                               
7 EPPSO, 2012

=== PAGE 115 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
7
 
 
Source: 2011 RMI Census of Population and Housing, EPPSO 
Overall, the highest level of education attained by girls is lower than that of boys. In 2011, 47% of adult 
men aged 25 years and over had completed high school or higher education compared with 39% of 
adult women8. School enrolment statistics show nearly equal enrolment of males and females (girls 
comprise 49% of elementary students and 51% of secondary students), net enrolment rates point to 
higher enrolment of girls than boys especially at secondary school level. While attendance rates 
disaggregated by sex are not available, overall absentee rates for 2015 are 12 % for Majuro and Ebeye, 
and 3 % for the outer islands9. 
In the RMI, Technical Vocational Education and Training (TVET) is administered by the Ministry of 
Education through secondary-level TVET programs and by the College of the Marshall Islands (CMI) 
and the University of the South Pacific (USP). TVET programs play an essential role in fostering 
economic development through skills development in response to the needs employer needs. The 2015 
RMI Training Needs and Gaps Analysis report notes that “employers consistently reveal their 
dissatisfaction with the number and quality of applicants for position vacancies in the formal economy10”. 
In this regard, the 2014 Education for All in the Republic of the Marshall Islands Report notes the need 
to increase of female enrolment in TVET programs, revitalizing TVET in secondary schools and 
ensuring that TVET programs are responsive to the needs of employers. 
Gender Based Violence 
In addition to the gender differential in employment and governance spheres, the National Gender 
Mainstreaming Policy states that the very high rate of gender-based violence in the country poses a 
major barrier to achieving social and economic development goals. Violence against women and girls 
in the Marshall Islands “is alarmingly high” with 51% of women experiencing intimate partner physical 
and/or sexual violence in their lifetime.11 Attitudes about domestic violence, from the perspective of both 
men and women serve to perpetrate the prevalence of domestic violence, with 85% of women agreeing 
domestic violence is justified under certain circumstances.12 
 
It has been well established by global experts that the vulnerability of people during and after disasters 
varies significantly according to their class, ethnicity, gender, disability and age. There is also 
a “devastating amount of research that shows that disasters reinforce, perpetuate and increase gender 
inequality, making bad situations worse for women”13. Extreme weather events also result in more short 
and long-term emotional trauma and mental health problems, including: post-traumatic stress disorder, 
depression, sleep difficulties, social avoidance, drug or alcohol abuse. 
 
                                               
8 EPPSO, 2012. 
9 EPPSO, 2012 
10 Republic of the Marshall Islands Training Needs and Gaps Analysis. European Union: Pacific Technical and Vocational 
Education and Training Project. Helene Jacot des Combes, August 2015 
11 National Gender Mainstreaming Policy 2015-2019 of the RMI 
12 Draft 2016 PDNA Report  
13 http://www.foei.org/news/how-climate-change-may-lead-to-an-increase-in-violence-against-women

=== PAGE 116 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
8
 
In 2011, the RMI government enacted the Domestic Violence Prevention and Protection Act and 
established a Domestic Violence Prevention and Protection Task Force (DVPPA), administered by the 
Secretary of the Ministry of Internal Affairs to support implementation of the law and make 
recommendations for actions required and to coordinate resources. 
 
In 2013 and 2014 the RMI government conducted a Family Health and Safety Study however this 
research did not specifically examine the impacts of emergency situations and changing climate 
conditions on family violence. As such, this is an area where further analysis is required. 
 
Recent research findings on child protection in the RMI which found that there is limited knowledge 
within communities about dealing with the impacts of climate change on children (who make up about 
40 % of the population) and are most vulnerable to disaster impacts14 
Women and Governance 
At national level, the participation of women in legislative and executive branches of government 
remains unbalanced: three women currently serve as members of the thirty-three seat Nitijela 
(parliament). Local government in the RMI is administered by the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MIA). Each 
inhabited atoll/island has a local council headed by a mayor.  The mayor is chosen by council members 
who themselves are elected to office every four years. Individual islands are represented in the Atoll 
Local Government by a councilman who is representing the interests of the respective inhabitants. Local 
governments are responsible for the passage of regulations and ordinances that affect their atoll and 
play a major role in the community. Local council activities include: local police services, solid waste 
collection, and maintenance of local roads. Funds are disbursed to the local councils on an annual basis 
in relation to the size of the population being served. Mayors report back to the MIA every three months. 
In addition to the local government, traditional leaders are responsible for many decisions affecting the 
community. The Iroij (chief) and Alaps (traditional landowners) have significant influence in governance 
and decision-making processes though the governance mechanisms are strongly influenced by the 
large amount of people migrating to the urban areas from the coastal islands. While women have the 
right to sit on the Council of Iroj (which serves a largely consultative function on matters of custom and 
tradition) the practice is that sisters designate their brothers to represent the family; three of the twelve 
seats on the Council of Iroj are currently occupied by women15. 
As outlined in the National Gender Mainstreaming Policy, the National Disability Inclusive Policy and 
verified through the results of the 2016 PDNA Gender Assessment and 2016 community consultation 
processes, women and people with disabilities remain marginalized from planning and decision-making 
processes at all levels. 
Mechanisms to address gender inequality in Marshall Islands: legal and administrative 
frameworks 
Marshall Islands National Strategic Development Plan Vision 2018 
RMI’s national strategic directions are articulated in two connected development plans: i) the Strategic 
Development Plan Framework 2003-2018 Vision 2018, and (ii) the National Strategic Plan (NDP) 
2015−2017 which both support a human rights approach. With respect to the ACWA, Vision 2018 
expresses the Government’s to ensure that all citizens of the RMI have access to clean and adequate 
water resources, in order to achieve hygiene and sanitations levels equivalent to world standards. 
The NDP is supported by various Master Plans that direct the work of RMI ministries and statutory 
bodies. NDP priority sectors are: education, health, environment (including climate change), 
infrastructure development and maintenance. Of direct relevance to this project are NSP strategic 
                                               
14 Ibid  
15 National Gender Mainstreaming Policy 2015-2019 of the Republic of the Marshall Islands

=== PAGE 117 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
9
 
areas: i) Environment, Climate Change and Resiliency, ii) Infrastructure Development (water and 
sanitation), and Social Development (gender and vulnerable groups). 
Republic of the Marshall Islands National Climate Change Policy Framework 
The RMI Water and Sanitation Policy and Proposed Action Plan approved in 2014 and formalized as a 
legal instrument through the National Environmental Protection (Amendment) Act in 2016, serves as 
the foundational framework for climate-resilient water sector development at national and sub-national 
levels. This Policy includes 5 strategic goals and a series of targets and strategies related to each goal. 
Policy Statement 4 is to: “Target service improvements at the disadvantaged”16. The Policy also: 
GESI strategies are also included in other Policy areas and objectives. For instance, Objective 3.2: 
Water Supply and Sanitation Service Management indicates that “designed and constructed 
infrastructure will be accessible to the widest number of user including the elderly, disabled, very young 
and pregnant women.” The National Water and Sanitation Policy also includes a series of GESI 
strategies under Section 1.2 Social Marketing Campaigns and Section 4.2 “Behavior Change for the 
Disadvantaged” that are relevant to the project design. 
Marshall Islands National Climate Change Policy Framework 
The purpose of the Marshall Islands National Climate Change Policy Framework (NCCPF) is to set out 
the strategic priorities for scaling up the government’s commitments to address climate change, both in 
terms of current and future vulnerabilities. This policy promotes a coordinated approach to reducing 
projected climate-related risks that can lead to loss of life, economic disruption, environmental and 
property damage and increased poverty in vulnerable groups. 
The NCCPF is premised on the Government’s belief that RMI’s people are extremely vulnerable to the 
impacts of climate change, hence the urgent need to “implement measures to build resilience, reduce 
disaster risk, and support renewable energy and energy efficiency”. 
National Gender Mainstreaming Policy of the Marshall Islands 2015-2019 
The goal of the RMI National Gender Mainstreaming Policy is to progress gender equality and 
empowerment of women, including in decision-making processes, political participation in local 
governments in the outer islands. 
A 2010 “Stocktake” analysis17 on the capacity of the Government of the RMI to mainstream gender 
concluded that:  
o 
Gender issues are rarely mentioned in high-level discussions; 
o 
Very few sectors were using gender disaggregated data; 
o 
Gender analysis was not used in policy and program development processes; 
o 
There was no accountability or reporting measures related to mainstreaming gender 
in the government; 
o 
Resources allocated to addressing gender issues were largely insufficient, and 
o 
There was very limited technical capacity to conduct gender analysis and support the 
gender mainstreaming approach. 
 
Climate change resilience and water security are key priorities for RMI, and critical to achieving various 
government policies and strategies for sustainable and equitable development, including Vision 2018, 
National Climate Change Policy Framework (NCCPF), the Joint National Action Plan (JNAP) for Climate 
                                               
16 For the purpose of this policy, disadvantaged people are defined as: i) households or communities with nil or limited access to 
improved and sanitation conditions; ii) those living in or with extreme poverty, severe disability due to age, disease, injury or 
other causes; iii) disaster or conflict affected households; iv) those with significantly adverse ground conditions, and v) those 
with lack of space for private facilities. 
17 Stocktake of the gender mainstreaming capacity of Pacific Island governments – Republic of the Marshall Islands. 
Secretariat of the Pacific Community, 2012.

=== PAGE 118 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Management, RMI Water and Sanitation Policy and Proposed 
Action Plan and the National Environmental Protection (Amendment) Act, and the National Gender 
Mainstreaming Policy with a Policy Strategic Plan of Action for 2015 – 2019. 
III. Literature Review: Impacts of Climate Change and Water Insecurity on Vulnerable 
Groups  
This section provides a summary of the impacts of climate change and water insecurity on vulnerable 
groups of people including women and youth. It considers global and national level research findings, 
drawing from the Pacific and RMI context. It also includes information on international standards related 
to GESI and CCA/DDR which provide an important frame of reference for proposed project interventions 
and targets. The section begins with an overview of WASH and the relationship to climate change and 
vulnerability.  
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) 
The concept of WASH groups together water, sanitation and hygiene because the impact of deficiencies 
strongly overlaps and therefore need to be addressed together to achieve sustainable development 
outcomes, especially for women and children. Historically, sanitation and hygiene have received less 
attention and funding than water security, but this is slowly changing, particularly in view of emerging  
The concept of “Institutional WASH” arose through global recognition that focusing on water, sanitation 
and hygiene issues at household and community level only is not enough to achieve the kind of 
sustained behavioral changes required for successful climate change adaptation. As such, Institutional 
WASH considers the availability of WASH facilities:  
 At schools, for both students and teachers, and especially for girls, given that WASH 
effects attendance and performance;  
 At health centres given the vital need to prevent infection and spread of diseases, and 
 At the workplace, given the need to ensure people are able to work in a healthy and safe 
environment.  
 
Water and Sanitation in Schools 
Global studies reveal that over half of schools built in developing countries do not have adequate water 
and sanitation facilities. As indicated in this report, when water, toilets and hand-washing facilities are 
not available in schools in the RMI, absenteeism increases as children spend more time collecting water 
and tending to personal hygiene needs.  In addition to attendance issues, studies - including this 
assessment confirm a direct link between the availability of water and sanitation in schools and student 
health, learning outcomes, gender equity, poverty, personal self-worth and dignity. 
With respect to current sanitation conditions in schools in the outer atolls and islands of the RMI, the 
key findings from the GIZ WASH and School assessment conducted in 2016 indicate that:  
 The number of functional toilets and urinals do not meet national standards;  
 There are no dedicated or easily accessible toilets for students with disabilities;  
 Toilets are not configured to privacy and are unsuitable for girl’s menstruation 
requirements 
 No or inadequate number of hand-washing facilities; seawater is used for hand-washing; 
 Soap is generally not available at schools for student use; 
 Teaching of WASH principles, in particular hygiene practices, at the school is not 
widespread; 
 There is no budget provided to schools to support for WASH requirements; 
 There is no specific plan for WASH maintenance in schools, including who is responsible 
for ensuring repairs and providing soap and other consumables.

=== PAGE 119 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
Stakeholder consultations with students in outer atolls and islands of RMI verified that these findings 
are equally relevant at the additional schools consulted.  
Children 
Using the four sets of rights set out in the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) as a guideline 
for assessing climate change impacts on children in the RMI, it is apparent that children’s rights are not 
being fully realized given PDNA 2016 and community consultation findings.   
◦ 
Survival: Health issues caused by water and sanitation concerns including unsafe 
drinking water and water borne diseases; and nutrition issues stemming from 
insufficient or poor-quality food; 
◦ 
Development: Decreases in school attendance and educational attainment due to 
weather induced access issues; school closure due to lack of water; lack of water and 
natural disasters; 
◦ 
Protection: Child protection issues related to overcrowded housing, very high levels of 
violence against women and high urban migration; 
◦ 
Participation: Children becoming more aware of potential impacts of climate change on 
their lives and futures but limited opportunities for involvement in decision-making or 
participation in adaptation initiatives.  
The 2011 Children’s Charter for Disaster Risk Reduction, which had extensive input of from children 
worldwide, calls for a stronger commitment from governments and development partners to provide 
safe schools, to protect children before, during and after disasters, to meet the right to safe community 
infrastructure, and to support children’s rights to participation in disaster risk reduction programs. 
Beyond the identification of vulnerable populations, a “child-centred approach” to disaster risk reduction 
fully engage children by involving them in adaptation processes, including needs identification and 
strategy development.  
Women  
Women in the Marshall Islands and other Pacific countries generally bear the double burden of 
productive and reproductive activities – all of which are significantly impacted by climate change. 
Reproduction activities include domestic responsibilities such as tending to home gardens, cooking 
meals, caring for children and the elderly, cleaning etc. As droughts and storms intensify, these 
resources become scarcer and women often have to travel further in order to collect enough food, water 
and other resources for their families. In fulfilling these duties, women may not have enough time to 
engage in income-generating activities or to take on extra roles in their communities. These extra time 
burdens can have serious social and financial implications for women and lead to exacerbating gender 
inequity in households and communities.

=== PAGE 120 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
IV. Summary of Relevant Findings from 2016 PDNA 
To assess the socio-economic impacts of the 2015-2016 drought, and to assist in mobilizing resources 
needed for recovery, the Government of RMI requested that a Post-Disaster Needs Assessment 
(PDNA)18 be conducted. Given that a full PDNA would be a challenge for agencies already working at 
capacity to support recovery efforts, a ‘rapid socio-economic assessment’ (RSEA) was conducted 
rather than the more comprehensive PDNA. It was intended that the RSEA would form the basis of the 
Drought Recovery Strategy to be managed by the Government of RMI.  
While PDNAs have been conducted for droughts in other parts of the world, this was the first such 
assessment following a drought in the Pacific region. As such, conducting this RSEA provided a highly 
value learning opportunity for other drought affect countries in the Pacific.  
The PDNA team assembled following the 2016 drought in the RMI was supported through technical 
and financial assistance from the European Union (EU), the Pacific Community (SPC), the United 
Nations (UN) and the World Bank Group, who were assisted by a significant number of stakeholders 
from a host of national government and non-governmental agencies. The results of this assessment 
are based on a comprehensive literature review and consultations with over 150 residents of drought 
effected communities throughout the RMI. 
The Draft PDNA Report indicates that the 2016 drought affected a total of 53,158 people (or 7,738 
households) across the RMI and created significant negative consequences in all sectors as outlined 
in the Feasibility Study. The following sections overview PDNA findings with respect to quality of life 
and gender equity and social inclusion impacts relevant to the project design.  
In addition to negative economic impacts, the 2016 drought also caused a decline in the quality of life 
and wellbeing of affected households and communities based on the application of a Quality of Life 
Index. This index is composed of six equally weighted indicators (see Figure 3) that are assessed prior 
to the disaster, immediately after the disaster, and periodically during the recovery and reconstruction 
process.  
                         Figure 3: Quality of Life Weighted Indicators Used in 2016 PDNA Assessment 
 
The atolls and islands most affected by the 2016 drought in terms of quality of life indicators are 
shown in Figure 4. 
                                               
18  The PDNA is an approach to analyzing disaster effects and impacts for the purpose of identifying recovery needs, as they 
are understood from human, socio-cultural, economic and environmental perspectives. A unique aspect of the PDNA is that 
it is led and owned by the government of the affected country with assistance from a multidisciplinary, multiagency team. 
Under the PDNA methodology, assessment of the disaster effects is based on a bottom-up approach, captures information 
about the effects of the event sector by sector, and aggregates the data to determine the event’s total effects on society and 
the economy. Assessment of disaster effects is based on the quantification of damage and losses.

=== PAGE 121 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
Figure 4: Most affected atolls/islands based on decline in quality of life index  
 
According to the PDNA Assessment the three atolls most affected by the 2016 drought were: 
◦ 
Ailuk Atoll was the most affected decline in the QLI composite index (30%), which results 
from the combination of a 47% decline in the health index, a 43% decline in the access 
to water supply index, a 1% in education index, and a 15% decline in personal income 
index.  
◦ 
Jabot Atoll was the second most affected location in composite quality of life index decline 
(28%), arising from the combination of the highest deterioration in the health index 
because of increased morbidity rates (64%), the highest decline in personal income 
(28%), and a 20% decline in access to water supply.  
◦ 
Arno Atoll was the third most affected (28% decline) stemming from the combination of 
a 56% decline in access to water supply, a 29% decrease in the health index due to 
increased morbidity rates, and a 16% decline in personal income. 
Key PDNA Quality of Life Findings  
1. Reduced food supply 
Many families in the RMI, especially in the outer islands, produce a significant proportion of their 
own food, notably fish, traditional tree crops like coconut, breadfruit and pandanus and other 
crops such as bananas and taro. During the drought fishermen reported that they had to go further 
to get their normal fish catch, resulting in more time spent fishing. Most atolls and islands reported 
the total loss of local crops and traditional medicines. Many reported having to change from their 
‘traditional’ diet to relying on imported goods and canned food. 
2.  Reduced family income and increased costs 
The 2016 drought reduced family income from handicraft sales because of the lack of required input 
supplies (i.e., pandanus, coconut, vines etc.). In addition, there were increased costs associated 
with securing potable water for drinking and purchasing food due to the reduced supply of 
agriculture and fisheries products. Low income families were faced with difficult and stressful 
decisions about spending their limited incomes for water rather than on needed purchases. At the 
same time a number of community groups were fund raising for conferences with one women’s 
group tasked to fundraise as much as USD 16,000 while other groups reported lower values of 
around USD 5,000. This is on top of the activities like bingo evenings, with key respondents in

=== PAGE 122 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
Majuro noting that during the drought there was an increase in potential winnings; perhaps to entice 
more people to participate. 
While incomes from copra actually increased during the 2016 drought because of the acquisition of 
copra by Tobolar on a more frequent basis to a wider range of atolls, copra processing plant figures 
do not reveal the inconsistencies in copra collections from outer islands and number of households 
able to sell their copra during each collection trip. For example, Ailinglaplap Atoll had four pick-ups 
in FY 2015, which increased to seven pick-ups in FY 2016. This collection schedule implies that 
families might or might not have received income from copra prior to the drought, comprising their 
ability to prepare for the drought when warnings were issued. 
3.  Increased time and work burdens 
All family members reported an increased burden in terms of normal household roles and 
responsibilities. For example, a wife and mother of three reported spending three extra hours a day 
collecting and fetching water during the drought; while a young man from Arno spent two hours a 
day collecting his family’s drinking water from the RO unit some distance away. This research 
revealed that although it is usually men (including young men) who usually collect drinking water 
because of their physical strength; when water supplies were at their lowest levels whole families 
would go to the water stations to collect and carry as much water as they could. In the case of female 
headed households, these women had to rely on family members, friends and neighbours for their 
drinking water.  
4.  Negative impacts on children’s education 
Due to the need to assist with collection of drinking water each morning; lack of drinking water and 
sanitation in some schools; closure of some schools’ due to water issues; non-attendance due to 
insufficient water to bathe and/or wash school uniforms, and general “lassitude related to the high 
temperatures and insufficient drinking water”. Drought-induced disruption to education is especially 
significant given that the RMI is already struggling with low educational attainment rates and an 
insufficiently skilled labour force. 
5.  Increased disease 
The drought worsened seasonal disease outbreaks, notably the prevalence of conjunctivitis (pink 
eye), diarrhea, influenza and scabies.19  This assessment revealed that children with malnutrition 
treated in hospital increased by almost five-fold; implying the overall level of child malnutrition may 
have substantially increased. Given that women are largely responsible for the health and wellbeing 
of their family, especially children, the elderly and people with disabilities, increased disease 
prevalence served to increase time and care burdens for women. 
6.  Increased morbidity and malnutrition 
In view of changing climate and environmental conditions brought about by the drought, the 2016 
PDNA identifies the likelihood of increased morbidity and malnutrition due to the decline in food 
availability caused by crop failure, especially among vulnerable population groups including 
pregnant and lactating women and people with chronic diseases.  
 
 
 
                                               
19  Based on the information from the incidence of drought related diseases in 2016 and the years previous, the drought 
related disease burden was especially high for families living in Aur, Jabat, Lae and Mili in terms of the proportion of 
households affected by the incidence of one or more of these diseases. In 2011, 25 % of households in the island of 
Lae had a female household head, and these households would have felt the cost of care even more acutely. 
Breastfeeding mothers reported drinking between five to eight cups of water a day during the drought, which they 
considered adequate and is consistent with compensation of water lost through milk which is estimated at 600 to 700 
mL/d (Hydration for Health, 2016). In 2007 children were tested for signs of malnutrition and it was found that 17 % 
showed signs of malnutrition, and overall 13 % were observed to be malnourished after various tests and targeted 
observations. Malnutrition was more prevalent in the outer islands (rural areas) than in urban areas (DHS, 2007).

=== PAGE 123 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
V. Summary of GESI Findings from Community Consultations 
The results of the project design community consultation process summarized in this section are 
presented according to the thematic categories used in data collection (i.e., questionnaire and 
community focus group discussions). Survey categories included: water supply, water collection, water 
quality, water management; sanitation issues and impacts on community well-being.  
It should be noted that project design community consultation results represent the views of the 1,280 
stakeholders20 and therefore may differ from official RMI government statistics and other research 
results. The intention of the community consultation process was not to provide a comprehensive 
quantitative assessment of water and sanitation services in all target communities, but rather to solicit 
the views of a sample of women, men and youth and children residing in targeted areas with respect to 
the adequacy of water and sanitation services and the impact this has on their lives.  
Women and Men’s Consultations 
Water Supply: Household Level 
 Table 4 shows that 95% of households in the areas consulted reported that they get their 
water from household rainwater tanks during normal weather conditions. During times of 
drought, only 44% said water they get water from household rainwater tanks. 
                                      Table 4: Sources of Household Water Supply  
Q 1: Where does the community get their water from?  
Water Supply During Normal Weather Conditions 
  
Well  
Rain Tanks 
Total 
Sub Total 
2 
42 
  
Total 
  
44 
  
% 
5% 
95% 
100% 
Water Supply During Droughts 
  
Well 
Rain Tanks 
RO only  
Sub Total 
4 
20 
2 
Total 
  
  
  
% 
9% 
44% 
4% 
 
 
 As shown in Table 13 the primary concern of all stakeholders consulted is the lack of rainwater 
catchment at household and community level – including schools and health care centres. The 
vast majority of people consulted indicated they are highly dependent on rain water harvesting 
and supplies are inadequate prolonged during dry periods. 
 
 
                                               
20 Inclusive of 695 women, 132 female students, 385 men and 68 male students residing in 22 Atolls, 36 Islands and 26 villages in targeted 
communities.

=== PAGE 124 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
 
Figure 5: Household Water Supply During Normal Weather Conditions  
 
 
Figure 6: Household Water Supply During Periods of Drought 
 
 
 In response to the question regarding household water supply, respondents estimated that 
67% of households in their community have water supply while 32% do not have household 
access. 
Table 5: Household Access to Water Supply 
Q 2: Does everyone in the community have a household water supply? 
Overall Percentage of Households with Water Supply 
With 
Without 
              Total 
            67% 
 32% 
               100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5%
95%
Q 1. Water Supply During Normal Weather Conditions
Well
Rain Tanks
9%
44%
5%
42%
Q 1. Water Supply During Droughts
WELL
RAIN TANKS
RO only
RO & WELL

=== PAGE 125 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
 
 
Figure 7: Estimated Percentage of Households with Water Supply  
 
Water Supply: Community Level 
 Table 6 shows public water sources available in the communities consulted.  
Table 6: Type of Community Water Sources 
Q 16: What public water sources are available in the community (excluding 
household level)? 
  
Well 
Tank 
RO units 
Total  
Sub Total 
2 
24 
16 
  
Total 
  
  
  
42 
% 
5% 
57% 
38% 
  
 
 The majority of public water supplies are located at community centres and churches, with 
fewer numbers at health care centres, airports and schools.  
 Of significant concern, about 40% of public water sources were reported to be non-functioning 
as shown in Table 7.  
Table 7: Condition of Public Water Sources 
Q 16a: Condition and Quality of water from this source? 
  
Working 
Not Working 
Polluted 
Total 
Sub Total 
24 
17 
1 
Total 
42 
% 
57% 
40% 
2% 
100% 
 
 When asked if there is a current water shortage in the community, 68% of respondents believe 
there is. 
 When asked where additional public water supplies should be located, respondents stressed 
the need to identify accessible locations, close to housing and schools, that would be 
accessible to all members of the community, regarding of who owns the land. While locating 
water tanks at churches was also suggested by numerous respondents, concern was also 
raised that people who do not attend that church would have no or restricted access. 
67%
32%
Q 2. Overall Percentage of Households with 
Water Supply

=== PAGE 126 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
Table 8: Respondent Perspective on Current Water Shortage 
Q 4: Is there a currently a water shortage in the community? 
Yes 
No 
TOTAL 
% 
68% 
32% 
100% 
 
Water collection 
 ACWA community consultations revealed that the responsibility for water collection is widely 
dispersed within families as shown in Figure 8.  
Figure 8: Responsibility for Water Collection in Families Consulted 
 
 However, stakeholders consulted also said that during droughts men and older male children 
take more responsibility for queuing up at the portable RO installations and community 
catchments due to people’s increased work-loads and tensions within the community that can 
lead to safety and security issues.  
Safety  
 Almost 60% of respondents, including men, women and youth raised concerns about safety en 
route or at water sources. These issues included stealing, fighting and harassment. In 
response to the question about whether action had been taken to resolve security issues, 
about 30% indicated action had been taken place but they did not indicate what this involved.  
About 84% of respondents indicated that safety issues have not been resolved or made no 
comment in response to this question.  Only 10% of men and 6.7% of women indicted that 
safety issues have been resolved. 
Water quality 
 In response to the question about whether people think their water is safe to drink, 56% of 
respondents indicated “no” or “sometimes”, while 44% of respondents believe their water is 
safe to drink. 
                                Table 9: Respondent Views on Safety of Drinking Water 
Q. 11: Do you think your water is safe to drink?  
  
Yes 
No  
Sometimes 
Sub Total 
19 
9 
15 
Total 
% 
44% 
21% 
35% 
29%
19%
7%
45%
Q 9.  Who is mostly responsible for water collection? 
Children/Youth
Men
Women
All

=== PAGE 127 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
 When asked whether people get sick from consuming the water, about 60% said “yes” - of 
these the majority are children.  The most common illness attributed to poor water quality were 
stomach aches, eye problems, diarrhoea and skin disorders.  While the majority of 
respondents said they usually seek medical treatment for these aliments, the reasons people 
don’t seek treatment include transportation difficulties, “goes against custom”, “because we 
are ashamed” and lack of medical facilities and supplies.  
Water treatment 
 Boiling: 46.5% of all respondents indicated that they never boil water from tanks before drinking 
while 46.5% said they sometimes do. The remaining 7% said they always boil water from rain 
tanks prior to consumption (primarily respondents from Rongrong, Mejatto and Ronglap). About 
71% of all respondents indicated they never boil water used for food preparation; 14.6% they 
“sometimes” do, with about the same number of respondents indicating they always boil tank 
water used to prepare foods (primarily people living in Rongrong and Lib). About 56% of all 
respondents indicated they never boil groundwater; 18.6% said they “sometimes” do, while 
25.6% said they “always” boil groundwater for drinking. 
 Filtering: In response to questions about filtering water for drinking purposes, about 51% of all 
respondents indicated they never filter water from rain tanks; about 30% said “sometimes” 
and.21% said they always filter water from rain water tanks prior to consumption (primarily 
respondents from Maloelap, Tarawa, Airok, Wollot, Jeng, Mejit and Likiep.). With regard to 
filtering rain water for food preparation, about 62% of respondents said “never”; 21.4% said 
“sometimes” and 16.7% said “always” (mainly people from Maloelap Airok, Jeng, Mejit, Likiep, 
Ebadon. Lib, Jabot). With regard to groundwater, about 79% of all respondents indicated they 
never filter ground water for drinking; while 21% said they “sometimes” do. There was relatively 
the same response to the question on filtering ground water for food preparation purposes. 
 Cleaning Agents: In response to questions about whether people add any type of disinfectant to 
rain tank water prior to drinking, about 44% said “never”, 40% said “sometimes” and 26% said 
“always” (primarily respondents in Lae Ailuk, Likiep p, Ujae Uae, Mejatto Kwajalein/Ronglap). In 
terms of treatment of groundwater used for drinking, about 72% indicated they never add 
disinfectant; 16% said sometimes and 12% said always (respondents from Lae, Aur, Mejit, 
Kwajalein Ebadon). With respect to adding cleaning agents to water used for food preparation, 
about 58 % of all respondents indicated they never add disinfectant to tanks water; 23% said 
“sometimes” and 18.6% said 'always' (primarily respondents from Lae, Ailuk, Likiep, Ujae Uae, 
Mejatto Kwajalein/Ronglap). About 77% of all respondents indicated they never add disinfectant 
to groundwater for food preparation,14%  said sometimes and 9.3% said “always” (primarily 
respondents from  Lae , Mejit, Ebadon). 
Water management 
 As shown in Table 10, household level decision-making on water use seems to be largely 
shared between women and men (76.2%). However, in cases where one gender was specified 
as the primary decision-maker, men play this role about 4% more often than women. At the 
community level, all respondents indicated that men are the sole decision-makers. While many 
women indicated this is not a problem as “we have our say even though we don’t say it around 
other men, our husbands know what we want”.  However in some cases, women’s focus groups 
indicated that they were displeased with this arrangement. 
Table 10: Water Management Decision-Making by Gender at Household and Community Level 
 
Gender 
Who makes decisions re water use at 
household level? 
Who makes decisions re water use at 
village level? 
Men 
12.5% 
100% 
Women 
8.3% 
0% 
Both 
76.2% 
0%

=== PAGE 128 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 These finding have significant implications for the design of the ACWA project.  In order to 
ensure that water governance and management arrangements at community level are gender 
inclusive, specific strategies will need to be developed and implemented.  
 
Sanitation and hygiene 
 As shown in Table 11, community stakeholders reported a number of sanitation impacts when 
water supply is low.  
                             Table 11: Impacts of droughts on sanitation and hygiene 
Impacts on sanitation during water shortages 
% of Respondents 
Less water to wash  
14.3 
Sanitary issues 
42.9 
Never wash 
14.3 
Toilets don’t work 
14.3 
Schools closed due to lack of water 
14.3 
 
 Although a question was asked regarding the number of households with/without toilet 
facilities, it is not possible to provide an accurate count as people seemed reluctant to answer 
this question, gave vague answers or provided percentage responses without indicating the 
number of households included in calculations. 
However, in all locations visited, respondents indicated that people often use the bush or 
beach for toileting purposes. When asked if this practice creates any difficulties for the 
community, over 72% said “yes”. The primary issues identified were pollution, increased flies, 
unsanitary conditions and spread of disease.  
 When asked where additional toilets would best be located, 65% of respondents indicated 
churches and schools.  
 
Menstruation Hygiene Management (MHM) 
 Although all female respondents were asked questions regarding the impact of water 
shortages and availability of sanitation facilities on menstruation, very few responses were 
received. This is most likely due to cultural taboos and discomfort in discussing this issue in 
the public domain – perhaps on the part of both the researchers and the respondents. 
 Of the responses received to questions regarding MHM issues, 11 focus groups indicated that 
water issues have a negative impact on school attendance and performance during 
menstruation; 7 groups stated that health problems arise due to inadequately water during 
menses; 6 groups stated there are cultural restrictions related to water use by women and 
girls during menstruation such as not being able to prepare food, be around certain family 
members or access water from wells and sometimes other locations.  
 Some male focus groups also discussed MHM issues, and confirmed the cultural restrictions 
facing women and girls during their menses. For example, they are “not allowed to get water 
from the well” and so “can’t keep themselves clean”. One man commented that “no clean, no 
go around”. 
Livelihoods 
 The primary source of income reported by all communities surveyed was copra, with 
handicraft sales being the secondary source of cash. In response to the question regarding 
total household income (from all sources) in an average 3 month non-drought period, 65% of 
households were said to earn between $200-$400; about 16% were said to earn between 
$400- 600 and the remainder earn anywhere from less than $200 to over $1500. In response 
to the question regarding total household income (from all sources) in an average 3 month

=== PAGE 129 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
 
drought period, incomes were said to drop by at least 50% across all areas. There were no 
significant differences in the figures provided by women and men or by location to either of 
these questions. 
 
Education  
 As shown in Table 12, over 91% of community stakeholders consulted indicated that there are 
negative impacts on education when water supply is low. The primary consequence reported 
were reduced attendance caused by sickness and school closures (about 82%) followed by 
poor performance (about 34%). 
Table 12: Impacts of drought on education 
Are there any impacts on school(s) when water supply is low? 
% of 
Respondents 
Attendance 
82.2% 
Low grades 
34.1 
 
Migration 
 In all communities surveyed, a total of 164 families were reported to have relocated over the past 
five years. The majority of these families moved to the USA, the remainder were have relocated 
to Majuro or Ebeye. Over 80% if these households were said to have relocated to access better 
education and employment opportunities; about 20% moved due for medical reasons. 
Conflict 
 Figure 9 shows responses in relation to the question on the presence of conflict within 
communities and households over water related issues (about 30% said “yes”).  
Figure 9: Conflict over Water Issues 
 
 
 Respondents indicated that water shortages can cause significant tensions within families and 
communities that have long-term impacts on relationships. People said there are fights over who 
should have access to public water supplies and not sharing equally.  Some respondents also 
noted longer waiting time (due to lessening availability of safe water); disagreements of the 
priorities for water use within families, and tensions when public access points were not available 
to all members of the community – i.e., some denominations were not able to access water 
located on certain church compounds.  Respondents also noted that people are reluctant to ask 
other households for water because they feel ashamed.  
Preferred locations of new public water supplies 
Yes
Yes
No
No
0.0%
20.0%
40.0%
60.0%
80.0%
Is there ever conflict over water use  at
household level?
Is there ever conflict over water use  at
community level?
Conflict over water use  at Household  and Community 
level?

=== PAGE 130 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
 
 When asked where any new community water supplies should be located, the number one 
response was churches (60.7%); followed by community centres (13.4%), “central” community 
location (13.4%) and schools (8.6%). Most comments related to this question revolved around 
the need to ensure public water sources can be easily accessed by everyone in the 
community.   
Student Consultations 
The ACWA community consultation process also included school-based consultations involving a total 
of 200 students (132 female and 68 male) attending 18 elementary schools and 1 high school21 in 
targeted areas. The purpose of these consultations was to solicit the views of students on the adequacy 
of water and sanitation facilities at their schools and the impacts this has on their education (attendance, 
performance and attitude) and overall wellbeing  
 
The results of these consultations are intended to augment the findings of the concurrent GIZ Climate 
Change Resilience Project design research on the adequacy of sanitation systems in outer island 
boarding schools. These consultations, carried out by the WUTMI and MIOF field researchers engaged 
as part of the ACWA design process, were conducted using a focus group methodology centered 
around the same survey instrument used by the Climate Change Resilience Project team to ensure 
consistency of data collected.  
The following tables highlight the key findings from ACWA student consultations.  
              Table 13: Availability of Water at Schools Consulted 
Is water available at your school? 
  
       No 
Yes 
        Total 
Sub Total 
           12 
     6 
  
Total 
  
    18   
  
           % 
          67% 
                    33% 
       100% 
                   
              Table 14: Adequacy of Water Supply at Schools Consulted 
When the water source is working does it provides enough water for drinking, 
hand-washing & food preparation? 
  
No 
Yes 
Total 
Sub Total 
15 
3 
  
Total 
  
18 
  
% 
83% 
17% 
100% 
 
             Table 15: Student Views on Water Quality at their School 
Do you think that water at your school is safe to drink?   
  
No 
Yes 
Total 
Sub Total 
8 
10 
  
Total 
  
18 
  
% 
44% 
56% 
            100% 
 
 
Table 16: Condition of toilets at Schools Consulted 
                                               
21 Including Rongrong High School and the Elementary schools located in Aur, Tobal Aur, Airok, Tarawa, Wolot, Jeng, Kaben,  Mejit, Ailuk, 
Utrik, Likiep, Ebadon, Mejatto, Ujae, Lae, Lib and Majken.

=== PAGE 131 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
 
Are most (75%) of the toilets at your school working? 
  
No 
Yes 
Total 
Sub Total 
18 
2 
  
Total 
  
20 
  
% 
90% 
10% 
100% 
 
            Table 17: Separate Toilet Facilities for Boys and Girls at Schools Consulted 
Are there separate toilets for boys and girls at your school? 
  
No 
Yes 
Total 
Sub Total 
14 
5 
  
Total 
  
19 
  
% 
74% 
26% 
100% 
 
 
              Table 18: Accessibility of School Toilets for Students with Physical Disabilities 
Are there separate and accessible toilets for students with physical disabilities 
at your school? 
  
No 
Yes 
Total 
Sub Total 
18 
0 
  
Total 
  
18 
  
% 
100% 
0% 
 100% 
 
             Table 19: Private Facilities for Girls during Menstruation at Schools Consulted 
Are there private facilities available for girls during their menstruation? 
  
No 
Yes 
Total 
Sub Total 
18 
0 
  
Total 
 18 
0 
  
% 
100% 
0% 
100% 
 
           Table 20: Condition and Availability of Hand-Washing Facilities at Schools Consulted 
Do most (75%) hand-washing facilities work at your school? 
  
No 
Yes 
Total 
Sub Total 
18 
1 
  
Total 
  
19 
  
% 
95% 
5% 
100% 
 
              Table 21: Recent Learning about Sanitation and Hygiene at School 
Students have heard about WASH topics in class in the past month 
  
No 
Yes 
Total 
Sub Total 
16 
2 
  
Total 
  
18 
  
% 
89% 
11% 
100% 
 
These results highlight the serious issues at the schools visited with respect to water, hygiene and 
sanitation services and the impact this is having on student attendance and performance.

=== PAGE 132 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
 
Children 
The primary impacts of water insecurity on children identified during stakeholder consultations included: 
 Increases in water borne illnesses such as diarrhea and influenza;  
 Water shortages leading to dehydration and skin disorders; 
 Decreasing supply of high quality local foods, due to drought conditions, depleted 
fisheries and the replacement of local foods with by less nutritious western goods like 
white rice; 
 Significant decreases in school attendance and educational outcomes due to lack of 
water and toilet facilities in some schools;  
 Lack of medicines in some care centres resulting in children not being regularly 
immunized or treated for illnesses in a timely manner, and 
 Children are not getting treated for water related illnesses such as s diarrhoea because it 
has become such a common ailment which has major potential for further health 
complications for children.  
 
Priority Water and Sanitation Issues and Proposed Solutions 
 Table 22 shows the primary water security and sanitation issues identified by male and female 
stakeholders during the GESI community consultation process. These issues and proposed 
solutions were synthesized from Section G of the GESI survey form and include responses to 
Question #30; “What are the main water and sanitation related problems in your community?, 
and Question 31; “What are the best ways to improve water and sanitation conditions in your 
community?  
Table 22: Summary of Stakeholder Views on Priority Water Security and Sanitation 
Issues and Proposed Solutions 
Key Issues 
Proposed Solutions 
1. 
Limited or no water 
storage 
Increase water storage facilities at the household level and increase 
capacity of public water sources 
2. 
Lack of water supply 
and quality  
Increase water storage, and engage and support EPA to provide their 
water testing and treatment services to people in the outer islands  
3. 
No access to water 
testing and 
treatment kits 
EPA should train communities, including women and provide testing kits to 
community members 
4. 
Lack of support from 
the EPA 
Engage the EPA in the project  
5. 
Increased water-
borne diseases 
Provide testing/treatment kits; improve hygiene management education, 
help the Ministry of Health provide better medical services at local health 
dispensaries 
6. 
Decrease in 
economic 
opportunities and 
income 
Reduce delays in transportation - particularly to pick up copra as it 
generates the most income for families in the outer islands. Stakeholders 
suggested the project engage with the Ministry of Resources and 
Development, the Ministry of Transportation and Communication and the 
Shipping Company to promote better economic opportunities 
7. 
Lack of toilet 
facilities 
Construct toilet facilities in public areas that are accessible to everyone, 
especially for women, girls, children and people living with disabilities.

=== PAGE 133 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
The project design process identified several key water insecurity factors that prevent women, men and 
children from accessing safe freshwater year round including: 
1. Lack of adequate household and community rainwater harvesting systems in terms of its 
efficiency (i.e. maintenance and sizing issues) as well as volume; 
2. Limited of information regarding the availability and quality of ground water which are likely to be 
contaminated from both organic contaminants and high salinity especially during periods of 
drought; 
3. Stationary desalination systems that are limited in locations and / or ineffective due to the high 
cost and skills required for operation and maintenance; 
4. Challenges of outer atoll and island sanitation systems that depend on rain water. These 
systems fail during drought periods and may also contaminate groundwater resources; 
5. Inequitable access to existing water supplies by all members of the community; 
6. Limited capacity to pay for high operating costs for solutions provided in urban centres, and 
7. Limited participation of women and other vulnerable groups in decision-making processes 
regarding water use and security. 
From a GESI perspective, the inadequate access to safe and clean water resources and sanitation 
facilities has resulted in the following consequences: 
1. Food insecurity, caused by decreased yields of good quality subsistence crops, loss of 
livestock, and depleted fisheries stocks; This situation creates additional work for women in 
gathering and preparing family meals and results in malnutrition which is having a significant 
impact on children; 
2. Health problems, leading to increased prevalence of conjunctivitis (pink eye), diarrhoea, 
dehydration; scabies, influenza-like illness, communicable diseases which are made worse 
by unhealthy diets during droughts. For pregnant women, young children and other 
vulnerable groups adverse health impacts can have life-long repercussions; 
3. Loss of livelihoods, due to reduced yield from cash crops, associated agricultural products 
(such as handicrafts) and livestock. According to the 2016 PDNA, the single most affected 
sector by the 2016 droughts was agriculture which sustained a decline in gross production of 
USD 1.77 million. As articulated during PDNA and ACWA consultations, reductions in family 
income created stress on families and led to household and community conflict; 
4. Disruptions in education: Analysis of MOE data revealed that absenteeism rates during the 
2016 drought were high in Majuro (up nearly 10%) reaching 20.1%; in Lib the rate increased by 
3.6% reaching 10.6%; in Ailinglaplap the rate rose by 3% reaching 6.3%. MOE data also 
revealed that the effects of the 2016 drought were more concentrated in elementary schools 
“perhaps due to the higher vulnerability of small children to the lack of water, and/or to the 
higher concern of parents in this regard” (PDNA Draft Report). The results of ACWA student 
consultations revealed that their schools have a serious water security problem that has 
significant impacts on attendance, performance and over student well-being; 
5. Poor hygiene and sanitation during droughts which has negative health impacts caused by 
lack of water for bathing and cleaning, non-functioning toilets leading to increased open 
defecation and reduction in critical public services – primarily schools. Issues related to 
menstruation hygiene management were also raised by women during community 
consultations and by government and NGO officials;  
6. Damage to social cohesion, resulting from community and household level disputes over 
access to and use of limited water supply during drought conditions. There are examples of 
families fighting over water and villages divided over land use rights; almost 30% of 
community stakeholders consulted reported conflict at community or household level over 
water issues; 
7. Exclusion of women and other vulnerable groups from planning and decision-making 
processes at community, island and national level. During the GESI ACWA community

=== PAGE 134 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
 
consultation process all respondents stated that women are not involved in decision-making 
on water management matters at community level. 
Based on the results of this gender analysis, it is clear that improving water quality and supply at both 
community and household level will create more equitable access to water resources for vulnerable 
groups including women, children, the elderly and those with disabilities, and will improve health and 
education outcomes, enhance livelihoods, and reduce household and community level conflict caused 
by water shortages.  
 
This outcome will be achieved through investment in new and upgraded climate-proof water 
infrastructure and through implementation of a range of mainstreamed and targeted water resilience 
interventions aimed at ensuring that all members of target communities have the knowledge and ability 
to use water resources wisely and have real opportunities to be involved in training, planning and 
decision-making processes at all levels. Further, national policy level interventions and capacity 
building support provided by the project will ensure compliance with international water security and 
access standards and assist in achieving national and international goals and targets regarding gender 
equity and social inclusion.

=== PAGE 135 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
27
 
Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan and Budget 
 
The following GESI Action Plan identifies numerous interventions to ensure gender responsive and 
transformative results through a range of mainstreaming and targeted strategies. Mainstreaming will 
ensure that women and youth, who are key players in natural resource and water management in the 
outer atolls and islands of RMI, are fully involved in community level design, implementation and 
monitoring processes. The “gender transformative” approach” refers to changes that can occur for 
women as a result of improved water supply by reducing their work burden; reducing conflict at 
household and community level and by enabling women to more actively participate in a community 
decision-making process not currently available to them.  By ensuring women are included in CWCs 
they will have a formal, public role in water management which, over time, could lead to women’s 
increased engagement in broader political processes at community and/or island level. 
This Action Plan provides suggested entry points for gender-responsive actions to be taken during 
community-level project design and implementation and throughout monitoring and evaluation as 
outlined below. This includes the use of specific GESI indicators and targets to measure and track 
progress on these actions at activity level. Suggested indicators will need to be reviewed and 
incorporated in the detailed M&E plan to be developed during project commencement to ensure GESI 
data is routinely collected and analyzed throughout project implementation. In this regard, the ongoing 
identification of lessons learned and best practices in GESI should be included in six month and annual 
project update reports 
 
To ensure adequate attention to GESI factors and outcomes, a Gender and Youth Specialist will be 
responsible for the implementing the action plan and have been provisioned for in the project budget 
This specialists will take the lead but it will be the responsibility of the entire project team and key 
stakeholder groups to ensure GESI results are achieved.   
Project Design and Implementation 
Detailed community level project design and implementation will take into consideration the following 
GESI implications: 
1. Ensure the initial Water Resource Survey to be conducted in all targeted rural communities at 
project inception captures the views of women, men and youth. This will ensure that the type and 
location of new and upgraded water infrastructure will meet the needs of all community members 
and will also enhance buy-in and ownership for the project from the community as a whole.  
2. Ensure women, men and youth are equitably represented and actively involved in all Community-
based Water Committees. This will ensure that the needs and perspectives of all members of the 
community are addressed and will also assist in building leadership skills and empowering 
vulnerable groups. In order to garner genuine community support for gender balance on Water 
Committee, it is essential that both men and women receive gender sensitization training. Men 
need to understand that because women are generally the primary users of water at household 
and community level, their perspectives are critical to sustainable water planning and management.  
 
3. Train women and youth from targeted communities in O&M and construction skills of household 
and rainwater harvesting systems, groundwater wells etc. This will enable women and young 
people living in rural areas who have limited employment opportunities to be actively engaged in 
designing, constructing, operating, maintaining and monitoring community water security 
investments which will serve to build sustainability and increase employability. It is important that 
the project strives for equitable participation of young men and women in training programs through 
establishment of an agreed gendered quota system.  
4. Ensure new Standard Operating Procedures for household and community water security 
measures are gender and age sensitive by including GESI indicators in new SOPs. 
5. Work with the Environmental Protection Authority (EPA) to improve water testing capabilities at 
community level and ensure that women and youth are involved in this process. This action is

=== PAGE 136 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
28
 
needed to address community concerns related in inadequate monitoring of water quality in rural 
communities which leads to health issues (i.e., conjunctivitis, diarrhea, dehydration and increased 
communicable diseases) especially in children and the elderly.  
 
6. Ensure that drought warnings and other relevant weather information is conveyed in accessible 
formats to all community members so that everyone has access to information required for 
improved readiness. This could include use of the public radio broadcasting, mass SMS text 
messaging, relaying information through local governments, traditional leaders, churches, health 
centers, schools and WUTMI Chapters. 
 
7. Undertake a review of the RMI National Water and Sanitation Policy and Action Plan from a GESI 
perspective to ensure the full inclusion of vulnerable people in all relevant policy areas and 
strategies including social marketing campaigns and improved water and sanitation facilities in 
public locations. While this Policy has a strong gender equity and social inclusive perspective, it 
could be strengthened through the inclusive of specific targets related to the participation of women 
and other vulnerable groups in water and sanitation governance forums.  Involving the Ministry of 
International Affairs and WUTMI in this review process would build capacity and lay a firm 
foundation for inter-agency collaboration. 
 
8. Facilitate Inter-island knowledge exchange visits with women and youth sharing experience and 
best practice on climate change risk reduction on water resources. Create opportunities for learning 
exchanges facilitate inter-island competitive tournaments on best practices in climate change risk 
reduction on water resources, including water security and conservation of water resources. 
Trainings will serve to increase coping capacities, and reduce hardship faced by communities in 
times of disaster and water scarcity. This activity could be undertaken in partnership with the 
Marshall Islands Red Cross and existing women and youth networks (i.e., WUTMI and the National 
Youth Congress).  
 
9. Provide certification programme for women and youth focused on climate change adaptation and 
disaster risk reduction. Women and youth’s expertise in water demand management will be 
developed through a Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction certification programme part of 
a non-formal course of study at the University of the South Pacific. Women and youth engaged in 
learning exchange visits will also gather practical management skills, such as project management, 
written and oral presentation, reporting, monitoring and evaluation of project, conflict management, 
etc. 
 
10. Ensure equitable participation of women and men in the upcoming Certificate Course for Water to 
be developed and implemented by the College of the Marshall Islands to promote employability of 
both women and men and ensure gender parity in the next generation of water leaders and experts 
in the RMI. It is important that curriculum materials developed for this course are GESI inclusive 
and that scholarships funded by the Project are awarded to equal numbers of women and men. 
11. Build the capacity of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and all RMI state agencies responsible for water 
planning and management to assess climate change impacts on vulnerable groups of people, 
identify appropriate solutions and monitor impacts. This could be achieved through the provision of 
technical assistance, training, twinning arrangements and staff exchanges.  
 
12. Ensure equitable representation and participation of women, men and youth in Annual National 
Water Forums and that the topics discussed are inclusive of the perspectives of vulnerable groups. 
To reinforce the importance of a gender and social sensitive approach to water resilience, it is 
recommended that this topic be addressed at the initial National Water Forum. 
 
13. Ensure all information, education and communication materials developed by the Project are 
inclusive of the water security needs and rights of women, men and youth and are widely 
disseminated in user-friendly formats. This work will need to be undertaken in collaboration with 
specialist agencies to ensure that complex and often gender-sensitive concepts, issues, and 
solutions related to resilient water resource management will be understood by diverse actors. It 
will be important to draw on good practice examples regionally and globally for participatory

=== PAGE 137 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
29
 
planning, reflective practice, and community engagement including use of popular theater, 
music, dance, story-telling, audio-visual productions, info-graphics etc.  This work needs to build 
upon and be coordinated with the Reimaanlok process (RMI’s community-led conservation process 
for marine and natural resource management).   
14. Develop, implement and enforce a Code of Conduct for all project staff which includes a zero 
tolerance for discriminatory practices and violence of any kind. 
 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Through onset analysis, data has been collated to establish a baseline which will be monitored 
throughout implementation. To ensure gender equality and climate resilience, it is important to combine 
high-quality geospatial data and studies with a participative community approach. This analysis has 
identified the differences between men, women and at-risk populations with respect to their water use 
needs, access requirements and decision-making inputs. In order to monitor and evaluate gender 
equity and social inclusion, relevant quantitative and qualitative outcomes are provided below. Table 
23 shows GESI indicators and targets alongside overall project level measures and targets for ease of 
reference.   
 
Quantitative outcomes: 
• 
At least 49% of female-headed households will be beneficiaries; 
• 
50% of beneficiaries engaged in information dissemination activities and installation activities 
will be women and youth under the age of 25 (50% of youth will be girls); 
• 
Improvements in health and well-being for men, women and youth through provision of safe 
and clean water, and measured by the number of RWH systems, and water structures installed 
per households; 
• 
Improved learning and employment opportunities through formal and informal training 
programmes and learning opportunities with the University of the South Pacific for women and 
youth, measured by the number of women and the number of male/female youth in leadership 
roles in water pricing, regulation and access dialogue; 
 
Qualitative outcomes: 
• 
Opportunities to generate additional income. Women and youth are more likely to respond to 
incentives that address their family’s basic needs, such as better health and nutrition, as a 
result of water security measures and the provision of 20 LPCD of potable water; 
• 
Time-saving for women  as a result of lower hours in labour required for water management 
practices prior to the implementation of the project; 
• 
Contribution to improved self-esteem and empowerment of women and youth in the community 
as a result of training and leadership opportunities; 
• 
Expanded involvement in public and project decision-making, and enhanced knowledge on 
climate change and efficient water practices as a result of formal and informal education 
programmes for women; 
• 
Support for training and educational activities for women and youth provided by the University 
of the South Pacific and related to climate change and water demand management for reduced 
demand of rainwater and increased involvement of women and youth to participate with 
confidence, and take leadership positions in community meetings, competitive tournaments on 
efficient water practices;  
• 
Effectiveness of awareness raising on climate change adaptation and its adverse impacts on 
the water, and agriculture sector in outer atolls and islands of RMI.

=== PAGE 138 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
30
 
                                                                                              Table 23: Project and GESI Targets and Indicators 
Objectives 
Activities 
GESI Targets and Indicators 
Project Level Measures 
and Targets 
Partner 
Institutions 
Timeline 
Budget 
(US$) 
Output 1: Implementation of optimal mix of interventions to ensure climate resilient water security in outer atolls and islands of RMI 
1.1. Improve 
existing 
rainwater 
harvesting 
systems for 
community 
buildings and 
households in 
outer islands 
and atolls 
during 
increasing 
frequency and 
periods of 
drought. 
1.1.1. Improve 
existing rainwater 
harvesting 
systems for 
community 
buildings and 
households in the 
outer atolls and 
islands. 
 
1.1.2 Improve 
existing rainwater 
harvesting 
systems for 
community 
buildings (CB) 
and increase 
storage capacity 
in the outer atolls 
and islands. 
Baseline: 0 
Target 1.1.1 (a)  At least 49% of female and single 
headed households have improved access to rainwater in 
target communities 
Indicator: 1.1.1 (a):  Number of women, men and youth 
(male and female) and female headed households with 
improved access to potable water resources verified 
through project baseline, mid-term and end term surveys; 
annual monitoring reports 
Target 1.1.1 (b):  At least 50% of beneficiaries engaged in 
installation activities are women and youth:50% of youth 
are girls  
Indicator 1.1.1 (b):  Number of beneficiaries engaged in 
installation activities by gender & age  
Target 1.1.1 (c):  100% of community buildings with 
upgraded rainwater harvesting and storage are equally 
accessible to men, women, children, PWD and the elderly 
Indicator 1.1.1 (c):  All community members equitably 
accessing and benefiting from upgraded CB water 
systems 
Measure: 1.1: Number of 
households and community buildings 
with upgraded existing rooftop 
rainwater harvesting systems. 
Target 1.1:  Upgrading of RWH for 
2,529 households and 158 
community buildings  (target 49% 
female headed households) 
 
OCS 
NDMO 
OEPPC 
Red Cross 
Youth groups 
WUTMI 
Year 2 to 
the end of 
the project. 
24,167  
1.2.  Provide 
additional 
rainwater 
harvesting 
systems and 
increase of 
storage 
capacity for 
1.2.1. Build new 
roof catchment 
systems 
1.2.2 Build 
new 
storage 
tanks 
Baseline: 0 
Target 1.2.1 (a)  At least 49% of female and single 
headed households have improved access to rainwater in 
target communities 
Indicator: 1.2.1 (a):  Number of women, men and youth 
(male and female)  and female headed households with 
improved access to potable water resources verified 
Measure 1.2:  Number of community 
buildings with improved efficiency of 
rainwater harvesting systems and 
increased storage capacity 
Target 1.2:  121 new community 
roof/storage systems installed 
 
OCS 
NDMO 
OEPPC 
Red Cross 
Youth 
groups 
WUTMI 
Year 2 to 
the end of 
the project. 
16,313

=== PAGE 139 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL
31
communities in 
outer islands 
and atolls for 
usage during 
increasing 
frequency and 
periods of 
drought. 
through project baseline, mid-term and end term surveys; 
annual monitoring reports 
Target 1.2.1 (b):  At least 50% of beneficiaries engaged in 
installation activities are women and youth:50% of youth 
are girls  
Indicator 1.2.1 (b):  Number of beneficiaries engaged in 
installation activities by gender & age   
Objectives 
Activities 
GESI Targets and Indicators 
Project Level Measures 
and Targets 
Partner 
Institutions 
Timeline 
Budget 
(US$) 
Output 2: Optimization of alternative water sources to reduce reliance on harvested rainwater in the context of reduced rainfall. 
2.1: Protect 
groundwater 
wells from more 
frequent storm 
surges and 
contamination  
2.1.1. Provide 
community water 
solutions for 
water vulnerable 
populations   
Baseline: 0 
Target 2.1.1 (a): At least 50% of female and single 
headed households targeted for groundwater protection in 
target communities 
Indicator 2.1.1 (a): Number of women, men, 
children/youth, elderly and PWD, inclusive of single 
headed households  with increased access to good quality  
groundwater and improved aquifer infrastructure  
Indicator 2.2.1 (b): 100% of women and youth have 
improved understanding of groundwater protection ad 
management 
Measure 2.1: Number of wells 
protected from storm surge and 
surface derived contamination. 
Target 2.1:  100% (2586) target 
households and community 
groundwater wells will be protected 
from storm surges and contamination 
in 77 target rural communities 
Red Cross 
Women’s 
groups 
Youth 
groups 
WUTMI 
Year 1 to 
the end of 
the project. 
97,336    
2:2: Enhance 
women and 
youth’s 
leadership 
through best 
practices and 
community 
awareness 
programmes on 
efficient usage 
(demand 
2.2.1 Facilitate 
inter-island 
knowledge 
exchange visits 
with women and 
youth, sharing 
experience and 
practice on water 
conservation 
2.2.2 Certification 
program for 
Baseline: 0 
Target 2.2.1 (a): 100 percent women and youth (50% of 
youth are girls) participate in knowledge exchange visits  
Indicator 2.2.1 (a) Number of women and youth (male and 
female) who complete knowledge exchange visits and 
results of gender analysis of participant evaluations 
Target 2.2.1 (b): 100 percent women and youth (50% of 
youth are girls) undertake certificate program on CCA 
and/or DRR 
Measure 2.2:  extent of adoption of 
best practices. 
Target 2.2:  100% of training 
participants have adopt the best 
practices (disaggregated by gender) 
Red Cross 
Women’s 
groups 
Youth 
groups 
WUTMI 
University of 
the South 
Pacific 
Year 1 to 
the end of 
the project. 
1,448,881

=== PAGE 140 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
32
 
management) 
of rainwater 
women & youth 
focused on 
climate change 
adaptation & 
DRR 
Indicator 2.2.1 (b) Number of women and youth (by 
gender) who complete CCA certificate program and results 
of gender analysis of participant evaluations 
Target 2.2.1 (c): At least 50% of women and youth who 
participated in knowledge exchange visits and CCA 
certification become involved in water conservation efforts 
including water pricing, regulation and access dialogue in 
their communities/groups. 
 
Indicator 2.2.2 (c): Number of women and youth (by 
gender) who become engaged in CCA/DRM activities in 
their communities/groups  
Objectives 
Activities 
GESI Targets and Indicators 
Project Level Measures 
 and Targets 
Partner 
Institutions 
Timeline 
Allocated 
Budget  
Output 3: Climate change induced drought preparedness and response measures implemented in outer atolls and islands 
3.1  Develop 
national-level 
contingency 
plans and 
Standard 
Operating 
Procedures 
(SOPs) for 
climate change 
induced drought 
response 
 
 
3.1.1.  
Conduct training 
programs for 
drought risk 
management and 
contingency 
planning at 
institutional level  
 
3.1.2.  
Implement SOPs 
for drought 
preparedness 
and response   
Baseline: 0 
Target: 3.1.1 (a):  50% of participants involved in drought 
risk management and contingency training at institutional 
level are women and youth  
Indicator 3.1.1 (b): Number of women and youth actively 
involved in development and implementation of SOPs and 
results of gender analysis of participant evaluations 
Target: 3.1.1 (b):  GESI considerations fully 
mainstreamed in national level contingency plans and 
SOPs 
Indicator 3.1.2 (a): New SOPs include gender targets and 
indicators 
Measure 3.1:  Effectiveness of 
training for drought response as 
indicated by adoption of contingency 
plans and SOPs. 
Target 3.1: 100% of CWCs, having 
been trained, have adopted the 
contingency plans and SOPs  
CMI 
OCS 
OEPPC 
NDMO 
Year 1 to 
the end of 
the project. 
101,601     
3.2 Develop 
and implement 
community-level 
drought 
contingency 
planning in 
3.2.1 Training for 
community-
based water 
committees and 
local government 
representatives 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 3.2.1 (a): Community Water Committees (CWCs) 
are comprised of 50% women and youth; youth are 50% 
girls 
 Measure 3.2:  Number of developed 
and implemented community-level 
drought contingency planning in 
outer islands and atolls  (includes 
formation of Community Water 
Committees) 
CMI 
OCS 
OEPPC 
NDMO 
Year 1 to 
the end of 
the project. 
    28,178

=== PAGE 141 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
33
 
outer islands 
and atolls 
 
 
3.2.2  Training 
community 
members in 
operation and 
maintenance of 
rainwater 
harvesting 
systems 
Indicator 3.2.1 (a): Number of women and youth who 
regularly attend and participate on CWCs; results of focus 
group discussions with CWC stakeholder groups 
Target: 3.2.1 (b): 50% of participants involved in 
community level  training  are women and youth; youth are 
50% girls  
Indicator 3.2.1 (b) : Number of women and youth who 
attend community based training program and results of 
gender analysis of participant evaluations 
Target: 3.2.1 (c): 100% of community-level drought 
contingency plans are GESI sensitive  
Indicator 3.2.1 (c) : Number of community-level 
contingency plans that are responsive to the needs of 
women, children and other vulnerable groups during 
droughts 
Target 3.2:  77 community-based 
water committees (CWCs) with 
enhanced capacities to develop, 
implement, operate, maintain and 
monitor drought SOPs

=== PAGE 142 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
34
 
ANNEX 1 
Summary of Women and Men’s Consultations 
Water Supply: Household Level 
 Table 4 shows that 95% of households in the areas consulted reported that they get their 
water from household rainwater tanks during normal weather conditions. During times of 
drought, only 44% said water they get water from household rainwater tanks. 
                                      Table 4: Sources of Household Water Supply  
Q 1: Where does the community get their water from?  
Water Supply During Normal Weather Conditions 
  
Well  
Rain Tanks 
Total 
Sub 
Total 
2 
42 
  
Total 
  
44 
  
% 
5% 
95% 
100% 
Water Supply During Droughts 
  
Well 
Rain Tanks 
RO only  
Sub 
Total 
4 
20 
2 
Total 
  
  
  
% 
9% 
44% 
4% 
 
 
 As shown in Table 13 (pg 43) the primary concern of all stakeholders consulted is the lack of 
rainwater catchment at household and community level – including schools and health care 
centres. The vast majority of people consulted indicated they are highly dependent on rain 
water harvesting and supplies are inadequate prolonged during dry periods.

=== PAGE 143 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
35
 
Figure 5: Household Water Supply During Normal Weather Conditions  
 
 
Figure 6: Household Water Supply During Periods of Drought 
 
 
 In response to the question regarding household water supply, respondents estimated that 
67% of households in their community have water supply while 32% do not have household 
access. 
Table 5: Household Access to Water Supply 
Q 2: Does everyone in the community have a household water supply? 
Overall %age of Households with Water Supply 
With 
Without 
              Total 
67% 
32% 
100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5%
95%
Q 1. Water Supply During Normal Weather Conditions
Well
Rain Tanks
9%
44%
5%
42%
Q 1. Water Supply During Droughts
WELL
RAIN TANKS
RO only
RO & WELL

=== PAGE 144 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
36
 
 
 
Figure 7: Estimated %age of Households with Water Supply  
 
Water Supply: Community Level 
 Table 6 shows public water sources available in the communities consulted.  
Table 6: Type of Community Water Sources 
Q 16: What public water sources are available in the community (excluding household level)? 
  
Well 
Tank 
RO units 
Total  
Sub Total 
2 
24 
16 
  
Total 
  
  
  
42 
% 
5% 
57% 
38% 
  
 
 The majority of public water supplies are located at community centres and churches, with 
fewer numbers at health care centres, airports and schools.  
 Of significant concern, about 40% of public water sources were reported to be non-functioning 
as shown in Table 7.  
Table 7: Condition of Public Water Sources 
Q 16a: Condition and Quality of water from this source? 
  
Working 
Not Working 
Polluted 
Total 
Sub Total 
24 
17 
1 
  
Total 
  
  
  
42 
% 
57% 
40% 
2% 
100% 
 
 When asked if there is a current water shortage in the community, 68% of respondents believed 
there is. 
 When asked where additional public water supplies should be located, respondents stressed 
the need to identify accessible locations, close to housing and schools, that would be 
accessible to all members of the community, regarding of who owns the land. While locating 
67%
32%
Q 2. Overall %age of Households with Water 
Supply

=== PAGE 145 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
37
 
water tanks at churches was also suggested by numerous respondents, concern was also 
raised that people who do not attend that church would have no or restricted access. 
Table 8: Respondent Perspective on Current Water Shortage 
Q 4: Is there a currently a water shortage in the community? 
  
Yes 
No 
TOTAL 
% 
68% 
32% 
100% 
 
Water collection 
 Community consultations revealed that the responsibility for water collection is widely dispersed 
within families as shown in Figure 8.  
Figure 8: Responsibility for Water Collection in Families Consulted 
 
Safety  
 Almost 60% of respondents, including men, women and youth raised concerns about safety en 
route or at water sources. These issues included stealing, fighting and harassment. In response 
to the question about whether action had been taken to resolve security issues, about 30% 
indicated action had been taken place but they did not indicate what this involved.  About 84% 
of respondents indicated that safety issues have not been resolved or made no comment in 
response to this question.  Only 10% of men and 6.7% of women indicted that safety issues 
have been resolved. 
Water quality 
 In response to the question about whether people think their water is safe to drink, 56% of 
respondents indicated “no” or “sometimes”, while 44% of respondents believe their water is 
safe to drink. 
                                Table 9: Respondent Views on Safety of Drinking Water 
Q. 11: Do you think your water is safe to drink?  
  
Yes 
No  
Sometimes 
Sub Total 
19 
9 
15 
Total 
  
  
  
% 
44% 
21% 
35% 
 
29%
19%
7%
45%
Q 9.  Who is mostly responsible for water collection? 
Children/Youth
Men
Women
All

=== PAGE 146 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
38
 
 When asked whether people get sick from consuming the water, about 60% said “yes” - of these 
the majority are children.  The most common illness attributed to poor water quality were 
stomach aches, eye problems, diarrhoea and skin disorders.  While the majority of respondents 
said they usually seek medical treatment for these aliments, the reasons people don’t seek 
treatment include transportation difficulties, “goes against custom”, “because we are ashamed” 
and lack of medical facilities and supplies.  
Water treatment 
 Boiling: 46.5% of all respondents indicated that they never boil water from tanks before drinking 
while 46.5% said they sometimes do. The remaining 7% said they always boil water from rain 
tanks prior to consumption (primarily respondents from Rongrong, Mejatto and Ronglap). About 
71% of all respondents indicated they never boil water used for food preparation; 14.6% they 
“sometimes” do, with about the same number of respondents indicating they always boil tank water 
used to prepare foods (primarily people living in Rongrong and Lib). About 56% of all respondents 
indicated they never boil groundwater; 18.6% said they “sometimes” do, while 25.6% said they 
“always” boil groundwater for drinking. 
 Filtering: In response to questions about filtering water for drinking purposes, about 51% of all 
respondents indicated they never filter water from rain tanks; about 30% said “sometimes” 
and.21% said they always filter water from rain water tanks prior to consumption (primarily 
respondents from Maloelap, Tarawa, Airok, Wollot, Jeng, Mejit and Likiep.). With regard to filtering 
rain water for food preparation, about 62% of respondents said “never”; 21.4% said “sometimes” 
and 16.7% said “always” (mainly people from Maloelap Airok, Jeng, Mejit, Likiep, Ebadon. Lib, 
Jabot). With regard to groundwater, about 79% of all respondents indicated they never filter ground 
water for drinking; while 21% said they “sometimes” do. There was relatively the same response 
to the question on filtering ground water for food preparation purposes. 
 Cleaning Agents: In response to questions about whether people add any type of disinfectant to 
rain tank water prior to drinking, about 44% said “never”, 40% said “sometimes” and 26% said 
“always” (primarily respondents in Lae Ailuk, Likiep p, Ujae Uae, Mejatto Kwajalein/Ronglap). In 
terms of treatment of groundwater used for drinking, about 72% indicated they never add 
disinfectant; 16% said sometimes and 12% said always (respondents from Lae, Aur, Mejit, 
Kwajalein Ebadon). With respect to adding cleaning agents to water used for food preparation, 
about 58 % of all respondents indicated they never add disinfectant to tanks water; 23% said 
“sometimes” and 18.6% said 'always' (primarily respondents from Lae, Ailuk, Likiep, Ujae Uae, 
Mejatto Kwajalein/Ronglap). About 77% of all respondents indicated they never add disinfectant 
to groundwater for food preparation,14% said sometimes and 9.3% said “always” (primarily 
respondents from Lae , Mejit, Ebadon). 
Water management 
  As shown in Table 10, household level decision-making on water use seems to be largely shared 
between women and men (76.2%). However, in cases where one gender was specified as the 
primary decision-maker, men play this role about 4% more often than women. At the community 
level, all respondents indicated that men are the sole decision-makers. In some cases, women’s 
focus groups indicated that they were displeased with this arrangement.

=== PAGE 147 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
39
 
Table 10: Water Management Decision-Making by Gender at Household and Community Level 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 These finding have significant implications for the design of the project.  In order to ensure that 
water governance and management arrangements at community level are gender inclusive, 
specific strategies will need to be developed and implemented.  
Sanitation and Hygiene 
 As shown in Table 11, community stakeholders reported a number of sanitation impacts when 
water supply is low.  
                             Table 11: Impacts of droughts on sanitation and hygiene 
Impacts on sanitation during water 
shortages 
% of Respondents 
Less water to wash  
14.3 
Sanitary issues 
42.9 
Never wash 
14.3 
Toilets don’t work 
14.3 
Schools closed due to lack of water 
14.3 
 
 Although a question was asked regarding the number of households with/without toilet facilities, 
it is not possible to provide an accurate count as people seemed reluctant to answer this 
question, gave vague answers or provided %age responses without indicating the number of 
households included in calculations. 
However, in all locations visited, respondents indicated that people often use the bush or beach 
for toileting purposes. When asked if this practice creates any difficulties for the community, over 
72% said “yes”. The primary issues identified were pollution, increased flies, unsanitary 
conditions and spread of disease.  
 When asked where additional toilets would best be located, 65% of respondents indicated 
churches and schools.  
 
Menstruation Hygiene Management (MHM) 
 Although all female respondents were asked questions regarding the impact of water shortages 
and availability of sanitation facilities on menstruation, very few responses were received. This 
is most likely due to cultural taboos and discomfort in discussing this issue in the public domain 
– perhaps on the part of both the researchers and the respondents. 
 Of the responses received to questions regarding MHM issues, 11 focus groups indicated that 
water issues have a negative impact on school attendance and performance during 
 
Who makes decisions re water 
use at household level? 
Who makes decisions re water use 
at village level? 
Gender 
Men 
12.50% 
100% 
Women 
8.30% 
0% 
Both 
76.20% 
0%

=== PAGE 148 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
40
 
menstruation; 7 groups stated that health problems arise due to inadequately water during 
menses; 6 groups stated there are cultural restrictions related to water use by women and girls 
during menstruation such as not being able to prepare food, be around certain family members 
or access water from wells and sometimes other locations.  
 Some male focus groups also discussed MHM issues, and confirmed the cultural restrictions 
facing women and girls during their menses. For example, they are “not allowed to get water 
from the well” and so “can’t keep themselves clean”. One man commented that “no clean, no 
go around”. 
Livelihoods 
 The primary source of income reported by all communities surveyed was copra, with handicraft 
sales being the secondary source of cash. In response to the question regarding total 
household income (from all sources) in an average 3-month non-drought period, 65% of 
households were said to earn between $200-$400; about 16% were said to earn between $400- 
600 and the remainder earn anywhere from less than $200 to over $1500. In response to the 
question regarding total household income (from all sources) in an average 3-month drought 
period, incomes were said to drop by at least 50% across all areas. There were no significant 
differences in the figures provided by women and men or by location to either of these 
questions. 
 
Education  
 As shown in Table 12, over 91% of community stakeholders consulted indicated that there are 
negative impacts on education when water supply is low. The primary consequence reported 
were reduced attendance caused by sickness and school closures (about 82%) followed by poor 
performance (about 34%). 
Table 12: Impacts of drought on education 
Are there any impacts on school(s) when water supply is low? 
% of 
Respondents 
Attendance 
82.2% 
Low grades 
34.1 
 
Migration 
 In all communities surveyed, a total of 164 families were reported to have relocated over the past 
five years. The majority of these families moved to the USA, the remainder were have relocated 
to Majuro or Ebeye. Over 80% if these households were said to have relocated to access better 
education and employment opportunities; about 20% moved due for medical reasons. 
Conflict 
 Figure 9 shows responses in relation to the question on the presence of conflict within 
communities and households over water related issues (about 30% said “yes”).

=== PAGE 149 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
41
 
Figure 9: Conflict over Water Issues 
 
 
 Respondents indicated that water shortages can cause significant tensions within families and 
communities that have long-term impacts on relationships. People said there are fights over who 
should have access to public water supplies and not sharing equally. Respondents also noted 
that people are reluctant to ask other households for water because they feel ashamed.  
 
Preferred locations of new public water supplies 
 When asked where any new community water supplies should be located, the number one 
response was churches (60.7%); followed by community centers (13.4%), “central” community 
location (13.4%) and schools (8.6%). Most comments related to this question revolved around 
the need to ensure public water sources can be easily accessed by everyone in the 
community.  
Student Consultations 
The community consultation process also included school-based consultations involving a total of 200 
students (132 female and 68 male) attending 18 elementary schools and 1 high school22 in targeted 
areas. The purpose of these consultations was to solicit the views of students on the adequacy of water 
and sanitation facilities at their schools and the impacts this has on their education (attendance, 
performance and attitude) and overall wellbeing  
 
The results of these consultations are intended to augment the findings of the concurrent GIZ Climate 
Change Resilience Project design research on the adequacy of sanitation systems in outer island 
boarding schools (see Section 5.1).These consultations, carried out by the WUTMI and MIOF field 
researchers engaged as part of the project design process, were conducted using a focus group 
methodology centered around the same survey instrument used by the Climate Change Resilience 
Project team to ensure consistency of data collected.  
The following tables highlight the key findings from student consultations.  
 
 
                                               
22 Including Rongrong High School and the Elementary schools located in Aur, Tobal Aur, Airok, Tarawa, Wolot, Jeng, Kaben,  Mejit, Ailuk, 
Utrik, Likiep, Ebadon, Mejatto, Ujae, Lae, Lib and Majken. 
Yes
Yes
No
No
0.0%
10.0%
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%
50.0%
60.0%
70.0%
80.0%
Is there ever conflict over water use  at
household level?
Is there ever conflict over water use  at
community level?
Conflict over water use  at Household  and Community 
level?

=== PAGE 150 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
42
 
 
              Table 14: Availability of Water at Schools Consulted 
Is water available at your school? 
  
       No 
Yes 
        Total 
Sub Total 
           12 
     6 
  
Total 
  
    18   
  
           % 
          67% 
                    33% 
       100% 
                   
              Table 15: Adequacy of Water Supply at Schools Consulted 
When the water source is working does it provides enough water for drinking, 
hand-washing & food preparation? 
  
No 
Yes 
Total 
Sub Total 
15 
3 
  
Total 
  
18 
  
% 
83% 
17% 
100% 
 
             Table 16: Student Views on Water Quality at their School 
Do you think that water at your school is safe to drink?   
  
No 
Yes 
Total 
Sub Total 
8 
10 
  
Total 
  
18 
  
% 
44% 
56% 
            100% 
           
      Table 17: Condition of toilets at Schools Consulted 
Are most (75%) of the toilets at your school working? 
  
No 
Yes 
Total 
Sub Total 
18 
2 
  
Total 
  
20 
  
% 
90% 
10% 
100% 
 
            Table 18: Separate Toilet Facilities for Boys and Girls at Schools Consulted 
Are there separate toilets for boys and girls at your school? 
  
No 
Yes 
Total 
Sub Total 
14 
5 
  
Total 
  
19 
  
% 
74% 
26% 
100% 
 
 
              Table 19: Accessibility of School Toilets for Students with Physical Disabilities 
Are there separate and accessible toilets for students with physical disabilities 
at your school? 
  
No 
Yes 
Total 
Sub Total 
18 
0 
  
Total 
  
18

=== PAGE 151 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
43
 
% 
100% 
0% 
 100% 
 
             Table 20: Private Facilities for Girls during Menstruation at Schools Consulted 
Are there private facilities available for girls during their menstruation? 
  
No 
Yes 
Total 
Sub Total 
18 
0 
  
Total 
 18 
0 
  
% 
100% 
0% 
100% 
 
 
           Table 21: Condition and Availability of Hand-Washing Facilities at Schools Consulted 
Do most (75%) hand-washing facilities work at your school? 
  
No 
Yes 
Total 
Sub Total 
18 
1 
  
Total 
  
19 
  
% 
95% 
5% 
100% 
 
              Table 22: Recent Learning about Sanitation and Hygiene at School 
Students have heard about WASH topics in class in the past month 
  
No 
Yes 
Total 
Sub Total 
16 
2 
  
Total 
  
18 
  
% 
89% 
11% 
100%

=== PAGE 152 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
44
 
ANNEX 2 
 Community Consultation Survey Form 
Focus Group Survey for use with Women and Men’s Groups 
 
Name of Community:___________________________________  Island: ________________________ 
Total population of Community: __________________________ Contact Person: ________________ 
# People Consulted: Female: ____  (under 25) ___ (Over 25__)   Men: ___ (Under 25) ___ (Over 25__)  
Name of Surveyor: ____________________________          Date: ______________________________ 
EXPLAIN PURPOSE OF PROJECT AND CONSULTATION: SEE TALKING POINTS 
A. Water Quantity/Supply  
 
Possible GESI Impacts: 
 Inequity - some people have access to water, others do not; 
 Conflicts within families/communities or between family’s communities over water; 
 Food insecurity (i.e., reduced yield from crops, fisheries and/or livestock); 
  Reduced livelihoods (i.e., reduced income from market sales; handicrafts, job loss; failed 
enterprises); 
 People leave the community due to water problems. 
   
1. Where does the community get their water from?  
Purpose 
During normal weather patterns 
During droughts 
Drinking 
 
 
Cooking 
 
 
Bathing 
 
 
Crops 
 
 
Livestock 
 
 
 
2. Does everyone in the community have a household water supply?  Yes ____ No ____ 
 
If NO, how many households do not have working rain water tanks? 
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________ 
3. Is water for sale in the community or nearby? Yes ______ No ______ 
 
   If YES, approx what % of community purchases regularly? 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Approx amount purchased per family monthly? _____________Cost per unit ___________ 
4. Is there currently a water shortage in the community? Yes ____ No _____  
   If YES, when did the shortage start? 
________________________________________________________________________________

=== PAGE 153 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
45
 
5. How many families have moved out of the community over past 5 years? _______ 
Where did they go? 
_________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________ 
6. 
What are the main reasons why people move out of the community? 
_________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________ 
7. Has anyone moved out of the community due to water problems? Yes ____ No ______ 
8.  What are the main sources of income for the community?  
Source 
Average amount earned per 
household in 3 month period during 
normal weather conditions  
Average amount earned per 
household in 3 month period 
during drought periods 
Copra 
 
 
 
Food Crops 
  
 
 
Handicrafts 
 
 
 
 
Livestock 
 
 
 
 
Tourism 
 
 
 
 
Other (specify)  
 
 
 
B. Water Collection 
 
Possible GESI Impacts: 
 Increased time required for water collection can effect workloads/other 
responsibilities – i.e., children   miss school, parents spend less time on child/home 
care, subsistence and livelihood activities; 
 Changes in water source can lead to safety or security issues 
 Changes in water source can create access issues for some – i.e., elderly, PWDs, 
pregnant women. 
 
9.  Who is mostly responsible for water collection in the community/family? 
 
Women ____Men ____Youth (male) ____ (female) ___Children (boys) ___  (girls) ____    
10.  Are there any concerns about safety or security en route or at water source? Yes___ 
No____  If YES, what concerns?

=== PAGE 154 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
46
 
_____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________ 
If YES, has action been taken to address concerns? Yes  ____  No  ____    
Are safety issues resolved now? Yes  ____  No  ____    
 
How were these issues resolved?  
_____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________ 
C. Water Quality 
 
Possible GESI Impacts 
 Increased health problems (i.e., dehydration, diarrhea, eye problems, skin disorders, 
typhoid, and dinghy) for most vulnerable groups (i.e., young children, pregnant and 
lactating women, elderly, PWDs). 
 
11. Do you think your water is safe to drink?      Yes ____   No  _____    Sometimes _____ 
 
If No or Sometimes: When and why is water not safe? 
_________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________ 
12.   Do people boil water from rain water tanks and ground water for the following 
purposes? 
Purpose 
Rain Water  
Ground Water 
Always 
Sometimes 
Never 
Always 
Sometimes 
Never 
Drinking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Food prep 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13. Do people add a disinfectant from rain water tanks and ground water for the following 
purposes?  
Purpose 
Rain Water 
Ground Water 
Always 
Sometimes 
Never 
Always 
Sometimes 
Never 
Drinking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Food prep 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 If YES, what is added to the water? 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
 
14. Do people filter water from rain water tanks and ground water for the following 
purposes?  
Purpose 
Rain Water 
Ground Water 
Always 
Sometimes 
Never 
Always 
Sometimes 
Never 
Drinking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Food prep 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.  Do people get sick from drinking the water?   Yes ____    No ____   Sometimes _____

=== PAGE 155 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
47
 
 
If YES, who gets sick most?______________________________  How often? _______ 
 
If YES, what kinds of illnesses? _____________________________________________ 
 
If YES, do people usually seek medical treatment? Yes ____  No ____Sometimes _____ 
If NO, why not? 
______________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
D. Water and Sanitation Infrastructure 
Possible GESI impacts: 
 Water supply is not easily accessible for some people (i.e., children, elderly, 
PWDs) 
 Latrines are inaccessible for some people  
 Latrines offer insufficient privacy and security 
 Latrines do not provide water for hygiene (i.e. MHM) 
 
16. What public water sources are available in the community (excluding household level)? 
Type of Water 
Source (tanks, 
wells, ROs) 
Location 
Who has access to 
this source? 
Who does not have 
access to this source and 
reasons why? 
Condition and 
quality of 
water from 
this source* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               * Working (W); Not working (NW); Clean (C); Polluted (P); Salty (S) 
17. If additional water supply sources were made available to the community for public use, 
where would these sources be best located? Why? Possible issues arising? 
Where in Community 
Reasons Why 
Possible access or other issues? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18. About how many householders in the community do not have toilets in house? 
_________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________ 
Where do these people go for toileting purposes? 
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________ 
Does this create any issues in the community?

=== PAGE 156 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
48
 
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________ 
 
19.  How many public toilets are available in the community? __________ 
 
  
   Location 
Number 
and type 
of toilet  
Source of 
water for 
flushing  
Who has access 
to this toilet? 
Who does not have 
access to this toilet 
and reasons why? 
Working or 
(W) or Not 
in Working 
(NW)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20. If additional toilets were made available in the community for public use, where should 
these be located? Why?  
Where in Community 
Reasons Why 
Possible access or other issues? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21. FOR WOMEN’S CONSULTATIONS ONLY 
 
a. How do water shortages affect women and school girls during menstruation? 
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________ 
b. Any impacts on school attendance or performance related to menstruation? Yes__ No __ 
If YES, explain impacts 
_______________________________________________________________________________ 
_______________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________ 
 
c. Any impacts on women and girl’s health related to menstruation? Yes___No _____ 
If YES, explain impacts 
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________ 
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________

=== PAGE 157 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
49
 
 d. Any impacts on women and girls due to lack of access toilets (home, school or 
community) during menstruation? Yes____ No _____ 
If YES, explain impacts 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________ 
 e. Are there any cultural restrictions related to water for women/girls during 
menstruation? Yes____ No __ If YES, explain 
________________________________________________________________________ 
E. Water Management 
Possible GESI impacts: 
i.Island and community-level decision-making processes re water use/access exclude 
women and other vulnerable groups resulting in needs not considered/addressed; 
ii. Island and community-level decision-making processes re maintenance exclude 
women and other vulnerable groups resulting in needs not considered/addressed; 
iii.Island and community-level decision-making processes re new infrastructure exclude 
women and other vulnerable groups resulting in needs not considered/addressed. 
22. Who makes decisions re water use at household level?  Men__Women __ Both ___ 
                                                                   at community level? Men ___Women ___Both ___ 
 
 
  
23.  Is there ever conflict over water use at household level?       Yes____   No ____       
  
 
                                           at community level?     Yes ____  No  ____    
  
 
 
 
  
If YES, what are the arguments about? How do they get resolved? Are there long-lasting effects on 
relationships? 
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________ 
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________ 
24.  Are the women or men surveyed generally happy with the way decisions about water 
are made at community level? Yes ____ No ____ 
If NO, why not? __________________________________________________________ 
If NO, what could be done to make decision-making processes better for everyone? 
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
25. How is the community informed when a draught is expected? 
________________________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________ 
  Is this warning system effective? Yes ____ No _____ 
 If No, Reasons why not: ____________________________________________________________ 
 
_______________________________________________________________________________ 
 If NO, what could be done to improve the effectiveness of early warning system?  
_________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________ 
26.  What does the community do when water levels are getting low? (restrictions, rationing)

=== PAGE 158 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
50
 
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
F. 
Community Services 
Possible GESI impacts: 
 Schools unable to provide proper education due to inadequate water supply/quality 
which negative affects attendance and performance of students and teachers; 
 Health care centers unable to provide proper health services due to inadequate water 
supply/quality leads to patients not seeking treatment; 
 Other community services, including businesses, unable to function properly leading to 
reduction in goods and services available and lost revenue 
 
27. Are there any impacts on school(s) when water supply is low (attendance and 
performance)? Yes  ____  No ____  
If YES, what impacts (specify name of school, # of students affected in 2016 drought): 
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
28. Are there any impacts on the health care center(s) when water is low? Yes ___No ___ 
If YES, what impacts (specify name of heath care center and services affected in 2016 drought): 
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
29. Are any other community/island services affected when water is low? Yes ___ No ___  
If YES, specify what services were impacted in 2016 drought): 
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________ 
 
G. Main Concerns and Proposed Solutions 
30.   What does the group think are the main WATER/WASH related problems in the 
community? 
1.________________________________________________________________________ 
2.________________________________________________________________________ 
3.________________________________________________________________________ 
4.________________________________________________________________________ 
 5. _______________________________________________________________________ 
31.   What does the group think are best ways to improve WATER/WASH issues in the 
community? 
1. ________________________________________________________________________ 
2. ________________________________________________________________________ 
3._________________________________________________________________________ 
4. ________________________________________________________________________ 
32. Other comments

=== PAGE 159 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
51
 
________________________________________________________________________________ 
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________

=== PAGE 160 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
52
 
ANNEX 3 
Student Consultation Survey Form 
 
Management of WASH in Schools 
Interviewer (s): 
 
Time: 
Date: 
Survey Approach / Method 
Group 
Interview 
/ 
Focus 
Groups  
(Teachers , Students, PTA, Maintenance) 
1. Island / Atoll: 
 
1.1 District 
 
1.2 
Name 
of 
LLG: 
 
1.3 Name of School 
 
1.4 
Name 
of 
Village: 
 
1.5 School Population (M/F 
in age groups) 
 
2.Level of 
Assessment: 
Preliminary 
Assessment 
3. Evaluation Focus: 
WASH  
4. Method used: 
UNICEF Rapid Monitoring of WASH in School Bottlenecks  
5. Group make up: (take 
group photo) 
Total Male: 
Total Female: 
School Children: 
 
Table 1: Water 
 
Questions / Observations 
Yes 
No 
Notes 
Water. A functional and child-friendly water point is available at or near the school that provides a sufficient quantity 
of water that is safe for drinking 
W1. An improved water source is available at or within 
1500ft (500 meters) of the school 
 
 
 
W2. The water source is currently functioning and water is 
available at the school 
 
 
 
W3. Drinking water has been available to students at all 
times during the past week 
 
 
 
W4. When the water source is functional, it provides enough 
water for the needs of the school including drinking, 
handwashing & food preparation 
 
 
 
W5. There is evidence that water is safe for consumption 
 
 
 
W6. The drinking water facilities are accessible to young 
children and students with disabilities 
 
 
 
 
Notes: 
W1. Based on Joint Monitoring Program definitions6, improved water sources include water piped to taps or public 
stands, protected wells and springs, boreholes, rainwater, and bottled water if there is another water source for washing, 
cooking and other needs. 
W5. Examples of evidence include: the presence of covered filters with a safe mechanism for accessing water such as 
a tap, presence of chlorine residual (0.2- 0.5 mg/L free chlorine), or absence of faecal or thermotolerant coliforms in 100 
mL.

=== PAGE 161 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
53

=== PAGE 162 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
54
 
Table 2: Sanitation 
Questions / Observations 
Yes 
No 
Notes 
Sanitation. The number of improved and functional toilets and urinals meet national standards and are 
clean and child-friendly 
S1. The school has improved toilet facilities 
 
 
 
S2. At least 75% of toilets are functional 
 
 
 
S3. The number of functional toilets and urinals meet 
national standards 
 
 
 
S4. At least 75% of functioning toilets are clean 
 
 
 
S5. There are separate toilets for boys and girls 
 
 
 
S6. There are toilets accessible to students with 
physical disabilities 
 
 
 
S7. There are toilets available for younger children 
 
 
 
S8. Individual toilet compartments are lockable from 
the inside and secure 
 
 
 
S9. Private facilities are available for girls during 
menstruation 
 
 
 
 
Notes: 
S1. Improved toilet facilities include traditional pit latrines, ventilated improved pit (VIP) latrines, flush and pour-flush 
toilets, and composting toilets 
S2. “Functional” defined as useable with no major physical problems. The %age can be changed based on program 
goals. 
S3. World Health Organization guidelines may be used in the absence of national standards: no more than 25 girls per 
toilet and 50 boys per toilet and urinal (every 50 cm of urinal wall = 1 urinal)7 
S4. “Clean” defined as free of faeces on the seat / wall / floor, no large amounts of urine, dirt or litter, no strong bad 
smell, and no significant fly problem. The %age can be changed based on program goals. 
S7. Toilets for younger children should have a smaller drop hole, squat plate or lower toilet, low door handle, and the 
compartment should not be so dark it frightens children 
S9. Private washing facilities for cloth napkins or private disposal for disposable napkins

=== PAGE 163 ===
Annex XIII (c) –Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL
55
Table 3: Hygiene 
Questions / Observations 
Yes 
No 
Notes 
Hygiene. Functional and child-friendly handwashing facilities and soap (or ash) are always available to students, and 
there is quality hygiene education at the school 
H1. The school has handwashing facilities 
H2. At least 75% of handwashing facilities are 
functioning with water currently available 
H3. The number of functioning handwashing facilities 
meets national standards 
H4. Sufficient soap (or ash) is currently available at a 
convenient location for student use 
H5. Soap and water have always been available to 
students in the past week 
H6. Handwashing facilities are accessible to children 
with physical disabilities 
H7. Handwashing facilities are accessible to younger 
children 
H8. Hygiene is taught at the school 
H9. There is a designated time period allotted to 
students to wash their hands before eating
H10. Students have heard about WASH topics in class 
in the past month
H11. Posters or other hygiene promotion materials are 
seen in the school
H12. At least one teacher has attended a training or 
workshop on hygiene education in the past year
Notes: 
H1. Handwashing facilities can be a faucet with running water, a container with tap, bucket with dipper and basin, or 
another similar mechanism. 
H8. Mark yes if, hygiene education is provided through special lessons, part of life skills training, or part of the regular 
curriculum, and includes at least some instruction on handwashing with soap or ash 
__________
