=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.12.20034
producer: Adobe PDF Library 19.12.66
creationDate: D:20190612143821+09'00'
modDate: D:20190613093938+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
6 – 8 July 2019 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 20 
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
14 June 2019 
Consideration of funding proposals - 
Addendum III 
Funding proposal package for FP109 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled “Safeguarding rural communities and their physical and
economic assets from climate induced disasters in Timor-Leste”;
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
c)
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d) Secretariat’s assessment;
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
f)
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page b 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
102 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
103 
Secretariat’s assessment 
106 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
122 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
131 
Gender documentation 
134

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme Title: 
Safeguarding rural communities and their physical and 
economic assets from climate induced disasters in Timor-
Leste 
Country/Region: Timor Leste 
Accredited Entity: United Nations Development Programme 
Date of Submission: 24 May 2019

=== PAGE 4 ===
Contents 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
Section C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
Section F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
Section G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
Section H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
Section I 
ANNEXES 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
•
Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to other project documents
such as project appraisal document.
•
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50.
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“[FP]-[Agency Short Name]-[Date]-[Serial Number]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 99 A 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information
A.1.1. Project / programme title
Safeguarding rural communities and their physical 
assets from climate induced disasters in Timor-Leste 
A.1.2. Project or programme
Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region
Timor-Leste/ Asia and the Pacific 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies)
National Directorate for Climate Change, Ministry of 
Commerce, Industry and Environment (MCIE) of 
Government of Timor-Leste 
A.1.5. Accredited entity
United Nations Development Programme 
A.1.5.a. Access modality
☐Direct
☒International
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary
Executing Entity: Ministry of Commerce, Industry and 
Environment (General Directorate for Environment) 
Beneficiary: Approximately 175,840 direct beneficiaries in the 
6 target municipalities (15% of total population). 
Beneficiary institutions: Ministry of State Administration 
(MSA); Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (MAF) and 
Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Environment (MCIE); 
Ministry of Public Work, Transport and Communication 
(MoPTC); Ministry of Social Solidarity (MSS) and Sub-
National Authority (Baucau, Ermera, Aileu, Viqueque, 
Lautem and Liquica Municipalities).   
Averted economic losses equivalent to 11.5% of GDP; 
Introduction of new knowledge and skills including design, 
construction and maintenance (for at least 1,500 engineers 
and practitioners nationally) in climate proofing of small-scale 
rural infrastructure, essential for local resilience.  Training and 
upskilling of 1,500 practitioners, engineers, contractors in 
climate proofing of infrastructure;  
130 climate proofed small-scale rural infrastructure units (47 
Road slope stabilization projects (216.94 km); 38 Water 
Supply Systems; 25 Irrigation systems (54.18km); 20 flood 
defenses (14.15 km)) for a total value $25.68 Million USD 
which includes $12.5 Million co-financing from MSA, resulting 
in increased access of rural communities to essential services 
such as education, health services and access to market, and 
reduced exposure to climate-induced hazards;  
Environmental Co-benefits: 300 ha of degraded land 
rehabilitated and protected from erosion, landside and flood 
risk from climate variability and change, benefitting 
infrastructure and improving livelihoods, by agroforestry (100 
has reforested state lands, 100 ha agroforestry on state lands, 
and 100 ha of agroforestry on farmland). 23,412 households 
with improved and climate resilient livelihoods through 
implementation of agroforestry. A further 1200ha of 
reforestation and agroforestry from MAF co-financing.  
☐Micro (≤10)
☐Small (10<x≤50)

=== PAGE 6 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 99 
 
A 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD) 
☒  Medium (50<x≤250)  
☐  Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus 
☐  Mitigation 
☒  Adaptation ☐  Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission 
23 June 2018; 19 November 2018; 29 November 2018; 6 
December 2018; 17 December 2018; 15 March 2019; 13 
May 2019; 24 May 2019 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details 
Contact person, position 
Keti Chachibaia 
Regional Technical Specialist 
Organization 
United Nations Development Programme 
Email address 
keti.chachibaia@undp.org 
Telephone number 
+66 2 304 9100 ext. 5091 
Mailing address 
United Nations Service Building 
Rajdamnern Nok Avenue, Bangkok 10200 Thailand 
 
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from: 
☐ 
Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ 
Low emission transport  
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)   
☐ 
Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ 
Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.) 
 
Increased resilience of: 
☒ 
Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.) 
☐ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.) 
☒ 
Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.) 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
 
☒ 
 
 
 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words) 
 
1. Approximately 70% of Timor-Leste’s rural population (840,000 people) is highly vulnerable to climate changes, 
particularly increasing variability of rainfall and extreme weather events. Lives and livelihoods in the remote interior 
of the country and coastal regions are both highly exposed. Impacts of intensified extreme events include damage 
and degradation of decentralized small-scale critical infrastructure, particularly water supply and drainage structures, 
embankments, and feeder roads and bridges. Damages leave rural populations isolated, lacking basic services. 
According to climate change scenarios and risk models, occurrences of climate extremes and related damages will 
at least double towards mid-century.  
 
2. The project objective is to safeguard vulnerable communities and their physical assets from climate change-induced 
disasters. It aims to address existing institutional, financial and legislative barriers, increasing the climate resilience

=== PAGE 7 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 99 A 
of vulnerable small-scale rural infrastructure. Output 1 focuses on strengthening the capacity of mandated institutions 
to assess and manage climate risks in order to maintain local infrastructure services. GCF-funded activities will 
embed new skills, technologies, and innovative methods in climate risk identification and mitigation processes. 
Monitoring and recording of climate risk information will be enhanced, and these data will be integrated into policies, 
standards, guidelines, and long-term investment planning for small-scale rural infrastructure. Output 2 focuses on 
implementing climate resilient building measures to improve small-scale rural infrastructure in vulnerable areas1. GCF 
funds will assist in the development and implementation of catchment management strategies, supporting long-term 
resilience and climate risk reduction via landscape restoration and enhanced land stability, particularly in vulnerable 
catchments where small-scale infrastructure is present.   
3. The project targets 175,840 direct beneficiaries, an estimated 15% of the total population. Benefits include increased
climate resilience for small-scale infrastructure as well as 300 ha of reforested and rehabilitated land to buffer against
climate-induced disasters. The project will ensure long-term infrastructure resilience via (i) embedding climate
resilience standards into the processes through which small-scale infrastructure is planned, designed, constructed
and maintained; (ii) improving climate hazard and risk assessment capacity and access to climate risk information.
This project was developed at the request and full support of the NDA. All proposed interventions are aligned with
the national determined contributions for adaptation, the National Adaptation Programme of Action, and strategic
development plans. The project further ensures country ownership through strong stakeholder and community
engagement components.
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) 
23 June 2018 
Expected financial close (if applicable) 
TBD [Date of agreement on the FAA between UNDP and GCF] 
Estimated implementation start and end date 
Start: 01/03/2020 
End:  28/02/2026 
Project/programme lifespan 
Project Implementation: 6 years 
Benefit Stream: 20 years  
1 Small-scale rural infrastructure provision usually consists of a large number of comparatively small investments over a defined small 
geographical area and is therefore treated as a single sector in its own right, and is governed, financed and managed through 
decentralized sources and public services as a single sector.

=== PAGE 8 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 99 
 
B 
 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme 
4. The Government of Timor Leste is seeking grant financing for the proposed priority adaptation investments to 
safeguard vulnerable rural communities and their physical and economic assets from climate change induced 
disasters. The project will invest in 6 target municipalities that are highly susceptible to the identified climate hazards. 
5. The proposed measures are intended to lift barriers and strengthen capacity at all levels and do not lend themselves 
to reflow back to the government or private sector, hence requiring maximum concessionality in GCF grant financing. 
Small-scale infrastructure is designed, constructed, and maintained by the government. GCF funds will be used to 
scale up successful risk-based adaptation methods and technologies in order to “climate-proof” small-scale rural 
infrastructure and secure it against climate-induced hazards. GCF funds will complement public financing from the 
District Investment Development Plan (PDIM) at the municipal level and the National Programme for Suco 
Development (PNDS) at the suco, or village, level to provide decentralized infrastructure services in the most climate 
vulnerable districts of the country.  
6. GCF funds will be complemented by co-financing of USD $37.087 million from 5 main sources.  
(i) 
First, the Government of Timor Leste has pledged annual Ministry of State Administration budget 
support of $12.5 Million USD in cash for PDIM and PNDS projects over 5 years from year 2 to year 6. This 
will be channelled towards covering the base cost of 64 small scale rural infrastructure units. These are 
baseline investments that will be supplemented by climate-proofing via GCF funding. These funds are 
leveraged from the total PDIM and PNDS budget allocations towards the most exposed units in the most 
climate vulnerable districts (as identified during the feasibility phase) whereby climate risk criteria and a 
potential to mobilize GCF climate funds influenced the government prioritization of the districts and units as 
a result of the proposed project.  
(ii) 
Government of Timor Leste has also pledged annual Ministry of State Administration budget support of 
annual Operations & Maintenance costs for the 130 resilient infrastructure units. Total O&M commitment 
(including both O&M during project implementation and post-project O&M) of GoTL is 29.4 Million USD for 
20 years, out of which $7.187 Million USD covers year 3 to year 6 during project implementation and 
therefore is included as project co-financing. The remaining $22.213 Million USD would cover post project 
O&M for the next 16 years after project implementation and is not included as project co-financing (see Annex 
III(b) O&M Plan for further details). Therefore, the Ministry of State Administration total project co-financing 
is $41.9 Million USD.   
(iii) 
Government of Timor Leste annual Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries budget support of $12 Million 
USD for support of agroforestry and reforestation of approximately 137 ha in the 6 target municipalities, which 
will include purchase of seedlings, labour for the establishment of plantations and the maintenance over 5 
years (detailed under Output 2) 
(iv) 
Government of Timor Leste annual Ministry of Social Solidarity support of $5 Million USD for disaster 
risk management (DRM) activities in the 6 municipalities over 5 years from year 2 to year 6. This will include 
enhancing DRM, using the hazard maps, damage and loss systems and asset condition inspection tools 
developed by the project, and MSS’s strengthening capacity to provide effective local-level DRM with regard 
to safeguarding communities and infrastructure assets.  This includes measures of preparedness, 
prevention, mitigation, as part of the programme of National Disaster Operation Center (NDOC), which will 
incorporate the new hazard and risk maps into preparedness planning and prevention, and implement the 
DRMapp as part of asset management and mitigation of disaster impact; and 
(v) 
UNDP co-financing – $0.4 Million USD in cash will be used for project management costs.  
7. Operations and Maintenance for each the 130 infrastructure units has been calculated for a 20-year period and 
includes recurring annual and periodic maintenance2 based on total 20-year maintenance prorated costs across the 
                                                             
2 Please see individual infrastructure unit tabs in excel spreadsheets XIII (h) 2-5, Ranking tab of excel file XIII (h) 1 and tables in 
O&M Plan Annex XIII (b), for the profile of maintenance costs for each infrastructure unit over 20 years.

=== PAGE 9 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 99 
 
B 
20 years in line with international standards of assigning annual and periodic maintenance costs3.  O&M for the 20-
year lifespan (25 years in the case of road and irrigation schemes) of the individual infrastructure units has also been 
included in the economics analysis of the viability of each infrastructure unit, and calculation of overall project viability, 
in line with standard international engineering best practice. The government commitment for O&M, is for a period of 
20-years as is reflected in the GoTL O&M commitment letter (Annex IV(b)) which ensures O&M during the duration 
of the project (years 3-6) and beyond (years 6-20).  Please see Section D2 - Exit Strategy and Annex XII (b) for more 
detail on the O&M strategy. 
8. A breakdown of cost estimates by sub-component/Activity is provided below4 
Output 
Activity 
GCF 
funding 
amount 
(USD) 
Govt. Co-
financing 
amount 
(USD) 
UNDP Co-
financing 
amount 
(USD) 
Amount for 
Entire 
Project 
(USD) 
Output 1:  Climate risk 
information is 
developed, monitored 
and integrated into 
policies, regulations 
and institutions to 
inform climate resilient 
small-scale rural 
infrastructure planning 
and management 
Activity 1.1 - Develop and deliver 
climate risk information services and 
vulnerability mapping to all sectoral 
institutions 
1,883,515 
- 
- 
1,883,515 
Activity 1.2 - Establish a database 
system for monitoring, recording and 
accounting climate induced damages 
in order to inform climate risk reduction 
planning and budgeting 
790,512 
4,470,057 
- 
5,260,569 
Activity 1.3 - Refine ordinances, 
regulations and associated codes and 
standards to enable climate proofing 
small-scale rural infrastructure 
573,233 
- 
- 
573,233 
Total Output 1 
3,247,260 
4,470,057 
- 
7,717,317 
 
Output 2: Climate risk 
reduction and climate-
proofing measures for 
small-scale rural 
infrastructure are 
implemented to build 
the resilience of 
vulnerable 
communities in six 
priority districts 
  
Activity 2.1 - Climate risk reduction 
measures for small-scale rural 
infrastructure are fully integrated into 
the planning and budgeting cycles of 
Village and Municipal development 
plans 
1,186,049 
- 
- 
1,186,049 
Activity 2.2 - Implementation of 
climate-proofing measures for small-
scale rural infrastructure 
14,128,803 
19,687,062 
- 
33,815,865 
Activity 2.3 - Supporting catchment 
management and rehabilitation 
measures to enhance climate resilient 
infrastructure and communities. 
3,129,732 
12,000,000 
- 
15,129,732 
Total Output 2 
18,444,584 
31,687,062 
- 
50,131,646 
Project Management Cost 
664,961 
529,943 
400,000 
1,594,904 
Total project financing 
22,356,805 
36,687,062 
400,000 
59,443,867 
 
                                                             
3 E.g. ILO states: “Whilst the cost of rural road maintenance is small relative to the asset value, it is crucial that maintenance is 
carried out on a timely and regular basis. Consequently, it is a recurrent activity and needs to be financed as such”.  
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---asia/---ro-bangkok/documents/publication/wcms_100030.pdf  
4 The Accredited Entity (AE) fee for the proposed project is at 7% or US$1,564,976.35. The budget figures presented in this proposal 
excludes the fee.

=== PAGE 10 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 99 
 
B 
Please see Annex XIII(f) for the GCF budget breakdown by expenditure type (project staff and consultants, travel, goods, services, 
etc.) and disbursement schedule. The currency of disbursement is USD.

=== PAGE 11 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 99 
 
B 
B.2. Project Financing Information 
 
Financial Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing 
(a) = (b) + (c) 
59.444 
million USD ($) 
 
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient 
 
(i) Senior Loans 
(ii) Subordinated Loans 
(iii) Equity 
(iv) Guarantees 
(v) Reimbursable 
grants * 
(vi) Grants * 
 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
22.357 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
million USD ($) 
(  )  years 
(  )  years 
 
 
 
 
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR 
 
 
 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1 for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E. 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi) 
22.357 
Options 
 
(c) Co-
financing to 
recipient 
 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Name of 
Institution 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Grant 
Grant 
Grant 
Grant 
Grant 
 
0.400 
12.500 
12.000 
5.000 
7.187 
 
million USD ($) 
million USD ($) 
million USD ($) 
million USD ($) 
million USD ($) 
 
UNDP 
MSA 
MAF 
MSS 
GoTL 
(  )  years 
(  )  years 
 
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Lead financing institution: not applicable  
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co-financing institution. 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable) 
N/A 
 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable) 
N/A

=== PAGE 12 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 99 
 
C 
C.1. Strategic Context 
 
9. Timor Leste is a least developed country5 and post-conflict society with a fast-growing population. The country 
remains dependent upon subsistence agriculture. Increasing climatic variability and unpredictability, particularly in 
relation to rainfall and extreme weather events, presents a significant risk to the lives and livelihoods of rural people. 
Timor Leste is prone to a number of climate-induced hazards including floods, landslides, and drought which result 
in frequent loss of lives and livelihoods. Impacts of intensified extreme events on critical rural infrastructure include 
damage and degradation of assets such as water supply and drainage structures, embankments and river 
protections, and community-level feeder roads and bridges. These damages leave rural populations without basic 
services and often in full isolation. Timor Leste’s Initial National Communication to UNFCCC (INC, 2014) recognizes 
two possible major impacts of climate change, including (a) a shift in seasonal and latitudinal precipitation patterns, 
and (b) an increase in the frequency and scale of extreme weather events. Climate change is expected to result in 
a more intense dry season and wet seasons characterised by fewer but more intense events, including El Niño 
events that may become more severe. These changes may exacerbate existing problems with drought, floods, and 
water quality. Water management infrastructure such as water storage, water supply and flood defence infrastructure 
is increasingly exposed to climate change impacts, thus necessitating additional and more resilient infrastructure as 
climate patterns change. 
 
Climate change in Timor Leste 
 
10. Temperature and Rainfall: Timor Leste’s Initial National Communication (INC) June 2014, under the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), recognizes two possible major impacts of climate change 
including: (i) a shift in seasonal and latitudinal precipitation patterns, and (ii) an increase in the frequency and scale 
of extreme weather events. Based on the analysis of historical data and the results of climate scenarios generated 
with both the Regional Climate Model (RCM) using the A1B emission scenario 20 Global Circulation Models (GCMs) 
using new emission scenarios, and Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs)6In Timor Leste:  
• 
Temperature has been increasing consistently by around 0.016 degrees Celsius per year (INC, 2014). Prior 
to the 2040s, the mean temperature anomalies in Timor Leste are expected to increase by up to as much 
as 1°C for all emission scenarios. Projections based on IPCC AR4 CMIP3 models with SRES scenarios 
show that the mean temperatures during the 2041-60 and 2061- 2080 periods are expected to increase from 
the current temperature between 1.5°C and 1.8°C and between 2.1°C and 2.7°C respectively. For the high 
emission scenario (RCP8.5) the increase in temperature relative to current conditions may reach 3°C by 
2100, while for the low emission scenario (RCP2.6) it may increase by up to 0.5°C. 
• 
Rainfall has been showing a downward-trend in the dry season and upward-trend in the rainy season in the 
last few decades. Rainfall is predicted to continue to decrease in the dry season and increase in the wet 
season with overall rainfall increasing by 7–13% by 2050. The most considerable increase is expected to 
occur in the June/ July/ August season during the 2041-60 period. The seasonal rainfall climatology in 
September/ October/ November is predicted to be drier than the historical baseline, especially in the 2061-
80 period. In general, the seasonal rainfall climatology in the region will be much wetter during 2041-60 than 
the 2061-80 periods. 
• 
Rainfall variability is also predicted to increase. In the future, the wet season onset may be delayed by about 
20 days from the current climate pattern, while dry season onset may be delayed by as much as 11 days, 
depending on the period and emission scenarios. In addition, the drier area on the northern coast of the 
country (annual rainfall less than 1000 mm) will expand in the future. These changes in both spatial and 
temporal rainfall distribution will have significant impact on the water balance.  
                                                             
5 Timor Leste has a UN Human Development Index of 0.595 and ranks 133 out of 188 countries 
6 Climate change assessments from the INC and other studies provides the evidence basis for the climate change discussion

=== PAGE 13 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 99 
 
C 
• 
Extreme rainfall events such as tropical cyclones are expected to decrease in frequency but increase in 
intensity7. Furthermore, an increase in rainfall is predicted for areas of high altitude. For example, the 
mountainous districts are projected to experience higher increase in rainfall during the wet season8. Since 
climate change is expected to result in a drier dry season and wetter wet season, intense events and El Niño 
events may become more severe. These changes are expected to increase intensities of droughts and 
floods.  
 
11. Climate change-induced hydro-meteorological hazards: Geographically, Timor-Leste is exposed to several kinds of 
natural hazards, which include frequent events such as tropical cyclones, riverine flooding, drought, and landslides 
as well as rarer events (such as earthquakes and tsunamis). The most prominent and frequent hazard types in the 
country’s recent history include floods, landslides, and drought (prolonged dry spells). An assessment of the impact 
of climate-induced hydro-meteorological hazards on Timor-Leste under both baseline and climate change scenarios 
has been completed based on existing national-scale hazard maps and detailed socio-economic data on hazard 
receptors (including people, property, agriculture and infrastructure such as roads, bridges, and water supply).9 This 
assessment shows that, under climate change, there will be an increase in the number of areas and key infrastructure 
affected for all hazards. In most cases, at least a doubling of hazard-affected areas in percentage terms is expected. 
On average, the increase in impact of each hazard between the baseline and climate change scenarios nationally is 
26.3%, 21%, 55.4%, and 55.8% for landslides, floods, erosion, and drought risk, respectively. The economic losses 
that could occur under climate change range from USD $203 Million, $37 Million, $10 Million, and $12.5 Million for 
landslides, floods, erosion, and droughts, respectively10. These losses will impose significant additional financial 
burden on the government and affected population. At the same time, the frequency and intensity of climate extremes 
and disasters will necessitate additional infrastructure maintenance measures while also increasing the demand for 
additional protective features to be embedded into the design of new construction. These effects, in combination, will 
considerably increase the cost of construction, operations and maintenance of rural infrastructure. The implicit 
additional cost cannot be absorbed by local authorities or the general population and remains the responsibility of 
the government. 
 
Climate change impacts 
 
12. Climate-induced impacts on agricultural productivity. Agriculture is the most important socioeconomic sector in East 
Timor, accounting for approximately 75% of employment. The projected year-to-year variability and drier dry seasons 
will impact water resources and availability, increasing vulnerability to drought, in particular, in the absence of 
minimal water resource infrastructure for storage. In addition, with expected increases in rainfall in wet seasons, 
certain areas, such as the southern side of the country, will be further exposed to climate change-induced flooding. 
For example, Cova Lima, Manufahi, and Viqueque each receive more rainfall than northern districts, and experience 
two wet seasons each year. These events also increase the vulnerability of existing infrastructure further 
exacerbating water insecurity for agricultural productivity. Furthermore, rainfall variability and extreme events are 
expected to increase the intensity of runoff from the country’s mostly steep terrain further exacerbating soil erosion, 
incidence of landslides and flash flooding and low soil fertility for crop production. Limited land in mountainous areas 
means that fallow periods are short, resulting in declining yields which are further exacerbated by soil erosion and 
nutrient depletion, both of which will increase with climate change. 
 
13. Given the heavy reliance on subsistence agriculture to survive, the population is therefore vulnerable to climate-
induced hazards such as floods and droughts which lead to crop failures. Lack of water in the dry season is 
                                                             
7 Wallace, L. Sundaram, B. Brodie, R.S. Marshal, S. Dawson, S. Jaycock, J. Stewart, G and Furness L. 2012. Vulnerability assessment 
of climate change impacts on groundwater resources in Timor-Leste. Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency, Australian 
Government. Available at:  
https://www.environment.gov.au/system/files/resources/3bf4aa02-6fa1-4c84-8f52-64773a63cfa9/files/groundwater-timor-leste-
report.pdf 
8 Moss, J. & McGann, M. October, 2011. Climate Change and Energy Poverty in Timor-Leste. University of Melbourne, Social Justice 
Initiative. 
9 In developing the baseline and climate change risk assessment and damages and losses assessment, existing hazard maps were 
used and climate change impacts were inferred by assuming a worsening of the hazard categories (e.g. baseline medium hazard will 
become high hazard) etc. This enabled quantification of potential climate risks and impacts and is based on the best available 
information at project design stage.  Note:  Irrigation infrastructure data was not available so it is not included in the analysis. Note:  
Irrigation infrastructure data was not available so it is not included in the analysis. 
10 Detailed socio-economic risk assessment is provided in Section 2.9 of the Feasibility Study (Annex II)

=== PAGE 14 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 99 
 
C 
increasingly affecting agricultural production. Drought in 2001 to 2002, and the late arrival of the wet season in 2002 
to 2003 resulted in an estimated 34% decline in maize production between 2002 and 2003. As a result, 110,000 
people were identified as needing food aid, particularly in the drier maize producing districts of Aileu, Ainaro, Ermera, 
and Liquica. Overall, a potential loss equivalent to 6.7% of combined gross domestic product (GDP) per year by mid-
century due to climate change impacts, is expected. Most agriculture, including maize is unirrigated, making it 
vulnerable to drought and irregular rainfall. Irrigation is also a critical input for rice production. However, most of 
these systems operate in the wet season only, due to insufficient water in the dry season; therefore, increased rainfall 
variability is expected to affect rice production, especially without the necessary investments required to build the 
resilience of water infrastructure to climate change. Rice crops in flood prone areas may also experience reduced 
production in the future because of increased flood events, while increased temperature may result in increased 
evaporation of water from paddies. 
 
14. Climate change impacts on coastal and small-scale, rural infrastructure: Climate change is expected to intensify 
coastal flooding and erosion adversely impacting infrastructure such as buildings and roads, agricultural activity, and 
lead to increase in shoreline retreat. Additionally, natural hazards can cause substantial damage to the country’s 
fragile infrastructure and buildings which deteriorate over time by exposure to natural hazards (i.e. slow on-set 
hazards, coupled with poor maintenance) as well as injury and fatality to residents when natural hazards occur as 
disasters or high intensity events. More specifically, vulnerability is most prevalent in the decentralized rural 
infrastructure sector within Timor-Leste. Managed at a local level, this sector consists of a large number of 
comparatively small investments located in small geographical areas. Due to significant differences in size, scale and 
typological features between large scale centralized and small-scale decentralized infrastructure, the latter is treated 
as a single sector, financed through decentralized mechanisms of municipal and village level public finance. The rural 
infrastructure assets in this sector are characterized as small-scale units that have interconnected uses, rely on the 
same resources (eg. shared water source, shared land and shared topographic challenges), and thus are subject to 
impacts from interrelated climate hazards. Specifically, the most dominant climate risks to rural small-scale 
infrastructure are from flash floods, landslides, soil erosion, flooding and drought; and risks will only increase through 
the gradual intensification of these hazards due to climate change. Further detailed information on the physical and 
economic losses incurred from climate change and detailed analysis of risks due to climate-induced hazards are 
summarized in Section B.2 and further detailed out in Annex II Feasibility Study. 
 
15. The exposure of rural communities to climate-induced disasters within Timor-Leste’s is exacerbated by un-favourable 
socio-economic conditions, limited access to infrastructure and services and limited adaptive capacity and resilience 
to enable effective response to or recovery from such disasters, which further deepens their deprivation. Women are 
notably at risk because of their comparatively limited education, income and ability to influence decision-making.   
 
Social and economic vulnerability 
 
16. The degree of geographic isolation/lack of access to urban areas coupled with socio-economic conditions 
demonstrates that most rural settlements in the country are highly vulnerable to climate change induced risks. Of 
the 89 sucos (villages) with the lowest living standards, the average share of households with electricity is only 3%. 
This compares with an average share of 66% in the 89 sucos with the highest living standards11. Access to improved 
water and improved sanitation is also much higher in sucos with high living standards.  
 
17. In addition to asset, social and infrastructure indexes, capacity to cope is also an important index of vulnerability. 
When coping capacity is considered, the analysis shows that the impact of climate change is dependent on the size 
of the change (the increase in % of the municipality which will be affected by the highest category of the particular 
hazard) as well as the coping capacity for that municipality. This analysis points to the need to enhance the coping 
capacity of communities. In addition, it provides a means of identifying where the enhancement of components of 
coping capacity needs to be prioritised to address the most vulnerable to climate change. In this case, that focus is 
on increasing the resilience of infrastructure assets. 
 
18. When the impact of climate change with coping capacity considerations is assessed for each receptor type (roads, 
agriculture, water sources, houses) and taking all hazards into consideration, the following municipalities have 
emerged as the most vulnerable: Baucau, Ermera, Aileu, Viqueque Lautem and Liquica. The assessment of 
                                                             
11 Asian Development Bank, 2013.  ‘Least Developed Sucos Timor Leste’

=== PAGE 15 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 99 
 
C 
impact of climate-induced hydrometeorological hazards on rural infrastructure in Timor Leste, conducted during the 
Feasibility Study, has shown an increase of frequency of hazard occurrence and severity of impact under climate 
change.  Severity of impact was shown to be dependent on the ability of communities to cope with hazards. The 
analysis shows that the increase in the areas affected as well as the number and length of key infrastructure 
affected, increases for all municipalities and for all hazards, with the worse affected municipalities being the 6 
target municipalities.  
 
National and Sector Policy Context 
19. The Government of Timor Leste (GoTL) Strategic Development Plan (SDP 2011-2030) 12 sets out government 
priorities, strategies, and actions covering three key areas: social capital, infrastructure development, and economic 
development.  A central pillar of the GoTL’s Strategic Development Plan (2011-2030) is the building and 
maintenance of core and productive infrastructure to address the large infrastructure deficit and to enable Timor 
Leste to develop economically and socially.   
 
20. District Investment and Village Investment Plans (PDIM and PNDS) outline small-scale rural infrastructure 
development priorities with an aim to address the current infrastructure deficit in rural settings. PDIM and PNDS 
provide secured annual budgets for small-scale rural infrastructure; however, this sector’s work proves particularly 
challenging as it provides decentralized infrastructure services in the interior of the country in the context of complex 
mountain terrain susceptible to climate hazards. Climate hazard risk reduction and mitigation are critical to include 
in construction and maintenance stages of small-scale rural infrastructure development.    
 
21. According to Timor Leste’s NDC, priority adaptation measures will be focused on reducing adverse effects of climate 
change, promoting sustainable development, and reducing poverty. This is anticipated to be accomplished by 
employing new, as well as building on existing, strategies and plans across all sectors within Timor-Leste - including 
the National Priorities process. Stated NDC priorities include: Development of integrated agroforestry and watershed 
management including climate change dimensions; implementation of integrated, sustainable land management 
promoting fixed/permanent agriculture; reduced burning; reduced erosion and increased soil fertility; reforestation of 
degraded land to prevent landslides and provide a sustainable fuel wood source in priority areas with high 
vulnerability to climate-related risks; and improved physical infrastructure/civil engineering and natural vegetation 
methods to prevent landslides in hill sites, roads and river banks. 
 
22. Timor Leste’s National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) (2010), aims to implement the action plan to 
reduce the vulnerability of Timor-Leste to the consequences of climate change in all key sectors, through three cross-
cutting strategic approaches. These approaches are to be embedded in all sectoral projects and programmes 
emerging from the NAPA process: 
 
• Capacity development and institutional strengthening for stakeholders in matters related to adaptation to climate 
change and climate variability; 
• The demonstration of new ideas and techniques through field based interventions that improve the resilience of 
the population and ecosystems; and 
• Information, education, and communication campaigns for stakeholders on the risks due to climate change and 
climate variability. 
 
23. The draft National Climate Change Policy intends to provide policy guidance to mainstream climate change into 
development policies and prioritize climate resilience in development plans. The draft policy specifies the need to 
promote climate resilience and climate proofing approaches in small-, medium- and large-scale infrastructure 
development, as well as the need to create a platform for better coordination between climate change adaptation 
and disaster risk management interventions. Furthermore, the draft policy highlights the need for vulnerability 
assessments and disaster risk assessments to complement the information on existing and potential loss and 
damage incurred by the climate change. The importance of decentralization is highlighted to emphasize the need 
for integration of climate resilience into different levels of governance. Though the policy remains in draft form, it 
provides direction and places a strong emphasis on addressing priority adaptation needs, including resilient 
infrastructure services, to safeguard communities and their assets.  
                                                             
12 Section 2.7 of the FS (Annex 2 of the FP) provides a detailed discussion on the infrastructure priorities set out in in the SDP

=== PAGE 16 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 99 
 
C 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
 
24. Vulnerable small-scale rural infrastructure assets in Timor Leste include water supply systems, rural road and bridges, 
flood defences, and irrigation systems. These infrastructure units have small geographic footprints, are often 
embedded within a community, and are highly exposed to climate hazards including flash floods, landslides, soil 
erosion, flooding and drought. According to the data recorded in the Desinventar damage and loss database, flooding 
affects the highest number of people and infrastructure units in the country, with drought and landslides second. 
Physical damages and economic losses to rural infrastructure due to these hazards are likely to increase with climate 
change. More specifically, under climate change and with coping strategies taken into account, flood damages to 
property13 in the 6 identified target municipalities could total $9.9 Million USD (25% national total). From a single flood 
event under climate change, crop income could drop $0.5 Million USD (50% national total), while 41 irrigation systems 
(66.6% of the national total) and 13 water sources (34% national total) would be affected. Likewise, property damage 
due to landslides in the 6 target municipalities would be $117.4 Million USD (63% national total), while crop income 
could drop $8.3 Million USD (62.4% national total) from a single landslide event. Crop income losses from erosion in 
the 6 target municipalities would be $5.33 Million USD (54% of national total), while 53 Water Supply systems (37% 
of national total) and 205 Irrigation systems (65% national total) would be affected. Crop income losses from drought 
in the 6 target municipalities would be $6.7 Million USD (54% of national total), while 64 Water Supply systems (33% 
of national total) and 279 Irrigation systems (70% national total) would be affected.  
 
25. In addition, the design and application of existing infrastructure and construction standards is not climate resilient, 
and there is limited investment in operation and maintenance. This is exacerbating exposure and resulting in the 
failure of infrastructure services, an essential factor in the development of rural communities. Impacts include isolation 
of communities when roads and bridges are damaged by localized extreme events, reduction in water yields due to 
droughts, contamination of unprotected water sources, flooding of communities due to inadequate flood defences. In 
addition, the institutional and financial capacity of local administrations and communities to adapt to the changing 
situation is weak. This includes the ability of municipality planning officials, engineers, and decision makers to identify 
areas that are critically vulnerable to climate hazards, to draw the links between ecosystems/catchment management 
and infrastructure development, and to identify, appraise, prioritize, design, cost and ‘budget in’ resilience measures. 
 
Baseline Investment 
 
26. With a full recognition for these vulnerabilities, the Government of Timor Leste is actively investing in infrastructure 
development to deliver essential services. The government has prioritized national and municipal rural roads and 
bridges, water and sanitation and drainage systems as critical infrastructure units for development. A central pillar of 
the Strategic Development Plan (SDP) 2011-2030 is the building and maintenance of core and productive 
infrastructure. It is therefore critical to ensure that these investments are carried out in full recognition of climate 
change-induced risks in order to secure the long-term longevity of their services to local communities.  
 
27. The value of government expenditure on roads and bridges amounted to $253.6 million USD, or 16% of total 
government expenditure on infrastructure in the last five years. Expenditure on irrigation in the same period was 
relatively modest, at $14.4 million USD, or less than 1% of total expenditure. However, irrigation forms a strong basis 
for the achievement of the SDP’s objective of rice self-sufficiency, and national expenditures on irrigation were 
supplemented by donor financing.14 The level of expenditure on roads and bridges is forecast to increase, both in 
nominal terms and as a proportion of total expenditure on infrastructure, over the next five years. The allocated budget 
of $516.3 million USD for the development of roads and bridges during this period represents a substantial investment 
for Timor Leste, and is likely to be in excess of sustainable levels of $78 million USD per year.  
 
28. The driver for irrigation schemes in Timor-Leste is rice production. The government strategy on the development and 
rehabilitation of irrigation schemes has been justified on the basis of the need to increase rice products to safeguard 
flood security. The GoTL Strategic Development Plan (SDP) 2011-2030 states that Timor Leste is aiming to increase 
                                                             
13 Property damage is used as a general indictor of vulnerability but property (houses) is not under consideration as infrastructure to 
be climate proofed.   
14 Ministry of Finance, WB (2015) “Timor-Leste – Public Expenditure Review”. The level of expenditure on electricity is budgeted to 
be much lower over the next five years than in the past. This is because the construction of two major power plants (Betano and Hera) 
and the majority of the national grid had already been completed by the end of 2013.

=== PAGE 17 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 99 
 
C 
the area of irrigated rice by 40% (from 50,000 hectares to 70,000 hectares) by 2020, which would require significant 
investment in rehabilitating and extending irrigation systems and improving water storage. The level of expenditure 
on irrigation is budgeted to increase from $14.4 million USD in the period from 2008 to 2013 to $46.5 million USD 
over the next five years, with plans for expenditure to a value of ten times that. The total value of expenditure in the 
period from 2008 to 2013 on irrigation, including financing provided by development partners, amounted to $83 million 
USD. Furthermore, agriculture sector plans under preparation suggest spending of up to $438 million USD on river-
based irrigation, including the construction of large dams.15.  These investments are mainly aimed at large scale 
irrigation infrastructure.  However, a World Bank review of the SDP (2011-2030) highlighted a number of issues.  The 
WB review found that in the period from 2003 to 2013, US$82 million had been invested by donor and government 
in the rehabilitation of a number of large irrigation schemes, but only resulted in modest increases in levels of rice 
production, which confirmed negative EIRRs derived for the irrigation strategy. The review found that only small 
community based irrigation schemes have generated acceptable EIRRs, suggesting that the irrigation 
strategy to support increased rice production is best achieved through these small community-based 
schemes.  It recommended that the more cost-effective irrigation strategy would involve the use of TWSPS to supply 
supplementary wet and dry irrigation season water, together with the implementation of the current river WBRD 
irrigation strategy.  A Seeds of Life review found that the proposed use of river diversion irrigation schemes will 
cost about $38.40 million per year ($480Mt) more than an alternative approach based on tube-wells and the 
use of small pumps, plus more intensive use of production inputs and marketing services.  Seeds of Life 
Review also concluded that the economic cost of growing rice in Timor-Leste would be less than the cost of importing 
rice; about $440/Mt compared with $660/Mt using TWSPs systems, and by using an intensive “ricebowl” 
approach to irrigated rice production, rather than the current scattered “every district must have irrigation 
approach” would also reduce the cost of growing irrigated rice.   
 
29. At the village and municipal levels, essential small-scale rural infrastructure investment is made via public funding 
under the PDIM16 and PNDS17 planning instruments (the local level planning and implementation processes). These 
processes have prioritised investments in small-scale rural infrastructure through the government budgetary 
allocations since 2011. Local budgets under PDIM and PNDS are annually planned and spent, ranging between 
$10.7 million and $76.9 million USD depending on the composition of target districts (see detailed breakdown in FS 
Chapter 6).  
 
30. Since the start of the PDIM and PNDS process in 2011, 1,474 projects have been undertaken in the 6 target 
municipalities, accounting for about 49% of all PDIM and PNDS projects nationally. In addition, between 2014-2017, 
international donor-funded climate-resilience projects totalled $3.76 Million USD or 25.5% of the total donor funded 
projects nationally.   
 
 
31. These infrastructure investments18 are not systematically informed or guided by rigorous and comprehensive climate 
resilient strategies, although some climate-proofing standards have been applied on large scale sectoral 
investments19. As infrastructure density increases, it will only leave much greater value of assets exposed to climate 
change-induced hydro-meteorological hazards. Furthermore, another critical gap is that overall national climate risk 
reduction strategies are weak and lacking.  Without a comprehensive climate risk management framework and 
                                                             
15 Ministry of Finance, WB (2015) “Timor-Leste – Public Expenditure Review”. 
16 Maximum allocation of $150,000 USD per project (municipality level) 
17 Maximum allocation of $50,000 per project (village level) 
18 Please see Annex 2 of the Feasibility Study for a list of projects with climate resilience elements, funded by international funding 
bodies 
19 WB, IFC, and ADB investments do follow internal standards of climate proofing however, without embedding necessary institutional 
capacities and policy conditions into the national government as to enforce such standards in future, neither are these done to support 
the O&M requirements. These are simply beyond the scope of such loan programmes. 
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017 Total
PDD: $ 44.3 M
PDD: $ 64.5 M PDID: $ 71.5 M PDID: $ 76.9 M
PDID: $ 2
8.3 M
PDIM: $ 2
3 M
PDIM: $ 10.7 
M
$ 319 M
PDL: $ 3.5 M
PDL: $ 6.2 M
PNDS: $ 6.5 M
PNDS : $13.6 M
PNDS: $ 1
7.8 M
PNDS $ 10
 M
PNDS: $ 400,0
00.00 
$ 58 M
$ 377 M
Total Allocation for PNDS,PDID projects  from 2011 - 2017: 377M 
Budgetary Allocation for PDID and PNDS project 2011 - 2017
Total

=== PAGE 18 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 99 
 
C 
corresponding local enforcement capacities these investments can further disrupt already fragile land systems and 
contribute to much greater exposure to hazards and their consequences. 
 
Adaptation Solution 
 
32. Timor Leste urgently needs to safeguard communities and their physical assets from climate change-induced 
disasters. To enhance the climate resilience of the decentralized small-scale infrastructure sector, the government 
requires the knowledge, skills and capacity to secure functional longevity of the infrastructure under the conditions of 
a changing climate. Main threats to infrastructure assets include physical damage or destruction caused by extreme 
weather events; coastal flooding and inundation from sea level rise; changes in patterns of water availability; and 
effects of higher temperature on the overall performance of infrastructure. Climate change will affect all of these 
threats, and thus will impact where infrastructure is built and how it is designed and operated. Provision of 
decentralized infrastructure services therefore requires appropriate decentralized management tools and sufficient 
resources at the local level to effectively plan and supervise the development of infrastructure services. Such a 
system will rely heavily on local resources including labour, materials, communities and small contractors, and can 
draw on rural participatory methods for infrastructure planning, labour-based technology, community and small-scale 
contracting and maintenance. 
 
33. Additionally, slope and land stability are foundational conditions for infrastructure stability. Changes in land use, in 
particular, affects watershed functions (drainage control, erosion processes and landslide susceptibility) that may 
increase exposure and aggravate consequences of hydrometerological hazards at the catchment scale. These 
complex factors of infrastructure engineering and land use change in the context of catchment management need to 
be brought together as an integrated solution to a long-term resilience of people and their assets. Relying solely on 
engineering solutions of climate proofing is no longer sufficient given the level of uncertainties and how little we know 
about future climate change impacts in the long term. Furthermore, a focus on engineering solutions only may 
considerably increase costs. For example, without improving the broader climate risk reduction framework there 
would be a need for additional infrastructure dedicated to climate protection, such as sea defences or flood protection 
measures. In addition, more infrastructure is being developed within catchments which are experiencing increasing 
and intensifying hazardous natural processes due to climate change. Therefore, even investments in climate proofing 
and maintenance will become increasingly expensive and less effective with time, unless the catchment processes 
themselves are adapted to climate change through land rehabilitation and management at the catchment scale.  
Therefore, the normative solution will ultimately focus on the reduction in exposure to hazards as the way to avoid 
escalation of infrastructure development costs, via effectively combining the engineering solutions of climate proofing 
assets with sustainable land use choices to increase land stability and risk reduction. Thus, arresting erosion 
processes and combatting land degradation through community-driven and climate compatible land use choices is 
the key to the long term resilience of target communities and their physical and economic assets. Land use choices 
that are conducive to catchment rehabilitation and protection will be stimulated through climate responsive activities 
such as community agroforestry, alleviating pressure on the natural environment and reversing deforestation and 
land degradation. Furthermore, municipal finance options for climate resilient infrastructure and catchment 
management will ensure the long term financial sustainability of the proposed adaptation alternative.  
 
34. The following climate proofing measures will be applied to the 4 target infrastructure types of decentralized small-
scale rural infrastructure:   
 
• 
Revegetating land around rural water supply systems. Climate-resilience approaches will include 
revegetating land around water sources, formalising informal sources (putting in pipes and collection/storage 
systems to enhance environmental protection and supply dependability), installation of standpipes in villages, 
and connection to existing sources in order to project water supply systems in light of climate change impacts. 
• 
Rehabilitation of rural bridges and slope stabilization of rural road corridors. Climate-resilience 
approaches will include: rehabilitation of bridges that are usually washed away in the rainy season using climate 
resilient materials; protection of bridge openings with bioengineering methods (e.g. Vetivier grass); slope 
stabilization through implementation of sustainable structural measures (such as gabion baskets, vegetation of 
road corridors with bioengineering material like Vetivier grass, vegetation of road embankments, and re-sizing 
of drainage systems) that accommodate baseline levels of flows and projects levels of flow due to climate 
change.

=== PAGE 19 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 99 
 
C 
• 
Installation of rural flood defences to withstand climate change impacts.  Climate-resilience approaches 
will include design and installation of flood defences to withstand the increasing frequency and intensity of floods 
due to climate change. The designs will include bioengineering methods to protect flood embankments from 
climate-induced erosion where possible.  
• 
Formalization of existing and new rural irrigation systems. Climate-resilience approaches will include 
formalisation of existing or newly installed rural irrigation schemes (including water storage systems) to store 
water for use in prolonged dry seasons and mitigate against intensified droughts that are projected to occur with 
climate change. With this intervention, the efficiency and stability of rural water supply for crop production will 
be secured and made resilient to climate risks of intensified droughts which will enhance the resilience of local 
agricultural system. In supporting only small community based irrigation schemes which include climate proofing, 
the project is also aligned with the finding that only these types of schemes are economically viable.  
 
35. The proposed adaptation solution will enable transformational change by adopting a strategy to address the 
increasing costs of maintaining functional longevity of small-scale rural infrastructure under the mounting threats from 
climate change. If the current baseline is continued without the proposed interventions, not only will the recovery 
costs of reconstructing and maintaining vulnerable rural infrastructure progressively increase, but the local 
communities that are reliant these key rural systems will be put at imminent risk due to the intensifying impacts of 
climate change on these exposed rural areas. However, as an alternative pathway, GCF resources can reduce the 
impacts of climate risks by delivering climate proofed, site-specific, engineering designs that will be combined with 
bioengineering efforts and restoration of the catchment ecosystems within which these physical assets are located. 
This alternative pathway reduces not only the risk of losses and damages, but also the cost of construction and 
operations and maintenance compared to the baseline pathway. In addition, this alternative delivers significant 
auxiliary social, economic and environmental benefits. In this way, the proposed adaptation solution will create a 
paradigm shift in local and national practices by introducing a cost-efficient and climate-resilient pathway that enables 
the long-term protection of rural communities and systems to the increasing risks brought by climate change.  
 
Barriers 
 
36. To achieve the above adaptation alternative, there are a number of barriers, summarized below, that need to be 
overcome. 
 
Incomplete policies, standards and regulations that limit the implementation of climate resilient small-scale rural 
infrastructure  
  
37. The policies and laws governing climate change are established, such as draft National Climate Change policy and 
DRM Policy as well as some sectoral policies that include consideration of climate change. However, there remains 
regulatory and legislative limitation in implementing the climate change interventions prescribed in these draft policies. 
Moreover, several deficiencies and gaps in the enabling environment governing the implementation of infrastructure 
remain, which need to be addressed in order to embed climate resilience into the design, construction and 
maintenance of small scale rural infrastructure. The National Disaster Risk Management Policy, adopted in 2008, 
commits both the sectoral ministries and local communities, including suco (village) and aldeia (sub-village) chiefs to 
engage in both ex post and ex ante risk reduction. This policy covers a shift from traditional crisis response 
management to disaster, conflict, and climate change risk management. However, it remains too broad and is not 
guided by locally-specific information. In the absence of rigorous hazard and risk mapping as well as a damage 
accounting system, it is difficult to identify, plan, cost, and budget for risk reduction investments, especially in relation 
to physical infrastructure. Furthermore, sector ministries and local administrations are not guided by detailed 
operation protocols to effectively implement disaster risk reduction and climate resilience measures. Thus, the rural 
infrastructure that is being built may increase levels of exposure and risks of adverse impacts.  
 
Limited technical capacity to engineer climate proofing measures to infrastructure 
 
38. Technical capacity for compiling and analysing climate data for informing risk reduction practice is nascent. This 
includes capacities for producing hazard, risk and vulnerability maps and forecast bulletins.  There is ongoing support

=== PAGE 20 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 99 
 
C 
for Timor Leste to upgrade and modernize the hydrometeorology observation network both nationally 20  and 
regionally21.  However, currently much of the meteorological and forecasting data for informing climate risk and 
vulnerability is available from regional centres such as the Regional Integrated Multi-Hazard Early Warning System 
for Africa and Asia (RIMES) or the Australian Bureau of Meteorology, and data products focused on Timor Leste are 
limited. Planning institutions are, therefore, limited to inadequate and outdated information when planning for future 
climate change scenarios and climate-induced disasters.  
 
39. Risk management practitioners at the national and sub-national levels are not able to use seasonal and long-term 
forecasts of climatic conditions to inform probabilistic assessments of risks posed by climate-induced disasters to 
infrastructure. Without such risk assessments, tailored measures for disaster and climate risk management cannot 
be developed. Specifically, with respect to compiling: i) climate risk assessments; ii) vulnerability assessments; iii) 
damage and loss assessments; vi) economic valuations that underpin different sectoral, national and subnational 
plans; and v) contingency planning, there is currently a lack of capability at national and sub-national levels. Without 
these necessary skills, it will not be possible for effective planning and implementation of climate change adaptation 
to support climate proofing of infrastructure in Timor Leste. Furthermore, engineering skills and knowledge of climate 
proofing is nearly non-existent. All key types of practitioners within the climate disaster management and 
infrastructure planning and development fields currently lack capacities to be able to systematically identify and 
assess climate-induced hazards or to include climate proofing measures in infrastructure design and construction. 
Equipment, Verification, Evaluation and Supervision (EVAS) engineers that support village and municipal 
infrastructure development investments under the Ministry of State Administration have no training or re-training 
opportunities in climate proofing, neither are they guided by technical manuals or codes or standards to apply and 
adhere to.  There are not innovative technologies for physical damage and risk assessment (e.g. Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicles (UAV) drone technology for ground-truthing and verifying physical damage) available or used. Such 
equipment and technology would complement the observation network, enable more frequent surveys in remote and 
challenging topography, and enable rapid post-event damage and loss surveys and assessments.  Such ground 
truthing approaches are particularly needed to conduct infrastructure and damage and loss assessments, and are 
particularly effective to understand the general context in an island setting.   
 
Weak capacity of municipal and village level institutions to plan, implement, and maintain network rural 
infrastructure that is resilient to the increasing impacts of climate change 
 
40. The sectoral legislative and institutional enabling environment does not currently take a risk-informed cross-sectoral 
approach to addressing and incorporating climate change considerations. This has resulted in poor spatial planning, 
land use water resource management, and disaster risk management - all of which significantly affect the ability to 
plan and develop climate resilient infrastructure. Already weak institutional functions and capacities at 
national/centralized levels are even weaker at district/municipal and village (suco) level. All stages of the District 
Investment Development Plan (PDIM) planning  must embed climate risk reduction criteria for decision-making  - 
from suco-level prioritization, to reviews at administrative post and municipal levels, and clearances at the Ministries 
of State Administration and Strategic Planning and Investment through their joint technical committee. The PDIM 
manual currently does not include detailed guidelines for climate resilient infrastructure development. There is no 
standard operating procedure (SOP) for infrastructure use and maintenance that considers emerging conditions of 
climate change. Spatially expressed risk information at various timescales is not available to the PDIM planners and 
engineers to reference their siting decisions, choices of construction materials, and engineering designs in response 
to existing vulnerabilities and projected risks. Furthermore, there is a lack of capacity at municipal level for designing 
climate resilient infrastructure. Climate risk-informed District Investment Development Plan (PDIM) and National 
Programme for Suco Development (PNDS) processes are critical for resilient development of local communities and 
infrastructure services.  
 
                                                             
20 For example, GIZ has been implementing the project ‘Global Climate Change Alliance’ (GCCA-TL) in Timor Leste since 2013 which 
has improved capacity of the Agriculture and Land Use Geographic Information System (ALGIS) to collect, analyse and share agro-
met data.  10 out of 12 ALGIS weather stations (AWS) are operational, a monthly edition of MAF Agro-meteorological Bulletin based 
on ground data is produced. 
21 WMO is working with the government and civil society partners in Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Timor-Leste and 
Vanuatu to develop a potential Green Climate Fund (GCF) project that aims to markedly improve the countries’ Early Warning Systems 
“EWS Enhancing EWSs to build greater resilience to hydro and meteorological hazards in Pacific SIDS”

=== PAGE 21 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 99 
 
C 
Limited options for financing climate resilient decentralized small-scale rural infrastructure at sub-national level 
 
41. When planning and implementing infrastructure investments through municipal / district and village development 
planning mechanisms, broader landscape and ecosystem functions are not systematically considered a viable 
strategy to safeguard the investments. In both the short- and long-term, investments in ecosystems can protect and 
sustain built infrastructure and human livelihoods22,23,24. However, the allocation of development resources in Timor 
Leste is focused on physical infrastructure. Consequently, the value of ecosystem-based approaches to climate risk 
management is overlooked. The local planning process does not consider management of watersheds, especially 
where areas requiring management are larger than individual sucos (villages). In such cases, watershed 
management activities would not be considered in the suco plans nor be brought up to the district plans. However, 
recognition of the watershed as a planning entity is beginning; the National Directorate for Forestry has initiated the 
process of developing watershed management plans for select sucos.  
 
42. The economic deprivation of rural communities and lack of alternative livelihoods leads to harmful land use practices 
resulting in land degradation. There are currently no incentives for local communities to rehabilitate degraded 
watersheds and adopt land use and livelihood practices that contribute to sustainable management of land and 
forests, neither do the communities have any investment resources to engage in adaptive land use and livelihood 
activities. Thus, substantial areas of land have been cleared of vegetation in Timor Leste and are under-utilized. At 
least 30% of land area is suitable for tree growing. However, this potential is not used to stabilize the land or reduce 
hazard risks to the communities and infrastructure, nor is it utilize to unlock the socio-economic potential of 
agroforestry to enhance livelihoods. Furthermore, current PDIM and PNDS do not have funding criteria or requirement 
to embed additional cost of climate risk reduction to physical and economic assets. Hence there is currently no 
understanding of the investment requirements for climate proofing infrastructure under climate change conditions 
due to the lack of climate risk information and methods on which to base such investment planning. These have 
traditionally followed the annual investment planning cycle which is not conducive to embedding long term adaptation 
objectives25. However, there are policy prerequisites to integrate climate and disaster risk management into these 
decentralized planning mechanisms that requires adequate enforcement capacities.    
 
43. The combination of these four key barriers has hindered particularly vulnerable communities from effectively planning, 
establishing and utilizing approaches to protect and build the resilience of their physical and economic assets in the 
face of climate change. The proposed GCF project seeks to use the proposed adaptation alternative as a barrier-
removal approach that will enable transformation and paradigm-shift in the current baseline towards a climate-resilient 
future. 
 
C.3. Project / Programme Description 
 
44. The main objective of this project is to safeguard vulnerable communities and their physical assets from climate 
change-induced disasters. First, the project will strengthen technical capacities of mandated institutions to assess 
and manage the risks of climate-induced physical damages and economic losses as well as integrate climate resilient 
measures into policies and planning. GCF funds will be used to embed new technical skills, improve availability of 
risk information, and create effective response mechanisms. Second, the project will implement climate risk reduction 
and climate-proofing measures for small-scale rural infrastructure in order to build the resilience of vulnerable 
communities in six priority districts. GCF funds will be used to introduce engineering skills and implement ecosystem 
based adaptation approaches for climate proofing of small-scale rural infrastructure that are essential to reducing 
prevalent social and economic vulnerabilities that will only worsen with climate change. In addition, GCF resources 
                                                             
22 Doswald et al. 2014. Effectiveness of ecosystem-based approaches for adaptation: review of the evidence base. Climate and 
Development. DOI: 10.1080/17565529.23013.867247.  
23 Highland, L.M. & Bobrowsky. 2008. The landslide handbook – A guide to understanding landslides. U.S. Geological Survey Circular 
1325. Reston, Virginia. 
24 Rao et al. 2012. A comparative analysis of ecosystem–based adaptation and engineering options for Lami Town, Fiji. A synthesis 
report by the Secretariat of the Paciﬁc Regional Environment Programme. 
25 PDIM legal framework has been recently amended in 2016 in line with the deconcentrating/decentralization program that allows re-
appropriation of the unspent budget. This new amendment allows administrative units to carry funds beyond the year of allocation. 
The decision on this appropriation is through consultation between the administration unit. The municipal and the line ministries 
responsible for the program to the following year

=== PAGE 22 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 99 
 
C 
will be invested in the development and implementation of catchment management strategies, which will support 
landscape restoration and land stability as climate risk reduction and long-term resilience measures. The 
rehabilitation activities will be undertaken in the catchment areas located in the areas of small-scale infrastructure 
units. 
 
45. The project is supporting an ongoing decentralized investment framework which is administered through the PDIM 
and PNDS processes, by embedding the knowledge of climate risks and skills of climate proofing design, 
construction, operation and maintenance of rural infrastructure.26  Through the project, local authorities’ capacity for 
climate-risk informed development of long-term investment plans will be enhanced, thereby strengthening de-
centralized decision-making. Human resource capacity in managing climate risks to local development funding 
(including technical capacity for assessing proposals, ensuring performance standards, conducting safety, 
environmental impact and cost-effective evaluations of proposals, and monitoring local development projects) will be 
enhanced. The project is addressing the current gap in technical expertise in the target districts by developing a long-
term capacity and resourcing plan and implementing training (including training of trainers, TOTs) focused on 
specialised climate proofing expertise for local experts, including architects and structural engineers. The project is 
also doing the following: strengthening the enabling environment and ensuring the availability and use of gender 
responsive climate risk and vulnerability data to inform risk assessments and the prioritisation of infrastructure; raising 
awareness and knowledge on the possible localized impacts of climate change on vulnerable livelihoods; embedding 
the use of site-specific natural systems in sustaining built systems and engaging communities to do so through 
catchment management and agroforestry, thus enhancing livelihoods; enabling engagement of local planners with 
communities through joint analysis of risks and changes in risk over time; enabling participation of households and 
communities in local development planning processes; and embedding long-term operations and maintenance 
arrangements with local participation to ensure long term sustainability of infrastructure, service delivery and local 
governance. The project is therefore addressing many of the current limitations of the decentralised investment 
framework to deal with climate risks to physical assets, as detailed in Section 6.3 of the Feasibility Study.      
 
46. The following outputs will be delivered: 
 
• 
Output 1: Climate risk information is developed, monitored and integrated into policies, regulations and 
institutions to inform climate resilient small-scale rural infrastructure planning and management 
• 
Output 2: Climate risk reduction and climate-proofing measures for small-scale rural infrastructure are 
implemented to build the resilience of vulnerable communities in six priority districts 
 
Climate change drivers and impacts addressed by the project activities 
Output 
Activity 
Climate Change Drivers and Impacts 
Output 1:  Climate risk 
information is developed, 
monitored and integrated 
into policies, regulations 
and institutions to inform 
climate resilient small-
scale rural infrastructure 
planning and management 
Activity 1.1 - Develop and deliver 
climate risk information services 
and vulnerability mapping to all 
sectoral institutions 
• 
Increased temperature and decreased rainfall in dry 
season that leads to increased and intensified droughts 
which impacts water supply and agricultural production. 
• 
Increased and intensified rainfall during wet season 
leading to increased floods, landslides, and erosion 
• 
Increased rainfall variability that impacts water balance 
• 
Intensified extreme events and hazards leading to loss of 
lives, damage of property, loss of crop, damages in rural 
infrastructure (roads, bridges, and water supply) 
• 
Increased financial burden due to climate-induced 
damages and losses 
Activity 1.2 - Establish a database 
system for monitoring, recording 
and accounting climate induced 
damages in order to inform climate 
risk reduction planning and 
budgeting 
                                                             
26 In Timor-Leste, expenditure on infrastructure is implemented through three windows, these being: 1) the line ministries’ 
Consolidated Fund of Timor-Leste (CFTL) budgets; 2) the Infrastructure Fund; and 3) the District Integrated Development Plan 
(PDID), now PDIM, a district development program which includes the construction of small-scale infrastructure projects with 
budgets of less than US$500,000. At the village level, the PNDS process is used for small-scale infrastructure of less than 
$150,000. The line ministries’ CFTL budgets are used to execute projects that have budgets of a value of less than US$1 million 
and which are expected to be completed within a year. The Infrastructure Fund, a multi-year fund that was established in 2011, is 
used to execute large projects with budgets to a value in excess of US$1 million and which are expected to take more than one year 
to complete. The main goal of the PDIM and PNDS is to develop the domestic private sector, with its secondary goals being to 
create an increased number of employment opportunities in rural areas and to provide high quality infrastructure demanded by the 
local population in these areas.

=== PAGE 23 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 99 
 
C 
Activity 1.3 - Refine ordinances, 
regulations and associated codes 
and standards to enable climate 
proofing small-scale rural 
infrastructure 
  
  
Output 2: Climate risk 
reduction and climate-
proofing measures for 
small-scale rural 
infrastructure are 
implemented to build the 
resilience of vulnerable 
communities in six priority 
districts 
  
Activity 2.1 - Climate risk reduction 
measures for small-scale rural 
infrastructure are fully integrated 
into the planning and budgeting 
cycles of Village and Municipal 
development plans 
Activity 2.2- Implementation of 
climate-proofing measures for 
small-scale rural infrastructure 
• 
Increased and intensified droughts and prolonged dry 
seasons leading to water insecurity, loss of vegetation 
and loss of crops 
• 
Intensified droughts leading to the increasing uncertainty 
in yield.  
• 
Intensified extreme events leading to increased and 
intensified landslides that impact drainage and road 
stability 
• 
Increased and intensified rainfall during wet seasons 
leading to erosion and damage of flood embankments, 
and requirement for increased flood protection  
• 
Increased frequency and intensity of floods causing higher 
flood flow velocities and higher discharges that increase 
exposure and damage of roads, bridges and other rural 
infrastructure 
• 
Increased soil erosion leading to increased risk of water 
source pollution, destabilization of soil, land degradation, 
loss of crop yield and greater exposure of physical assets 
• 
Increased variability in rainfall and intensified rainfall 
during wet seasons leading to intensified runoff, soil 
erosion, landslides flash flooding and low soil fertility for 
crop production 
 
Output 1: Climate risk information is developed, monitored and integrated into policies, regulations and 
institutions to inform climate resilient small-scale rural infrastructure planning and management 
 
47. This output will address the gaps in policy, regulations, and institutional capacity to deliver climate resilient small-
scale rural infrastructure. It will do so by addressing gaps in the climate risk knowledge base through the development 
and introduction of hazard, risk and vulnerability assessment and mapping methods, technologies and tools, and 
capacity development within the main central government institutions involved in climate change adaptation and 
disaster risk management. Climate-induced hazard, risk and vulnerability maps are essential for the assessment of 
current and future hazards, for the identification of receptors such as infrastructure, people and agriculture at risk, 
and for the design of hazard management solutions that fully accounts for climate change. There is currently no 
definitive or accurate hazard and risk mapping for Timor Leste and existing national-scale hazard maps are of a 
broad-brush nature, lacking the level of technical detail on which to base comprehensive climate risk adaptation and 
disaster risk management. The strategic assessment of risk to population, infrastructure, economic activity, and future 
development under conditions of climate change is a government priority to support and guide municipalities to wisely 
and rationally manage risk exposure to acceptable levels. Under this output, the project will also address gaps in the 
legislative and policy framework by supporting the elaboration of policies, legislation, guidelines, and standards to 
embed climate change considerations across all sectors relevant to infrastructure development. Furthermore, the 
project will facilitate the dissemination and sharing of common and definitive climate risk information needed by all 
sectors to embed climate risk considerations into their functions.  The Climate Change and Biodiversity Centre 
(CCCB), established under the SSRI project, has a mandate to provide climate information services across all 
government institutions to facilitate climate responsive policies and decision-making and to undertake capacity 
building of government practitioners.  The project intends to build the capacity of the CCCB to embed necessary skills 
training (ToT) for long-term sustainable delivery of the key aspects of the capacity development plan.  
 
48. The Capacity Assessment Study funded by SSRI included a broad review of capacity deficits in all municipalities and 
provided a high-level review of capacity issues, taking full account of the training that was provided by SSRI and 
other projects.  Hence, with regard to training and other aspects of capacity development, SSRI’s main contribution 
is an in-depth capacity development needs assessment and capacity development strategy formulated for a

=== PAGE 24 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 99 
 
C 
sustainable practice of Small Scale Resilient Infrastructure – SSRI.  The UNDP-GCF project is fully guided by and 
embeds the key elements of capacity development strategy at policy, intuitional, and individual technical skill levels. 
The capacity development that had been identified for the GCF project is therefore building upon and complementary 
to that already undertaken by SSRI project and will importantly extend to other municipalities and embed capacity in 
the relevant institutions via the Training of Trainers (ToT) approaches and further development of central and 
municipality institutions within the PDIM and PNDS process.   
 
Activity 1.1. Develop and deliver climate risk information services and vulnerability mapping to all sectoral 
institutions.  
 
49. The GCF investment will be used to introduce technology, methodologies and capacities for the development of 
climate risk information and the long-term institutional capacity to undertake hazard, risk and vulnerability mapping 
in the future.  Activity 1.1 will help develop and deliver climate services such as climate hazard and risk and 
vulnerability assessments, cost-benefit assessments for adaptation solutions and related training to responsible 
public servants across mandated institutions. The hazard and risk maps will be used for risk-informed decision-
making for all aspects of development and risk management in the future. Uses will include development planning 
for zoning of development activity away from high hazards areas to avoid physical damages and economic losses to 
people, property and economic activity. Hazard and risk maps will be prepared for the whole of Timor Leste for the 4 
main hazards - floods, landslides, soil erosion, and droughts.   
 
50. This activity will introduce a bespoke GIS-based socio-economic risk model as a tool for risk assessment (including 
potential physical damage and economic losses modelling), cost-benefit analysis and the identification and appraisal 
of climate resilient intervention measures for strategic planning in the future.  The hazard will be used in combination 
with infrastructure (bridges, roads and buildings), land use (settlements, agriculture, grazing lands, and conservation 
areas), property, and socio-economic data to model the socio-economic impacts of each hazard and produce 
vulnerability maps. The resulting vulnerability maps, based on the accurate hazard mapping of the current situation, 
will form the baseline. The baseline model will form the basis of future appraisal-led disaster risk management and 
climate risk-informed infrastructure planning. Central government and infrastructure practitioners will be trained in the 
use of the hazard and risk models developed and importantly, capacity will be built to enable the updating and 
maintenance of the models. Municipality engineers will also be trained in the use of the models for appraisal-led 
infrastructure planning.   
 
51. Local field officers and village youth leaders will be trained in surveying techniques, including the use of global 
positioning systems (GPS) to undertake topographic surveys which will be required for the production and updating 
of flood risk maps and other community-based mapping for development, calibration and validation of the hazard 
maps. GPS will also be effectively used to record the coordinates of the infrastructure (as part of the asset mapping 
and asset management to be introduced in Activity 1.2) on the GIS hazard maps to inform planning and budget 
allocations. A series of technical staff trainings in climate risk modelling, mapping and vulnerability, cost benefit 
analysis (CBA) and project appraisal techniques, specifically in relation to infrastructure planning and development 
and climate-induced disaster risk management, will be delivered.   
 
Activity 1.2. Establish a database system for monitoring, recording and accounting climate induced damages in 
order to inform climate risk reduction planning and budgeting 
 
52. GCF investment will be used to strengthen systems for monitoring and recording climate-induced disaster events. 
GCF resources will allow an estimation of the economic damages caused by climate change-induced events and 
establish a database management system to monitor damages over time. These improved systems will provide 
evidence for budgeting and implementation of climate risk reduction measures, specifically in relation to community 
infrastructure services. Such an accounting system will complement the risk modelling under Activity 1.1 and together 
will help demonstrate that benefits of avoided physical damages and related economic losses can outweigh costs of 
climate proofing and risk reduction. The manual and digital templates, including the detailed guidelines and training 
for the MSS field officers on how to record damage and loss data will be developed. This will also include a mobile 
application to record the data and transmit to the central server in real time. Use of UAV technology / drones will be 
introduced to map out current hazard risk conditions effectively at the catchment scale. Climate risk profiling of such 
accuracy and scale will underpin the planning and implementation of risk reduction measures in hazardous and

=== PAGE 25 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 99 
 
C 
densely populated areas. A series of trainings will be conducted on data management and analysis and data 
management standards and protocols will be introduced. Data sharing protocols will be put in place at all Ministries 
and Directorates holding relevant data resources. This activity will provide the profile of current climate risks and a 
means of systematically recording damages realised in actual events.  Drone technology will be useful in mapping 
extent of current hazard conditions and in expediting the assessment of losses following extreme climate events.  
They will complement the observation network, enable more frequent surveys in remote and challenging topography, 
enable rapid post-event damage and loss surveys, assist in assessments and ground truthing, and provide condition 
inspections for infrastructure asset management (needed at an increasingly large scale due to the worsening impacts 
of climate change). 
 
53. The existing Desinventar database in Timor Leste contains some 1,600 records from 2001 to present; however, the 
scale and capabilities of the database needs to be expanded in order to systematically account for all physical 
damages and economic losses associated with climate hazards that will enable evidence-based planning and 
budgeting for climate proofing and risk reduction investments A Risk Management Application will be developed for 
the storage, analysis and management of disaster data. Relevant inputs and reports will be managed on a simple 
real time system available to all tracking the observation data, verification data and compensatory responses, and to 
collate and track disparate reporting. The benefits will include: rapid and simple access to data; single data storage 
database; shorter lead times from data requests to delivery; improved feedback through standard reporting; better 
ownership and accountability; transparency; data quality control; timely resource allocation (to affected area); costs 
savings for rapid assessment teams; reduced operational costs for damage and loss data collection and storage; and 
on-demand data, both to- and from- District and sub-District data from NDOC. This will greatly increase cost-efficiency 
and accuracy of developing real-time climate hazard data that is critical in informing and guiding policy design and 
planning for climate resilient rural infrastructure. 
 
54. Currently the cost of disaster risk management including an average of 10 to 15 rapid assessments per year, is 
around $600,000 USD to $1.5 million USD if site mobilisation and other items are factored in. It is estimated that the 
Risk Management Application will cost approximately $500,000 USD to develop and operationalize. Based on 
qualitative estimations, it will result in long-term savings and efficiencies in institutional processes and will improve 
quality in the service, speed of response, quality of sector data and attributes in defining the physical/socio-economic 
characteristics of the disaster/event.  It will transfer the National Disaster Operational Centres’ (NDOC’s) role from 
largely post-event compensatory to supporting more effective response during and immediately after the disaster. In 
addition, it will act as conduit for initiation and improvement of PDNA and will be validated by data collected by drones. 
 
55. GCF resources will also contribute towards the application of an asset location and condition survey method 
(developed under the UNDP-GEF/LDCF Small Scheme Rural Infrastructure project) and will establish an asset 
management database on which to base damage and loss monitoring of infrastructure.  GCF resources will also 
enable the introduction of asset inspection guidelines, methods and approaches, and will train MCIE, Ministry of 
Social Solidarity (MSS), Ministry of Public Works (MoPW) national and municipality staff in the use and maintenance 
of the datasets, and in condition inspection in order to improve effectiveness of climate proofing methods. In addition, 
the asset management database will be used for planning, costing and prioritisation of asset maintenance using 
principles of portfolio risk assessment.  The project will develop essential processes for infrastructure asset 
management including, maintaining a systematic record of individual assets (costs, original service life, remaining 
useful life, physical condition, repair and maintenance consistency); developing a defined program of planned 
maintenance of infrastructure including repair and replacement; and implementing and managing information 
systems (e.g., updating Geographic Information Systems on which the system will be based) based on surveys.  Such 
systematized asset management practice will enable effective planning and costing of climate proofing measures 
and will minimize the damages from climate hazards.  
 
Activity 1.3. Refine ordinances, regulations and associated codes and standards to enable climate proofing 
small-scale rural infrastructure 
 
56. Activity 1.3. will prepare a set of revised standards, guidelines and specifications for rural infrastructure, 
encompassing both technical and functional standards to respond to climate risk reduction requirements. The 
guidelines and SOPs for all infrastructure investments to be carried out under the municipal (PDIM) and village 
(PNDS) development plans will be developed. Trainings for the technical personnel and groups of engineers to enable 
full compliance with the revised standards and codes will be delivered. GCF investment will be used to embed climate

=== PAGE 26 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 99 
 
C 
resilience into existing sectoral plans such as the Rural Roads Master Plan & Investment Strategy 2016–2020, and 
the National Water Supply Policy and Strategic Plan, an important framework that provides the medium- to long-term 
vision for the water sector and a framework for the institutional arrangements, overall operation and management of 
DNSA and coordination with other sectoral agencies and partners. Existing technical specifications will be reviewed 
to address the climate change resilience aspects of the specifications. Existing guidelines and manuals will be 
reviewed and strengthened thereby providing guidance for technicians and engineers to develop and design projects 
that are adaptable and resilient to climate change.  In the case of small irrigation schemes, the guidelines would have 
to be developed from scratch. The existing Standard Method of Measurement (SMM) developed by Agency of 
National Development (AND) will be reviewed to ensure that it incorporates climate resilient design considerations, 
such as physical parameters and appropriate choice of materials. Other relevant and related standards that are in 
use in construction will also be developed (e.g. soil-bioengineering standards for infrastructure projects).  Once 
developed, engineers will be fully trained in the use of the new specifications, guidelines, and manuals.   
 
Output 2. Climate risk reduction and climate-proofing measures for small-scale rural infrastructure are 
implemented to build the resilience of vulnerable communities in six priority districts 
 
57. Under this output, the project will work closely with the municipal and village level government investment 
programmes, including PDIM and PNDS, to climate-proof local small infrastructure investments in the geographic 
focus areas. Actual physical investments will be accompanied by the development of essential capacities as well as 
initiation of institutional and procedural systems required for scaling up climate resilient approaches to infrastructure 
development in the country. This output builds upon the SSRI project, considering lessons learned and deepening 
the level of intervention in the municipal and village development planning processes (PDIM and PNDS) in order to 
fully embed climate resilience into infrastructure design, implementation, construction and maintenance. It will do so 
via the development of manuals, guidelines and specifications using climate risk information and methods developed 
in Output 1, for all stages of the rural infrastructure planning and implementation, and by building capacity at the local 
level for implementing these new methods.  Using the new approaches, the project will directly implement climate 
resilience measures for small-scale rural infrastructure to be rehabilitated or built within the six priority districts of 
Baucau, Ermera, Aileu, Viqueque, Lautem and Liquica following PDIM and PNDS priorities.   Furthermore, watershed 
rehabilitation and management approaches will be embedded to reduce exposure of infrastructure to climate risk and 
thus safeguard infrastructure and climate proofing investments from long-term climate change impacts. 
 
58. The identification and prioritization of climate proofing needs were undertaken as part of project design which included 
a risk assessment of the infrastructure units using the currently available national hazard maps, against which the 
existing and approved PDIM and PNDS infrastructure had also been assessed. The risk assessment was undertaken 
using a GIS-based socio-economic risk model that was developed for the preparation of this proposal. The 
assessment incorporates the hazard maps, all receptor data of existing and planned infrastructure (including roads, 
water supply systems, irrigation systems, flood defences, agricultural land, dwellings, land use categories, socio-
economic indices) based on the latest 2015 census survey, and calculates the damages and losses to infrastructure, 
agriculture, property, and livelihoods, under baseline and climate change scenarios. The results of the risk 
assessment identified the extreme hazard categories of each hazard (moderate and high severity flood risk for 
prioritization and the 1 in 100-year flood depth for design of the infrastructure; high and very high severity drought; 
moderate and high severity erosion; and high and very high intensity landslide risk) for each infrastructure unit, which 
was then used to design the specific climate proofing intervention for each infrastructure unit. Section 2.9 of the FS 
provides the detailed results of the risk assessment, while Sections 10.2 and 11.11 detail the prioritization and design 
of climate proofing for the rural infrastructure projects.  Annex 8 to the FS provides the prototype designs of climate 
proofing features of target infrastructure across all categories.        
 
Activity 2.1. Climate risk reduction measures for small-scale rural infrastructure are fully integrated into the 
planning and budgeting cycles of Village and Municipal development plans 
 
59. Activity 2.1 will introduce climate risk screening methods and embed climate risk reduction criteria across PDIM and 
PNDS planning and decision-making cycles. It will provide step-by-step guidelines for climate risk reduction measures 
for all categories of small-scale rural infrastructure through the following guidance: the PDIM manual – CAMP; 
Community-based management and maintenance – GMF manual, KAM – municipal procurement guidelines; and 
administrative post and the Ministerial Technical Committee review checklists. A team of technical staff of Equipment

=== PAGE 27 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 99 
 
C 
Verification, Evaluation and Supervision (EVAS) experts will be trained to determine the likelihood and consequences 
of risk in relation to asset (infrastructure exposure and vulnerability). Their skills to engineer climate resilient designs 
and apply various methods of bioengineering (e.g. by use of local vetiver plants to stabilize the slopes and gabion 
structures) will be developed.   
 
60. Interventions will embed the systematic use of climate hazard and risk information (to be developed under Activity 
1.1) in the PDIM project identification process to provide a more comprehensive, robust and evidence-based means 
of identifying projects at the suco level. The GCF project will provide technical assistance to Administrative Post (AP) 
staff in prioritizing projects at this level and in undertaking an appropriate level of feasibility studies on which to base 
climate-risk informed project prioritization. At the municipal level, the GCF project will also introduce climate risk 
criteria into the prioritization process and include other methods of measuring benefits of projects based on the 
introduction of appraisal-led project prioritisation using socio-economic cost-benefit analysis methods and tools to be 
developed under Activity 1.1. 
 
61. Capacity development will be provided to enhance the ability to incorporate climate-risk considerations into technical 
feasibility studies and will include introduction of investment feasibility considerations, introduction of socio-economic 
cost-benefit analysis, optioneering and options appraisal methods as well as environmental impact assessment that 
integrate climate change impact scenarios, to strengthen the feasibility process, safeguard investments and optimize 
engineering solutions.   
 
62. At the detailed design level, technical assistance will be provided to introduce climate change considerations into 
design of infrastructure to ensure that they will accommodate likely changes of environmental variables (frequency 
and intensity of occurrence) expected with climate change. Importantly, the project will train municipality engineers 
in the new climate-risk informed infrastructure detailed design methods and will include specific training in the design 
of bio-engineering methods relevant to Timor Leste.  Bioengineering capacity development will be accomplished 
through technical assistance and by providing dedicated training events.    
 
63. In order to enhance the ability of infrastructure contractors to implement climate-resilient construction, the project will 
introduce processes for pre-qualifying contractors, based on specific criteria such as certification in prior trainings on 
implementation of climate-resilient projects, experience of implementing climate-resilient projects, experience of 
contract management of such climate-resilient projects and access to engineering expertise aligned with the types of 
climate resilient measures to be built into infrastructure (such as bioengineering methods).  
 
64. The project will strengthen the monitoring capacity at Administrative Post (AP) level through the provision of 
appropriate engineering expertise during implementation. The existing AP staff will be trained in a full cycle project 
monitoring to enable compliance with new resilience standards and requirements.  The project will also seek to embed 
all training described above into appropriate centralised training centre courses by assisting with the development of 
course curriculum and certification and using training of trainers approaches. Further details can be found in Annex 
II Feasibility Study. 
 
Guidelines and Technical Specifications 
65. In order to achieve continuity and support to these new roles and functions the project will support the development 
of the following manuals and guidelines for Climate-resilient Rural Infrastructure Projects in Timor Leste (SCRIPT) 
• 
Manual/guidelines for the design and construction of rural road infrastructure – in collaboration with MSA, 
Ministry of Public Works and AND; 
• 
Manual/guidelines for the design and construction of small irrigation schemes – in collaboration with Ministry of 
Agriculture and Fisheries, Ministry of State Administration; 
• 
Manual/guidelines for the design and construction of rural water supply infrastructure – in collaboration with 
Ministry of Public Works.  
 
66. Technical specifications for rural infrastructure will be reviewed and revised to improve the quality and adaptability of 
the construction to climate change for the various infrastructure types. The Technical Specifications forming part of 
the contract documents for the design and construction of roads, bridges and drainage structures will include specific 
sections for various elements such as excavation, gravel, concrete, masonry works, drainage, retaining-walls, etc. 
There will be a review of these specifications to include of a section/chapter on climate adaptation features/elements 
of each road, bridge and drainage infrastructure asset (for example, scour-checks, check-dams, rip-raps, gabions,

=== PAGE 28 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 99 
 
C 
soil-bioengineering, etc.). The project will review existing specifications which need to be revised and improved to 
respond to changing climate and existing conditions in the ground. This may include the design for retaining walls, 
specifications for the strength of concrete in various applications, and details for reinforced concrete and masonry. 
Existing guidelines and technical specifications for water supply systems will also be reviewed and enhanced to 
include climate resilient design. 
 
67. Overall, GCF funds will be used to enhance the existing technical capacity to account for climate resilient engineering 
designs, solutions and practices that are essential for the reduction of prevalent vulnerabilities in the most climate 
vulnerable districts. In addition, GCF proceeds will be invested in the development and implementation of catchment 
management strategies, which will support landscape restoration and land stability as climate risk reduction and long-
term resilience measure. The rehabilitation activities will be undertaken in the catchment areas located in the areas 
of small-scale infrastructure units. 
 
Activity 2.2. Implementation of climate-proofing measures for small-scale rural infrastructure 
68. Small-scale rural infrastructure in the target districts and villages will be climate proofed. The key interventions 
include: revegetation of land around rural water supply systems, formalization existing and new rural irrigation 
systems, rehabilitation of rural bridges, slope stabilization of rural road corridors and installation of climate resilient 
rural flood defences (protective gates, gabions, and bio-engineered defences). Revegetating land around rural water 
supply and formalization of existing and new rural irrigation systems will address risks of changing water availability 
patterns and especially drought events. Slope stabilization of local village and municipal road corridors and 
rehabilitation of bridges will enable rural communities to overcome isolation and also have access to emergency 
evacuation routes during extreme climate events and disasters. Installation of climate resilient rural flood protection 
will create water flow control and flood risk management infrastructure. These small-scale rural infrastructure units 
will be established in the six target districts as the means to address adaptation deficit where the social vulnerabilities 
and exposure to climate risks are particularly high.  
 
69. Based on the municipal level climate change risk and vulnerability assessment undertaken in the feasibility study, the 
project will target the 5 municipalities worst affected by multiple hazards: Baucau, Ermera, Aileu, Viqueque and 
Lautem. In addition, Liquica, which is at high risk from flooding and landslides only and for two receptors (houses and 
agriculture) only, and therefore did not rank within the top 6 has been included as it represents a municipality with 
significant deficit of flood protection infrastructure and will address one of the hazards with the greatest and most 
frequent impact on communities.    
 
70. A total of 130 infrastructure units have been identified, (SSRI project investments were used as a reference for 
costing, per unit cost, including base cost for construction to be covered from municipal funds and climate proofing 
cost to be covered from GCF funds). PDIM and PNDS implementation has averaged 493 infrastructure units and $54 
Million USD per year between 2011 and 2016 nationally. Over the 5 years of infrastructure implementation, PDIM 
and PNDS investments in the 6 target municipalities will be $12.5 Million USD and this amount has been committed 
as co-financing toward the 130 infrastructure units identified for this project (see Annex IV for government co-financing 
letters).  Therefore, PDIM and PNDS co-financing will cover 49% of the investment in infrastructure and will cover the 
base cost of construction and/or rehabilitation of selected infrastructure units.  Therefore, PDIM and PNDS co-
financing will cover 49% of the investment in infrastructure and will cover the base cost of construction and/or 
rehabilitation of selected infrastructure units.  
 
71. The following chart provides a breakdown of infrastructure units by type for each Municipality 
Table 1:  Breakdown of infrastructure type and costs by municipality (FP= Flood protection; IS= Irrigation System; RR=Rural Roads; 
WS = Water Supply) 
Municipality 
FP No. 
FP Costs 
IS No. 
IS Costs 
RR No. 
RR Costs 
WS No. 
WS Costs 
Aileu 
5 
740000 
3 
325000 
14 
2447472 
3 
265000 
Baucau 
2 
525000 
7 
445000 
5 
1549973 
9 
875000 
Ermera 
1 
72900 
4 
1035000 
9 
4048800 
6 
775000 
Lautem 
4 
612500 
6 
961687 
5 
799882 
11 
745000 
Liquica 
5 
950000 
2 
600000 
9 
3784987 
3 
340000

=== PAGE 29 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 99 
 
C 
Viqueue 
3 
528750 
3 
315000 
5 
2200404 
6 
755925 
Totals 
20 
3,429,150 
25 
3,681,687 
47 
14,831,518 
38 
3,755,925 
Total Units 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
130 
Total Cost 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
25,698,28027 
 
72. In each of the target sites, a mixture of interventions will be used according to the needs of each site. The summary 
of each type of intervention and projected costs are listed in table and further detailed out in Annex II Feasibility 
Study. The proposed climate proofing interventions will directly benefit 19,751 households or 175,84028 people that 
represents 14.65% of the population of Timor Leste.   
 
Table 2: Number of infrastructure units by type that will be implemented under Activity 2.2  
Climate Proofing 
Measures 
Description 
Units 
Approximate 
Cost (USD) 
Revegetating land 
around rural water 
supply systems 
• 
Revegetating land around sources 
• 
Formalising informal sources (putting in pipes and collection/storage 
systems to enhance environmental protection and supply dependability) 
to address increasing uncertainty in yield of informal sources due to 
intensifying droughts and the increased risk of source pollution from 
increasing soil erosion.  Formalising collection through small-scale 
reservoirs enables storage during the wet season, and use in the dry 
• 
Installing standpipes in villages to address increasing uncertainty in 
yield of informal sources due to intensifying droughts that is resulting is 
conflict over water use.  Standpipes enable equitable distribution 
among villages 
• 
Connecting to existing sources in order to project water supply systems 
in light of climate change impacts of increasing uncertainty in yield of 
informal sources due to intensifying droughtiness and the increased risk 
of source pollution from increasing soil erosion 
38 
3,755,925 
Formalization of 
existing and new 
rural irrigation 
systems 
• 
Formalising existing or newly installed rural irrigation schemes 
(including water storage systems) to store water for use in prolonged 
dry seasons and mitigate against intensified droughts that are projected 
to occur with climate change 
• 
Through this intervention, the efficiency and stability of rural water 
supply for crop production will be secured and made resilient to climate 
risks of intensified droughts, enhancing the resilience of local 
agricultural systems.   
25 
3,681,687 
Installation of rural 
flood defences to 
withstand climate 
change impacts 
• 
Designing and installing flood defences to withstand the increasing 
frequency and intensity of floods due to climate change 
• 
Designs will include bioengineering methods to protect flood 
embankments from climate-induced erosion where possible 
20 
3,429,150 
Rehabilitation of 
rural bridges and 
slope stabilization 
of rural road 
corridors 
• 
Rehabilitating bridges that are usually washed away in the rainy season 
using climate resilient materials. Bridges are increasingly at risk of 
failure during floods due to higher flood flow velocities and higher 
discharges due to climate change. 
• 
Protecting bridge openings from higher flood flow velocities and higher 
discharges and increased erosion, with bioengineering methods (e.g. 
vetivier grass) 
47 
14,791,488 
                                                             
27 The total value of all infrastructure projects/units is 25.7 million USD. The GoTL is providing 12.5 Million of this total through PDIM 
and PNDS funds towards the highly exposed units in the most climate vulnerable districts. It also covers 7.187 million USD O&M 
costs from year 3 to year 6 (during the project implementation). The referenced 33.8 million USD comprises: GoTL (MSA) 12.5 
million + 7.187 Million = 19.687 Million, and 14.1 million USD of GCF financing.   
27 The number of direct beneficiaries of the 130 infrastructure projects/interventions alone is 119, 498. Complementary catchment 
management activities have been estimated to result in an additional 56,342 direct agro-forestry beneficiaries. This gives a total 
number of direct beneficiaries of 175,840 beneficiaries of Output 2.

=== PAGE 30 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 99 
 
C 
• 
Slope stabilization through implementation of sustainable structural 
measures (such as gabion baskets, vegetation of road corridors with 
bioengineering material like vetivier grass, vegetation of road 
embankments, and re-sizing of drainage systems) that accommodate 
baseline levels of flows and projects levels of flow due to climate 
change.  These measures will address the intensifying erosion and 
landslide risks of embankments above and below rural roads in the 
steep rural environment and will provide drainage for the increasing 
road drainage flow velocities that are required due to climate change.   
Total 
130 
25,658,25029 
 
73. A cost-benefit30 analysis has been conducted on all 130 units and they have been ranked and prioritised based on 
their internal rates of return (IRR) and the number of associated beneficiaries, into high, medium and low priority 
(dark to light blue cells in Table below) which will dictate the order or priority in which they will be implemented during 
each implementation year.  This is to ensure that the highest priority projects benefitting the most people will be 
completed first.  The IRR calculation includes the cost of maintenance (periodic and annual) that would be required 
over a 20-year lifespan of the infrastructure.     
 
74. Rehabilitation of rural bridges and slope stabilization of rural roads are the most expensive accounting for 57% of 
total project costs (and 36% of the number of projects), with only 34% of all interventions falling in the high and 
medium priority categories. This is mainly a reflection of high maintenance costs associated with bridges and road 
corridors despite the large benefits that road projects will bring to rural communities. For example, without 
maintenance included in the IRR calculation, 84% of bridges and road corridors fall within the high and medium 
priority categories. It is also a reflection of the isolation of some communities that will benefit from the climate resilient 
roads such that the beneficiary numbers of some of the schemes are low compared to the overall cost. However, it 
is specifically to relieve the isolation of communities that many of these interventions are needed and to secure the 
economic activities that vulnerable communities are heavily dependent on. It also points to the need to ensure a 
proper maintenance strategy to capitalise on the gains that will be made from climate proofing.  It is likely that climate 
proofing will reduce maintenance costs, so the values used reflects the reduced maintenance that climate proofing 
will provide, balanced against the need for increased maintenance with worsening climate-induced hazards that will 
be incurred.   
 
75. Revegetating land around rural water supply systems has the two highest proportions of interventions in the high and 
medium categories (91%) which reflects the relatively low capital and maintenance costs, compared with the numbers 
of beneficiaries, as well as the socio-economic gains that will be realised by rural communities. Revegetation activities 
refer to localised revegetation of the land around water sources which, if degraded, can lead to erosion around water 
sources, pollution of water sources due to sedimentation being washed into the water sources, and reduced 
functionality of sources.  Localised land degradation can also lead to undermining and damage of transmission lines. 
As part of the climate-proofing of water supply sources, there is usually a need to address these localised land 
degradation issues to ensure land stability.  The cost of revegetating land around water supply systems, is included 
in the infrastructure costs of the water source infrastructure. This is a typical engineering practice to stabilize the land 
prior to construction. Hence, the costs of revegetation account for only a small part of activity costs, and the main 
portion of the activity costs are related to the climate proofing of rural water supply infrastructure units to be 
implemented. It should also be noted that the revegetation under 2.2 is not the same as the agro-forestry and 
reforestation under Activity 2.3. 
 
76. The proposed GCF project will provide only the water supply systems/infrastructure with no physical 
intervention/infrastructure for sanitation.  However, the water supply systems that are implemented will have a direct 
positive impact on sanitation and hygiene, as the water supply systems provide water not only for drinking purposes, 
but also for washing, cleaning and other domestic purposes. In the design of the systems, there is provision for 
adequate supply of water for drinking and other domestic purposes including sanitation, including flushing of toilets 
where improved facilities are constructed and hygiene practices (bathing, washing, etc.). Water supply infrastructure 
                                                             
29 $12.5 Million will be government co-financing 
30 Details of method and discussion of results of the cost-benefit analysis is contained in Annex 8 of the feasibility report

=== PAGE 31 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 99 
 
C 
that the project will implement will therefore provide opportunities for households to follow the Community-led total 
sanitation approach (CLTS) and install pour flush latrines or flush toilets. During project formulation, consultations 
were undertaken with NGOs that are working in Timor-Leste on WASH interventions that have stated that the key 
issue regarding improved sanitation and good hygiene practices has been lack of water availability due to lack of 
infrastructure. There are areas for collaboration, particularly in the management of water supply systems, with 
interventions focusing on sanitation and hygiene. In particular, provision of community water stands, promotion of 
good hygiene practices by raising awareness and instilling behavioural change have been considered the areas for 
partnership and collaboration with organizations that are working on these issues in Timor-Leste. Under the 
leadership of Director General and as part of the National Water Forum set up at the Department of Water and 
Sanitation of the Ministry of Public Works consultations have been held and cooperation agreed with WaterAid, 
UNICEF, WHO and other agencies who have sanitation and hygiene interventions in rural communities and signed 
the letter of commitment for cooperation (Annex XIII (d-2) – Annexure 1). While the project does not include physical 
interventions such as building toilets, the GCF project will ensure that the Standards for improved sanitation facilities 
embeds climate proofing approaches and WHO standards on sanitation.  Hence, the increased availability and 
reliability of water supply to households through the climate proofed water supply units to be implemented by the 
project means that households will be more inclined to install improved sanitation methods that require the use of 
water, such as the pour-flush toilets, and additionally benefit from interventions from NGOs and other organizations 
that are actively supporting sanitation practices. This is fully in line with the government’s National Sanitation Strategy 
that aims at full CLTS targets by 2020-21. In fact, the evidence shows that certain municipalities that have been 
previously declared as Free from Open Defecation turned back to open defecation practice due to unavailability of 
water for flushing and sanitation as well as hygiene. The table below shows that the states of sanitation coverage in 
GCF project target municipalities. 
 
Table 3: Sanitation facilities / methods of private households at GCF target municipalities of Timor Leste31  
Administrative 
Post and Suco  
Private 
Households 
Proportion of flush & latrine toilets 
  
Status of Open Defacation Free (ODF) (meaning 
that all people in all households have access to 
toilet. ODF is part of the implementation of PAKSI 
(Action Plan for Community Sanitation and Hygiene) 
of the Ministry of Health (MoH)).  
Total 
flush 
toilet 
% 
Total 
latrine 
% 
No facility 
& others 
% 
Source: 
https://www.communityledtotalsanitation.org/country/
timor-leste-east-timor  
 Aileu  
7,598 
2593 
34% 
4,436 
58% 
569 
7% 
Declared 'Open Defecation Free’ (ODF). 92 percent 
of all households in Aileu Municipality have a toilet. 
 Baucau  
22,976 
6152 
27% 
13,497 
59% 
3,327 
14% 
  
 Ermera  
20,671 
5601 
27% 
11,680 
57% 
3,390 
16% 
Officially declared ‘Open Defecation Free’ (ODF) on 
22 Feb  2019 
 Lautem  
12,050 
2965 
25% 
5,458 
45% 
3,627 
30% 
Expected to declare 'Open Defecation Free' (ODF) in 
November 
 Liquica  
11,885 
3,557 
30% 
6,142 
52% 
2,186 
18% 
Officially declared ‘Open Defecation Free’ (ODF) on 
30th April 2019) 
 Viqueque  
15,297 
2,585 
17% 
5,753 
38% 
6,959 
45% 
Expected to declare 'Open Defecation Free' (ODF) in 
November 
 
 
77. Formalization of existing and new rural irrigation systems include interventions, of which 66% fall in the high and 
medium priority categories.    
 
78. Installation of rural flood defences to withstand climate change impacts shows only a small proportion of high and 
medium priority projects (20%) and this is in large part, due to the very small numbers of beneficiaries, agricultural 
land and property that can be protected by individual flood defences. It is likely that flood risk management strategies 
that do not only include infrastructure will need to be examined and the right combination of structural and non-
                                                             
31 Open Defecation Free – ODF means that all people living in a municipality exclusively use toilets rather than defecating in public 
places. The ODF team, together with municipality ODF secretariat team, monitor and encourage people to build toilets for 
themselves, Suco Councils verify ODF. (Source: https://www.wateraid.org/au/articles/liquica-announces-open-defecation-free-
status?fbclid=IwAR1Zvz8ZGhnwAxi0t8MVTXJj3JXyhSfPNEFNTj8hJxKv16-ECuBKYShMZcIAs CLTS is progressing and more 
households are having sanitation installations the data will be verified and updated at the inception stage of the project

=== PAGE 32 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 99 
 
C 
structural measures implemented (e.g. soil-bioengineering and broader sub-catchment restoration and 
management). It is noted that actions under Activity 2.3 will address ecosystem-based methods of resilience and will 
have attendant benefits on flood risk management, but the cost-benefit of these have been assessed separately (see 
Activity 2.3).     
 
79. With regards to the use of hydro-meteorological data in the climate proofing measures of water supply  systems, the 
most common system in rural Timor-Leste for both water supply systems and irrigation schemes are gravity fed (from 
springs, surface water collected from catchment – water capturing and rivers). Climate proofing design of small-scale 
irrigation and water supply units embeds consideration of drought discharge volumes and recharge rates to ensure 
continuous functionality of the system and water availability, as well as water source protection measures to reduce 
the risks of drying out water sources and catchment rehabilitation to stabilize water yielding capacities of the 
catchments. For the water supply systems, the reservoir sizing has been designed based on the population 
(beneficiaries) and using the national average of 35 litres per person per day (as per the manual for water supply 
systems) with provision for population growth for at least 20 years or the design life of the water supply systems, and 
30% increase factored into the design to account for capacity requirement due to climate change impacts which will 
increase the water needs/consumption (see Section 11.11 of the FS for further details).  
 
80. Taking into account the above and with the aim of addressing the deficits of small-scale rural infrastructure, the project 
will formalize existing systems by surfacing the irrigation and water supply transmission earthen channels, which will 
reduce transmission losses, improve the serviceability to farms and increase the efficiency of the channels during 
low flows and dry periods. The formalization and implementation of irrigation infrastructure has two key positive 
impacts (1) increased capacity of the community to produce crops more than once per year and (2) increase in 
cultivable lands due to availability and improved reliability of water. 
 
81. With regards to the interventions relating to water supply, water storage reservoirs will improve supply reliability during 
dry season and reservoirs will be managed by the water management group (GMF) that will agree on the operating 
rules during the dry season based on water availability and  reservoir recharge rates. The combined efforts of climate 
proofing of physical structures of the existing and future infrastructure and catchment rehabilitation for its runoff 
formation and drainage control services ensures stability and functionality of the target infrastructure in the face to 
evolving climate risks.  
 
82. Furthermore, the proposed water supply interventions have taken into consideration provisions for adequate supply 
of water for drinking and other domestic purposes including sanitation (flushing of toilets where improved facilities 
are constructed) and hygiene practices (bathing, washing, cleaning and etc.). Also, when water is not available, 
households are less inclined to use improved sanitation methods that require the use of water, such as the pour-flush 
toilets. However, with the installation of the water supply systems, households can self-construct improved sanitation 
facilities and can benefit from interventions from NGOs and other organizations that are actively supporting sanitation 
practices. In this way, the water supply systems that are implemented will have a direct positive impact on sanitation 
and hygiene. 
 
83. During project formulation, consultations were undertaken with NGOs that are working in Timor-Leste on WASH 
interventions that have stated that the key issue regarding improved sanitation and good hygiene practices has been 
lack of water availability. There are areas for collaboration, particularly in the management of water supply systems, 
with interventions focusing on sanitation and hygiene. In particular, promotion of good hygiene practices by raising 
awareness and instilling behavioural change has been considered as part of public awareness activities for 
beneficiaries through partnership and collaboration with organizations that are working on these issues in Timor-
Leste. This partnership was discussed with WaterAid that has sanitation and hygiene interventions in rural 
communities. UNICEF, WHO and Ministry of Health (environmental Health department) also have programmes that 
provide opportunities to collaborate on public awareness programmes to address hygiene issues. The GCF project 
will collaborate and complement these efforts. 
 
84. This preliminary project identification, outline scoping and cost-benefit analysis will be refined during the project and 
will be based on detailed hazard mapping. It will utilise the robust cost-benefit assessment and appraisal-led methods 
and tools to be introduced by the project under Output 1. In refining the assessment, the viability of each scheme will 
be determined and additional criteria used to ensure that the most beneficial schemes are implemented as priority. 
The $25.66 million (including $12.5 Million co-financing) USD budget is therefore an upper limit of capital costs that 
the project will cover in implementing these infrastructure schemes.

=== PAGE 33 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 99 
 
C 
 
Investment Planning  
 
85. As discussed above, currently the PDIM and PNDS do not have funding criteria or requirement to embed additional 
cost of climate risk reduction to physical and economic assets and there is currently no understanding of the 
investment requirements for climate proofing infrastructure due to the lack of climate-risk information and methods 
on which to base such investment planning. 
 
86. To address this barrier, the project will develop and implement new approaches to investment planning to ensure 
that infrastructure investment including annual and periodic maintenance which can be met in the long-term and will 
include climate proofing.  Approaches will include: 
 
• 
Embedding climate proofing in the PDIM and PNDS project identification and screening processes from village 
level project identification through to project feasibility, design and costing. 
• 
Identification of financing models for investment maintenance costs (e.g. of community-based scheme that 
involve the use of tariffs or in-kind contributions to establish municipal maintenance programmes (e.g. GMF as 
being done on SSRI) or engagement of private sector in infrastructure maintenance financing).  
• 
Development of municipal infrastructure investment plans based on risk-informed project designs, including 
maintenance, and cost-benefit analysis based on CBA methods and models to be introduced in Activity 1.1. 
• 
Use of municipality investment plans for technical justification for central budget allocation to cover investment 
and maintenance cost of climate resilient rural infrastructure utilising the climate proofing methods introduced 
by the project.  
• 
Providing evidence of the long-term need for maintenance to safeguard infrastructure investments and assisting 
the government in identifying and prioritising financing, based on the principles of portfolio risk assessment 
(PRA) and associated cost-benefit analysis.  Furthermore, the CBA tools to be developed by the project will be 
embedded in municipality as a standardised requirement for developing annual infrastructure investment plans.  
 
87. Using the asset management database to be introduced in Activity 1.2, the project will develop essential processes 
for infrastructure asset management. These will include: maintaining a systematic record of individual assets (costs, 
original service life, remaining useful life, physical condition, repair and maintenance consistency); developing a 
defined program of planned maintenance of infrastructure including repair and replacement; and implementing and 
managing information systems (e.g., updating Geographic Information Systems on which the system will be based) 
based on surveys.   
 
Operations and Maintenance 
88. The annual and periodic maintenance cost for each of the 130 infrastructure units has been identified during project 
design process for 20-years of the infrastructure lifespan32.  Emergency maintenance which may be required to repair 
damage caused by unexpected events, by definition, cannot be forecasted and therefore has not been budgeted in 
annual O&M cost profile or implementation programmes. This will be considered in the investment planning to be 
undertaken based on risk-informed climate hazard information and will include contingency investment planning for 
such incidences, thus allowing for timely response to hazardous events to limit loss of access to infrastructure and 
limit the extent of the damages.  The O&M strategy is detailed in the O&M annex (Annex XIII (b)).   
 
89. To ensure sustainability of O&M, the project will strengthen the technical, financial and institutional capacity for the 
O&M mechanisms of rural infrastructure. To this end, the project will embed the capacity to identify and address 
current and future requirements for maintenance by developing and embedding, asset management system, tools 
and approaches, including regular asset condition inspection mechanisms and damage and loss accounting.  Under 
Activity 1.2 and 1.3 the project is developing essential processes for infrastructure asset management including, 
maintaining a systematic record of individual assets (costs, original service life, remaining useful life, physical 
condition, repair and maintenance consistency); developing a defined program of planned maintenance of 
infrastructure including repair and replacement; and implementing and managing asset information systems as well 
as portfolio risk management methods that ensure the systematic prioritisation of the maintenance costs of each 
                                                             
32 Please see individual infrastructure unit tabs in excel spreadsheets XIII (h) 2-5, Ranking tab of excel file Xiii (h) 1 and the tables 
in O&M Plan Annex XIII (b), for the profile of maintenance costs for each infrastructure unit over 20 years

=== PAGE 34 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 99 
 
C 
infrastructure unit for the lifespan of the unit. Such systematized asset management practice will enable effective 
planning and costing of climate proofing measures, and, in particular, asset maintenance. 
 
90.  The project will also implement a strategy for the harmonisation of the PDIM and PNDS infrastructure into a 
maintenance programme with regular budget allocated for maintenance, thus enhancing the service life of the 
infrastructure units. Building on improved institutional arrangements for O&M achieved under the SSRI project and 
the passing of Decree Law 3/2016, which embeds O&M responsibility under the respective Municipal Service with 
MSA having overall financing and implementation responsibility for small scale rural infrastructure O&M, the GCF 
project is supporting the ongoing decentralized investment framework which is administered through the PDIM and 
PNDS processes, by embedding the knowledge of climate risks and skills of climate proofing design, construction, 
operation and maintenance of rural infrastructure and embedding long-term operations and maintenance 
arrangements with local participation to ensure long term sustainability of infrastructure, service delivery and local 
governance.   
 
91. Furthermore, with regards to long-term O&M financing, the project will embed financing models for investment 
maintenance costs (e.g. of community-based schemes that involve the use of tariffs or in-kind contributions to 
establish municipal maintenance programmes and will seek to engage private sector in infrastructure maintenance 
financing) using CBA approaches (being developed under Activity 1.2). It will use asset portfolio risk management 
approaches, in the identification and prioritization of long-term asset maintenance. Hence, the project is developing 
long-term infrastructure investment strategies which will help government to identify the infrastructure O&M needs 
and mechanisms for the long-term, which will include consideration of reduced O&M costs due to the climate proofing 
of infrastructure by this project. This comprehensive approach to O&M will ensure that the government would cover 
all O&M costs up to year 20 and beyond which will ensure the sustainability of O&M as a key and integral part of 
infrastructure climate proofing.   
 
Activity 2.3. Supporting catchment management and rehabilitation measures to enhance climate resilient 
infrastructure and communities. 
 
92. This activity will scale-up climate resilient catchment management in order to reduce the exposure of communities 
and their physical assets, such as rural infrastructure, to climate-induced hazards.  Even with the climate proofing 
approaches to be introduced and implemented, it will still be necessary to implement catchment rehabilitation and 
management to re-establish proper catchment ecosystem functions in order to safeguard infrastructure and climate 
proofing investments from long-term climate change impacts. This will have the added benefit of reducing the cost of 
climate proofing and maintenance of infrastructure in the future. The project will assist MAF in utilizing climate risk 
information in their reforestation programmes (as part of project co-financing). Climate risk model and risk maps 
produced by the project will assist MAF in prioritization of catchments for rehabilitation, defining the methods of 
rehabilitation as well as geographic extend. Helping MAF to develop catchment re-forestation and agroforestry 
strategies that will include community engagement and training in forestry and agroforestry practices will lead to direct 
re-forestation of the catchments and improve livelihoods to the communities which ensure land use practices that 
contribute to overall risk reduction and long term climate resilience.  
 
93. This project will be implemented via catchment management adaptation strategies (that include rehabilitation of 
hazardous areas through providing climate risk information) and actual on-the-ground methods for landscape 
restoration. The project will include landscape restoration, but will also employ the development of agroforestry 
strategies, including the community-based identification of appropriate climate resistant varieties of trees for planting 
in said restoration activities. Agroforestry and restoration ecosystem-based adaptation activities will be implemented 
at the catchment level.      
 
94. More specifically, agro-forestry and reforestation activities refer to catchment management measures which will 
address wider catchment degradation which has led to increased flood, erosion and landslide risks which in turn 
threatens all infrastructure situated within the catchment. This intervention will assist MAF to develop their catchment 
agro-forestry and reforestation strategy based on climate risk information to be developed by the GCF project. The 
UNDP-GCF project will work with the Ministry of Agriculture and fisheries (MAF) and the National Directorate for 
Forestry and Agri-business (under MCIE) to develop catchment rehabilitation strategies including agro-forestry 
strategies for upstream catchments of target infrastructure. The project will develop strategies and actions for 
catchment rehabilitation, including selection of tree species, methods of rehabilitation and maintenance that are fully

=== PAGE 35 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 99 
 
C 
informed by the hazard maps to be developed under Activity 1.1. It will delineate the priority hazardous areas for a 
phased rehabilitation strategy. It will assist in the identification of plant species that will provide the soil, water and 
nutrient protection properties needed to address degradation of catchment.  Several varieties of tree species have 
already been identified. This intervention will implement catchment rehabilitation and management to re-establish 
proper catchment ecosystem functions in order to safeguard infrastructure and climate proofing investments from 
long-term climate change impacts. This will have the added benefit of reducing the cost of climate proofing and 
maintenance of infrastructure in the future. The agroforestry activities will be fully aligned with the relevant policies, 
especially the Agricultural Policy and Strategic Framework and will be implemented in line with the relevant value 
chains and market linkages being developed by GoTL, ensuring the sustainability of the agro-forestry activities.   
 
95. GCF resources, combined with co-finance from the Ministry of Agriculture and fisheries (MAF) and the National 
Directorate for Forestry and Agri-business (which comes under MCIE) will be used to develop catchment rehabilitation 
strategies, including agroforestry, for catchments upstream of target infrastructure assets. The project will develop 
strategies and actions of catchment rehabilitation, including selection of tree species, methods of rehabilitation and 
maintenance that are fully informed by the climate hazard maps to be developed under Activity 1.1. The maps will 
delineate the priority hazardous areas for a phased rehabilitation strategy. This will assist in the identification of plant 
species that will provide the soil, water and nutrient protection properties needed to address degradation of 
catchments.  Several varieties of tree species have already been identified, among them falcataria moluccana, a fast-
growing tree that is typically cultivated for timber; Acacium mangium that is increasingly being used for agroforestry 
projects for its nitrogen fixation properties, but also for shadow it creates for other trees, such as wild coffee. It is a 
resistant tree, and can be productive in low fertility soils with poor moisture content. Casurina and Toona Sureni are 
also used for their timber and fast burning properties. Teak, mahogany, sandalwood and coconut have also been 
identified as climate resistant and with high livelihood value (see Annex II Feasibility Study for further details). The 
project will assist MAF and MCIE in developing a long-term strategy and plan for agroforestry as a catchment-wide 
ecosystem-based adaptation method. This will include identification of the most appropriate species for each 
municipality, based on the ability to address soil erosion and land degradation. The main benefit of this activity will 
be in its reduction of climate change impacts on the rural infrastructure of the 6 target districts. Other co-benefits 
include: gradual improvement of the geo-physical and hydrological condition of the catchment, reduced incidence of 
burning (slash and burn farming), promotion of the culture of planting and growing high value, climate resistant crops, 
provision of short and long term yet sustainable economic benefits to project beneficiaries, and the promotion of the 
creation of sustainable enterprise.  
 
96. Actual catchment rehabilitation works will be conducted in the catchment areas that are particularly hazardous across 
the target districts. These areas will require reforestation in order to stabilize the soil, arrest erosion, and stem 
degradation that exposes the community and physical assets to climate change risks. The proposed catchment 
management works will involve convergence of existing government reforestation programmes with collective action 
by the community. MAF typically applies the community engagement methods in most of the reforestation schemes 
and the proposed project will also follow the same established practice. The project will support the MAF directorates 
on forestry and watershed management to undertake a phased approach to catchment rehabilitation while focusing 
on areas of high exposure to climate risk. Such climate risk informed prioritization will be based on hazard modelling 
and mapping of a range of climate change scenarios. Based on hazard risk information developed during the 
feasibility study, 200 hectares of state-owned land has been identified for reforestation/catchment management 
schemes. The project will work with the MAF to design and deliver this support to their existing reforestation and 
catchment management schemes in the 6 target municipalities which contain 19 sub-catchments in total. This is in 
line with MAF SDP (2011-2030) objective 3.4 which aims ‘To develop capacity for improved decision making in 
planning and budgeting processes by providing accurate and up-to-date climate information and analysis. As part of 
rehabilitation efforts agroforestry will be used as an important element of catchment management. The MAF forestry 
and MCIE agri-business experts will engage with community leaders to facilitate the formation of cooperatives for 
sustainable agroforestry.    
 
97. At the local level, and based on the agroforestry strategies to be developed, the project will support farmers in 
identifying suitable community agroforestry opportunities. It will do this by identifying agriculture associations and 
cooperatives which will serve to facilitate individual members or groups in developing community-based agroforestry.  
These associations will also serve to provide technical and logistical guidance to farmers and will be organised by 
type of agroforestry (e.g. coconut growers association) and by geography (e.g. on an Administrative post level) to 
provide logistical support to farmers. In addition, these groups will include women’s associations as well as youth

=== PAGE 36 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 99 
 
C 
organisations. The project will work with the MAF to design and deliver this support to their existing reforestation and 
catchment management schemes in the 6 target municipalities.   
 
98. Furthermore, this activity will support rural communities to implement agroforestry on their lands and, in so doing, will 
enhance catchment management adaptation strategies. The main benefit of the catchment-based approach is that it 
addresses the livelihood pressures of communities within the catchments where key infrastructure is being 
developed, and at the same time helps to protect the infrastructure from climate-induced hazards through the re-
establishment of critical ecosystem functions. Based on the 10 sucos with the highest vulnerability to soil erosion in 
the 6 target municipalities, it is estimated that 23,412 households face potential crop losses due to erosion (a total 
loss of $1.9 Million USD).  GCF funds will be used to generate climate risk information at appropriate scale to support 
MAF in designing and delivering the reforestation and catchment management schemes both on public and farm 
lands.  MAF co-financing will be used to implement reforestation, covering the labour cost, attendance and 
maintenance in order to increase the survival rate of the planted stands. MAF will also mobilize local communities 
and engage with local vulnerable farmers in the target municipalities to promote and support multiplication of 
seedlings for agroforestry.  
 
99. Assuming agroforestry will be promoted in areas such as these, the potential number of beneficiary households is 
24,312. It is estimated that approximately 100 ha of privately-owned land belonging to these climate vulnerable 
households currently under threat from land degradation. Community implementation models have been used before 
and consultations were undertaken for the project to ensure community buy-in (See Annex XIII d-1 – Stakeholder 
Consultation). This will be used to establish agroforestry within the target, priority sub-catchments. The hectares of 
land to be rehabilitated has been calculated based on number of households currently at risk from erosion and likely 
to be losing crop yields because of the combined effect of catchment degradation and climate change exacerbated 
hazard risks. The best proven approach is to target communities and incentivise them to engage in agroforestry (i.e. 
such households are likely to engage as they currently have a problem with loss of crops due to intensified hazards 
and degradation of their land). The communities thus identified will be supported to implement climate resilient 
livelihoods that are conducive to resilient catchment management and climate risk reduction.     
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity) 
 
100. The main project sponsor is the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Environment (MCIE). The MCIE mandate gives 
it the responsibility for environment and climate change related policies, legislation and program/project 
implementation. The MCIE, and more specifically the National Directorate for Climate Change (NDCC), will be the 
project implementing partner.33 In addition, the Ministry of State Administration (MSA), Ministry of Social Solidarity 
(MSS) and Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (MAF) will serve as additional responsible parties. 
 
101. The project is implemented in line with established Government of Timor Leste and UNDP procedures in Timor 
Leste.  The Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Environment will take overall responsibility for implementation and 
success of the project. They will establish necessary planning and management mechanisms to oversee project 
inputs, activities and outputs. The project formulation process will be used to further define management, coordination 
and consultation mechanisms. A variety of stakeholders will be involved in all stages of project development and 
implementation, including the validation of project activities, preparation of project outputs, and participation in 
trainings. Activities will be implemented to involve as many and as diverse stakeholders as possible.   
 
102. The 2015-2019 Country Programme has a resource envelope of $74,959,000 USD. Based on Country Programme 
focal areas, resources are distributed as following: Resilience Building (22%); Inclusive and sustainable development 
(43%); and Democratic governance (35%). In the last four years (2013-2016), the average of country office delivery 
is 10.5 Million. Key staff from the UNDP country office that will support programme development and its 
implementation include: Leadership: UN Resident Coordinator and UNDP Resident Representative (1), Country 
Director (1) Operations Manager (1), Programme: Assistant Country Director/Head of programme Unit (3) 
Communication Analyst/Head of Communication and Management Support Unit (1); Operations: Head of HR/HR 
Analyst (1) Head of Finance/Finance Analyst (1), Head of Procurement/Procurement Analyst (1) Head of ICT/ICT 
Analyst (1), Common Premises Manager (1), Field Security Associate (1). 
                                                             
33 The NDCC was formerly known as the National Directorate for International Environment and Climate Change (NDIEACC).

=== PAGE 37 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 99 
 
C 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
 
103. Agriculture dominates economic activities in Timor Leste (IV Constitutional Government Program, 2007-2012). It is 
subsistence agriculture with low inputs and outputs, and comprises crops and livestock, fisheries and forestry.   It is 
estimated to employ more than 75% of Timorese people. Staple crops are maize, rice, and cassava with sweet potato, 
potato, mung bean, peanut and soya bean being widely grown in farmlands on steep slopes. The exception to this is 
the rice crop, which is mostly found on flat areas or terraces on moderate slopes. Cash tree crops such as coffee, 
coconut and candlenut are important and are grown on specific slopes and bands of elevations. For example, coffee 
plants are found in cool high elevation areas in some districts such as Ermera, Aileu and Ainaro, while coconut plants 
are found in the coastal areas of some districts such as Baucau and Viqueque. Low agricultural production combined 
with a lack of access to markets and inputs contributes to high food insecurity, particularly in rural areas where 74 
percent of the rural population suffers moderate and severe food insecurity.34 Annual food deficits also contribute to 
malnutrition rates, especially for children and women, which have been among the highest in the world.35.   
 
104. Despite the heavy reliance on agriculture for subsistence and for income generation, there is a lack rural 
infrastructure to support agricultural productivity including access to markets and what infrastructure exists is at 
increasing risk of damage from intensifying climatic hazards. An ADB study on least developed sucos (villages) 
measured the living standards across the country against the asset index. The sucos with highest living standards 
are concentrated around the capital Dili and close to district centres. Sucos with the lowest living standards are the 
most remote and have small population. Access to infrastructure is higher in sucos with higher living standards, and 
there is a large gap in access between groups. For example, of the 89 sucos with the lowest living standards, the 
average share of households with electricity is only 3%. This compares with an average share of 66% in the 89 sucos 
with the highest living standards. Access to improved water and improved sanitation is also much higher in sucos 
with high living standards.     
 
105. The project is using agroforestry as a strategy to improve catchment management practice and stabilize the land. 
Deforested and degraded watersheds significantly exacerbate disaster risks and associated risks of physical damage 
and economic losses to the communities and their physical and economic assets, such as essential rural 
infrastructure. Potential of such a strategy is enormous in Timor Leste. Over 30% of its land area is under-utilized 
and is suitable for tree growing. Demand on food and timber products are growing fast both in the region and globally.  
 
106. FAO (2010)36 reports that 264 million ha of trees were planted by 2010 for both productive purposes (timber, 
pulpwood, biofuel) and protection purposes (carbon, soil erosion, water regulation). These areas span a continuum 
of situations in terms of ownership, species richness, and intensity of management. For the 10 years leading up to 
2010, the annual increase in planted forests was 5M ha annually, globally. FAO further suggests that to provide for 
future world food and wood needs, an additional 100 million hectares of managed plantation forests will be required. 
It seems clear that the role of forest plantations as source of food and wood products will continue to increase. 
 
107. In Timor Leste today, nearly all urban and rural households use fuelwood for cooking. This predominance of fuelwood 
in the national energy mix is expected to continue in the foreseeable future, a consequence of the highly rural nature 
of the economy and the general poverty of the population. In 2006, the World Bank (2007) estimated that total annual 
fuelwood use in Timor Leste was 600,000 tonnes, representing an average household consumption of 4.3 
tonnes/household/annum. As part of this study, fuelwood (Eucalyptus alba in 2.5 kg bundles) was purchased in the 
Dili market for a notional selling price of US$0.37/kg. If all the fuelwood consumed in Timor Leste was monetarised, 
the value of fuelwood consumed annually is currently about US$220 Million USD. Current wood harvest and primary 
processing practices using chainsaws are extremely wasteful and inefficient, capturing only an estimated 15% of the 
volume grown. Timor Leste needs to improve wood processing efficiency and encourage the private sector to invest 
and become actively involved in establishing, harvesting and processing domestically-grown forest trees for local use 
and for export. GCF investment will be the first such targeted effort to facilitate the community-led and development 
in the sector of agroforestry.  
 
                                                             
34 Food and Nutrition Security Task Force. Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Algis Map. Dili, January 2012. 
35 World Bank, Country Partnership Strategy, op.cit.   
36 FAO ((2010) Global forest resources assessment 2010 country report Timor-Leste.

=== PAGE 38 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 99 
 
C 
108. Based on the geomorphological condition of the target sites the proposed design of the Agroforestry intervention is 
a Agri-Silvicutural System (ASS). This design has three major components: Multi-Purpose Trees (MPTs), Cash-Crops 
(CCs) and Fruit Bearing Trees (FBTs). 
 
109. MPTs will be planted as hedgerows to address soil erosion and control water flow. The MPTs will also serve as local 
source of natural fertilizer, main ingredients of natural pesticides and insecticides and alternative fuel wood source. 
Leaves of MPTs are also excellent feed source for poultry and livestock. CCs will be the immediate source of income 
of the project beneficiaries while waiting for the main crop (FBTs) to grow and become productive. The CCs will be 
cultivated along the alleys in between the hedgerows of MPTs. Any CCs that will thrive on the alleys can be grown if 
it will not lead to further land degradation. The project beneficiaries who will engage in agroforestry will also agree on 
the type of CCs they will produce simultaneously each planting season to increase the volume of production and 
facilitate transport and marketing of their produce. FBTs are the main crop of the proposed Agroforestry intervention. 
The species were selected based on the most commonly available and widely grown species in the municipalities. 
The FBTs will also serve as a deterrent that will discourage the common practice of burning for land clearing prior to 
agricultural cultivation. The intervention will also serve as a precursor in the development of a culture of planting and 
caring for trees alike among the project stakeholders. 
 
MPTs 
110. Ai-gamal and Lamtoro (Leucaena leucocephala) are two species highly recommended to serve as MPTs for the 
Agroforestry Intervention. These species are widely and locally available in Timor Leste. Farmers plant this species 
as live-fence, living-post for barbed-wire fence, and farm hedgerows for SWC measure and alley cropping. These 
species can grow in any type of soil. Ai-Gamal can thrive up to 1600 m elevation and Lamtoro up to a maximum of 
2,100 m. 
CCs 
111. Timor Leste farmers are very innovative and can grow any crop even in thin-layered problematic soil. The selection 
of CCs that will be grown will depend of the agreement between and among farmers who will engage in the 
Agroforestry intervention because they are more familiar and knowledgeable of the condition of the target sites and 
are more experienced. They will also receive technical assistance to help them make decisions. 
FBTs 
112. The list of FBTs in the table below also shows the site requirement for each species. This will be the principal basis 
in making the final selection.   
 
113. Despite knowing that project beneficiaries will not immediately reap the full benefits from planting FBTs, Municipal 
key officials are still very optimistic and are fully convinced that Agroforestry will not only provide sustainable income 
but will also improve the economy of the municipality. The table below shows the list recommended FBTs, the specific 
site requirements to achieve optimal production and their Return on Investment (ROI).

=== PAGE 39 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 99 
 
C 
114. The main adaptation benefits of agro-forestry will be as follows: Agroforestry is an intervention where farmers 
produce or grow different crops by combining and mixing them simultaneously or sequentially. Hence, every inch of 
the farm is utilized. The crops grown are complementing each other. Hedgerows protect the cash crops from erosion, 
provides a source of organic fertilizer and ingredient for natural pesticides. Growing FBTs or main crops will also 
benefit from the production and maintenance of CCs. MPTs can also protect the main crops if utilized as shade trees.  
 
115. Family members, especially children and girls who are usually tasked to gather firewood need not to walk far and 
look for places to collect since the MPTs can already supply their requirement. The family may decide also not to free 
graze their livestock and poultry because they can use as animal feed the young leaves and small branches of MPTs 
and agricultural waste from their farm. Women will be more engaged in harvesting, cleaning, sorting and marketing 
fruits when the FBTs become productive. In short members of the family will share the responsibilities in tending the 
farm. 
 
116. Based on the socio-economic profile of potential beneficiaries half of the family members consist of woman and 
almost a quarter are headed by them. Hence, the likelihood those women, young and adult, will also have a big role 
in running the farm as an enterprise. 
 
117. Key climate change adaptation benefits of agro-forestry include:  reduce soil erosion and land degradation, improve 
gradually the geo-physical condition of the catchment, reduce incidence of burning (slash and burn farming), promote 
the culture of planting and growing high value crops, provide short and long term yet sustainable economic benefits 
to project beneficiaries and promote the creation of sustainable enterprise, ultimately reduce the impact of climate 
change on infrastructure, increased flood security. 
 
 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable) 
 
118. Any licenses or permits required for the implementation of the project will follow the established policies and 
processes by the government. 
 
119. 
Tax Considerations for UN-supported Projects: UN-supported projects are currently tax-exempt in Timor 
Leste.  
 
120. 
Foreign Exchange and Insurance Policies: UNDP’s currency hedging policy is based on the use of natural 
hedges (matching cash flows (i.e. revenues and expenses) in non-USD currencies) to the extent possible. UNDP 
Country Office bank account balances are managed not to exceed approximately one month’s disbursement 
requirements to minimize risk. 
 
121. The Government signed a Standard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA) with UNDP in 2002. Consistent with the 
SBAA, the responsibility for the safety and security of the Implementing Partner (executing entity) and its personnel 
and property, and of UNDP’s property in the Implementing Partner’s custody, rests with the Implementing Partner 
(executing entity).  
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements 
 
122. The project will be implemented following UNDP’s National Implementation Modality (NIM), according to the 
Standard Basic Assistance Agreement between UNDP and Government of Timor Leste, the Country Programme 
Action Plan (CPAP), and as policies and procedures outlined in the UNDP POPP.  
(see: https://popp.undp.org/SitePages/POPPSubject.aspx?SBJID=245&Menu=BusinessUnit). 
 
123. The national executing entity - also referred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP terminology - is 
required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and procedures, 
including the NIM Guidelines. These include relevant requirements on fiduciary, procurement, environmental and 
social safeguards, and other performance standards. In legal terms, this is ensured through the national 
government’s signature of the UNDP Standard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA), together with a UNDP project 
document which will be signed by the Implementing Partner to govern the use of the funds. The (national)

=== PAGE 40 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 99 
 
C 
Implementing Partner for this project will be the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Environment (MCIE) 
accountable to UNDP for managing the project, including monitoring and evaluation of project interventions, 
achieving project outcomes, and for the effective use of UNDP resources.  
 
Contracts and flow of funds 
 
124. MCIE is also the National Designated Authority of the Green Climate Fund and all the national level coordination 
mechanisms will be under the aegis of the ministry. The Ministry of State Administration – MSA, responsible for 
municipal and village investment programmes (PDIM and PNDS); Ministry of Social Solidarity – MSS, responsible 
for disaster risk reduction policies and actions; and Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries – MAF, responsible 
for reforestation policies and actions, will take the roles of Responsible Parties under the respective project activities, 
following their mandates. Under the National Implementation Modality, and in terms of the Project Document to be 
signed between UNDP and GOTL (Subsidiary Agreement under the FAA), UNDP will advance cash funds on a 
quarterly basis to the MCIE as EE. The major agreements to be entered into are those between the MCIE and: 
• 
The Ministry of State Administration; 
• 
The Ministry of Social Solidarity; and 
• 
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. 
As the AE, UNDP will disburse funding (received from the GCF according to the FAA disbursement schedule), to 
the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Environment (MCIE), as the Executing Entity, for the purposes of 
undertaking the project. The MCIE will conclude agreements with the three Ministries that will be made Responsible 
Parties (RPs), responsible for delivering particular projects activities following their institutional mandates (these will 
be detailed during the formulation of the project document).   
 
 
Flow of funds: 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
125. In addition, the Government of Timor Leste has requested UNDP to provide direct project services for this project. 
These services cover both technical and administrative support and are specified in the draft Letter of Agreement. 
The direct project services follow UNDP policies on the recovery of direct project costs relating to GCF funded 
projects. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNDP (AE) 
MCIE 
GCF 
Direct 
Procurement of 
goods & Services 
3 Responsible 
Parties – MSA, 
MSS, MAF 
Procured 
service 
providers: NGOs

=== PAGE 41 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 99 
 
C 
 
Indicative Schematic of the Management Arrangements for the Proposed Project 
 
Figure 1:  Indicative Schematic of Management Arrangements for proposed project 
126. The Project Board is comprised of the following organizations: Ministry of Commerce Industry and Environment 
(MCIE), Ministry of State Administration (MSA), Ministry of Social Solidarity (MSS), Ministry of Agriculture and 
Fisheries (MAF), Ministry of Public Works (MPW) and UNDP. The Project Board is responsible for making, by 
consensus, management decisions when guidance is required by the National Project Director and the board will 
approve annual project budget and work plans required for the implementation of the project. Project Board decisions 
will be made in accordance with standards that shall ensure management for development results, best value money, 
fairness, integrity, transparency and effective international competition. In case a consensus cannot be reached within 
the Board, final decision shall rest with the UNDP senior representative, as per the UNDP POPP. The Project Board 
will meet every six months. 
• 
An Executive (role represented by National Implementing Partner) that holds the project ownership and 
chairs the Board. The Executive will be a Senior Representative from MCIE. 
• 
A Senior Supplier representative providing guidance regarding the technical feasibility of the project, 
compliance with donor requirements, and rules pertaining to use of project resources. This role will be 
fulfilled by UNDP in its capacity as GCF Accredited Entity;  
• 
Senior Beneficiary representatives who ensures the realization of project benefits from the perspective 
of project beneficiaries; and  
• 
The National Project Director, a Focal Point from the MCIE who is responsible for overall direction, 
strategic guidance, and timely delivery of project outputs. 
 
127. The National Project Director will oversee the implementation on behalf of and as a representative of the Sponsor 
(MCIE) and according to the agreed workplan, guided by the Project Board. The National Project Director function

=== PAGE 42 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 99 
 
C 
will end when the final project terminal evaluation report, and other documentation required by the GCF and UNDP, 
has been completed and submitted to UNDP. The National Project Director is responsible strategic guidance and 
decision-making for the project. The National Project Director’s prime responsibility is to provide strategic guidance 
and support to the Project Manager in ensuring that the project produces the results specified in the project document, 
to the required standard of quality and within the specified constraints of time and cost.  
 
128. The Chief Technical Advisor (CTA) will provide regular technical guidance to the project management and technical 
teams in managerial and technical issues. He/she will be hired long-term for the duration of the entire project 
implementation period by UNDP, based on UNDP recruitment procedures. 
 
129. The Project Manager (PM) will lead the Project Implementation Unit and run the project on a day-to-day basis on 
behalf of the MCIE within the constraints laid down by the Project Board. The Project Manager function will end when 
the final project terminal evaluation report, and other documentation required by the GCF and UNDP, has been 
completed and submitted to UNDP. The Project Manager is responsible for day-to-day management and decision-
making for the project. The Project Manager’s prime responsibility is to ensure that the project produces the results 
specified in the project document, to the required standard of quality and within the specified constraints of time and 
cost. The PM will be a local staff contracted by UNDP and located at MCIE. Both Project Manager and National 
Project Director will both be represented in the Project Board.  
 
130. Project Support: The PM will be supported by a core team of technical and support staff forming the Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU). The PIU will be located at the MSA to execute project activities, including day-to-day 
operations of the project, and the overall operational and financial management and reporting (the PIU will include a 
finance and administrative officer and monitoring and evaluation officer).  For the project’s technical support, a 
Technical Committee comprised of key relevant government departments and technical partners (Civil Society 
Organizations, academia, interest groups and associations on the ground) will be established and will work closely 
with the central Project Management Unit, with the mandate to vet the project deliverables and provide technical 
inputs and validation. In addition to the Technical Committee, a separate donor coordination group will be set up to 
ensure there are synergies and coordination and that a scale up strategy is enforced through multiple programmes 
and investments. At the municipal level, the project will require Field coordinators for each target municipality to 
localize the project plans and synchronize work planning and implementation with overall coordination by the National 
Project Coordinator, and supported by the Project Manager and CTA.  
 
131. UNDP provides a three-tier oversight and quality assurance role involving UNDP staff in Country Offices and at 
regional and headquarters levels. The quality assurance role supports the Project Board by carrying out objective 
and independent project oversight and monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate project management 
milestones are managed and completed. Project Assurance must be independent of the Project Management 
function; the Project Board cannot delegate any of its quality assurance responsibilities to the Project Manager.  The 
project assurance role is covered by the accredited entity fee provided by the GCF. As an Accredited Entity to the 
GCF, UNDP is required to deliver GCF-specific oversight and quality assurance services including: (i) Day-to-day 
oversight supervision, (ii) Oversight of project completion, and (iii) Oversight of project reporting.  
 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation 
Please see Annex X for an indicative timetable of project implementation.

=== PAGE 43 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 99 
 
D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement 
 
 
 
132. Without GCF involvement, the government of Timor Leste will not be able to absorb the additional cost of adaptation 
into its ongoing investments into small-scale rural infrastructure services. Although economic growth performance 
has been positive during the past decade of the country’s 12-year existence, capacity constraints persist. Without 
GCF investment, vulnerable communities (mainly engaged in small-holder farming) will continue to be susceptible 
to climate change impacts that they have limited coping mechanisms to withstand. Therefore, GCF support is critical 
to address the main identified barriers inhibiting climate resilient local infrastructure. Through direct investment in 
climate resilient engineering solutions and enabling sustainable policies and practices and ecosystem-based 
methods of catchment management, GCF funds will increase the long-term resilience of decentralized infrastructure 
services. 
 
133. Gaps in key rural infrastructure services not only prevent the successful adaptation of vulnerable communities, but 
also limit the potential for local economic and social development. This points to the need for last mile investments 
to meet the needs of these isolated communities and the safeguarding of those investments against climate change-
induced hazards. Therefore, small-scale village infrastructure services have been invested in through local district / 
municipal and village investment plans, but these funds presently cannot absorb incremental cost of climate change 
impacts. The GCF efforts to strengthen capacities and create enabling conditions will mobilize additional funding to 
secure these assets. GCF investment in climate proofing and community resilience will catalyse public and private 
investment towards climate resilient development of vulnerable communities and their community assets. In 
addition, GCF will provide additional district / municipal and village level investments that will allow scaling up existing 
efforts for transformative change and impact across the country. 
 
 
D.2. Exit Strategy 
 
 
134. The project’s sustainability and exit strategy is rooted in the key elements of design and implementation. The 
following assures long-term sustainability beyond the project implementation period: 
 
135. Investment in human resources and institutions: The project is focused on developing knowledge institutions 
that have skilled human resources as well as adequate information, tools and technologies to effectively pursue their 
mandate in climate risk management. Project investments will improve the availability of risk information and create 
effective response mechanisms. The project will help all relevant institutions develop and implement comprehensive 
short- to long-term personnel learning and training programs at all scales - including community, Administrative Post 
(AP), municipality and national levels. All these programmes will be integrated into existing education and training 
systems and will become routine after the end of the project. This approach to capacity development is far reaching 
and more likely to ensure sustainability, and continued growth, of improved human resource and technical 
capacities.  To address sustainability of institutional capacities advanced as part of the project, the project will 
support the development and adoption of relevant legal frameworks, policies and planning frameworks for climate 
resilient infrastructure development. In addition, as part of the exit strategy, the project will address the legal 
frameworks, policies, and processes which currently present barriers to the climate resilient provision of 
decentralized infrastructure services in Timor Leste.  Through enhancements to the legislative and institutional 
framework, the project will ensure that the required systems/mechanisms for accountability, transparency, and 
technical knowledge transfer for decentralized climate resilient infrastructure development are in place for the long-
term. 
 
136. Most importantly, cost-benefit assessment methodologies and a socio-economic risk model will be embedded into 
the planning processes for the Integrated Municipal Development Planning (PDIM) and National Village 
Development (PNDS) programmes as a result of the project (Output 1). These will ensure that financial and 
economic resources are available after GCF assistance ends for the government to better analyse climate risks 
associated with the provision of decentralised infrastructure services at the municipal and village level, identify and 
finance cost-effective climate risk reduction measures, and maintain infrastructure investments over time. The cost-
benefit modelling initiated as part of this effort will be used to support efficient use of financing.   
 
137. Investment in social and economic assets of vulnerable communities:  The damaging effects of extreme 
events and changes in weather patterns exacerbated by climate change will unravel the potential for socioeconomic

=== PAGE 44 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 99 
 
D 
development in vulnerable and isolated communities. However, investing in small-scale infrastructure in a way that 
is resilient to such climate change impacts can help reduce the vulnerability of these areas. Infrastructure that is 
“climate proofed” will have structural stability and functional longevity in the face of climate changes. The reliability 
of infrastructure such as roads, bridges, and pipes will, in turn, help secure essential services such as water supply, 
irrigation, mobility, and access to services. In addition, infrastructure built to standards that account for predicted 
climate impacts will provide protection against the multiple hazards that dominate the country’s hazard profile 
(floods, flash floods, landslides, storms). This project seeks to strengthen PIDM and PNDS investment planning and 
implementation cycles by embedding climate risk information and enhancing the capacity to prioritize, budget, locate 
and deploy infrastructure that is functionally stable in the face of climate hazards. This will help ensure the financial 
sustainability of infrastructure climate proofing efforts for the long-term. In addition, this will provide the potential to 
mobilise financing to absorb the additional cost of climate proofing in the future, through municipal and private sector 
finance mechanisms. 
 
138. Investment in natural capital: The functional capacity of the landscape plays an essential role in maintaining long-
term resilience and safeguarding investments and communities against climate-induced disasters and slow onset 
changes in weather patterns, especially in an island community of complex and harsh terrain. For example, stable 
adjacent slopes and healthy watersheds will keep the cost of climate-proofing infrastructure proposed above within 
a manageable range. Thus, it is critical for the project to take a broader climate risk reduction approach that also 
accounts for, and promotes the maintenance of, the ecosystem services provided by the natural environment in the 
project areas. Natural landscapes can provide protective services and reduce the need for additional infrastructure 
dedicated to climate protection, such as sea defences or flood walls, interconnections in water supply, or retrofitting 
of all existing infrastructure units. Fostering an environment of stable and well-managed natural capital is an 
investment in the long-term sustainability of social and economic assets, such as those that the GCF project will 
fund in Timor Leste. 
 
139. Post-project O&M: In addition to protecting investments via maintaining the natural surroundings, the government 
cofinancing supporting district / municipal and village investment mechanisms will also include budgeted O&M costs 
for a period well beyond the project duration. Local customary land use laws (tara bandu) and traditions will be used 
as well as locally defined roles and responsibilities for control, protection and maintenance to sustain the GCF 
investments. 
 
140. In terms of maintenance of infrastructure, MSA is committed to provide O&M to 130 infrastructure units to be 
implemented by the project, during and after the end of the project (please refer to MSA’s co-funding letter, (Annex 
IV)). Furthermore, the implemented infrastructure units will be integrated into the existing rural infrastructure asset 
network to be operated and maintained by relevant line ministry practitioners sitting under MSA at the municipal 
level.  (please refer to O&M plan Annex XIII (b).  
 
 
141. In addition, the project will assist relevant government institutions in developing long-term O&M financial planning 
to ensure that infrastructure, equipment and systems implemented under the project will be maintained in the long-
term. The project interventions have been designed to strengthen financing and implementation of O&M in the long-
term. To this end, the project will address current and future requirements for maintenance by developing and 
embedding CBA, asset management and portfolio risk management methods that ensure the systematic 
identification and prioritisation of the maintenance costs over the lifespan of the infrastructure units. Recognising 
that O&M is integral to climate proofing of infrastructure, the project will also implement a strategy for the 
harmonisation of the PDIM and PNDS infrastructure into a maintenance programme with regular budget allocated 
for maintenance, thus enhancing the service life of the infrastructure units  
 
142. Specifically, the project will provide the following safeguards to financial sustainability: 
• 
Review budgetary requirements for long-term maintenance of rural infrastructure based on climate risk 
information to be developed by the project, and development of a financing model for the long-term maintenance 
(using cost-benefit modelling to support the financing model) 
• 
Strengthening multi-disciplinary approach to O&M for a harmonised O&M framework for rural infrastructure 
• 
Advising the government on optimum/efficient allocation of funds for climate proofing and DRM 
• 
Improve the donor coordination in the area of rural infrastructure development and climate proofing 
• 
Enhancing community-government dialogues around local infrastructure needs, risks and risk reduction 
strategies and their financing.

=== PAGE 45 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 99 
 
 E 
 
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas 
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential 
143. The project targets the districts of Timor Leste that are among the most vulnerable in terms of poverty indices, 
infrastructure deficits, gaps in basic public services and social vulnerabilities, and high levels of community exposure 
to climate induced disasters. Selected rural districts encompass a diversity of terrains, including mountainous zones,  
river valleys, and coastal areas. Likewise, the local conditions for small-scale rural infrastructure and community 
development are varying.  Under Output 2, the total number of direct beneficiaries will reach approximately 175,840 
people directly benefitting from the proposed climate resilient rural infrastructure projects. Approximately 208,367 
people and some 300 ha of land will benefit from agroforestry and reforestation activities. The main areas of 
adaptation impact include: (i) increased resilience of infrastructure and the built environment to climate change threats 
(GCF result #3). At least $25.66 million USD (including $12.5 Million government co-financing) worth of small-scale 
rural infrastructure - approximately 130 units (47 slope stabilization projects (216.94 km); 38 enhanced water supply 
systems; 25 improved irrigation systems (54.18km); 20 flood defenses (14.15 km)) - will be made more resilient to 
climate variability and climate change. Furthermore, 300 ha of land will be under of a combination of agroforestry, 
reforestation and catchment management measures.   
 
144. The project will increase resilience and enhance livelihoods of the most vulnerable segments of population, 
particularly women, children and the elderly. Physical damage and economic losses due to impacts of extreme 
climate related disasters will decrease by at least half (calculated against baseline Damage and Loss)37. Nationally, 
economic losses from extreme hazards range from $203 Million, $37 Million, $10 Million and $12.5 Million USD for 
landslides, floods, erosion and drought respectively for the whole of Timor Leste.  This is a considerable financial 
burden and development setback for a low-income country with a heavy dependence on subsistence agriculture.  
Through the development of climate risk information, inclusion of such information and improved DRM systems and 
climate change adaptation in the long-term, the project will help reduce these levels of economic damages. 
 
145. In the 6 target municipalities climate-induced hazards currently have the following impacts on people, infrastructure 
and agriculture38: 
 
• 
Dwellings (number of homes affected): 14,663 homes affected by floods; 87,139 homes affected by drought; 
75,819 homes affected by erosion; 84,853 homes affected by landslides 
• 
Water supply sources (Number of homes at risk from impacts on water sources): 66,027 homes at risk from 
floods; 76,049 homes at risk from drought; 76,049 homes at risk from erosion; 75,186 homes at risk from 
landslides 
• 
Rural roads (length of rural roads impacted): 323.69 km impacted by floods; 2,143 km impacted by landslides   
• 
Agriculture (numbers of hectares affected): 40,598ha affected by landslides; 15,785ha affected by floods; 
40,598ha affected by erosion; 40,598ha affected by drought 
 
146. 
The 20 flood control projects identified will have the effect of averting $37,000 USD in annual economic damages 
in the target communities, impacting 11,338 beneficiaries and protecting 109 ha of land from flooding. The 47 road 
slope stabilization sites will increase access to markets and other services for 92,397 beneficiaries and will 
substantially increase their economic activity from current values of $1.68 million USD combined. The 38 water supply 
projects identified will reach 21,973 beneficiaries with a combined income of $1.2 Million USD. The 25 irrigation 
schemes will reach 50,246 beneficiaries and will enhance income from crops, currently a value of $428,485 USD. 
 
147. 
The impact potential of climate proofing critical small-scale rural infrastructure is high as it will safeguard vulnerable 
communities and their economic assets from climate change-induced disasters. In addition, livelihoods of 
                                                             
37 See Section 2.9 of the Feasibility Study for the detail socio-economic risk assessment 
38 Details of the socio-economic risk assessment on which figures are based, can be found in Chapter 2 of the feasibility report

=== PAGE 46 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 99 
 
 E 
communities will be enhanced through agroforestry which, in combination with reforestation and catchment 
management measures, will reduce land degradation on 300 ha of land, impacting 208,367 beneficiaries39.  A further 
1200 ha of land within project areas will be rehabilitated through MAF co-financing.    
 
148. 
It is expected that the proposed project adaptation interventions, will provide essential climate resilient 
infrastructure to the most vulnerable, enable them to participate more effectively in a productive society and providing 
access to essential clean water (through water supply infrastructure), transportation (through road and bridge 
construction and rehabilitation), increased crop productivity (through irrigation infrastructure), and flood defenses 
resulting in better health and socio-economic development and protection of people, property and community assets 
from floods, landslide and erosion risks.  The needs of disabled and vulnerable people will be considered throughout 
the project in terms of policies and regulations, design of infrastructure, capacity building of decision makers, and 
implementation, including employment opportunities.  For example, Activity 1.3 involves the revision of regulations, 
standards and specifications for climate proofed infrastructure, such revision will include consideration of the needs 
of disabled and vulnerable people.  
 
149. 
The project design has been informed through consultation with various stakeholders and has sought to reflect 
the gender differentiated aspects of climate risks. Information on the needs of vulnerable groups (women, ethnic 
minorities, disabled, elderly) has been collected and will continue to be collected through ongoing and inclusive 
stakeholder engagement. Through a Gender Action Plan (GAP), which addresses the needs of not only women and 
other vulnerable groups, concrete actions will assist in fulfilling Timor Leste’s commitment to gender equity and 
international obligations on gender responsive climate change and disaster risk measures.  The GAP will draw on 
lessons learnt from the UNDP SSRI project include the need for gender responsive planning and implementation.   It 
will include gender analysis as part of risk and vulnerability and support capacity building of staff and implementing 
partners to collect sex and age disaggregated baseline data; develop specific performance indicators to monitor, 
report or track progress, inform decision; and strengthen accountability on commitments for gender equality.  For 
example, the project will seek to mainstream gender in the PDIM to ensure women’s involvement in all stages of the 
process: 
 
• Planning: Take women’s opinion, experience, skills and knowledge in developing the strategic plan and PDIM 
projects 
• Design: Prioritize and ensure women participation in all stages from project planning to implementation; ensure 
provision enhance the women’s capacity. 
• Implementation of projects: Ensure women’s participation in implementing projects in rural areas 
• Monitoring & Evaluation: Balance participation to make M&E more effective 
       
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below. 
GCF core 
indicators 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation only) 
Annual 
N/A 
Lifetime 
N/A 
• 
Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by 
gender (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
• 
Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only) 
Total 
Direct Beneficiaries - 175,840 (89,643 
males, 86,197 females), 19,751 
households 
Total Beneficiaries (direct and indirect) 
– Total population in the six target 
districts of Baucau, Ermera, Aileu, 
Viqueque, Lautem and Liquica -  
                                                             
39 All these figures are based on the socio-economic risk modelling undertaken for the formulation, as part of feasibility study.

=== PAGE 47 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 99 
 
 E 
522,000 people (266,116 males, 
255,884 females) 
Percentage 
(%) 
Direct Beneficiaries - 15% of population 
Total Beneficiaries – 43.5% of the total 
population and covers 64% of total land 
area 
Other 
relevant 
indicators 
Indicator:  Number and value of physical assets made more resilient to climate variability and change 
Target:  130 infrastructure units (47 Road slope stabilization projects (216.94 km); 38 Water Supply 
Systems; 25 Irrigation systems (54.18km); 20 flood defenses (14.15 km)) for a total value $25.68 Million 
USD 
 
Indicator:  Increase in generation and use of climate information in decision-making 
Target:  Climate hazard and risk information for 4 of the main hazards (floods, landslides, erosion and 
droughts) facing Timor Leste 
 
Indicator:  Total area of degraded land rehabilitated and protected from erosion, landside and flood risk 
from climate variability and change, benefitting infrastructure and improving livelihoods 
Target:  300 ha of land with agroforestry (100 has reforested state lands, 100 ha agroforestry on state 
lands, and 100 ha of agroforestry on private land).  23,412 households with improved livelihoods through 
implementation of agroforestry. A further 1200ha of reforestation and agroforestry from MAF co-financing. 
 
150. Total number of beneficiaries and reduced annual economic losses under baseline and CC scenarios were 
calculated during the feasibility study using existing indicative hazard mapping, socio-economic datasets available 
for all of Timor Leste (official statistics of the 2017 Census), and a GIS-based socio-economic risk model that was 
developed for the feasibility study.  To calculate the number of beneficiaries for rural roads, GIS techniques were 
used to derive “catchment” areas of beneficiaries. The risk map layers were used to first identify whether the road 
falls within the High-Risk Category and then using a buffer distance of 5K the household beneficiaries were 
determined based on the 2015 census. For flood projects, the location of the proposed projects was identified using 
Google Earth imagery to digitise polygons of beneficiary areas and combined with the Flood Risk Map, the number 
of location of households counted if they fall within the High-Risk Category. Again, using the 2015 census the number 
of beneficiaries was determined. If the project is meant to benefit the whole community, the total household and 
population of the said community was used. For irrigation schemes, beneficiaries were calculated based on 
households and population of the Irrigation Service Areas along the length of the proposed irrigation scheme. For 
water supply projects, beneficiaries were calculated based on the Service Area (Suco) Households Population for 
each scheme. It should be noted that the population groups benefited by individual infrastructure works do not 
overlap, as each suco (village) only receives 1 infrastructure unit and the beneficiaries have been calculated based 
on number of beneficiary households in the suco in which the infrastructure unit is being implemented. With linear 
infrastructure such as roads, flood defences and irrigation channels connecting sucos in different aldeias, the suco 
names are repeated as start and/or end points of the infrastructure, but beneficiary households are different40. 
 
151. GIS data on people, property and agricultural land enabled the enumeration and, in some cases, the quantification 
of the impact of the 4 main hydro-meteorological hazards. The analysis considered the baseline scenario and a 
climate change projection. Findings of GIS-based socio-economic risk mapping (e.g. vulnerable regions, population 
affected, infrastructure, property, and agricultural land damaged and related economic losses) form the basis of the 
calculations. 
 
152. The sub-catchments within which priority infrastructure units are located have been identified. These priority sub-
catchments delineate the land area that requires ecosystem rehabilitation work through via reforestation, mainly by 
                                                             
40 See Annex 7 to the Feasibility Study – detailed list of infrastructure beneficiary sucos by municipality

=== PAGE 48 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 99 
 
 E 
use of locally-appropriate planting and agroforestry activities. The hectares of land to be rehabilitated has been 
calculated based on number of households currently at risk from erosion within the infrastructure sub-catchments 
and who are currently likely to be losing crop yields because of the combined effect of catchment degradation and 
climate change exacerbated hazard risks.  The best proven approach is to target communities and incentivize them 
to engage in agroforestry (i.e. such households are likely to engage as they currently have a problem with loss of 
crops due to intensified hazards and degradation of their land). The communities thus identified will be supported to 
implement climate resilient livelihoods that are conducive to resilient catchment management and climate risk 
reduction.  Total targeted land area thus amounts to 300 ha. This is made up of 100ha of private land on which 
agroforestry will be implemented by individual households, 100ha of state land on which agroforestry will be 
implemented with the help of communities, and 100ha of state land on which re-forestation will be implemented.  A 
further 1200ha of reforestation and agroforestry is planned from MAF co-financing.  
 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale) 
153. The project has replication potential within the target districts which will be possible by at least 6 times.  Total 
population of the six target districts of Baucau, Ermera, Aileu, Viqueque, Lautem and Liquica is 522,000 people, or 
43.5% of the total population. These districts together cover 64% of the total land area.  This project also has 
replication potential in the remaining 7 municipalities, which would benefit the reminder of the population. 
 
154. The paradigm shift lies in the proposed strategy to address increasing cost of maintaining functional longevity of 
small-scale rural infrastructure under the mounting threats from climate change. Baseline pathways will lead to 
progressively increasing costs of infrastructure, necessitating changes in construction requirements, addition of 
protection features, and increases in operations and maintenance costs. The alternative pathway the project is 
proposing is to both improve and climate-proof the engineering designs for infrastructure assets, and utilize 
bioengineering methodologies and restoration of the catchment ecosystems within which these physical assets are 
located. As an alternative pathway, such a combined approach reduces not only the risk of climate-related damages 
to the physical assets, but also the cost of construction and that of operations and maintenance compared to baseline. 
Therefore, the cost of adaptation will become manageable in the future. This makes the preferred solution viable for 
upscaling and replication in other areas, which would lead to a paradigm shift. The proposed alternative will also 
deliver significant auxiliary social, economic and environmental benefits.   
 
155. The steps necessary to achieve this paradigm shift pathway are as follows: First, the project is introducing new skills 
and methods for generating climate risk information and enhancing engineering capacities. Through introducing new 
modelling, mapping and risk assessment survey approaches and technologies, the project will address the underlying 
lack of climate risk information in the country necessary for informed sectoral planning and decision making 
(especially for rural infrastructure siting, construction, and maintenance). These new methods will be supported by 
standards and guidelines that enable systematic use of climate risk information in the design and implementation of 
infrastructure and the management of climate-induced hazards in the future. The resulting improved financial, 
technical and human resource capacities necessary to undertake hazard, risk and vulnerability assessments and 
assess the socio-economic damages and losses that can occur due to climate-induced hazards will enhance the 
level of risk information and allow use of such information in prioritizing risk reduction activities. In addition to 
enhancing climate risk information, the project is improving engineering capacities and introducing knowledge of new 
technologies of climate-proofing infrastructure that are locally appropriate (including innovations such as 
bioengineering methods). These new knowledge, skills and technology will fundamentally change the practice of 
infrastructure development and implementation and will be transformative. To ensure the longevity of these new 
capacities, the project will strengthen the sectoral legislative and enabling environment to promote a risk-informed 
approach to addressing and incorporating climate change considerations into spatial planning, land use regulations, 
water resource management, and disaster risk management.   
 
156. Secondly, the project is enhancing the enabling environment for PDIM and PDNS funding sources for rural 
infrastructure development. PDIM and PDNS processes will be supported by longer term investment planning and 
improvements in broader policies of climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction. The project will address

=== PAGE 49 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 99 
 
 E 
the limited nature and decline in investment in rural infrastructure through the PDIM and PNDS rural planning 
processes as well as the perceived higher cost of including climate resilience into infrastructure development and 
investment planning. The latter will be accomplished by introducing evidence based cost benefit analysis into design 
methods that accounts for climate change, identifying current and future requirements for maintenance under climate 
change and outlining the costs of climate proofing and maintenance. This project approach to community engagement 
through the PDIM and PNDS process, will have key benefits including identification of communities and therefore 
buy-in, greater community ownership and consequently greater efficiency in project implementation.      
 
157. Thirdly, the project will bring about both improvements and restoration activities in catchment ecosystems to improve 
ecological function. Unsustainable and environmentally harmful rural livelihoods have significantly degraded land in 
all catchments in TL. This degradation has increased exposure of residents and infrastructure to climate-induced 
hazards and will further impede rural livelihoods in the future. Ecological restoration will be accomplished through 
promotion of climate-smart agroforestry and forestry activities. Not only will these efforts improve ecosystem function 
and infrastructure stability, but they will also yield significant social and economic benefits to the communities. In 
addressing catchment management, the project is further building resilience into infrastructure development and 
reducing the long-term cost of infrastructure maintenance.   
 
158. The following diagram presents the project Theory of Change, demonstrating how the activities can remove current 
barriers and achieve transformational change in infrastructure development. This will result in increased infrastructure 
and built environment resilience, as well as enhanced livelihoods and resilience of the most vulnerable people, 
communities and regions of Timor Leste.  
 
 
 
Figure 2:  Theory of Change for the project 
 
159. In summary, GCF funding will: address the lack of climate risk information in TL; strengthen sectoral policy and 
legislative frameworks via embedding climate change considerations into all sectors that impact the resilience of 
infrastructure; and build institutional capacity at the central and local levels to enable long-term use of climate risk

=== PAGE 50 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 99 
 
 E 
information, methods and tools in planning for and investing in rural infrastructure as well as the development of CCA 
and DRR activities. Furthermore, GCF funding will address livelihood pressures that lead to land degradation via the 
introduction of climate smart agro-forestry and reforestation in catchments where infrastructure will be developed. 
This will provide ecosystem-based protection of infrastructure, reduced maintenance requirements in the long-term, 
and reduced exposure of communities and their assets to climate induced hazards. The preferred solution provides 
a clear link between activities that seek to address adaptation needs (as per the new CC and DRM laws) and the 
development of rural infrastructure (as per the Strategic Development Plan). The preferred solution will bring about 
transformative change in the way in which Timor Leste plans and develops rural infrastructure in the future and will 
safeguard infrastructure and livelihoods. 
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning

=== PAGE 51 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 99 
 
 E 
 
160. The project has particularly strong emphasis on knowledge generation, learning and information 
sharing/dissemination. First, the project will introduce hazard and risk assessment modelling and mapping tools and 
generate definitive hazard maps for all major climate-induced hazards for the whole country. These will be used in 
climate risk management and to train MCIE and MSS staff in the use and maintenance of these new tools and 
technologies.  Furthermore, the project will develop damage and loss accounting methods, tools, and technologies 
as well as asset inventory and management databases. Project activities will provide a series of trainings to the 
mandated institutions, to include sessions on data collection and treatment, methods of risk and vulnerability 
assessment, and economic valuation. Under Output 1, the project will facilitate the dissemination and sharing of 
common and definitive climate risk information needed by all sectors of central government to embed climate risk 
considerations into their functions. The Climate Change and Biodiversity Centre (CCCB), established under the 
previous, GEF-funded SSRI project, has a mandate to provide climate information services across all government 
institutions to facilitate climate responsive policies and decision-making and to undertake capacity building of 
government practitioners. The proposed GCF project intends to build the capacity of the CCCB to embed necessary 
skills training (ToT) for long-term sustainable delivery of the key aspects of the capacity development plan. 
161. At the municipal level, targeted trainings will focus on engineering methodologies that can help climate-proof 
infrastructure, including innovative bioengineering methods for slope stability. This new knowledge and set of skills 
will create the conditions for new engineering practice for more resilient infrastructure development in the country. 
Through developing manuals and guidelines on infrastructure climate proofing for each category of infrastructure and 
training municipal staff in the application of these methods, the project is embedding climate resilient infrastructure 
implementation and long-term management approaches. Following this effort, relevant institutions at national and 
sub-national level will be strengthened to embed such knowledge and skills for continuity of the learning process.  To 
this end the project will implement the capacity development priorities identified by SSRI and fully consider lessons 
and findings of SSRI to institute the required capacities, provide tools, methods, engineering skills and other enabling 
conditions (including the production of climate risk information) to establish an iterative practice of climate proofing 
for small-scale infrastructure within the PDIM and PNDS frameworks. The project has also embedded training and 
TOT methods for all project activities to instil knowledge through sustained mechanisms of training, guidance and 
knowledge generation. The social resilience of communities will be strengthened through a robust knowledge 
management approach at the community level, utilizing existing CCAPRID - Capacity Development on Climate 
Change Adaptation Planning for Rural Infrastructure Development and CAMP -    Community Action Management 
Plan processes.  In addition, socio-economic data to be collected (Activity 1.1) and updated using local 
labour/knowledge will engage the community at a whole-of-catchment scale.  Implementation of the Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan will include community engagement and capacity development on topics to include climate risk 
management and resilience building measures. Meanwhile, formation of community catchment management groups 
will improve ownership of these interventions while implementation of the Gender Action Plan will ensure that 
interventions take account of gender specific requirements and enhance gender equality in Timor Leste.  In addition, 
the strengthening of cooperatives through the development and implementation of the agro-forestry strategy will 
embed knowledge and learning of resilient and sustainable agro-forestry methods and practices within communities.  
 
162. The project will implement a knowledge management (KM) framework (See Chapter 12 of the FS for detailed 
description of the KM framework).  It will have the following key aims: 
• 
To ensure access to data and information generated by the project as well as long-term access to data on which 
stakeholders’ essential institutional functions rely and/or data and information that can be used for evidence for 
policy and practice advice (connecting people to information and knowledge)  
• 
Connect key stakeholder groups, practitioners and experts to ensure that key learning and experience is shared 
within and across sectors (connecting people to people)  
• 
Ensure staff in the stakeholder institutions know about effective and relevant KM techniques so that knowledge 
is shared, captured and retained by the institutions and shared within and across the sector (institutional KM 
improvement)  
• 
By developing and promoting KM as a tool for continuous and sustainable improvement and ensuring that KM 
tools generated by the project will be systematically used and maintained within the stakeholder institutions 
(Developing and embedding KM tools and practices).

=== PAGE 52 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 99 
 
 E 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
 
163. The project is creating three main categories of enabling conditions for climate resilient communities and their 
physical assets. First, innovative tools and methods will be introduced for hazard, risk and vulnerability assessment, 
modelling and mapping. Based on this, definitive hazard maps will be provided for key hazards for Timor Leste.  Cost-
benefit analysis methods and tools will be introduced to embed climate-risk informed, appraisal-led methods of 
strategic planning for Disaster Risk Management and climate change adaptation. A comprehensive approach to 
damages and losses accounting will be developed and tools such as a damage and loss digital template (for use on 
field officers’ mobile phones) will be introduced to collect and transmit damage and loss data in real time. A single 
comprehensive loss and damage database will be developed and linked to municipality staff and field officer data 
collection systems. This will provide timely and transparent data collection, transmission, storage, and use of data 
and will address a current lack of data on climate impacts and disaster losses. Enhanced efforts to collect loss data, 
coupled with the development of transparent methodologies and the provision of standardized datasets, are urgently 
needed. Asset Management systems linked to the damage and loss database and utilizing climate risk data will 
enable systematic condition monitoring and portfolio-risk-assessment based asset management of infrastructure.  
Data sharing systems across key sectoral institutions concerned with infrastructure development will enable a 
seamless data sharing for risk assessments and risk validation that is critical for risk informed budgeting and resource 
allocation. Furthermore, technologies will be utilized to create efficiency in this process. For example, use of drone 
technology for risk assessment and a long-term observation of change at broader geographical scales (of coastal 
and inland mountain watersheds) is effective in an island setting. Use of GPS enables local field officers and even 
community members to participate in local risk assessments by recording coordinates of vulnerable infrastructure as 
well as change in river flow directions. The GPS data and drone imagery will feed the GIS-based risk and vulnerability 
maps that will underpin land use decisions, risk reduction and infrastructure development investments. This will also 
determine target sub-watersheds for rehabilitation and agro-forestry schemes. Second, the project will strengthen 
institutions in their functions of adaptation planning and implementation. Decentralized investment mechanisms such 
as PDIM (district / municipal) and PNDS (suco / village) will be supported throughout their planning cycles. By 
embedding climate risk criteria into PDIM and PNDS planning manuals and guiding documents, the project will create 
planning and budgeting conditions that support climate risk management in the target vulnerable districts. This will 
benefit resident vulnerable populations and their essential economic assets (including water supply, irrigation and 
transport infrastructure). Third, the project will create the conditions to unlock both public and private sector finance 
for scalable investments into local development and climate risk reduction. Municipal investment plans based on cost-
benefit analysis and appraisal-led identification of climate-resilient infrastructure investment requirements will identify 
both public and private finance mechanisms. Such investment planning will enable evidence-based advocacy for 
public sector investment into climate-resilient infrastructure. In addition, the project enables community agro-forestry. 
This creates benefits for catchment management and provides an enabling environment for entrepreneurialism, thus 
lifting livelihood pressures off the land and addressing current financial access restrictions in rural communities.

=== PAGE 53 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 99 
 
 E 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
 
164. The project will create enabling conditions by addressing the current gaps in the disaster and climate change policies 
and respective subsidiary legislation concerning their enforcement. It will specifically focus on the regulations and 
procedures of municipal / district and village level investment plans to require and enforce climate risk reduction 
strategies. The project will develop the construction and building codes (in relation to water supply, flood defense and 
transport infrastructure) that include both construction standards and O&M protocols to enable climate proofing. 
Environmental and Social Impact assessment law and regulations will be adjusted to integrate climate risk management 
requirements as well as ensure that climate proofing measures on infrastructure are environmentally sustainable and 
socially acceptable. Strongly considering the customary law and traditions that influence land use decisions, the project 
will integrate adaptation policy measures into the land and forest laws. These measures will be devised to facilitate such 
climate risk management interventions as watershed rehabilitation and enabling community-led and managed agro-
forestry schemes. 
 
165. Existing institutions, policies and regulatory frameworks significantly influence the lives of the rural poor.  Supporting 
the capabilities of existing national, and especially local public institutions in servicing the rural communities and 
reorienting the existing policies of institutions in favour of the poor is an increasingly expected result of development 
projects and is an expected outcome of this project. This encompasses the change brought about in sectoral and 
national policies affecting the rural communities and their exposure. In addition, the degree of decentralization, which 
allows decision making to be taken at the local level, is also a relevant consideration and important to this project.   
 
166. The issues of uptake of climate risk information as the basis for policy and decision making will lead to barrier removal 
to drive uptake and investments in climate-resilient community infrastructure planning and implementation. 
167. The project is attempting to strengthen the PDIM and PNDS processes. As such, the project has the potential to have 
a long-term impact by effectively embedding climate risk considerations and resilience into the planning design and 
construction of small scale rural infrastructure.  The project will raise awareness to climate risks and build institutional 
and community capacity to address these risks, implement climate resilient infrastructure, and strengthen livelihoods 
(Activities 2.2 and 2.3). A key area of focus is the embedding of climate risk considerations into sector policy, and the 
project will leverage the evidence it gathered from the SSRI project to inform the wider policy framework.  
 
168. The GCF contribution to policy level work includes long-term catchment management strategies for risk reduction and 
improvements in overarching CRM and DRM policy frameworks.   It also includes the introduction of knowledge tools, 
guiding documents, investment planning, and CR information into sectoral strategies.  
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential 
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive development impact 
 
169. Main economic benefits from the project investment are derived from avoided economic losses due to climate change-
induced disasters.  Under climate change, economic losses by mid-century from single extreme hazard events are 
estimated to be $203 Million, $37 Million, $10 Million and $12.5 Million USD for landslides, floods, erosion and drought 
respectively.  These economic losses combined will result in a GDP loss of nearly 11.5%41. The ability to develop and 
deploy infrastructure services that are resilient to these climate changes will deliver significant economic benefits by not 
only avoiding economic losses (i.e. reduced rehabilitation and asset replacement costs), but also by creating new 
livelihood opportunities for the communities that will benefit from functioning water supply and irrigation networks, stable 
roads and bridges, and flood protection infrastructure (e.g. gabions combined with bioengineering methods). At least 
30 engineers will benefit from newly acquired skills and job opportunities to design and deploy climate resilient 
                                                             
41 Based on current GDP of $2.3 Billion.

=== PAGE 54 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 99 
 
 E 
infrastructure. These new skills will be in high demand both within the country and in the broader region. Local 
construction companies and community members will directly benefit from new construction work opportunities offered 
by the GCF investment, accompanied by the opportunity to further develop skills and participate in a growing labour 
market of climate proofing technologies. At least 1,500 workers will be employed over the course of the implementation 
of the project. In addition, new livelihood opportunities will be delivered by creating enabling conditions to develop 
community-managed agroforestry. Agroforestry systems offer a diverse set of products and can offer short / medium- 
term economic returns to growers while waiting for trees to mature. Such smallholder systems will include intercropping 
with agriculture crops in the early stages of establishment, offering immediate returns. Some of Timor Leste’s indigenous 
tree species are of international significance (Santalum album, Eucalyptus urophylla and Casuarina junghuhniana). 
Some of them have good properties of nitrogen fixation and soil fertilization, provide for fuel wood and construction 
material, and shade other important commercial varieties like coffee. Furthermore, small-grower agroforestry 
businesses can support and benefit from small and large industries, such as furniture, rural building construction, 
veneer, etc. 
 
170. Social benefits of the project relate to increased safety and protection of the local population from climate related 
disasters. Thousands of people in Timor Leste remain isolated during disasters such as floods, flash floods or landslides. 
Unstable infrastructure (or, in many cases, a sheer absence of it) keeps inhabitants of remote municipalities and villages 
cut off from basic transport services and unable to access local markets, health centres, or schools. Women are 
particularly affected as they need to reach hospitals during their pregnancy or attend to the health needs of their children. 
A damaged water supply network also forces women to walk long hours to reach the nearest water sources to collect 
water for the home. During the wet season, many isolated villages fear that floods will destroy their assets and keep 
them away from any available support. GCF investment will therefore safeguard local communities and their assets 
from climate disasters.  At the community level, the project will build capacity to identify climate risks and include climate 
resilient projects as part of future PDIM and PNDS processes. This will empower communities and help them adapt to 
climate change. The proposed GCF project is striving to engage and empower women in building resilient infrastructure 
that meets their needs and addresses some of their vulnerabilities.  It is doing so in the following ways: Deliberate 
targeting of women in the PDIM and PNDS project prioritisation and design process as applied and develop in SSRI 
project and during feasibility study. It considers roles of women in customary social roles and family responsibilities and 
the ways that they are specifically impacted by CC. The community engagement process during prioritisation of the 130 
infrastructure units, secured their input on current water supply issues which requires them to walk long distances daily 
to fetch water, and the optimum location of communal standpipes which will serve their villages and reduce this burden.  
In addition, women have been consulted on their farming practices and their input in the design of the relevant irrigation 
schemes has been secured.  In addition, risks to their agricultural productivity and therefore their ability to feed their 
families was fully taken into account in developing the agro-forestry requirements which will address current crop yield 
issues due to soil erosion.  The types of crops to be planted under the agro-forestry takes account of the family ‘bread-
basket’ requirement of the households and the saleability of surplus produce, in each municipality. Furthermore, in 
undertaking the socio-economic cost benefit analysist of the project, we have included gender-specific benefits of each 
infrastructure unit in our calculations.  Furthermore, these gender-responsive methods of socio-economic assessment 
will be embedding in the long-term PDIM and PNDS process for the identification and prioritisation of projects in the 
future and will be embedded in the guidelines and methodologies. In summary, the project is embedding the gender–
responsive community consultation approaches that were developed under the SSRI project into the PDIM and PNDS 
process guidelines and methodologies. The project is contributing to gender empowerment by reducing the time it takes 
for chores to be done by women (e.g. fetching water) and providing access to better hygiene and health through the 
supply of drinking water.  Water supply projects have added benefits for subsistence farming as water supply systems 
are not only being used for drinking water, but for ‘kitchen’ subsistence gardens as well.  In addition, road stabilisation 
projects provide access to markets (both directions) and link communities, thus allowing for greater trade and 
cooperation. With regard to food security, irrigation projects have the potential to provide increased annual productivity 
and yield to communities that have more secure water availability for their rice production.  Through the community 
engagement processes, the project will embed gender-differentiated aspects of climate risks into community-based risk 
mapping. In addition, disaggregating data collection procedures will inform infrastructure prioritisation, design and 
implementation. 
 
171. Environmental benefits mainly relate to disaster risk reduction investments both in climate proofed infrastructure and 
watershed rehabilitation. 300 ha of rehabilitated forest cover and a further 1200ha from MAF co-financing, will provide

=== PAGE 55 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 99 
 
 E 
water retention and runoff formation; regulation of hydrological flows (buffer runoff, soil infiltration, groundwater 
recharge, maintenance of base flows); natural hazard mitigation (e.g. flood prevention, peak flow reduction, landslide 
stabilization) and improve groundwater quality, benefiting 208,367 residents in the target districts42.  The water supply 
projects will provide environmental, social and health benefits by contributing to improved sanitation and hygiene 
through the provision of water supply and through close collaboration with WASH projects.  The GCF project will directly 
contribute to and complement WASH efforts on the ground. 
 
172. Environmental benefits that would accrue from catchment management include resource conservation, crop production 
and alternate land-use systems. Catchment management interventions of the project will integrate and address both 
water and the related land resources that affect or are affected by hydrometeorological hazards. Benefits will include 
management of floods and droughts, surface water and groundwater, water supply and water quality. Related land 
resources include streams, wetlands, forests, soil, fisheries, flora and fauna. 
 
173. Agroforestry systems play an important role in conservation of natural resources, especially soil. Adoption of 
agroforestry practices enhances the productivity of resource poor small and marginal farmers. Agroforestry has both 
productive and service functions. Among the productive functions, fuel wood, fodder and fruit are the most important 
besides construction wood, gums, resins, medicines, fibres and a host of other economic base and greater food security. 
The service functions include shade, reduction in wind speed, control of erosion and maintenance and improvement of 
soil fertility.  Agroforestry systems increase nutrients inputs through nitrogen fixing trees and nutrient uptake from deep 
soil horizons. They reduce nutrient leaching losses through tree root and mycorrhizal systems. Agroforestry systems 
recycle nutrients through decomposition of litter, pruning and root residues. While agroforests are typically less diverse 
than native forest, they do contain a significant number of plant and animal species. This diversity can, in time, provide 
ecological resilience and contribute to the maintenance of beneficial ecological functions. Similar to plantation forests, 
agroforests can help relieve some of the pressure to harvest native forests. 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient 
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only) 
 
174. Timor Leste faces high- to medium- levels of risk associated with multiple natural hazards. Every year it suffers from 
localized (and relatively small-scale) yet extensive disaster events, mostly related to climate variability. 43 This is 
compounded by the country’s vulnerability to climate change, arising from the cyclical effects of the Pacific region’s El 
Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and rainfall variability. As a result of climate change, rural populations, in particular 
women and children, face increased risks and vulnerabilities.  
 
Climate Change in Timor Leste 
 
175. Climate change is causing Timor Leste to become hotter and drier, with increasingly variable rainfall44.  Projections 
cited in the reports of Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)45, including those of the Commonwealth 
Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO)46 project notable changes in the region’s future climate. The 
following conclusions are based on historical climate data and the results of climate scenarios generated with both the 
                                                             
42 Economic appraisal of the benefits of agro-forestry has used REDD+ assessment methods to measure both regulatory and 
provisioning benefits and the latter came out as marginal compared to the former, therefore this is not presented as a cross-cutting 
project.  
43 UNISDR. Global Assessment Report 2011. New York, 2011. 
44  Vulnerability to Climate Variability and Change in East Timor, Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, Ambio, vol. 36, no. 5, (J. 
Barrett, S. Dessai, RN Jones, 2005) 
45 IPCC. 2007. Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the 
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK, and New York, 94 pp. Available at:  
http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/publications_and_data_reports.shtml 
46 Kirono D (2010) Climate change in Timor-Leste—a brief overview on future climate projections. CSIRO National Research 
Flagships, Aspendale, Victoria.

=== PAGE 56 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 99 
 
 E 
Regional Climate Model (RCM) using the A1B emission scenario and also 20 Global Circulation Models (GCMs) using 
new emission scenarios, Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs)47: 
 
176. In Timor Leste, temperature has been increasing consistently by about 0.016 degrees Celsius per year (INC, 2014).  
Prior to the 2040s, the mean temperature anomalies in Timor Leste are expected to increase by up to as much as 1°C 
for all emission scenarios. For the high emission scenario (RCP8.5) the increase in temperature relative to current 
conditions may reach 3°C by 2100, while for the low emission scenario (RCP2.6) it may increase by up to 0.5°C., It is 
expected to increase by 0.8–3.6 °C by 2070. Rainfall is predicted to decrease in the dry season and increase in the wet 
season with overall rainfall increasing by 7–13% by 2050. Extreme rainfall events such as tropical cyclones are expected 
to decrease in frequency but increase in intensity48. Furthermore, an increase in rainfall is predicted for areas of high 
altitude. For example, the mountainous districts are projected to experience higher increase in rainfall during the wet 
season49. 
 
177. Historical data suggests that during the 20th century and early 21st century, there were already some shifts in the peak 
of the wet season. In the future, the wet season onset may be delayed by about 20 days from the current climate pattern, 
while dry season onset will be delayed by as much as 11 days, depending on the period and emission scenarios. Thus, 
in some areas the length of the wet season would shorten. Extreme rainfall events are projected to become fewer but 
more intense as a result of decreasing numbers of tropical cyclones albeit with stronger intensity (Pacific Climate 
Change Science Program 2011). Decreases in rainfall are projected in some parts of the country, as well as changes 
in its seasonal distribution, with respect to the 1981-2010 conditions. For example, the drier area on the northern coast 
of the country (annual rainfall less than 1000 mm) will expand in the future.  These changes in both spatial and temporal 
rainfall distribution will have significant impact on the water balance, which suggests that the area with a duration of 
water deficit period (LDP) of more than 8 months will expand while the area with LDP<5 months will shrink. Historically, 
the sea level surrounding the main island of the country has risen at about 5.5 mm/year.  Following this pattern, over 
100 years, sea level rise may reach 76 cm. Based on varying predictions, sea level is expected to rise by between 9 
and 88 cm by the year 2100. In addition, based on the Pacific Climate Change Science Program (2011); Pacific Ocean 
acidification has also been increasing in Timor Leste’s waters. It will continue to increase and threaten coral ecosystems.  
 
Underlying vulnerabilities 
 
178. The degree of geographic isolation/access to urban areas coupled with socio-economic conditions demonstrates that 
most rural settlements in the country are highly vulnerable and susceptible to climate change induced risks. An ADB 
study on least developed sucos (villages) measured the living standards across the country against the asset index50. 
The sucos with highest living standards are concentrated around the capital Dili and close to district centres. Sucos with 
the lowest living standards are the most remote and have small population. Access to infrastructure is higher in sucos 
with higher living standards, and there is a large gap in access between groups. For example, of the 89 sucos with the 
lowest living standards, the average share of households with electricity is only 3%. This compares with an average 
share of 66% in the 89 sucos with the highest living standards. Access to improved water and improved sanitation is 
also much higher in sucos with high living standards.  
 
179. In addition to asset, social and infrastructure indexes, capacity to cope is also an important index of vulnerability. When 
coping capacity is considered, the analysis showed that the impact of climate change is dependent on the size of the 
                                                             
47 Climate change assessments from the INC and other studies provides the evidence basis for the climate change discussion 
48 Wallace, L. Sundaram, B. Brodie, R.S. Marshal, S. Dawson, S. Jaycock, J. Stewart, G and Furness L. 2012. Vulnerability 
assessment of climate change impacts on groundwater resources in Timor-Leste. Department of Climate Change and Energy 
Efficiency, Australian Government. Available at:  
https://www.environment.gov.au/system/files/resources/3bf4aa02-6fa1-4c84-8f52-64773a63cfa9/files/groundwater-timor-leste-
report.pdf 
49 Moss, J. & McGann, M. October, 2011. Climate Change and Energy Poverty in Timor-Leste. University of Melbourne, Social Justice 
Initiative. 
50 Asian Development Bank (2013) Least Developed Sucos, Timor-Leste. The assets used are (i) the share of houses in a suco with 
good quality floors, roof, or walls; (ii) the share of households owning a hand tractor, television, motorcycle, radio, telephone or mobile 
phone, refrigerator or freezer, bicycle, car or van, rice husker, rice mill, or boat; and (iii) the average number per person of chickens, 
pigs, sheep, goats, horses, cattle or cows, and buffalos. Based on these assets, the asset index has been calculated.

=== PAGE 57 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 99 
 
 E 
change (the increase in % of the municipality which will be affected by the highest category of the particular hazard) as 
well as the coping capacity for that municipality. This points to the need to enhance the coping capacity of communities 
and provides a means of identifying where the enhancement of components of coping capacity, namely infrastructure 
assets, livelihoods and socio-economic conditions, need to be prioritised to address the most vulnerable to climate 
change. The analysis shows that the climate risks to infrastructure and livelihoods is increasing, and that those who are 
most affected by such risks will be those least able to cope. This therefore demonstrates the need to address increasing 
risks to infrastructure, while also addressing threats to the communities.   
 
180. Women play an important role in Timor Leste’s rural communities. In particular, they are active in agriculture as 
cultivators, laborers and family workers. However, women face significant barriers and inequalities in terms of access 
to and control over resources such as land, capital and credit as well as access to agricultural inputs and technology, 
training, information and marketing services. This hinders their full participation in social and economic life in rural 
communities. Women and girls in Timor Leste are particularly vulnerable to food insecurity. Consequently, they suffer 
from malnutrition which leads to high rate of maternal, infant and child mortality (Seeds of Life III, 2010). Women’s ability 
to attain food security through higher agricultural productivity is disproportionally affected by their low social 
empowerment, weak community influence and lack of control over and access to income, resource and information 
(Seeds of Life III, 2010). It is further hindered by their isolation due to a lack of mobility and basic infrastructure. 
Eliminating gender gaps in rural communities is thus paramount to achieving productive rural communities in Timor 
Leste. 
 
181. When the impact of climate change with coping capacity considerations is assessed for each receptor type (roads, 
agriculture, water sources, houses) and taking all hazards into consideration, the following municipalities emerge as the 
most climate vulnerable: Baucau, Ermera, Aileu, Viqueque and Lautem.  Liquica is also identified as particularly 
susceptible to flooding.  Based on the assessment of damages and losses under baseline and climate change 
conditions, the 6 target municipalities will incur the following percentage of the total national losses from a single hazard 
event under climate change: 63% of property and 63% of crop income losses, 27 %51 of property and 45% of crop 
income flood losses, 54% of crop income erosion losses and 54% of crop income drought losses.  The people and 
infrastructure in target municipalities are therefore disproportionally affected by these climate-induced hazards.   
 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
 
182. Timor Leste is a post-conflict low income economy with the poverty rate measured at 49%. Over 70% of the population, 
and over 80% of the female workforce, is engaged in subsistence agriculture, where low crop yields persist. According 
to the World Food Programme, 20% of the population is food insecure and an additional 24% are vulnerable to food 
insecurity. This is largely due to high poverty rates, severe deficiencies in infrastructure and public services, but also 
due to increased climate variability and extreme events. Public education and training services are currently not up to 
a standard to build a productive, qualified, and skilled population. This translates into weak institutions that are largely 
understaffed, and not staffed by skilled personnel. 
 
183. Since gaining independence in 1999, Timor Leste has faced great challenges in rebuilding its infrastructure, 
strengthening civil administration, and generating jobs for young people entering the workforce. The development of 
offshore oil and gas resources has greatly supplemented government revenues. This technology-intensive industry, 
however, has done little to create jobs in part because there are no production facilities in Timor Leste, though there 
are plans to develop domestic processing capacity. 
 
184. The government has focused significant resources on basic infrastructure, including electricity and roads. Limited 
experience in procurement and infrastructure building has hampered these projects. The underlying economic policy 
challenge the country faces remains how best to use oil-and-gas wealth to lift the non-oil economy onto a higher growth 
path and to reduce poverty. 
 
                                                             
51 It should be noted that Dili on its own will incur 54% of flood losses due to the density of its population so 27% across the 6 target 
municipalities is still significant and essentially more than 50% of the risk outside Dili.

=== PAGE 58 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 99 
 
 E 
185. Gross domestic product is $2.3 Billion USD (based on 2011 purchasing power parity), with 1.65% of GDP coming from 
Foreign Direct Investment, while 9.4% are remittances.  Gross national income per capita is $5,362.50 USD (2011 
purchasing power parity) with development assistance at 6% of GNI.   Of note, and related to the poverty indicators, is 
the domestic credit provided by financial sector, totalling -53.6% of GDP.  The negative value for Timor Leste indicates 
a weak and unstable domestic financial framework and this is reflected in a very limited access to finance. 
 
186. In Timor Leste 64.3% of the population (694,000 people) are multi-dimensionally poor while an additional 21.4% live 
near multidimensional poverty (231,000 people). The breadth of deprivation (intensity) in Timor-Leste, which is the 
average of deprivation scores experienced by people in multidimensional poverty, is 50.1%. The multidimensional 
poverty headcount is 29.4% points higher than income poverty. This implies that individuals living above the income 
poverty line may still suffer deprivations in education, health and other living conditions.  
 
187. In addition to existing socio-economic challenges, Timor Leste faces many institutional barriers that need to be 
resolved. These include: inadequate rural infrastructure investment, existing infrastructure that is prone to failure and 
not climate resilient, the limited and non-risk informed prioritization of rural infrastructure budget allocations coupled 
with a lack of access to alternative climate risk financing mechanisms such as private sector finance, and a lack of 
climate risk information to inform sectoral planning and decision making. In addition, land degradation exacerbating 
exposure of rural infrastructure to hazards and a lack of coping strategies and capacity at community level to adapt to 
CC will result in an increased susceptibility to disasters and a deepening of poverty of the rural poor.   
 
E.5.  Country Ownership 
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, NAPAs 
and NAPs 
 
188. The project is fully in line with the adaptation priorities expressed in National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA). 
The NAPA strongly prioritizes climate disaster risk reduction to protect local populations and physical infrastructure. 
Protection of forest and watershed forest rehabilitation linked with issues of food security are also underscored as 
important. 
  
189. The project is aligned with SDGs 5, 6, 10, 11,13, 15.  Specifically with regard the SDG 1 the project will  
 
• 
Strengthen the resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all countries; 
• 
Integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and planning 
• 
Improve education, awareness-raising and human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, 
adaptation, impact reduction and early warning; 
• 
Promote mechanisms for raising capacity for effective climate change-related planning and management in least 
developed countries and small island developing States, including focusing on women, youth and local and 
marginalized communities. 
 
190. The government’s Strategic Development Plan for 2011-2030 offers a vision, targets and indicators for the next two 
decades. It is built around four pillars: (i) Social capital: health, education and social protection; (ii) Infrastructure: 
transport, telecommunication, power, and water supply and sanitation; (iii) Economic foundations: targeting three 
sectors for development – agriculture, tourism and petrochemicals – to bring about growth, jobs, and new sources of 
public revenues beyond oil; and (iv) Institutional framework: focusing on macroeconomic management and improving 
the capacity and effectiveness of government institutions. The proposed project as described in the preceding sections 
is structured around these priorities and offers a direct contribution towards the strategic directions of SDP. The 
proposed project also contributes to SDG 1 most directly through its contribution towards the access to public services.  
 
191. The Draft National Climate Change Policy intends to provide policy guidance to mainstream climate change into the 
development policies and prioritizing climate resilience in the development plans.  The Policy includes specific sections

=== PAGE 59 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 99 
 
 E 
on climate resilient infrastructure, Loss and Damage and Disaster Risk Management and Decentralization, and the 
need to integrate climate resilience into different levels of governance as illustrated below:  
 
Climate Resilient Infrastructure 
192. The policy aims to: 
• 
Promote climate resilience and climate proofing approaches and concepts in small, medium and large scale 
infrastructure. 
• 
Identify and map all appropriate and effective climate proofing measures that have been practiced in the country 
and in the region. 
• 
Commission a comprehensive cost-benefit analysis to assess the benefits and losses incurred by climate change 
and climate-induced disasters, while integrating climate resilient options into infrastructure development designs. 
• 
Integrate climate resilience aspects into the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) regulations and introduce 
provisions to make EIAs mandatory for all infrastructure development activities. 
• 
Develop a climate risk zone map disaggregated by key climate risks to guide infrastructure development projects. 
• 
Identify the most climate vulnerable communities as well as the underlying factors contributing to their vulnerability. 
Recommend appropriate infrastructure development priorities in those areas, such as improved access to water, 
irrigation canals, roads, or health facilities, etc., to help enhance community resilience. 
• 
Develop the capacity of the technical teams responsible for designing, approving, commissioning and 
implementing infrastructure development projects in the government as well as private sector to integrate climate 
resilience and environmentally friendly options into their work. 
• 
Integrate climate resilience into the existing monitoring and evaluation templates used by government authorities 
such as Ministry of Public works, Transport and Communication. 
 
Loss and Damage 
• 
Collaborate with existing vulnerability assessments, natural disaster risk assessments and complement the 
information on existing and potential loss and damage incurred by the climate change, disaggregated by type of 
loss and damage, sector, and region.  
• 
Prepare a repository of data and information on the existing and potential loss and damage, disaggregated by 
sector, magnitude, gender, and geography. 
• 
Establish a Task Force led by the Multi-Stakeholder Committee for Climate Change specifically for Loss and 
Damage. 
 
Disaster Risk Management 
• 
Make provisions of updating climate risks and vulnerability zones in collaboration with the NDMD to prepare risk 
sensitive land use planning. 
• 
Implement Risk Sensitive Land Use Plan to ensure that human settlements and infrastructure are not built in 
climate risk zones or disaster prone areas. 
• 
Collaborate with the Ministry of Social Solidarity to develop local level disaster risk reduction action plans that can 
be used to prioritize and implement disaster risk management interventions at the community level. 
• 
Integrate disaster risk management aspects into local development plans and budget allocation guidelines. 
• 
Coordinate with national and subnational disaster operating units and centres to help make informed decisions. 
• 
Integrate early warning mechanisms and early recovery mechanisms into livelihood enhancement programmes 
such that there is an integrated approach to managing disaster risks at the community level. 
• 
Create a platform for better coordination and collaboration between climate change adaptation and disaster risk 
management interventions. 
• 
Make provisions of community shelters to evacuate people at risk during the event of climate induced disasters. 
• 
Promote integrated watershed management aspects, sustainable infrastructure development and community-
based approaches to disaster risk management.

=== PAGE 60 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 99 
 
 E 
193.  The Draft Disaster Risk Management (DRM) Policy underscores the need for robust, systematic and reliable climate 
data to make informed decisions on DRM and the linkages between the climate change adaptation measures and DRM 
measures.  The alignment and complementarity with climate change actions and priorities are made visible through the 
objectives and priorities in the DRM Policy, such as: 
• 
The DRM Policy will “create an integrated national capacity to identify, assess and monitor disaster risks (including 
hazards, vulnerabilities, exposure levels and economic effects together with prevailing capacities), including the 
effects of climate change”. 
• 
The DRM Policy will “promote development planning and programming into which disaster risk management is 
integrated along with climate change adaptation. 
 
194. To ensure that the disaster risk management aspects are well integrated into different levels of planning, budgeting 
and execution of local and national development, the DRM policy proposes key areas of intervention including a) Risk 
assessment and identification; b) Preparedness and Response Planning; and c) DRM communication. Proposed areas 
of intervention under Risk Assessment and Identification are:  
• 
improved risk assessment and mapping,  
• 
access to assessment data to all stakeholders in disaster risk management,  
• 
comprehensive disaster damage and loss data management to provide tools for analysis, planning and 
programming alongside risk assessment 
 
195. The Revised Draft National Forest Policy emphasizes the integration of conservation, protection, and management of 
forest resources. Though the linkages have been drawn with allied sectors such as watershed management, agriculture, 
biodiversity, land use management, and cross cutting aspects (such as capacity development and climate change), 
these linkages are not very strong. The policy instruments that have been identified to facilitate implementation of the 
Policy are: 
• 
community-based management of forests and watersheds 
• 
participatory reforestation and land restoration 
• 
forest conservation and protection 
• 
market and enterprise development 
• 
extension, training, research and information 
• 
incentives, valuation and monitoring 
 
196. Direct reference to climate change is made under the Policy Instrument of the Forest Conservation and Protection and 
climate change adaptation under the community-based management of forests and watershed, forest resource based 
market and enterprise development and the participatory reforestation and land restoration topic areas.  The linkages 
drawn speak to the need for control of land degradation, sustainable land use management, combating desertification, 
reforestation and climate vulnerability assessment with focus on forest resources and forest management also have 
strong climate change adaptation and mitigation connections. 
 
197.  MAF’s Strategic Development Plan 2014-2020 (MAF SDP) was developed based on the priorities for the agriculture, 
fisheries and forestry sectors outlined in the Timor Leste National Strategic Development Plan 2011-2030. MAF SDP's 
main objectives are to: (i) focus on agricultural and rural development that supports small farmers and promotes 
improved markets in order to reduce poverty; (ii) ensure food and nutrition security, and sovereignty; and (iii) promote 
economic growth and employment in rural areas, and thus across the nation.  
 
198. MAF commenced in 2015 a review of the National Forest Law with support from the Food and Agriculture Organisation 
(FAO) and is currently developing a long-term forestry investment plan to diversify from the largely oil-dependent 
economy, which is a strong signal of the renewed priority being placed in the development of the forestry sector.  
 
199. Furthermore, in June 2016 the GoTL sent to the National Parliament the draft new Land Law which will, inter alia, 
provide the required legal framework for agroforestry, giving more security and ownership to local assets (i.e. land and 
trees).   Customary rights are mentioned in the new proposed Land Law but there is a lack of provision on how 
communities’ rights will be protected and how to create an enabling environment that would sustain agroforestry 
development.

=== PAGE 61 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 99 
 
 E 
200. There is strong commitment from the government of Timor Leste to implement this project.  The project is based on an 
approach that seeks to build national executing capacity, to ensure maximum ownership and sustainability. Wherever 
possible, activities will be led by government department and external assistance or service providers will be contracted 
on an as needed basis.  
 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
 
201. UNDP is one of the largest brokers of climate change grant support to developing countries focusing on the main 
signature programmes: (i) supporting integrated climate change strategies; (ii) advancing cross-sectoral climate resilient 
livelihoods; (iii) ecosystem-based adaptation; (iv) fostering resilience for food security; (v) climate resilient integrated 
water resources and coastal management; and (vi) promoting climate resilient infrastructure and energy. UNDP globally 
has an excellent track record and experience in implementing climate adaptation and disaster risk reduction 
programmes and projects as well as highly competent technical team at HQs and regional offices.   
 
202. UNDP provides a vital coordination role for catalyzing enhanced capacity to adapt to climate change risks and impacts 
across sectors in Timor Leste. The UNDP Country Office plays an important convening role for an entire UN system 
serving to consolidate all efforts across multiple UN agencies under the unifying framework of “delivering as one”.  
 
203. UNDP in Timor Leste has a long-standing relationship with the key ministries and departments and in close partnership 
delivers the largest climate change and disaster risk reduction portfolio in the country (amounting to USD $18 million in 
2017). Therefore, UNDP Country Office in Timor Leste has a track record of implementing large scale projects, with 
both soft and hard assistance components. UNDP in Timor Leste, through its government partner the Ministry of State 
Administration, has recently successfully completed the Small Scale Rural Infrastructure, or SSRI, project. This 
prototype project will serve as a basis for scaling up under this GCF project.  The country office in Timor Leste is 
supported by Regional Technical Advisors at the UNDP offices in Bangkok, Thailand, as well as by policy, adaptation, 
economics and climate modelling experts in at the HQ and regional offices. The project will be implemented by Ministry 
of Commerce, Industry and Environment using UNDP’s National Implementation Modality, which is designed to ensure 
domestic systems are used for accountability. The interventions through this project will be compliant with the Fund’s 
ESS and compliant with stakeholder consultations. UNDP has a three-tiered quality assurance system. Services that 
UNDP will provide to the Implementing Partner in support of achieving project outcomes includes undertaking all 
procurement for the project. UNDP’s services will be provided by staff in the UNDP Country Office (Dili), UNDP Asia 
Pacific Regional Hub (Bangkok) and UNDP Headquarters (New York). UNDP will act as the Quality Assurance partner 
for the project. 
 
204. While the overall execution/implementation of project will rest upon the MCIE as an implementing partner, concrete 
outputs and activities/sub-activities will be implemented by a combination of experts from a number of parties.  These 
will include various government entities as responsible parties (relationships facilitated through Letter of Agreements 
between UNDP and responsible parties), as well as consultant teams and organizations which will be procured through 
open competitions and request for proposals. More specifically, the project will engage the following responsible parties 
in achieving project outputs: 
 
205. Ministry of Commerce Industry and Environment (MCIE): This agency houses the National Directorate for Climate 
Change and the Centre for Climate Change and Biodiversity and is the lead government agency on climate change 
policy and legislation. It is comprised of three national directorates – National Directorate for Climate Change (NDCC), 
National Directorate for Planning Control and Environmental Impact (NDCPEI), and the National Directorate of Pollution 
and Biodiversity (NDPB).  The NDCC is mainly focused on international climate change activities, while NDCPEI 
(planning application) and NDPB undertake biodiversity impact assessments for infrastructure projects. The NDPEI 
directorate is responsible for EIA as well as project categorisation and signoff of projects based on successful EIA 
completion. The role of MCIE includes the development of methodologies for addressing climate risk in all sectors, 
collaboration on bioengineering methods, and undertaking EIA and environmental safeguarding of infrastructure 
projects.  The GEF, GCF and UNFCC focal points and Designated National Authority for Timor Leste also sit within the 
MCIE. Main programmes implemented with the applicable UN agency/ies include: Renewable Energy Project; -Second 
National Communication (SNC) Project; Strengthening the Resilience of Small Scale Rural Infrastructure (SSRI) Project

=== PAGE 62 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 99 
 
 E 
and Local Government Systems to Climate Variability and Risk, Timor Leste (SSRI Project); Strengthening Community 
Resilience to Climate induced disasters in the Dili to Ainaro Road Development Corridor, Timor Leste (DARDC Project); 
GCF Readiness; Cross Cutting Capacity Development (PIF formulation). For this GCF project, the MCIE will be the 
Implementing Partner (specifically through the Climate Change Directorate) responsible for coordinating project 
activities. MCIE will also be responsible for coordination of cross-sectoral climate risk working group. 
 
206. Ministry of State Administration (MSA): This agency is responsible for infrastructure at all levels and, through the 
National Directorate for Local Administration, is responsible for local development and good governance through 
decentralisation of functions. PDIM and PNDS processes are the main mechanisms by which this decentralisation of 
infrastructure development is achieved.  Community-driven programmes using the PDIM process are therefore of 
importance to the MSA and fully aligned with the strategy of decentralisation for local level rural economic development. 
Likewise the PDIM and PNDS are aligned with the Strategic Development Plan 2011-2030, which includes the opening 
of rural roads to all hamlets and actively promoting revegetation and reforestation to protect the forests.  Under this 
GCF project, the MSA will be the lead agency and Responsible Party for Activities 2.1 and 2.2, and their activities will 
include development of standards, manuals, guidelines for climate resilient designs, responsible for leading the 
municipality engineers on the design and implementation of climate resilient infrastructure. The MSA was the main 
implementing agency for the SSRI project. Under the GCF project, the MSA will be responsible for: developing long-
term municipal investment plans for PDIM and PNDS; liaising with MCIE on climate change policy, legislation and cross-
sector CC risk information embedding; supporting standardization of climate resilient designs, evidence- based policy 
influencing and scaling up; organizing awareness raising and training events; development of step-by-step guidelines 
for climate risk reduction measures for all categories of small-scale rural infrastructure (water supply, road and bridges, 
irrigation, flood defences) through the PDIM manual – CAMP; and development of community-based management and 
maintenance protocols (such as the GMF manual, KAM), municipal procurement guidelines, and administrative post 
and the Ministerial Technical Committee review checklists. The MSA will provide technical assistance to Administrative 
Post (AP) staff in prioritizing projects at this level and in undertaking an appropriate number of feasibility studies on 
which to base climate-risk informed project prioritization.  At the municipal level, the MSA will introduce climate risk 
criteria into the prioritization process. Furthermore, the MSA will undertake detailed CBAs for 130 prioritised 
infrastructure projects in 6 target municipalities. They will also provide capacity development to enhance the ability to 
undertake engineering feasibility studies and incorporate climate-risk considerations.  
 
207. The Ministry of Social Solidarity (MSS) - National Disaster Management Directorate (NDMD) and the National Disaster 
Operation Centre (NDOC): The MSS is responsible for providing disaster risk management coordination and technical 
support to the government and communities in Timor Leste. The National Disaster Management Directorate (NDMD) 
and the National Disaster Operation Centre (NDOC) are organisations within the Ministry of Social Solidarity.  MSS will 
be the lead agency and Responsible Party for Activities 1.1 and 1.2.  Utilizing technical assistance, the MSS will develop 
and undertake multi-hazard, risk, and vulnerability assessments and mapping as well as damage and loss accounting 
activities. As part of this process they will work with communities to identify past impacts from hazards.  Their main 
responsibility will be for DRR, DRM, establishment and maintenance of DRM systems, and the purchase and 
maintenance of software, hardware, and equipment for the monitoring and management of climate-induced disasters.  
The MSS will be responsible for development of DRMapp as well as the purchase and maintenance of drone equipment 
and technology and development of mobile GIS-based asset condition inspection methods and tools. In addition, the 
MSS will be responsible for development of the asset management system and damage and loss database as well as 
the development and introduction of guidelines for new systems and methodologies and the coordination and 
management of municipality disaster data collection. 
 
208. The Ministry of Public Works, National Directorate for Water Resources and BESIK, is responsible for policy, planning, 
execution, organisation and monitoring of all water systems implemented by government and also all government 
partners. All agencies and NGOs who work on water supply system activities must work directly with the directorate for 
Water and Sanitation. The directorate will provide input to Activity 2.1 via development of Climate proofing standards 
and manuals for rural water supply and flood defence infrastructure, collaboration on climate resilient design approaches 
and sustainable O&M methods for rural water, sanitation and hygiene sectors, and standardization of designs and 
climate resilient policy development.  The Ministry of Public Works, National Directorate for Water Resources will also 
be involved in the design and implementation of water supply schemes under the project.

=== PAGE 63 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 99 
 
 E 
209. The Ministry of Public Works’ Roads 4 Development effort will be involved in the design of roads, road drainage 
structures and other related small infrastructure works. In addition, they will help with the standardization of designs and 
climate resilient policy development related to rural roads, and technical capacity development for communities and 
LA’s.   
 
210. The Ministry of Agriculture  and Fisheries (MAF) is the government institution mandated for the development of the 
main rural sectors and for coordinating rural development. The Directorate of National Forestry plays an important role 
in watershed management and reforestation in catchment areas in order to respond to climate change. It has 
established coordinating mechanisms at all levels for harmonizing functions, planning and implementation and for 
monitoring progress of achievements in rural development.  It will be the Responsible Party for Activity 2.3. With 
Technical Assistance, it will develop agro-forestry and reforestation strategies for target catchments, implement 
agroforestry and reforestation schemes in these catchments, train local extension workers, train communities to 
implement and maintain agroforestry activities, and undertake long-term monitoring of agroforestry schemes. 
 
211. Municipalities, Development Commissions, and Local Authorities will be responsible for the implementation of PDIM 
and PDID projects. In addition, they are responsible for local planning, development of strategic municipal plans, 
budgeting, and infrastructure development. During the project, these entities will undertake the development of annual 
climate- resilient investment plans, determine budgets, implement climate resilient small scale infrastructure and 
ecosystem services, standardize infrastructure designs, scale up best practices across the entire Municipality Plans 
programme, and engage in evidence-based policy advocacy.  Through the PDIM, PNDS and under MSA, they will be 
responsible for implementation of Activities 2.1 and 2.2. This will include responsibility for detailed design and 
implementation of climate resilient infrastructure with MSA technical assistance.  In addition, this will include engineering 
inputs to feasibility studies, detailed design, procurement and implementation of 130 infrastructure schemes (TA, 
municipal input, international experts, community engagement, bill of quantities development, procurement process, 
construction supervision, construction hand over, etc.). 
 
212. Activities related to community-based engagement and training will be implemented by a group/consortium of 
international and local NGOs that have grass-roots experience in the areas of community-level participatory 
infrastructure development and disaster risk planning and management, integrated natural resources management, 
community mobilization and empowerment.  These will include implementation of agroforestry and reforestation strategy 
for infrastructure sub-catchments.  Technical guidance to and QA/QC of contractor’s work will be provided by an 
international consultant(s) hired by UNDP.   
 
213. An Informal multi-stakeholder Technical Advisory Working Groups (TAWG) will also be established to provide inputs 
to and endorsement of the design and quality of the project outputs. The TAWG members will represent the government, 
private sector, academia and civil society to provide guidance and technical advice on the project. 
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
 
214. This proposal has emerged as a result of government’s request and series of consultations for project definition. A 
dedicated UNDP mission was organized during March 4-11, 2016 upon the request of the NDA/GCF focal point Mr. 
Mario Ximenes. Communities have been met and consulted in the municipalities of Liquica and Aleu. Discussions 
covered the issues of disaster risk reduction, mainly the challenges of flood protection, problems of infrastructure 
stability in the face of climate disasters and potential of community resilience and development. The communities 
prioritized the transport infrastructure, water supply and flood risk protection. 
 
215. On March 9, 2016, MCIE convened a stakeholder consultation meeting to review the GCF priority result areas and 
investment criteria. UNDP has been invited to present the GCF, programming priorities, eligibility criteria and main 
compliance requirements. A diverse group of stakeholders from the Ministries of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, 
State Administration, Public Works and Construction and Social Solidarity attended the workshop. Despite a wide array 
of priorities, most participants agreed that addressing the district infrastructure deficit is among the major binding 
constraints for socio-economic development in Timor Leste. There was a consensus among the stakeholders to focus

=== PAGE 64 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 99 
 
 E 
on climate resilience of district and village infrastructure that will build on the good practices and lessons of the relevant 
pilots, including those supported by UNDP. The project will bring the livelihood development into the mainstay of its 
strategy. Forest vegetation is a paramount factor of land stability. Supporting community agroforestry (coffee, fruit, 
timber and herb tree production) will lift the livelihood pressures on forests, stabilize broader land areas and hence 
minimize susceptibility and exposure to climate hazards. Furthermore, the GCF initiative can facilitate multiyear 
municipal investment planning, which will identify public and private (e.g. commercial banks) finance for climate resilient 
infrastructure and community livelihood development investments. 
 
216. The GCF project concept was developed in close collaboration with the National Designated Authority (NDA) and 
informed by stakeholder consultations. Consultations included the following52: 
• 
Initial consultations (25th July 2016 to 3rd August 2016)  
• 
Ministry Commerce, Industry and Environment (MCIE) 
• 
Ministry of State Administration (MSA) 
• 
Ministry of Social Solidarity (MSS) 
• 
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (MAF) 
• 
Ministry of Planning and Strategic Investment – Mega Projects (MPIE) 
• 
TL-National Commerce Bank (BNCTL) 
• 
TL-Central Bank (BCTL) 
• 
Ministry of Public Works, Transportation & Communication (MoPTC) 
• 
Prime Minister Office (OPM) 
• 
Chamber of Industry and Commerce – Timor Leste (CCI-TL) 
• 
Bilateral and interdepartmental consultations (2nd November to 11th November 2916); MCIE, MSA, MAFF, MSS, 
MPIE, MoPTC (mainly Directory Generals), OPM, ILO GIZ, CCI-TL 
• 
Community consultations and field surveys (28th July); District Administrators from the following municipalities 
(Bauca, Ermera, Aileu, Dili and Maliana) 
• 
National workshop. (7th November 2016) 
Participating stakeholders - Govt: Directors/Focal Persons from MoF, MSA, MCIE, MoPTC, MPIE, MSS, MAF, 
OPMDP: UNDP, ILO, IFC 
Summary of workshop – The key activities within the project concept were presented to the audience and the 
technical feasibility was debated with the technical directors present.  Broad agreement was reached on all 
activities.   
• 
High level ministerial consultation (9th November 2016); Minister of MCIE, Minister of MSS, Minister of MSA, 
Secretary of State of MSA 
Summary of workshop – The key activities within the project concept were presented to the audience and the 
technical feasibility was debated with ministers. The Secretary of State was present.  Broad agreement was 
reached on all activities. Main issues raised were regarding the implementation arrangements for the project. Also, 
questions regarding the number of municipalities being included in the project and whether it could include all 
municipalities.   
• 
Final workshop to validate the concept note (30th March 2017).  Minister of MCIE, Secretary of State of MSA, 
Directors/Focal Persons from MSA, MCIE, MoPW, MSS, MAF, UNDP, ILO, IFC 
• 
Summary of workshop – The further elaborated key activities within the project concept were presented to the 
audience and their technical feasibility was debated with the technical directors present.  Broad agreement was 
reached on all activities.  MCIE was confirmed as Implementing Party and all Responsible Parties confirmed as 
outlined in the implementation arrangements diagram. 
Consultation with municipalities – Infrastructure Project Identification  
 
Stage 1 - National Level Consultation 
Workshop 
                                                             
52 Several bi-lateral meetings, email exchanges etc. were conducted throughout the project formulation

=== PAGE 65 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 99 
 
 E 
217. A workshop was conducted to explain the background and context of the GCF proposal including the criteria for the 
selection and identification of proposed infrastructure projects with due consideration to the changing climate related 
hazards that will compromise the projects. 
Desk Review 
218. Desk review of municipal projects as proposed part of the PDIM documents.  Projects listed in the PDIM document that 
falls within the criteria of Small-Scale infrastructure and likewise offers greater benefit to vulnerable families or families 
and properties at risk due to Climate Change related hazards were initially selected. 
 
Stage 2 - Municipal Level Consultation 
219. Projects initially selected were validated to confirm that they meet the criteria of falling within areas that are highly at 
risk as a result of Climate Change and if said infrastructure will reduce vulnerabilities of livelihood systems and other 
lifelines as well. GIS using hazard map layers and google earth images and local knowledge were used in this activity. 
 
Stage 3 - Community consultation  
220. Community leaders were contacted and met to validate the social acceptability of proposed projects.   The team also 
conducted visual inspection of the proposed sites together with community members and municipal engineers.  Different 
teams of SSRI engineers and GIS experts covered the Eastern part and Western municipalities. 
 
Consultation with municipalities – Agroforestry; 
 
221. The following topics were explained as part of the introductory remarks before the formal consultation: 
• 
A brief background of the GCF proposal and how the project will contribute to the improvement of the condition of 
potential project beneficiaries; 
• 
The maps showing the specific location of the proposed projects; 
• 
The reason why the projects were selected and proposed and why there is a need to protect them from climate 
change related hazards and why are they at risk; 
• 
The basic concept of agroforestry and its potential as a mitigating measure (in addition to bio-engineering). 
• 
The catchment approach as a methodology of defining the target sites for reforestation and agroforestry as a 
mitigating measure; 
• 
The possible roles of the government during the implementation of the agroforestry intervention 
 
222. The list of participants during the consultation meetings is shown in Annex XIII(d). After the discussion, the consultant 
also explained how the fruit trees will function as a component of the agroforestry intervention and how it will discourage 
farmers from cutting them or burning the land.   The municipal officials also showed their willingness to promote 
agroforestry and the planting of the agroforestry trees identified.  
 
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
 
223. In terms of efficiency, the combination of interventions related to natural capital and physical infrastructure has been 
shown to lead to significantly higher improvements in resilience than if the project included only a single approach. 
Based on previous experience and lessons, consolidated during the feasibility assessment, the project addresses the 
fundamental barriers to achieving resilience by the provision of technical capacities, engineering skills, policies, codes, 
and ordinances. This will enable climate-proofed infrastructure development as well as investment in watershed 
restoration for climate risk reduction, resulting in long-term resilience of vulnerable communities and their physical 
assets. Investing in natural capital is more effective in the long-term as it will help decrease the cost of climate-proofing 
of infrastructure by reducing levels of exposure to climate hazards.

=== PAGE 66 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 99 
 
 E 
224. This project could have focused on implementation of climate resilient infrastructure for the target municipalities as the 
only intervention.  While this would benefit the target municipalities and might have had a trickle-down effect on other 
municipalities, it would not result in the fundamental change in how small scale rural infrastructure projects are identified, 
prioritised and implemented to be more climate resilient.  By addressing the missing climate risk information nationally, 
the project will lay the foundation for all infrastructure developed to be made climate resilient in the future.  In addition, 
by addressing the legislation, policy, standards, guidelines and technical capacity gaps, the project is ensuring that 
climate proofing of infrastructure becomes a requirement within a suitable legislative and enabling environment in the 
future.  It also ensures that the approach is integrated within the wider CCA and DRM framework.  Furthermore, the 
adoption of this holistic and integrated approach that addresses all the root causes including land use management, 
will have long-term efficiency and effectiveness benefits.    
 
225. Overall, the proposed solutions were designed to be in line with best practices and community ownership, as well as 
present synergies across the two outputs and interrelated activities. In addition, they builds on ongoing efforts to ensure 
their efficiency and cost-effectiveness. The proposed activities and interventions will reach 45% of the total population 
(counting both direct and indirect beneficiaries) over six municipalities.  
 
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only) 
N/A 
E.6.3. Financial viability  
 
226. Without GCF funding, the economic losses from a single extreme event of combined hazardous consequences (e.g. 
involving floods, landslides, and erosion) could be as much as $141 Million in the 6 target municipalities. PDIM and 
PNDS budgets of $12.5 Million USD over 5 years, on its own, therefore will not mitigate against this potential size of 
economic losses, particularly with the non-climate-resilient approaches currently used in PDIM and PNDS.  
 
227. The public goods nature of this project’s outputs doesn’t entail significant revenue generation or cost recovery from the 
project. Where income generation opportunities exist, these apply directly to the beneficiaries (for instance, improved 
agricultural income) primarily as household income.  A financial analysis for the project is detailed in Annexes XII (c) 
and (d).  The project cost-benefit analysis is provided in Annexes XII(a) and XII(b).   
 
228. Financial viability of the project investments is assured through a combination of elements that build ownership and 
the technical, financial, operational and institutional capacities of the national and sub-national governments and local 
communities to maintain and derive economic, social, environmental benefits from the proposed investments. The 
project does not create undue long-term burdens on the governments in terms of long-term O&M costs. Most 
community-level infrastructure investments are subject to local arrangements for maintenance and operations, except 
for rural roads, for which co-financing has been identified through the Roads for Development (R4D) regular road 
maintenance operations of the Ministry of Public Works, Transport and Communications (MPWTC). 
 
E.6.4. Application of best practices 
 
229. The proposed project is based on a set of best practices and lessons learned emerging from past projects and from 
experience derived by sectoral ministries and development partners in Timor Leste.  Key lessons are derived from the 
UNDP-supported project “Strengthening Small Scale Rural Infrastructure in Timor Leste – SSRI project”, which has 
piloted techniques, approaches and investments in the small scale rural infrastructure in three Municipalities - Baucau, 
Ermera and Liquica.  Other lessons are derived from the UNDP-supported project – “Dili-Ainaro Road Corridor (DARDC) 
Project”.   
 
230. Under the SSRI Project critical small scale rural infrastructure was designed to be climate-resilient and implemented 
through participatory approaches.  In addition, the project strengthened local governance systems, at the municipal and 
Administrative Post levels.  SSRI supported integrating climate change issues into Municipality and local level planning 
and implementation of PDIM projects in a manner that makes them withstand risks and impacts of climate change.  The

=== PAGE 67 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 99 
 
 E 
overall goal of the project is to safeguard development benefits for rural communities from future climate change induced 
risks, which is in line with, and underpinned by, a number of important policies and strategies governing Timor Leste’s 
national development and its specific response to climate change. 
 
231. The project successfully completed the climate-resilient design and implementation of small-scale infrastructure 
projects using the government District Investment Development Plan (PDIM) project implementation process.  Many of 
the projects include bio-engineering catchment management approaches: for example, planting along drainage routes 
(e.g. Ossoala and Maubaralisa), vegetation for protection of water sources (Ossoala, Lacoliu), catchment management 
practices such as engaging communities in planting (e.g. Ossoala with NGOs, Talimoro, Ermera - planted 2,000 
seedlings), and bio-engineering measures to protect structures (Legiuema 10 bridges, Lisadilla flood defense).  The 
project supported the establishment of the Centre for Climate Change and Biodiversity (CCCB) within the University of 
Timor Leste (UNTL) and MCIE through the provision of technical assistance (expertise and training), computer 
equipment, GPS equipment and GPS training, GIS software for climate mapping, mapping exercise, and facilitation of 
experts in climate mapping. 
 
232. The following approaches have been tested to developing climate resilience infrastructure in th SSRI project, which 
will also be used for the GCF project: 
 
 
1) Water Supply systems  
 
 a. identification of sources at risk from reduced supply due to droughts, and calculating requirements for 
 
upgrading sources and extending dependability of supply 
 
 b. Protection of water sources from pollution by revegetating land around sources, formalising informal sources 
 
(putting in pipes and collection/storage systems to enhance environmental protection and supply dependability) 
 
 c. Installation of standpipes in villages and connection to existing sources 
 
 
2) Roads and Bridges 
 
 a. Rehabilitation of bridges that are usually washed away in the rainy season using climate resilient materials, 
 
and protection of bridge openings with bioengineering methods (e.g. Vetivier grass) in combination with 
 
sustainable structural measures such as gabion baskets 
 
 b. Vegetation of road corridors with bioengineering material such as Vetivier grass, re-sizing of road drainage 
 
systems that accommodate flows, taking account of climate change flows.   
 
 c. Engagement of local communities in the vegetation of road embankments, as well as for wider catchment 
 
re-forestation to protect road works 
 
 
3) Flood defences 
 
 a. Building of flood defences to protect communities currently at risk using bioengineering methods to 
 
protection flood embankments from erosion.    
 
 b. Design of flood defences to flood levels that take account of climate change 
 
 
4) Irrigation systems  
 
a. Construction of new irrigation schemes which include water storage systems to store water for use in the 
 
dry season and mitigate against drought. 
 
233. The GCF project will build upon the lessons learned from the SSRI project to further embed climate resilient 
infrastructure planning and management by: 
 
234. By ensuring the project impact on rural communities includes enhancement of the value and derived benefits from 
existing community assets such as land, water, livestock and livelihoods, the project will increase the capacity of local 
communities to exploit potential economic opportunities and to develop stronger links with markets and external 
partners. This will be supported through the infrastructure improvements provided by the project.     
 
235. Existing institutions, policies, and regulatory frameworks significantly influence the lives of the rural poor.  Supporting 
the capabilities of existing national, and especially local, public institutions in servicing the rural communities and 
reorienting the existing policies of institutions in favour of the poor is an expected outcome of this project. This will be

=== PAGE 68 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 99 
 
 E 
achieved through the change that will be brought about in sectoral and national policies affecting the rural communities 
and their exposure. In addition, the degree of decentralization, which allows decision making to be taken at the local 
level, is also a relevant consideration and important to this project.  Hence, strengthening local level organizations in 
the implementation of infrastructure projects (Activity 2.1) is a key impact of the project and should result in enhanced 
local capacity to implement and use new climate resilient measures in the long-term.  The GCF will further strengthen 
the PDIM process to truly embed climate risk considerations and resilience into the planning design and construction of 
small scale rural infrastructure.   
 
236. The GCF project is also scaling up best practice from the DARDC project. The DARDC project is strengthening the 
resilience of communities living along road infrastructure in DARDC to climate-induced disasters such as floods and 
landslides, and reducing the risk of damage to such infrastructure by specifically targeting and strengthening institutional 
and technical capacities of sub-national government officials to plan for and implement disaster risk management (DRM) 
measures using ecosystem-based approaches.  The ecosystem-based approach to DRM is supporting community 
livelihoods and restoring ecosystems to reduce the risks posed by climate-induced disasters.  Communities in the 
project area, particularly local women, are implementing agroforestry techniques that are enhancing their livelihoods 
while protecting the infrastructure being developed. The project is also clarifying the link between climate risk reduction 
and sustainable agricultural practices by systematically using the land use enhancement along road development 
corridors and other types of infrastructure to increase climate resilience. 
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
 
GCF core 
indicators1 
Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only) 
(a) Total project financing 
US$_______  
(b) Requested GCF amount  
US$_______  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  
_______ tCO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO2eq (d = a / c) 
US$_______ / tCO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq removed (e = b / c) 
US$_______ / tCO2eq 
N/A 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the Fund’s financing, 
disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only) 
N/A 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)

=== PAGE 69 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 99 
 
 F 
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis 
Summary of Economic Analysis 
237. The economic analysis of the proposed project was carried out in accordance with the Guidelines for the Economic 
Analysis of Projects of United Nations Development Program.  The economic efficiency of the investment was 
determined by computing the economic net present value (NPV) with an assumed 10% discount rate, and the 
economic internal rate of return (IRR). For consistency purposes, all proposals developed with the support of UNDP 
have opted to use a 10% discount rate, in line with the existing practice of multilateral development banks. 
 
238. Economic values (costs and benefits) are all measured in real terms in 2017 values. Economic costs of the project 
are net of taxes, duties, and price contingencies. Furthermore, the analysis assumes a shadow wage rate of 1.00 
for unskilled and semi-skilled labour in Timor Leste. Provided that the economic cost of labour in Timor Leste is 
expected to be lower than the market wage rate (given Timor Leste's current unemployment rate of approximately 
60%), we expect this assumption leads to significantly overestimating the economic cost of the project, and 
underestimating the true net economic value of the project. 
 
239. As is common when undertaking the economic analysis of investment projects, numerous assumptions were used 
to delineate the “with project scenario” from the “without project scenario”. These assumptions are presented and 
discussed below. Assumptions were made to underestimate the true net economic value of the proposed 
investment project. 
 
Overall Project Economic analysis 
 
240. As part of the development of the project feasibility, a cost-benefit analysis (CBA) was undertaken for the 130 
infrastructure schemes to be implemented.  Implementation prioritization was based on this CBA.  The CBA 
analysis has been taken forward to derive the overall project net present value (NPV) and other economic 
indicators. 
 
241. The total project capital cost amounts to USD $ 60.04 Million. GCF’s contribution is estimated to be USD $ 22.953 
million while co-financing from the Government of Timor Leste will be USD36.687 Million, which includes 
Operational and Maintenance costs of USD 7.187 Million during project implementation. Other co-financing from 
UNDP of $400,000 is provided.  The annual breakdown of contributions is presented in the table at the end of the 
section (See Annex XII(a) and XII(b) for more detail). Capital investment take place over the 6-year period of project 
implementation. O&M cost are assumed to start in year 2 and are annual and periodic (5-yearly) in nature.  All 
periodic O&M costs between year 6 and year 10 are presented in year 7 which will enhance the present value of 
costs when compared with the present value of benefits. 
 
242. Following a risk based analysis of the extent of hydro-metrological hazards (floods, landslides, erosion and 
drought) in all Municipalities and watersheds in Timor Leste 53, 6 Municipalities were selected and structural 
measures were identified in each to create resilience to four components of public infrastructure: Rural Roads, 
Water Supply, Irrigation Systems, and Flood Protection. In addition, areas of high risk land erosion were identified 
with a view to introduction of agroforestry options to minimise the effects of erosion on agricultural land.  As 
described above, some 130 projects were evaluated using CBA from 144 projects initially selected by UNDP SSRI 
(Small Scheme Rural Infrastructure) team in the 6 Municipalities. 
 
243. Capital, operational (where appropriate) and maintenance costs were provided for each project and the Internal 
Rate of Return calculated based on monetised benefits relating to the avoidance of economic losses to communities 
(Sucos) assuming no resilience measures were put in place (The Do Nothing option). Clearly these resilience 
measures can never prevent all losses associated with worsening hydro-meteorological hazards but, at this broad 
analysis of feasibility, it is assumed that residual losses after completion of the projects are not included. 
                                                             
53 Analysis of Climate Change Risks, Impacts and Vulnerability for baseline and projected Climate Change Scenarios: Dr John 
Chatterton Project Deliverable 1 December 2016

=== PAGE 70 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 99 
 
 F 
 
244. The identification of high and very high risk for all 4 hydro-meteorological hazards did not include an assessment 
of their probability of occurrence, so under Do Nothing it is impossible to predict both the timing and frequency of a 
damaging event. The timing and frequency are very important when deriving the benefits of resilient mitigation 
measures: an assumption that a landslide event, for example, in a very high risk location will occur every 10 years 
on average will give a wholly different Internal Rate of Return for the project than one that is expected to occur 
every 2 years. 
 
245. The objective of creating structural resilience to infrastructure is not just to ameliorate the effects of major hazards 
in high and very high risk areas but to resist the degradation of infrastructure over time as increasingly adverse 
weather events associated with climate change make their use ineffective. 
 
246. For example, a road in a low or medium risk area may degrade (under Do Nothing scenario) over time, reducing 
access or inhibiting access altogether. This being so, to enable comparison of the relative priority of the cost benefit 
of all rural road schemes and all flood protection schemes, etc., the Do Nothing losses were assumed for each 
scheme with the same frequency and timing of occurrence. Thus, the IRRs are relative and not absolute giving a 
ranking of scheme viability. Developing absolute IRRs will be an important part of appraisal-led design once GCF 
funding has been allocated. In this analysis costs are broad brush as are benefits. 
 
247. For simplicity, the time horizon for each project is 10 years. It is quite possible that in reality no economic loss 
would be experienced at the high risk locations within this period (especially landslides), or at least for some 
schemes. For others, economic loss may be more frequent. What is certain is that the propensity of damaging 
hydro-meteorological hazards is expected to increase into the future and the theoretical predictions of losses 
(almost certainly more frequent than in reality) will enable priority ranked projects both nationally for all projects and 
by project type. The aim of this exercise is to identify likely priority areas for investment which will require further 
detailed modelling and investigation once GCF funding is secured. 
 
248. Though IRR’s were prioritized for each of the 130 schemes, at this stage the benefits for all 4 project types (rural 
roads, water supply, irrigation and flood control) were added together. Benefits are summarized as follows: 
 
• 
Avoided loss of total livelihood by improving irrigation systems, access to water supply, and road quality and 
connectivity.  Livelihood data was derived from the 2015 census data which is based on household surveys. 
The benefit streams assume that without improvement to infrastructure, loss of total livelihood would be 
reduced in alternate years. 
• 
Reduced flooding to land and property.  Property values are derived from 2015 surveys.  Agricultural land 
at risk was derived from land use data. 
• 
• 
Societal benefits.  Impact studies have found that following rehabilitation the roads not only had year-
round motorable access, but that travel times had been reduced by 50 percent. Access to services also 
improved along rehabilitated roads, including 24-hour ambulance service and mobile health services. A 
conservative uplift factor of 2:1 was used in line with similar appraisals carried out by the World Bank.  This 
is assumed to be US$2/person/year for a total of  28,671 people in the road network area. 
 
249. In environmental project appraisal, benefits may be regarded as monetary benefits expressed in USD, or non-
monetary benefits expressed as beneficiaries of the projects (households protected, population benefiting, service 
areas benefitting – for irrigation systems).  Non-monetary benefits are just as significant to justifying project priority 
as monetary benefits. In theory, all social benefits can be monetised, but not without considerable survey and field 
investigations. 
 
250. Subsistence farming may be blighted in areas of high erosion with commensurate loss of crop income and general 
livelihood. An analysis was done within the 6 Municipalities to indicate the potential sites for agroforestry to 
ameliorate erosion and generate further income for the beneficiaries. No costs and benefits have been derived at 
this stage.  The assumption is that every household has an average size (for subsistence farming) of 1,000 sqm 
and will be purely for the benefit of adapting subsistence farming practices to reduced loss of crops due to erosion 
while yielding some wider catchment management benefits.  It is not envisaged that large enough economic gain

=== PAGE 71 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 99 
 
 F 
will be made from these agroforestry schemes to warrant full economic and financial analysis.  A total of 92 Ha is 
estimated within the proximity of households in areas of high erosion, with nearly three quarters falling within 
Ermera.  
 
251. 
Summary of project Economic Viability 
The base line analysis gives an Internal Rate of Return of over 16.2%.  
 
Some explanation of the cash flows is required: 
 
• Annual O&M is included for all projects 
• Additional more comprehensive maintenance is included for rural roads in Year 6 
• Even without the projects it is uncertain, without significant additional work, as to when water supply would fail. 
It was assumed that in alternate years there would be no disruption to these services and benefits of 
improved infrastructure are only included therefore in alternate years 
• social benefits due to better access to markets, education, health, commercial and administrative facilities 
(assumed to be US$2/person/year).54 
• The four infrastructure bundles were added together to provide a single IRR as each complement the other in 
safeguarding communities at risk from hydro-meteorological hazards. Cross subsidization of costs between 
project types enables and overall IRR greater than 10%. 
 
Applying sensitivity tests to the base case as follows in all cases gives an IRR as follows: 
 
• Increasing Costs by 15% gives an IRR of 13.5% 
• Decreasing Benefits by 15% gives an IRR of 13.1% 
• Increasing Costs by 15% and Decreasing Benefits by 15% gives an IRR of 10.1% 
 
Summary of Financial Analysis 
 
252. In accordance with the Guidelines for the Financial Analysis of Projects of United Nations Development Program, 
the financial analysis has been carried out only for activities and sub-activities that can produce direct and 
quantifiable benefits in monetary terms, either to the beneficiaries or to the capital providers. As shown in Table 1 
above, only Activity 2.2 result in direct quantifiable savings or incremental revenue generation for the beneficiaries 
and hence only for these activities, the financial analysis has been conducted. 
 
253. The financial analysis is conducted both at the sub-activity level and at the activity level. For instance - the financial 
analysis, when conducted for Activity 2.2 and its sub-activities, analyses the financial viability of the sub-activities 
independently before analysing the financial viability of the entire Activity 2.2. This way, the financial analysis shows 
the Financial returns and viability both at the sub-activity level (Rural Roads, Water Supply, Irrigation Systems, 
Flood Protection) and at the activity level (Activity 2.2) 
 
254. Financial Analysis is carried out as two distinct scenarios. Scenario 1 describes a case when the GCF does not 
participate and when the proposed GCF’s capital investments are replaced with loans from Development finance 
institutions. Scenario 2 describes a case when GCF participates in the form of grant investments and supports the 
co-financing provided by the Government of Timor Leste (GoTL).  
 
Key Findings of Financial Analysis – Activity 2.2 
 
255. The result of the financial analysis for Activity 2.2 is shown in Table 4 below. 
 
                                                             
54 World Bank appraisal document for Timor Leste.

=== PAGE 72 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 99 
 
 F 
Table 4 – Activity 2.2 Financial Analysis 
Scenario 
FIRR (%) 
WACC 
(%) 
NPV 
Scenario 1) In the absence of participation from 
GCF, commercial loans are arranged  
13.19 % 
4.91% 
$9,584,770 
Scenario 2) GOTL co-financing supported by the 
GCF participation in the form of grants 
13.14% 
1.85% 
$40,834,58
8 
 
256. Analysis and Recommendations – Under scenario 1, in which the Grant participation of GCF is replaced with 
debt funding from commercial finance institutions, it could be noticed that the project investment results in a NPV 
of $9,584,770, demonstrating the financial viability of the project. The positive NPV is corroborated by the fact 
that the financial return of 13.19 %, as measured by the FIRR, is higher than the Weighted Average Cost of 
Capital (WACC) of 4.91%. When the commercial loans are replaced with the participation by the GCF in the form 
of Grants, the project continues to be financially viable with positive FIRR. In this case, the project investment 
results in a NPV of $40,834,588, which is much higher than the NPV in Scenario 1 and the FIRR of 13.14% is 
more than the Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) of 1.8%. Taking this and other aspects of financing into 
consideration, it is recommended that in spite of the positive FIRR profile of the project when funded by 
development finance loans, GCF participation in the form of grant is much needed for ensuring long-term 
financial viability and the operational sustainability. Our recommendation is based on the below-mentioned 
rationale – 
 
257. NO incremental earnings – The benefits from the project accrue to the project owners (GoTL) not in the form of 
increased income or earning but in the form of expected / prospective savings. The absence of “incremental 
earning” benefits to the project owners necessitates that the project be supported with non-commercial capital as 
much as possible for ensuring operational and financial viability over the longer-term.  
 
258. Benefits are Indirect – The benefits from the project accrue to the project owners (GoTL) in the form of potential 
savings. These savings accrue to the project owners over the long-term and are in the form of losses avoided / 
spending avoided such as transportation losses avoided due to Climate resilient Rural roads, avoided spending 
on up-keep of water supply systems etc. The local community and all other participants of the ecosystem along 
with the project owners enjoy these benefits. This way of realizing benefits necessitates that the project be 
supported with non-commercial capital as much as possible for ensuring operational and financial viability over 
the longer-term. 
 
259. Pre-mature economic profile; social and environmental background and challenges – Timor Leste is Asia’s 
youngest nation and is one of the World’s poorest countries. It’s past has been severely painful with several 
violence and social unjust. In 1999, upon popular consultation conducted by the UN, there was widespread 
violence. As much as 70 per cent of the county’s infrastructure was destroyed. Hundreds of thousands of people 
were left homeless and more than 1,200 were killed. An estimated 230,000 people were forced into the 
Indonesian territory of West Timor. In 2006, tensions between the national police and the armed forces resulted 
in open conflict between the two institutions, a breakdown of law and order and the displacement of more than 
150,000 people.  
 
260. The country has been under peaceful democracy since 2008 and is focused on infrastructure re-building. Owing 
to the premature economic profile of the country and viewing the project from the perspective of social and 
environmental challenges that this low-income country is facing, grant funding will better ensure financial viability 
and long-term operational sustainability for this project.

=== PAGE 73 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 99 
 
 F 
 
261. Regulatory constraints on availing commercial loans by GoTL – The Public Debt Law setout by the GoTL allows 
only concessional loans to be considered for the purpose of financing strategic infrastructure projects.  
 
262. Practical difficulties in tapping development / commercial finance – Though commerical loans have been 
presented as an alternative to GCF grants, the ground reality could be starkly different. The concessional loans 
that are provided by development partners such as JICA, ADB, China EXIM Bank come attached with several 
riders. These partners could be focused on funding large-scale infrastructure projects of national scale such as 
Road network up gradation, building large drainage infrastructure than small-scale rural infrastructure projects for 
climate resilience. Moreover, these projects may contain terms mandating the presence of certain implementation 
partners. For these practical challenges in availing development / commercial finance, it is recommended that this 
project be financed by GCF grants. 
 
263. Lack of borrowing program – The financial analysis had explored the possibility of GoTL replacing the GCF 
grants with more equity in the form of market borrowing. However, Asia’s youngest nation has not established a 
borrowing program yet and it does not have a currency of its own yet. 
 
264. Sensitivity Analysis – Sensitivity analysis was carried out to determine if increasing the cost of the project or 
generating less benefits from the investments could derail the financially viability of the project when funded by 
GCF. Table 5 below shows the results of sensitivity analysis on costs and Table 6 below shows the results of the 
sensitivity analysis on savings. 
 
Table 5 – Activity 2.2 Sensitivity Analysis on Costs 
Sensitivity Analysis - Costs 
Activity 2.2 
Investment 
Scenario 
FIRR 
NPV 
30,526,600 20% decrease in costs 
17.31% 
47,904,309 
34,342,425 10% decrease in costs 
15.05% 
44,369,449 
38,158,250 Base Case 
13.1% 
40,834,588 
41,974,075 10% increase in costs 
11.5% 
37,299,727 
45,789,900 20% increase in costs 
10.1% 
33,764,866 
 
Table 6 – Activity 2.2 Sensitivity Analysis on Savings 
Sensitivity Analysis - Savings 
Savings / Year 
Scenario 
FIRR 
NPV

=== PAGE 74 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 99 
 
 F 
6,333,856 
20% decrease in 
savings 
8.11% 
20,863,592 
6,507,324 
10% decrease in 
savings 
10.70% 
30,849,090 
7,230,360 Base Case 
13.1% 
40,834,588 
8,709,052 
10% increase in 
savings 
15.48% 
50,820,086 
9,500,784 
20% increase in 
savings 
17.73% 
60,805,584 
 
Output 2.3 – This activity supports catchment management and rehabilitation measures to enhance climate resilient 
infrastructure and communities. This activity will scale-up climate resilient catchment management in order to reduce 
the exposure of communities and their physical assets, such as rural infrastructure to climate-induced hazards. This 
activity will result in rehabilitated catchment ecosystems, the benefits of which do not accrue direct benefits to the 
project sponsors, however are “global goods,” benefitting the entire region. Hence, financial analysis is not considered 
pertinent in this scenario. 
 
Financial Analysis Conclusion  
 
265. The financial analysis was conducted In accordance with the Guidelines for the Financial Analysis of Projects of 
United Nations Development Program. The financial analysis has been carried out only for activities and sub-
activities that can produce direct and quantifiable benefits in monetary terms, either to the beneficiaries or to the 
capital providers. Activity 2.2 qualifies as such activities with direct and quantifiable costs and benefits. In monetary 
terms, these activities contribute to 63% of the total project spending / allocation and hence can be considered as 
a comprehensive indicator of financial analysis on the project itself. Two scenarios were considered - Under 
scenario 1, in which the Grant participation of GCF is replaced with debt funding from commercial finance 
institutions, it could be noticed that the project resulted in a substantially lower NPV of $9,584,770 in comparison 
to Scenario 2, which yielded substantially higher NPV of $40,834,588. The financial analysis also considered factors 
such as nature of project benefits, economic profile and situation of Timor Leste, regulatory and fiscal constraints 
while arriving at a recommendation. Taking all these aspects of financing into consideration, it is recommended 
that in spite of the positive FIRR profile of the project when funded by development / commercial loans, GCF 
participation in the form of grant is much needed for ensuring long-term financial viability and the operational 
sustainability  
 
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
 
266. The project supports the integration of climate change considerations into the development of climate resilient 
small-scale rural infrastructure that will, in turn, provide essential services to local communities. It is embedding 
such climate change considerations within the current infrastructure planning framework and strengthening the 
climate risk management capacity at the same time. The proposed project is technically viable as it consolidates 
field proven methods and practices and implements at a scale that is important for transformation of small scale 
rural infrastructure development in the target municipalities, while providing a strong basis for national scaling up 
and replication.

=== PAGE 75 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 99 
 
 F 
267. Risk Knowledge.  A key foundational activity of the project will be the strengthening of the climate risk knowledge 
base for the whole of Timor Leste for the major hazards.  This will be done through the introduction of modern 
assessment, modelling and mapping techniques and tools not currently available in Timor Leste.  Climate hazard, 
risk and vulnerability information currently available for Timor Leste is of a broad-brushed nature and does not 
provide the level of detail required for making risk informed decisions, nor for designing climate resilient 
infrastructure.  ALGIS - The Agriculture and Land-use Geographic Information System (ALGIS) within the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Fisheries (MAF), established by FAO maintains 12 automatic weather stations in Timor Leste. 
Information from these stations is collected and used for climate variable reporting. In addition, Seeds of Life (SoL) 
maintains a wide network of automatic weather stations and is upgrading the hydrometric network. They share data 
with the National Directorate for Meteorology and Geophysics (NDMG) and maintain a hydrometric database. The 
limitations of the hydrometric network in Timor Leste are being addressed by these organisations and also other 
entities that are supporting the government to enhance the observation network. Given that the main objective of 
the GCF project is to protect the physical assets and livelihoods of the rural population from the effects of climate 
change, the upgrade of the hydrometric network falls outside of project’s scope. However, the project is putting into 
place capacities for hydrological assessment, which includes innovative methods of using drones for the 
assessments. The project is thus supporting the generation and use of the hydrometric data by developing the risk 
data and knowledge which will inform and will be incorporated into the design, construction and operation and 
maintenance of climate resilient small-scale rural infrastructure. Furthermore, the project will introduce modern and 
proven modelling approaches in line with international best practices and will utilize the best available physical, 
hydrometeorological and socio-economic data available for Timor Leste. Modern modelling software will be 
introduced for all hazards and a review of data availability for Timor Leste confirmed that the methods are 
appropriate for the data available.   
 
268. Hazard, risk and vulnerability mapping.  Hazard, risk and vulnerability maps are essential for the assessment of 
current and future hazards and the design of hazard management solutions that fully accounts for climate change 
considerations and the identification of receptors such as infrastructure at risk. The strategic assessment of risk to 
population, infrastructure, economic activity and to future development under conditions of climate change is a 
government priority to support and guide municipalities to wisely and rationally manage risk exposure to acceptable 
levels. GCF resources will be used to introduce modelling technologies to develop hazard maps under current and 
climate change conditions for the whole country and for all hazards. The hazard and risk maps will be used to make 
risk-informed decisions for all aspects of development and risk management in the future. This will include zoning 
of development activity away from high-hazard areas to avoid physical damages to people and property and losses 
to economic activity. In addition, the hazard maps will be used as the basis of the multi-hazard early warning system 
to be developed in the future and will be used by national and local authorities and communities in the development 
of emergency preparedness and response plans. Furthermore, these maps could be used in the establishment of 
different financial risk transfer mechanisms and for raising public awareness and improving community 
preparedness. The visual maps will benefit decision makers and all involved in natural hazard risk management at 
the national and local level. They will also enable government and donor agencies to better focus their efforts in 
dealing with hazards in the basin in the future. Importantly the hazard maps will provide the basis for the 
management of climate-induced hydrometeorological hazards in Timor Leste now and in the future.    
 
269. Disaster Risk Management and asset management. The implementation and maintenance of modelling systems 
and the full adoption of the new technologies to be introduced will require technical capacities in all areas of hazard 
and disaster risk management to ensure their long-term sustainability. Some technical skills and competencies 
exist in governmental and non-governmental institutions in areas that contribute to risk reduction and disaster 
management and emergency response. There are good capacities to elaborate long-term development policies, 
strategies and plans in various sectors. This however is mostly the case at central level, rather than decentralized 
levels (regional, municipal and local).  While technical expertise exists in various sectors and for specific technical 
areas, knowledge of hazard modelling and risk reduction concepts and practices is an area for improvement. 
Technical capacities related to hazard identification, risk identification and assessment, prevention, risk reduction, 
risk mitigation, risk transfer, preparedness, climate risk management and climate change adaptation are rather 
weak across institutions and governance levels.  In certain sectors, there are insufficient human resources; in many 
cases, incentives for specialized education or training are lacking, and qualified staff turnover is high.  As part of 
the SSRI project, an assessment was made of the existing gaps in institutional capacity for all aspects of hazard

=== PAGE 76 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 99 
 
 F 
and risk management in Timor Leste.  A capacity development plan will be specified based on the needs identified. 
In addition to hazard maps for individual hazards, a multi-hazard map (MHM) will be developed for all major river 
basins in Timor Leste. This is an excellent tool to create awareness in mitigating multiple inter-related hazards and 
for assessing vulnerability and risk, especially when combined with the mapping of critical facilities. It is also useful 
in infrastructure design and construction, particularly in a country like Timor Leste where small-scale infrastructure 
in a given area can be susceptible to multiple hazards, all of which can be triggered by the same set of long-
term/creeping conditions as well as single events.   
 
270. Damage and loss recording.  The project is also introducing modern approaches to assessment of economic 
damages (through socio-economic risk modelling of the underlying hazard impacts), and damage and loss 
assessment and monitoring technologies.  In particular, the project will have introduced drone technology to 
enhance the identification of disaster impacts and speed up mobilization of response in order to reduce causalities.  
The use of UAV’s will assist in early pinpointing of crisis points and avoid the frustration of blocked access in the 
immediate aftermath of a disaster. There are concerns at National Disaster Operations Center (NDOC) regarding 
the speed of the rapid assessment process, which can take up to 2 weeks (while the recovery package can take 
“many months”).  Reasons given for such delay are remoteness, distance, and inadequate communication systems 
(though smart phones are being increasingly used to phone in data). The biggest threats were felt to be poor 
communication services and poor sharing and quality of data. Double entry and inadequate auditing to filter out 
misleading or poor data are common challenges. In all, 442 sucos would benefit from a real-time validation process 
with a robust quality assurance system.  Based on this, the support of drone systems in disaster management was 
fully recognised as a support system. The use of drones, or unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV), can significantly 
enhance risk and damage assessments and revolutionize disaster preparation, response, and management 
capacities in the future.  The deployment of drones will be aimed at supporting the government’s response planning 
activities and strengthen the preparation for and response to disasters including the assessment of physical 
damages for post disaster needs assessment.  It will also help in making better-informed decisions in protecting 
livelihoods. Data generated from the drone flights will also be useful in the long-term monitoring of hazards, which 
will feed into the continued updating of hazard and risk information used in climate risk management, design of 
climate resilient infrastructure, and environmental monitoring. Drones equipped with photogrammetric and 
navigation equipment will be used to allow rapid and reliable assessments of important hazard parameters. In 
addition, a Risk Management Application (DRMApp) will be developed to support the DRM operations.  
 
271. Climate proofing infrastructure.  The 130 infrastructure projects were subject to a cost-benefit analysis. Capital, 
operational (where appropriate), and maintenance costs were provided for each project, and the Internal Rate of 
Return calculated based on monetised benefits relating to the avoidance of economic losses to communities 
(Sucos) assuming no resilience measures were put in place (The Do-Nothing option). The time horizon for each 
project is 20 years. Cash Flow spreadsheets were developed to indicate the broad scale Internal Rate of Return 
(IRR) for each project comparing total costs (capital and periodic and annual maintenance) with the benefits as 
defined by the economic indicators. IRR’s are calculated for all costs, capital costs only, and economic indicators 
representing elimination of potential losses associated with improved climate resilient infrastructure.  On this basis, 
the projects were ranked – both for all projects in all municipalities and for each individual project type - to indicate 
where project investments are worth value for money.   
 
272. Evaluation of the cost of Climate-Proofing Infrastructure.  In certain countries of the region with complex terrain, 
the cost of “building in” climate resilience into roads projects is estimated to add 15-25% to the total project costs.  
However, the additional costs would nullify in 7 to 9 years due to lower maintenance costs over the long-term. This 
means that climate resilient roads would be much cheaper than conventional roads overall. Under the SSRI project, 
3 climate resilient rural road rehabilitation projects were implemented in 2016 at an average cost of around $63,658 
USD per km ($493,225/7.748 km). The investment for the complementary soil bioengineering interventions was 
between 3 – 5 % of the contract cost. Assuming a value of 10% of the cost, it can be estimated that the additional 
cost of climate-proofing roads is 1,474,152 or $6,890 USD per km. For water supply systems, the total investment 
cost per capita under the SSRI project was $75/person and provides approximately 15 years’ service life. 
Considering only the total investment cost, this yields a simple average of $5.00 per person per annum for 12.775 
m3 @35 litres/person/day which works out to approximately = $0.39 per cubic meter per year at constant supply. 
Since most of these systems are gravity-fed, operational expenses are minimal, as are maintenance costs. Hence

=== PAGE 77 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 99 
 
 F 
the proposed GCF project will provide 10.3 Million cubic meters per year of constant supply. This represents a 
guaranteed water supply in areas where there is currently no or irregular supply, and where clean supply is at risk 
from drought, erosion, flooding and landslides.  Under the SSRI project, 2 irrigation schemes were implemented, 
covering 110 ha of irrigated land, at a total cost of $294,613.67 USD and 5,238 beneficiaries.  It is estimated that 
the annual rice production for areas producing single crop per year is 1.5 MT per ha on average.  The proposed 
GCF project could therefore result in 5,550 Mt per ha per year more rice production.  This represents a more stable 
rice production in areas where variable production is being exacerbated by drought and prolonged dry seasons.   
 
273. Ecosystem based catchment management. In addition to the climate proofing measures that will be implemented 
for all types of infrastructure in the target priority locations, the project is also implementing an ecosystem based 
approach to catchment management for the subject catchments to enhance the protection of the infrastructure 
within these catchments. This includes the use of agroforestry. Agroforestry is a combination of agricultural and 
forestry technologies to create integrated, diverse and productive land use systems (Garrett and Agus, 2000). While 
agroforests are typically less diverse than native forest, they do contain a significant number of plant and animal 
species. This diversity can, in time, provide ecological resilience and contribute to the maintenance of beneficial 
ecological functions. Similar to plantation forests, agroforests can help relieve some of the pressure to harvest 
native forests.  Agroforestry is a collective name for land-use systems and technologies where woody perennials 
(trees, shrubs, palms, bamboos, etc.) are deliberately used on the same land-management units as agricultural 
crops and/or animals, in some form of spatial arrangement or temporal sequence. Agroforestry systems play an 
important role in conservation of natural resources, especially soil. Adoption of agroforestry practices enhances the 
productivity of resource-poor small and marginal farmers. Agroforestry has both productive and service functions. 
Among the productive functions, fuel wood, fodder and fruit are the most important besides construction wood, 
gums, resins, medicines, fibres. In addition, these productive uses contribute to food security. The service functions 
include shade, reduction in wind speed, control of erosion and maintenance and improvement of soil fertility. 
Agroforestry systems increase nutrients inputs through nitrogen fixing trees and nutrient uptake from deep soil 
horizons. They reduce nutrient leaching losses through tree root and mycorrhizal systems. Agroforestry systems 
recycle nutrients through decomposition of litter, pruning and root residues. In agroforestry systems, there are both 
ecological and economical interactions between the different components. 
 
274. Agro-forestry and reforestation will be implemented in the catchments upstream of the infrastructure to reduce soil 
erosion and landslide risks downstream, thus adding an additional layer of protection and lengthening the service 
life of the infrastructure.  The project will assist the MAF in developing the agroforestry and reforestation strategy 
and specific implementation procedures for the sub-catchments within which the infrastructure projects will be 
located. The strategy uses detailed hazard mapping to be developed by the project (Activity 1.1) for identifying 
priority areas for agroforestry and reforestation intervention, specifically targeting areas that will compromise the 
infrastructure due to climate change related hazards.

=== PAGE 78 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 99 
 
 F 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement 
 
283. The financial management and procurement of this project will be guided by UNDP financial rules and regulations 
available here. Further guidance is outlined in the financial resources management section of the UNDP 
Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures available here. UNDP has comprehensive procurement 
policies in place as outlined in the Contracts and Procurement’ section of UNDP’s Programme and Operations 
Policies and Procedures (POPP). The policies outline formal procurement standards and guidelines across each 
phase of the procurement process, and they apply to all procurements in UNDP. See here: 
https://popp.undp.org/SitePages/POPPSubject.aspx?SBJID=211&Menu=BusinessUnit       
 
284. The project will be implemented following the National Implementation Modality (NIM) following NIM guidelines 
available here. UNDP will ascertain the national capacities of the Implementing Partner/Executing Entity by 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations 
 
275. This project has completed the UNDP social and environmental screening procedure (see SESP attached as 
Annex VIa). This screening was undertaken to ensure this project complies with UNDP’s Social and Environmental 
Standards. The overall social and environmental risk category for this project is: moderate.  
 
276. The project is expected to have some short term small- to medium-scale environmental impacts particularly in 
relation to the rehabilitation of existing infrastructure but will have significant long lasting environmental benefits 
(See Section E.3.1). The project will rehabilitate/build irrigation infrastructure, roads and bridges, and flood control 
structures and will introduce agro-forestry into degraded areas to allow for resilience. 
 
277. The project will also improve the capacity of government and communities to plan, design, and deliver rural 
infrastructure that is climate resilient.  Guiding documents such as manuals, checklists, and standards will be 
reviewed and updated to support improved planning and implementation. 
 
278. Key considerations in minimising environmental and social impacts during the project are outlined in the ESMF, 
but include social inclusion and consultation, sediment and erosion control, and health and safety for workers and 
community. 
 
279. Physical impacts will be primarily associated with construction.  These impacts will generally be minor and of a 
temporary nature.  The implementation of the ESMF will ensure that these impacts are satisfactorily managed. 
 
280. Project interventions will be undertaken in areas of Timor Leste where communities are particularly vulnerable to 
the impacts of climate change.  These communities are largely rural and often have constrained or marginal 
livelihood opportunities. 
 
281. The project has been designed with attention paid to gender and social inclusion considerations.  The gender 
analysis undertaken at the project design phase, acts as an entry point for gender mainstreaming throughout 
implementation, and builds on stakeholder consultation, existing analytical documentation and data from projects 
currently being implemented, and national statistics where available. The project design takes into consideration a 
number of key gender implications, including (among other things), women’s critical role in agriculture and food 
security; analysis of the gendered division of labour; women’s access to and control over environmental resources; 
identification of gender equality gaps. 
 
282. During project implementation, qualitative assessments will be conducted on the gender-specific benefits that can 
be directly associated with the project. This will be incorporated into the annual Project Implementation Report, 
Mid-term Report, and Terminal Evaluation. Indicators to quantify the progress of project objectives in relation to 
gender equality are included in the Gender Action Plan.

=== PAGE 79 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 99 
 
 F 
undertaking an evaluation of capacity following the Framework for Cash Transfers to Implementing 
Partners/Executing Entities (part of the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers - HACT). All projects will be 
audited following the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted above and applicable audit guidelines and 
policies.   
 
285. The NIM Guidelines are a formal part of UNDP’s policies and procedures, as set out in the UNDP Programme and 
Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP).  The NIM Guidelines were corporately developed and adopted by 
UNDP, and are fully compliant with UNDP’s procurement and financial management rules and regulations. 
 
286. The national executing entity, MCIE - also referred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP terminology 
- is required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and procedures 
(including the NIM Guidelines).  In legal terms, this is ensured through the national Government’s signature of the 
UNDP Standard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA), together with a UNDP project document which will be signed 
by the Implementing Partner to govern the use of the funds.  Both documents require compliance.  
 
287. National Implementing Partner and all three Responsible Parties have undergone a Harmonized Approach to Cash 
Transfer (HACT) assessment by UNDP. Due to a time bound rule of validity additional micro assessments may be 
required during the project lifetime.  During implementation, UNDP will provide oversight and quality assurance in 
accordance with its policies and procedures, and any specific requirements in the Accreditation Master Agreement 
(AMA) and project confirmation to be agreed with the GCF. This may include, but is not limited to, monitoring 
missions, spot checks, facilitation and participation in project board meetings, quarterly progress and annual 
implementation reviews, and audits at project level or at Implementing partner level on the resources received from 
UNDP. 
 
288. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) framework consists of four processes, namely: i) macro 
assessments; ii) micro assessments; iii) cash transfers and disbursements; and iv) assurance activities. Assurance 
activities include planning, periodic on-site reviews (spot checks), programmatic monitoring, scheduled audits and 
special audits. During micro-assessment, there can weaknesses identified for which actions are required to 
addresses the gaps. When a spot check finds that the gaps are not addressed it will mean that the level of 
assurance activities will have to remain higher and modalities of engaging with that implementing partner will have 
to be reviewed if necessary. All details are available here:  
https://popp.undp.org/SitePages/POPPSubject.aspx?SBJID=167&Menu=BusinessUnit. 
 
289. The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits, informed by and together 
with any specific requirements agreed in the AMA. According to the current audit policies, UNDP will be appointing 
the auditors. In UNDP scheduled audits are performed during the programme cycle as per UNDP assurance/audit 
plans, on the basis of the implementing partner's risk rating and UNDP’s guidelines. A scheduled audit is used to 
determine whether the funds transferred to the implementing partner were used for the appropriate purpose and in 
accordance with the work plan. A scheduled audit can consist of a financial audit or an internal control audit.  
 
290. All GCF resources will be provided to the executing entity, less any agreed cost recovery amount. Under UNDP’s 
national implementation modality, UNDP advances cash funds on a quarterly basis to the executing entity for the 
implementation of agreed and approved programme activities, in accordance with UNDP standard policies and the 
NIM Guidelines. The executing entity reports back expenditure via a financial report on quarterly basis to UNDP. 
Any additional requirements will be as in accordance with the AMA.

=== PAGE 80 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 99 
 G 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures 
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
 
Political instability or regional conflicts 
 
 
Other 
High (>20% of 
project 
value)High 
(>20% of project 
value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will develop and implement an emergency management/contingency plan in line with UNDP CO’s crisis 
management requirements. This may reduce the level of impact of the risk to medium to low level  
 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
 
Project-implemented infrastructure is destroyed by 
catastrophic hazardous event 
 
 
Social and 
environmentalSocial 
and environmental 
High (>20% of 
project 
value)High 
(>20% of project 
value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will develop and implement an emergency management/contingency plan in line with UNDP CO’s crisis 
management requirements. During the design and construction of relevant infrastructure, disaster risks will be taken 
into consideration and climate proofing elements will be included in all stages of design and construction.  These 
activities will reduce the level of impact from hazardous events and lower the probability that the infrastructure will be 
destroyed to the minimum level.  
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary 
SAFEGUARDS RELATED 
 
291. Environmental and social risks relate primarily to the potential impacts of construction activities.  These include:  
the potential disturbance or damage of habitats; sediment and erosion; catchment-wide impacts of agro-forestry; 
and construction safety (workers and public). 
 
292. Agro-forestry activities can have potential negative impacts if poorly planned and managed e.g. if incorrect 
species are used, over-harvesting occurs, if soil erosion is not managed, if natural areas are cleared for agro-
forestry purposes. However, potential benefits also exist both in terms of social capital (livelihoods) and eco-
system services/catchment management. 
 
293. Women in Timor Leste are particularly vulnerable and there is a risk that this is not adequately addressed.  The 
project incorporates measures to foster the empowerment of women through their inclusion, involvement and 
education.  Providing opportunities for livelihood enhancement to women is a valuable aspect of the project.

=== PAGE 81 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 99 
 G 
 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Reduced government priority for climate change 
adaptation and DRR due to political, financial and 
technical re-focus, resulting in reduced ability to fully 
embed infrastructure climate proofing and DRR 
intervention measures into policies and enabling 
frameworks.   
 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)Medium 
(5.1-20% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will have constant consultations with high-level government representatives and will carry out lobbying 
and advocacy campaigns in support of CC adaptation and DRR. This will reduce the impact of the risk to the 
minimum level. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
 
Absorption and operational capacities of project 
responsible parties are inadequate to properly 
implement climate-proofing of infrastructure and 
management of disaster risk beyond the project  
 
 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)Medium 
(5.1-20% of 
project value) 
High 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will pay close attention to the capacity building of all relevant agencies through carrying out a training of 
trainers, conducting on-the-job and field trainings of the staff of relevant agencies, introducing/strengthening 
internships within responsible parties and particularly municipalities, and developing technical guidelines and 
methodologies for the sustainable design, construction and maintenance of climate resilient infrastructure. Capacity 
building throughout the project will reduce the probability and impact of this risk to the minimum level.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Due to poor financial performance of the government, 
and particularly ministries and agencies engaged in 
the project as responsible parties, significant budget 
and staff cuts occur in these state organizations. 
 
 
 
Financial 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value)Medium 
(5.1-20% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will assist government authorities to develop and implement sustainable long-term financial planning for 
the design and implementation of climate resilient infrastructure, including identification of potential private sector 
contributors and accessing international donor financing.

=== PAGE 82 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 80 OF 99 
 G 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Local communities are not interested in being engaged 
in community-based agro-forestry and reforestation 
activities for enhanced catchment management 
 
 
 
Social and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project 
value)Low (<5% 
of project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will conduct extensive awareness campaigns at the grassroots’ level on climate-induced natural hazards, 
vulnerabilities, and risks. In addition, the benefits of reducing these risks to infrastructure by implementing agro-
forestry, reforestation and catchment management will be highlighted. Awareness raising will be based on tried and 
trusted methods of community engagement established by the existing SSRI project. The project will also make 
significant efforts to mobilize and empower local communities in the implementation of community-based agro-forestry. 
This will reduce the impact and probability of the risk to the minimum level.  
Selected Risk Factor 7 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Agro-forestry implemented on land previously used 
primarily for agriculture.  
 
 
Social and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project 
value)Low (<5% 
of project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Stakeholder consultation will be undertaken prior to the final selection of agroforestry sites within the infrastructure 
catchments to minimise conflicts with pasture land. The economic benefits to communities from implementing agro-
forestry - from protecting infrastructure and agricultural land to the environmental and ecological benefits of overall 
catchment rehabilitation - are expected to be higher than opportunity costs related to current agricultural yields from 
the already degraded land.  
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon 
N/A

=== PAGE 83 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 81 OF 99 
 
 H 
H.1. Logic Framework.  
 
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework under 
the Results Management Framework. 
 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level55 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Increased climate-resilient 
sustainable development 
The project objective is to safeguard vulnerable communities and their physical assets from climate 
change-induced disasters by addressing existing institutional, financial and legislative barriers, and 
increasing the climate resilience of vulnerable small-scale rural infrastructure. strengthening the 
capacity of mandated institutions to assess and manage climate risks in order to maintain local 
infrastructure services. It will embed new skills, technologies, and innovative methods in climate risk 
identification and mitigation processes, enhance monitoring and recording of climate risk information 
and integrate climate risk data into policies, standards, guidelines, and long-term investment planning 
for small-scale rural infrastructure, and will implement climate resilient building measures to improve 
small-scale rural infrastructure in vulnerable areas,  To further safeguard climate proofed infrastructure, 
the project will  develop and implement catchment management strategies, supporting long-term 
resilience and climate risk reduction via landscape restoration and enhanced land stability, particularly 
in vulnerable catchments where small-scale infrastructure is present. The project targets 175,840 direct 
beneficiaries, an estimated 15% of the total population and will catalysed benefits including increased 
climate resilience for small-scale infrastructure as well as 1500 ha of reforested and rehabilitated land 
to buffer against climate-induced disasters. The project will ensure long-term infrastructure resilience 
via (i) embedding climate resilience standards into the processes through which small-scale 
infrastructure is planned, designed, constructed and maintained; (ii) improving climate hazard and risk 
assessment capacity and access to climate risk information. 
  
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term  
(if applicable) 
Final 
Fund-level impacts 
A1.0 Increased resilience 
and enhanced livelihoods 
of the most vulnerable 
people, communities, and 
regions 
A1.1  % reduction in 
losses of lives and 
economic assets (US$) 
due to the impact of 
extreme climate-
related disasters in the 
geographic area of the 
GCF intervention 
MSA D&L 
database  
Economic 
loss 
exposure 
equivalent 
to 11.5% 
of GDP 
Mid-Term – 25% 
reduction in 
economic losses in 6 
target municipalities 
 
Final – 75% 
reduction in 
economic losses in 6 
target municipalities 
Climate proofing, 
asset management 
and maintenance 
and DRM 
interventions result 
in target reduction in 
economic losses 
                                                             
55 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement): 
http://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/239759/5.3_-_Performance_Measurement_Frameworks__PMF_.pdf

=== PAGE 84 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 82 OF 99 
 
 H 
A3.0 Increased resilience 
of intrastructure and the 
built environment to climate 
change 
A3.1 total number of 
infrastructure units 
made climate resilient 
MSA asset 
database  
13 units 
per year 
non-
climate 
proofed 
infrastruct
ure in 
each of 
the 6 
target 
municipali
ties 
Mid-term - 31  
climate resilient 
infrastructure assets 
built or improved by 
project 
 
Final - 13056 climate 
resilient infrastructure 
assets built or 
improved by project 
Central government, 
Municipalities, and 
community members 
are willing and able 
to scale up climate-
resilient 
infrastructure design 
and development 
practices. 
A3.total number of 
beneficiaries with 
access to climate 
resilient infrastructure 
units 
MSA asset 
database  
33,000 
beneficiari
es in 3 of 
the target 
municipali
ties where 
SSRI has 
been 
implemen
ted 
Mid-term – 75,000 
beneficiaries direct 
beneficiaries (51% 
male, 49% female) of 
the 31 climate 
resilient infrastructure 
assets 
 
Final - 175,840 direct 
beneficiaries (51% 
male, 49% female) of 
the 130 climate 
resilient infrastructure 
assets 
A4.0 Improved resilience of 
ecosystems and 
ecosystem services 
A4.1 Extent of 
ecosystems 
strengthened, restored 
and protected from 
climate variability and 
change 
 
 
 
 
MAF 
database 
showing 
number of 
hectares 
under 
agroforestry 
and 
reforestation 
 
 
 
Deforestati
on rate of 
1.16% per 
year 
Mid-term – 100 ha of 
farm and state land is 
under agroforestry 
and reforestation 
efforts 
Final - 300 ha of farm 
and state land is 
under agroforestry 
and reforestation 
efforts 
  
All communities 
willing to implement 
agroforestry on their 
land and willing to 
assist in 
implementing 
agroforestry on state 
land 
                                                             
56 49% of assets will be implemented using government co-financing 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-
term (if 
applicable
)  
Final

=== PAGE 85 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 83 OF 99 
 
 H 
Project/programme 
outcomes 
Outcomes that contribute to Fund-level impacts 
A5.0 Strengthened institutional 
and regulatory systems for 
climate responsive planning 
and development 
A 5.1 # of Institutional and 
regulatory systems that 
improve incentives for 
climate resilience and 
their effective 
implementation 
Gazette of 
Register of 
regulations, 
register of 
institutional 
methodologies 
and guidelines 
Outdated 
sectoral 
guidelines for 
infrastructure 
development 
that do not 
include 
climate risk 
consideration
s 
Mid-term – 6 national 
policies, regulations,  
revised 
methodologies and 
guidelines for CR 
infrastructure 
adopted  
Mid-term – 6 national 
policies,  regulations,  
revised  
methodologies and 
guidelines for CR 
infrastructure 
adopted 
Government 
commitment to embed 
climate risk information 
in sectoral policies and 
legislation 
Political will to 
implement relevant 
legal-regulatory reform 
and to establish cross-
sectoral CC platform 
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive 
capacity and reduced exposure 
to climate risksA7.0 
Strengthened adaptive 
capacity and reduced exposure 
to climate risks 
A7.1: Use by public-sector 
services staff of Fund 
supported tools, 
instruments, strategies 
and activities to respond 
to climate change and 
variability 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
reports at mid-
term and final 
 
Mid-term - 100 staff 
in  MSA, MSS and 
MAF in central and 
local government 
using new tools and 
technologies 
Final - 200 staff in  
MSA, MSS and MAF 
in central and local 
government using 
new tools and 
technologies 
 
Government 
commitments to secure 
adequate O/M of 
relevant software and 
databases are fulfilled 
on a continuous basis 
both during the project 
implementation and 
afterwards 
Capacities built across 
relevant agencies 
through the project are 
maintained and 
periodically updated 
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive 
capacity and reduced exposure 
to climate risksA7.0 
Strengthened adaptive 
capacity and reduced exposure 
to climate risks 
A 7.2 # of males and  
females reached 
benefitting from climate-
resilient infrastructure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project 
baseline, mid-
term and end 
term surveys 
33,000 
beneficiaries 
in 3 of the 
target 
municipalities 
where SSRI 
has been 
implemented 
Mid-term – 75,000 
beneficiaries direct 
beneficiaries (51% 
male, 49% female) of 
the 31 climate 
resilient 
infrastructure assets 
Final - 175,840 direct 
beneficiaries (51% 
male, 49% female) of 
the 130 climate 
resilient 
infrastructure assets 
There is continued 
commitment and 
uptake of the 
information by targeted 
communities in the 
project 
Gender-
sensitive field 
surveys 
undertaken 
within the 
targeted sub-
catchments and 
districts. 
 
Mid-Term - Total 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries: 
261,000 (51% males, 
49% female) 
beneficiaries 
Final - Total direct 
and indirect 
beneficiaries: 
522,000 (51% males, 
49% female) 
beneficiaries

=== PAGE 86 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 84 OF 99 
 
 H 
                                                             
57 49% of assets will be implemented using government co-financing 
Project/programme 
outputs 
Outputs that contribute to outcomes 
1. 
Climate risk information is 
developed, monitored and 
integrated into policies, 
regulations and 
institutions to inform 
climate resilient small-
scale rural infrastructure 
planning and 
management 
1.1 #  of hazard risk maps 
and information 
developed and adopted/ 
embedded into sectoral 
policies and legislations 
Project reports, 
evaluation 
reports, site 
observations, 
databases, 
monitoring and 
risk 
assessment 
products 
 
Coarse 
resolution 
UNDP 
indicative 
national 
hazard maps 
for 4 major 
hydromet 
hazards 
4 sets of national 
hazard maps 
covering all of Timor 
Leste for floods, 
landslide, erosion 
and drought (to be 
completed before 
mid-term) 
Government 
commitments to secure 
adequate O/M of 
relevant software and 
databases are fulfilled 
on a continuous basis 
both during the project 
implementation and 
afterwards 
Capacities built across 
relevant agencies 
through the project are 
maintained and 
periodically updated 
Relevant government 
agencies cooperate on 
the development of 
hazard maps (MSS, 
MAF, MCIE, MPWTC 
etc.). 
Government 
commitment to embed 
climate risk information 
in sectoral policies and 
legislation 
Political will to 
implement relevant 
legal-regulatory reform 
and to establish cross-
sectoral CC platform 
2. 
Climate risk reduction and 
climate-proofing 
measures for small-scale 
rural infrastructure are 
implemented to build the 
resilience of vulnerable 
communities in six priority 
districts 
2.1 # of infrastructure 
units built to new climate 
resilient standards  
Project reports, 
evaluation 
reports, site 
observation, 
databases, 
construction 
supervision and 
asset 
inspection 
reports, 
monitoring and 
risk 
assessment 
products 
13 units per 
year non-
climate 
proofed 
infrastructure 
in each of the 
6 target 
municipalities 
13057 climate resilient 
infrastructure units 
(mid-term – 31 
20 roads; 11 water 
supply units; 
 
Final – 130) 
38 water supply 
units, 25 Irrigation 
system, 20 flood 
protection units. 47 
Rural roads. 
Political will to revise 
PDIM and PNDS 
processes to include 
CR considerations  
Effective embedding of 
CR infrastructure 
design standards at 
municipal level 
Government 
commitment to long-
term investment in CR 
infrastructure  
Government 
commitment to 
implementation of long-
term catchment 
agroforestry and 
reforestation strategy 
introduced by project  
2.2 # Hectares of 
agroforestry implemented 
in target infrastructure 
catchments 
Project reports, 
evaluation 
reports, site 
observation, 
databases, 
construction 
supervision and 
Deforestation 
rate of 1.16% 
per year 
Mid-term – 75 
hectares 
Final – 300 hectares

=== PAGE 87 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 85 OF 99 
 
 H 
asset 
inspection 
reports, 
monitoring and 
risk 
assessment 
products 
Agroforestry introduced 
to local communities 
will lead to alternative 
sustainable CR 
livelihoods that lead to 
reduced land 
degradation 
Government 
commitments to secure 
adequate O/M of 130 
infrastructure units are 
fulfilled on a continuous 
basis both during the 
project implementation 
and afterwards 
Capacities built across 
relevant local 
government 
organisations through 
the project are 
maintained and 
periodically updated 
Relevant government 
agencies cooperate on 
development and 
implementation of CR 
infrastructure (MSS, 
MAF, MCIE, MPWTC 
etc.). 
Activities 
Description 
Inputs 
Description 
1.1. Develop and deliver 
climate risk information 
services and vulnerability 
mapping to all sectoral 
institutions 
    
 
 
This activity includes data generation and 
analysis, modelling, production of hazard, 
risk and vulnerability mapping and related 
training and capacity, This activity will 
develop risk modelling and actionable risk 
information production capacities by 
implementing the following: 
1.1.1. Establish a project Spatial Data 
Infrastructure (SDI) and provide project GIS 
support throughout.   
 
1 International and 1 
national GIS consultant to 
develop and establish 
SDI,  
Consultants, Contractors, 
Training, Workshops and 
conferences 
 
Setting up of the project GIS (SDI 
system), engagement of national 
expert, travel-related costs, data 
review and data modelling inputs, 
GIS work, printing and production of 
reports and maps; project 
management. 
Data gathering and organisation 
into project GIS (SDI system), 
various data gathering, physical 
(e.g. topographic and geological) 
surveys.  Survey teams 
(contractors) 
Input will include cost of local and 
international experts, MSS staff, 
travel-related costs, GIS work, 
printing and production of reports 
and maps; project management.   
Flood hazard and risk maps will be 
developed in line with international 
best practice. Accurate digital 
elevation models (DEM) in the form 
of LiDAR will be used for all 
modelling. Topographic survey of 
rivers through high risk areas will be 
undertaken. Historical hydro-
hydrometric data for all Timor Leste

=== PAGE 88 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 86 OF 99 
 
 H 
required for all hazard and risk 
assessments will be utilized.   
Training workshops for MSS 
practitioners    
Input will include cost of local and 
international experts, travel-related 
costs, cost of international experts.  
Development of the risk and 
vulnerability surveying tool. 
Engagement of teams to undertake 
socio-economic surveys 
Input will include cost of local and 
international experts, travel-related 
costs, cost of international experts.  
Development of the GIS-based risk 
and vulnerability modelling tool 
based on hazard data, physical data 
(receptor data), socio-economic 
data from new survey methods 
Training of MSS and municipality 
staff in socio-economic survey tools 
(workshops) and engagement of 
teams to undertake socio-economic 
surveys 
1.1.2 Data gathering, data digitisation 
systematization, storage and analysis within 
the SDI GIS system for use in hazard and 
risk analyses to support the hazard and risk 
modelling and mapping. Undertake  detailed 
surveys for all hazard modelling 
 
2x Consultants for 
surveys, TOT Training. 
Data gathering and organisation 
into project GIS (SDI system), 
various data gathering, physical 
(e.g. topographic and geological) 
surveys.  Survey teams 
(contractors) 
 
1.1.3 Procure modelling software, 
databases, hardware for multi-hazard 
modelling to be embedded in MSS 
Purchase of software for 
hazard, risk and 
vulnerability modelling 
and mapping 
 
Purchase of modelling software for 
hydrological (flood and drought), 
hydraulic (flood), erosion modelling 
 
1.1.4   Using the most appropriate modelling 
techniques, establish numerical models for 
flood modelling, landslide and erosion and 
drought for all major river basin in TL based 
on surveys of the physical characteristics of 
the river basins.  Produce high resolution 
hazard maps 
 
 
International and national 
consultants to provide TA 
to undertake hazard, 
modelling and mapping. 
 
Input will include cost of local and 
international experts, MSS staff, 
travel-related costs, GIS work, 
printing and production of reports 
and maps; project management.   
Flood hazard and risk maps will be 
developed in line with international 
best practice. Accurate digital 
elevation models (DEM) in the form 
of LiDAR will be used for all 
modelling. Topographic survey of 
rivers through high risk areas will be 
undertaken. Historical hydro-
hydrometric data for all Timor Leste 
required for all hazard and risk 
assessments will be utilized.

=== PAGE 89 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 87 OF 99 
 
 H 
1.1.5 Deliver training in hazard modelling to 
at least 20 practitioners at national and local 
government level and identify long-term 
training needs 
 
Training, TOT training. 
 
Training workshops for MSS 
practitioners 
 
1.1.6   Develop and codify methods and tools 
for undertaking socio-economic surveys to 
collection necessary information to fully map 
the socio-economic conditions of the rural 
poor within the catchment; Using the 
methods developed, undertake detailed 
socio-economic surveys for 6 target 
municipalities in TL 
Socio-economic 
vulnerability survey 
methods and tool 
development 
 
Input will include cost of local and 
international experts, travel-related 
costs, cost of international experts.  
Development of the risk and 
vulnerability surveying tool. 
 
1.1.7 Undertake socio-economic and 
vulnerability assessment to fully map existing 
vulnerability within TL 
 
Socio-economic 
vulnerability surveys 
 
Engagement of teams to undertake 
socio-economic surveys 
 
1.1.8 Develop a GIS-based tool to integrate 
various spatial socio-economic data with the 
hazard maps, perform vulnerability 
assessment, produce vulnerability maps 
which will include damages and loss of life 
estimates and to test risk management 
interventions options.  Tools, methods, 
guidelines and procedures for recording 
disaster events, undertaking post-event 
surveys 
 
Development of risk, 
vulnerability, and CBA 
tool 
 
Input will include cost of local and 
international experts, travel-related 
costs, cost of international experts.  
Development of the GIS-based risk 
and vulnerability modelling tool 
based on hazard data, physical data 
(receptor data), socio-economic 
data from new survey methods 
 
1.1.9 Develop and deliver a training 
programme in socio-economic modelling 
methods and tools to MSS staff 
Training in socio-
economic modelling 
methods and tools 
Training of MSS and municipality 
staff in socio-economic survey tools 
(workshops) and engagement of 
teams to undertake socio-economic 
surveys 
1.2.  Establish a database 
system for monitoring, 
recording and accounting 
climate induced damages in 
order to inform climate risk 
reduction planning and 
budgeting 
 
 
 
 
 
This activity includes strengthening systems 
for monitoring and recording climate induced 
disaster events. Estimation of the economic 
damages caused by climate change induced 
events and establish a database 
management system to monitor damages 
over time. 
Review of all damage and loss accounting 
systems, design and development of a 
harmonised/unified system. This will be 
delivered by implementing the following: 
 
1.2.1 Procure 6 Drones and deliver (how 
many) user training 
  
Hover Drones x 6 (1 per 
pilot Municipality) Fixed 
wing Drone x 1. including 
training and spare parts 
 
Development of DRMapp 
(functionality will include 
mature knowledge 
management with 
inventory, reporting and 
feedback); Data 
Processing of Hover Data 
(4 times per year times 2 
weeks each pass 
assumed); Fixed data (In 
house expert; 4 times per 
Input will include cost of local and 
international experts, travel-related 
costs, cost of international experts.  
Development and implementation of 
unified damage and loss accounting 
system

=== PAGE 90 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 88 OF 99 
 
 H 
 
 
year (5cms to 8cms 
pixels) and Outsourcing 
processing 
 
1.2.2 Review of existing damage and loss 
databases and accounting technologies 
(Disaster Risk Management Portal, SIGAS 
accounting system, and Desinventar 
database).  Development and 
implementation of a harmonized and unified 
damage and loss recording and accounting 
system in the form of a Disaster Risk 
Management Application (DRMApp) which 
will provide a real-time system to all tracking 
the observation data, verification data and 
compensatory responses, including a 
Metadatabase to collate and track disparate 
reporting.  Available at National sub-national 
and municipal and suco level.  DRMapp will 
include development of electronic (online, 
mobile handheld proformas etc.) and manual 
damage and loss recording templates 
 
International and national 
consultants to develop 
and implement a 
harmonized and unified 
damage and loss 
recording and accounting 
system in the form of a 
Disaster Risk 
Management Application 
(DRMApp), development 
of electronic (online, 
mobile handheld 
proformas etc.) and 
manual damage and loss 
recording templates 
Includes collection of asset register 
datasets, validation, data cleansing, 
conversion.  Development of mobile 
GIS-based asset condition 
inspection methods and tools.  
International and national expert 
inputs for development of asset 
management system and engineer 
link to unified damage and loss 
database.  Input from MSS to the 
development in introduction of 
guidelines.   
International and national expert 
inputs for development of asset 
management system and engineer 
link to unified damage and loss 
database. 
Input from MSS to the development 
in introduction of guidelines.   
1.2.3 Develop and implement an 
infrastructure asset management system 
linked to Damage and loss database.  
Introduce asset inspection guidelines, 
methods and approaches 
1.2.4 Develop and deliver a training 
programme in damage and loss and asset 
management methods and tools to MSS staff 
 
Procurement of asset 
management system.   
Collection of asset 
register datasets, 
validation, data cleansing, 
conversion. 
Development of mobile 
GIS-based asset 
condition inspection 
methods and tools.  
International and national 
expert inputs for 
development of asset 
management system and 
engineer link to unified 
damage and loss 
database.  Input from 
MSS to the development 
in introduction of 
guideline.   
Training (D&L, asset 
management system) 
 
Training of MSS, MSA and 
municipality staff in asset condition 
inspection.  International expert 
inputs to train MSS staff on asset 
management system and damage 
and loss database 
1.3 Refine ordinances, 
regulations and associated 
codes and standards to 
enable climate proofing 
small-scale rural 
infrastructure 
 
 
This activity includes developing enabling 
conditions to create an enforceable policy 
framework for climate resilient small-scale 
infrastructure development. This will be 
delivered by implementing the following:  
1.3.1 Develop Gender Responsive Climate 
Change Strategy and Action Plan which 
Consultants, Contractors, 
Training, Workshops and 
conferences 
International and national 
experts.  Extensive 
stakeholder consultations 
 
Development of a climate change 
strategy for gender in the context of 
prioritization of small scale 
infrastructure development.

=== PAGE 91 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 89 OF 99 
 
 H 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
encompasses the priorities endorsed in the 
national documents as indicated in the 
upcoming National Climate Change Policy. 
 
 
1.3.2 Review and revise all standards, 
guidelines and specifications for rural 
infrastructure, encompassing both technical 
and functional standards to respond to 
climate risk reduction requirements, based 
on international best practices. 
 
Review and  revise 
standards, guidelines for 
rural infrastructure 
 
International and national experts.  
Extensive stakeholder consultations 
 
1.3.3 Input to the development of the Rural 
Roads Master Plan & Investment Strategy 
2016–2020 to help embed climate resilience 
measures into road master planning. 
 
International and national 
experts.  Roads 
Department (4RD) staff 
 Develop and embed climate 
resilience measures into a rural 
resilient roads plan 
 
1.3.4 Input to the development of a National 
Water Supply Policy and Strategic Plan to 
provide the medium to long-term vision for 
the sector and to provide a framework for the 
institutional arrangements, overall operation 
and management of DNSA and coordination 
with other sectoral agencies and partners, to 
ensure that climate resilience approaches 
are embedded in the policy and strategy for 
water supply 
 
International and national 
experts.  MPWTC staff 
  
Development of a plan for resilient 
rural water supply 
 
1.3.5 Develop guidelines and SOPs for all 
infrastructure investments to be carried out 
under the municipal (PDIM) and village 
(PNDS) development plans to make these 
plans climate responsive 
 
International and national 
experts.  MPWTC, 
training of municipality 
staff 
 
Develop guidelines for embedding 
climate resilience measures into 
PDIM and PDNDS rural 
infrastructure plans 
 
1.3.6 Develop a capacity building plan and 
roadmap for national and regional authorities 
to integrate new policies, plans and 
strategies and guidelines into PDIM and 
PNDS.  This would include the development 
of tools that will be needed for 
implementation and enforcement of new 
methods and guidelines for CR infrastructure 
development planning and implementation 
International and national 
experts. 
 Develop plan for capacity building 
for climate resilient rural 
infrastructure 
International and national 
experts.   
 
Training

=== PAGE 92 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 90 OF 99 
 
 H 
1.3.7 Implement capacity building and 
training based on CDP for national and 
regional authorities 
 
 
1.3.8 Support the National Institute for Public 
Administration (INAP) to implement Disaster 
Risk Management Training Manual, which 
has recently been launched by Ministry of 
Social Solidarity and INAP. 
Training 
Provide training on climate and 
disaster risk management 
2.1  Climate risk reduction 
measures for small-scale 
rural infrastructure are fully 
integrated into the planning 
and budgeting cycles of 
Village and Municipal 
development plans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This activity includes the Introduction of 
climate risk screening methods and embed 
climate risk reduction criteria across PDIM 
and PNDS planning and decision-making 
cycle. Under this activity the project will 
provide step-by-step guidelines for climate 
risk reduction measures for all categories of 
small-scale rural infrastructure through PDIM 
manual – CAMP; Community-based 
management and maintenance – GMF 
manual, KAM – municipal procurement 
guidelines and administrative post and the 
Ministerial Technical Committee review 
checklists. The following will be 
implemented: 
2.1.1 Develop step-by-step guidelines for 
climate risk reduction measures for all 
categories of small-scale rural infrastructure 
(water supply, road and bridges, irrigation, 
flood defences) through PDIM manual – 
CAMP; Community-based management and 
maintenance – GMF manual, KAM – 
municipal procurement guidelines and 
administrative post and the Ministerial 
Technical Committee review checklists 
 
Consultants, Contractors, 
Training, Workshops and 
conferences, materials 
and goods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consultants to provide TA 
for development of step-
by-step guidelines for 
climate risk reduction 
measures for all 
categories of small-scale 
rural infrastructure 
through PDIM 
 
Development and codification of 
detailed methodologies for 
incorporating CC considerations 
into risk assessments, strategies, 
policies and plans for all 
infrastructure relevant sectors using 
international best practice. 
2.1.2 Train team of technical staff of 
Equipment Verification, Evaluation and 
Supervision (EVAS) to determine the 
likelihood and consequences of risk in 
relation to asset (infrastructure exposure and 
vulnerability). Their skills to engineer climate 
resilient designs and apply various methods 
of bioengineering (e.g. by use of local vetiver 
plants to stabilize the slopes and gabion 
structures) will be developed 
 
Training, Workshops and 
conferences 
Training  
2.1.3 Provide technical assistance to 
Administrative Post (AP) staff in prioritizing 
projects at this level and in undertaking an 
appropriate level of feasibility studies on 
which to base climate-risk informed project 
prioritization.   
Training and technical 
assistance to AP staff in 
climate resilient project 
prioritisation and 
feasibility studies 
TA

=== PAGE 93 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 91 OF 99 
 
 H 
2.1.4 At municipal level, introduce climate 
risk criteria into the prioritization process, 
and include other methods of measuring 
benefits of projects based on the introduction 
of appraisal-led project prioritisation using 
socio-economic cost-benefit analysis 
methods and tools to be developed under 
Activity 1.1.  Undertake detailed CBA for 130 
prioritised infrastructures projects in 6 target 
municipalities.  Provide capacity 
development to enhance the ability to 
undertake engineering feasibility studies and 
incorporate climate-risk considerations into 
technical feasibility 
 
Training and technical 
assistance to municipality 
staff  
TA and municipal engineering input 
using new CBA methods for project 
prioritization.   
 
Detailed CBA of 130 infrastructure 
projects 
2.1.5 Introduce investment feasibility 
considerations, socio-economic cost-benefit 
analysis, optioneering and options appraisal 
methods as well as environmental impact 
assessment that integrate climate change 
impact scenarios, to strengthen the feasibility 
process, safeguard investments and 
optimize engineering solution. Develop long-
term municipality investment plans for PDIM 
and PNDS 
Training and technical 
assistance to municipality 
staff 
International and local experts 
2.1.6 At the detailed design level, technical 
assistance will be provided to introduce 
climate change considerations into design of 
infrastructure to ensure that they will 
accommodate likely changes of 
environmental variables (frequency and 
intensity of occurrence) expected with 
climate change.  Environmental impact 
assessment (EIA) will be introduced at the 
detailed design stage, in line with 
international good practice 
 
Training and technical 
assistance to municipality 
staff 
International and local experts 
2.1.7 Train municipality engineers in the new 
climate-risk informed infrastructure detailed 
design methods and include specific training 
in the design of bio-engineering methods 
relevant to Timor Leste.  Bioengineering 
training will be done through technical 
assistance and by providing dedicated 
trainings on bio-engineering. 
 
Training and technical 
assistance to municipality 
staff 
Training 
2.1.8 Introduce processes for pre-qualifying 
contractors, based on specific criteria such 
as certification in prior trainings on 
implementation of climate-resilient projects, 
experience of implementing climate-resilient 
projects, experience of contract management 
of such climate-resilient projects and access 
to engineering expertise aligned with the 
types of climate resilient measures to be built 
Training and technical 
assistance to municipality 
staff 
Development of pre-qualification 
criteria, training of contractors in CR 
methods

=== PAGE 94 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 92 OF 99 
 
 H 
into infrastructure (such as bioengineering 
methods) 
2.2  Implementation of 
climate-proofing measures 
for small-scale rural 
infrastructure 
 
 
This activity will carry out the investment 
component as part of the decentralized 
investment programmes of PDIM and NPDS 
and will embed climate resilient practice. 
Small-scale rural infrastructure in the target 
districts and villages will be climate proofed.  
2.2.1 Detailed design and construction of 
130  CR infrastructure projects 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Detailed design, 
procurement and 
implementation of 130 
infrastructure including 
TA of international and 
national experts, 
community engagement, 
preparation of bill of 
quantities development, 
input to procurement 
process, construction 
supervision, construction 
hand over.   
Safeguards expert 
(international consultant) 
for implementation of the 
ESMF  
 
Procurement and 
implementation/constructi
on infrastructure units 
(multiple contracts) 
Procurement of services 
for O&M for years 3-6 of 
project implementation 
(multiple contracts) 
Purchase of six 
motorbikes and 4 vehicles 
in support to project 
implementation, 2 DSLR 
camera and other related 
communication 
equipment 
International and national 
consultants 
National experts for 
oversight and 
supervision - (2 
engineers @ $114096) = 
$228,192 
 
 
 
Engineering inputs to detailed 
design, procurement and 
implementation of 130 infrastructure 
schemes (TA, municipal input, 
international experts, community 
engagement, bill of quantities 
development, procurement process, 
construction supervision, 
construction hand over) 
2.3  Supporting catchment 
management and 
rehabilitation measures to 
enhance climate resilient 
infrastructure and 
communities 
 
This activity includes scaling-up climate 
resilient catchment management in order to 
reduce the exposure of communities and 
their physical assets, such as rural 
infrastructure, to climate-induced hazards. 
The following will be implemented: 
Consultants, Contractors, 
Training, Workshops and 
conferences, materials 
and goods 
 
Technical Assistance to 
MAF 
International and local experts 
providing assistance to MAF to 
develop strategy. MAF central and 
local government input to 
development of strategy, Capacity 
Building, Site Assessment and 
Planning

=== PAGE 95 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 93 OF 99 
 
 H 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3.1 Develop agroforestry and reforestation 
strategy for infrastructure sub-catchments 
 
2.3.2 Implement agroforestry and 
reforestation strategy for infrastructure sub-
catchments 
 
 
Local Labour for land 
preparation, planting etc.  
Maintenance of agro-
forestry plantations 
Purchase of seedlings 
Seedling Production, Land 
Preparation and Out-Planting, 
Monitoring and Reporting, Farmer 
Registration, Farm Registration, 
Product Registration (if the farmers 
decide to go purely organic), Tree 
Registration and Certification

=== PAGE 96 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 94 OF 99 
 
 H 
 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
294. Project-level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the UNDP POPP and the UNDP 
Evaluation Policy.  
 
Oversight and monitoring responsibilities: 
 
295. The primary responsibility for day-to-day project monitoring and implementation rests with the National Project 
Manager. The Project Manager will develop annual work plans to ensure the efficient implementation of the project. 
The Project Manager will inform the Project Board and the UNDP Country Office of any delays or difficulties during 
implementation, including the implementation of the Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) plan, so that the appropriate 
support and corrective measures can be adopted. The Project Manager will also ensure that all project staff maintain 
a high level of transparency, responsibility and accountability in monitoring and reporting project results. 
 
296. The UNDP Country Office will support the Project Manager as needed, including through annual supervision 
missions. The UNDP Country Office is responsible for complying with UNDP project-level M&E requirements as 
outlined in the UNDP POPP. Additional M&E, implementation quality assurance, and troubleshooting support will be 
provided by the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor. The project target groups and stakeholders including the NDA 
Focal Point will be involved as much as possible in project-level M&E.  
 
297. A project inception workshop will be held after the UNDP project document is signed by all relevant parties to: a) re-
orient project stakeholders to the project strategy and discuss any changes in the overall context that influence project 
implementation; b) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team, including reporting and communication 
lines and conflict resolution mechanisms; c) review the results framework, re-assess baselines as needed, and 
discuss reporting, monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities and finalize the M&E plan; d) review financial 
reporting procedures and mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual audit; e) plan and 
schedule Project Board meetings and finalize the first year annual work plan. The Project Manager with support of 
CTA will prepare the inception report no later than one month after the inception workshop. The final inception report 
will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the 
Project Board. 
 
298. An Annual Project Report (APR) will be prepared for each year of project implementation. The Project Coordinator, 
the UNDP Country Office, all project RPs and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor will provide objective input to 
the APR. The Project Coordinator guided by CTA will ensure that the indicators included in the project results 
framework are monitored annually well in advance of the APR submission deadline and will objectively report 
progress. The annual report will be shared with the Project Board and other stakeholders. The UNDP Country Office 
will coordinate the input of the NDA Focal Point and other stakeholders to the Report. Within three months after the 
third year of the project interim independent evaluation will be conducted. The final project report, along with the 
terminal evaluation report and corresponding management response, will serve as the final project report package. 
Semi-annual reporting will be undertaken in accordance with UNDP guidelines for quarterly reports that are produced 
by the project Manager. 
 
299. An independent mid-term review process will be undertaken and the findings and responses outlined in the 
management response will be incorporated as recommendations for enhanced implementation during the final half 
of the project’s duration. The terms of reference, the review process and the final MTR report will follow the standard 
templates and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center. The final MTR report will be cleared by 
the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project Board. The 
final MTR report will be available in English.  
 
Additional GCF evaluation requirements: 
 
300. An independent terminal evaluation (TE) will take place no later than three months prior to operational closure of the 
project. The terms of reference, the review process and the final TE report will follow the standard templates and

=== PAGE 97 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 95 OF 99 
 
 H 
guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center. The final TE report will be cleared by the UNDP 
Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project Board. The TE report 
will be available in English. The UNDP Country Office will include the planned project terminal evaluation in the UNDP 
Country Office evaluation plan, and will upload the final terminal evaluation report in English and the management 
response to the public UNDP Evaluation Resource Centre (ERC) (erc.undp.org). The MTR and TE will be carried out 
by an independent evaluator. The evaluation report prepared by the independent evaluator is then quality assessed 
and rated by the UNDP Independent Evaluation Office. 
 
301. The UNDP Country Office will retain all M&E records for this project for up to seven years after project financial 
closure in order to support ex-post evaluations. A detailed M&E budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan will be 
included in the UNDP project document. 
 
Project Impact Monitoring and Evaluation: 
 
302. To examine the impacts of the project on rural communities, the review will examine whether the interventions 
implemented by the project have enhanced the value and derived benefits from existing community assets such as 
land, water, and livelihoods. Impact on income generation and improvement in livelihoods will be key direct benefits 
to be examined while improved skill or health, education, and socio-economic conditions will be key indirect benefits 
to be examined.  Impact on increased capacity of local communities to exploit potential economic opportunities and 
to develop stronger link with the markets and external partners, through the risk reduction and adaptation 
interventions provided by the project, will be examined.  Efforts to strengthen local institutions and construction and 
engineering companies in the implementation of similar projects in the future will be a key impact as this will reflect 
whether the project has built local capacity to implement and use these new climate proofing measures in the long-
term. Likely contribution of the project to food security will be examined.  Since the project is introducing agro-forestry 
as a means of safeguarding livelihoods, it will be important to directly monitor the extent to which is being achieved.   
 
303. Environmental degradation very often contributes to vulnerability to climate change and increased risk from climate-
related disasters. The extent to which the project contributes to the rehabilitation of the environment (particularly of 
the agricultural resource base and watershed management) in areas currently affected by land degradation and at 
high risk of hazards, is strongly associated with poverty impact. This domain concentrates on the local level 
environmental impacts of the project, as well as any environmental consequences of the project. It is also concerned 
especially with those environmental aspects, which are under the control of, or are influenced by, the rural 
communities. Environmental impacts may be negative as well as positive, intended or unintended, and all of these 
will be examined.  The agroforestry intervention’s prime goal is to use this approach as a sustainable mitigating 
measure to protect infrastructure from climate change-related hazards such as erosion and landslide. To directly 
measure if this goal was achieved, the improvement of the ground surface ecosystem of the water catchment will be 
observed. Counting the number of trees that survive and measuring the lines of hedgerows established is possible; 
however, to observe overall physical changes an aerial survey is more appropriate. To do this, the project will make 
use of UAVs.  The comparison of physical ground improvements due to the agroforestry intervention will be done 
using before and after aerial images.  To measure if the agroforestry intervention is successful in minimizing soil-
erosion, sediment-traps will be laid-out in strategic locations. The Municipal Suco Extension Workers (MSEW) and 
the agro-foresters (AFs) will visit the traps and record their observation after each major rain event.  AFs will also 
undergo a training course on basic farm record keeping and the MSEW will ensure that AFs are using this tool. The 
farm records will include all related cost and return figures. The consolidated information gathered from farm records 
will then be useful during the project-end year economic valuation. 
 
304. Existing institutions, policies and regulatory frameworks significantly influence the lives and resilience of the rural 
poor. This encompasses the change brought about in sectoral and national policies affecting exposure of local 
communities to hydro-meteorological hazards. In addition, the degree to which the project impacts local-level decision 
making capacity is also a relevant consideration and important to this project.  The review will examine the extent to 
which a contribution has been made to improving the national, and particularly local, institutions to implement climate 
resilient infrastructure that affects the lives and livelihoods of rural communities.

=== PAGE 98 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 96 OF 99 
 
 H 
305. To monitor and measure the changes brought by the project, impact evaluation will be designed to assist the 
project team to collect baseline information/data, final survey to gain insights into developmental and adaptive 
impact of the interventions that will be carried out during the project. For this purpose, before any interventions take 
place, a robust baseline survey needs to be administered. During the project, it is expected follow-up surveys and 
final large survey will also be carried out at end of project. The impact of the project will be assessed by 
undertaking the following:  
• 
A household survey targeting beneficiary households at least two times (baseline and final) during the 
project implementation;  
• 
Analysis of the survey data;  
• 
Follow-up survey which will be used by project staff; and  
• 
Training of project staff on the follow-up survey methodology.   
 
306. 
The methodologies for monitoring and reporting for the project outcomes are outlined in the means of 
verification in Table H.1.2 through which progress on each indicator from the baseline to the mid-point and end-
point targets will be tracked.   
 
307. 
More specifically, the results of Output 1 will be monitored through the administration of qualitative 
scorecards to measure awareness and adaptive capacity. A series of target surveys will reveal the level of 
knowledge and skills acquired through specialized trainings and TOTs. Desk reviews will be applied to identify 
whether the PDIM, NPDS and other relevant investment frameworks and policies have embedded the multi-
hazard risk information delivered by the project.  Stakeholder surveys will also be used to verify systematic 
production and use of quality risk information in relation to the design and deployment of small-scale rural 
infrastructure.  
 
308. 
For Output 2, detailed HH surveys will be undertaken to monitor physical stability of the infrastructure units 
and the quality of their services, as delivered by the project through the implementation of climate proofing 
measures. The surveys will capture changes in household and livelihood conditions for target beneficiaries, 
especially women, and the implications of improved access to water on their wellbeing and livelihoods. 
Additionally, HH questionnaires will be designed to elicit information, among other aspects, on access, ease of 
use, quality of service, functioning of the community structures, quality of support from the institutional staff, and 
issues around O&M of the infrastructure units. The tailored surveys will be conducted in relation to all categories 
of infrastructure units, the benefits of their functional longevity and durability, and the overall impact on adaptive 
capacity of target municipalities. The questionnaires will also capture the benefits of agro-forestry on household 
incomes and adaptive capacity. These questionnaires will be combined with regular field monitoring, verification 
and spot-checks. The field surveys will monitor tending measures and survival rates of planted trees as well as 
changes in erosion rates in the target sub-watersheds. The field reports will capture the progress on delivery 
and the application of all safeguards measures. 
 
309. The impact indicators will include but should not be limited to: (i) extent to which the project interventions such as 
improved DRM capacities and improved access to and use of climate risk information, have reduced exposure to 
hazards (ii) changes in income from agriculture and related activities (changes in income should take into account 
the level of home consumption); (iii) yield from agricultural production for key produce; (iv) yield of home gardens; 
(y) migration for seasonal work; (vi) farm land left fallowed; (vii) freshwater availability for household use; (viii) 
change in family savings.  
 
310. As part of the community survey a section will be included to monitor community involvement in the design and 
implementation of community-based agro-forestry schemes – tracking participation in paid work opportunities, as 
well as ongoing involvement in resilience building through in-kind commitment of time to maintenance and 
enforcement activities e.g. the community-based agro-forestry to be implemented on state land. This will include 
respondents’ estimation of approximate number of hours per month spent on local resilience building actions. Finally, 
monitoring over the implementation and results of site specific structural protection measures at 130 sites will be 
ensured as outlined in the ESMF.

=== PAGE 99 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 97 OF 99 
 
 H 
 
311. Since the project impacts from many of the interventions are likely to be realized close to the culmination of, and 
even after, project implementation, the impact evaluation methodology and tools will be embedded within responsible 
agencies to monitor in the long-term. This will ensure regular surveying of the key impact and development indicators 
required for long-term assessment of project results. Project monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in 
compliance with the UNDP POPP, the UNDP Evaluation Policy.

=== PAGE 100 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 98 OF 99 
 
 I 
I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal 
 
☐ 
NDA No-objection Letter (Annex I) 
☐ 
Feasibility Study (Annex II) 
☐ 
Financial Analysis (Annex III (a)) 
☐ 
Financial Analysis (excel) (Annex III (b)) 
☐ 
Co-financing Letters (Annex IV (a)) 
☐ 
O&M Letter (Annex IV (b)) 
☐ 
Term Sheet (Annex V) 
☐ 
Social and Environmental Screening Procedure (SESP) (Annex VI (a))  
☐ 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) (Annex VI (b))  
☐ 
Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (If applicable) (Annex VII)  
☐ 
Evaluation Report of the baseline project (If applicable) (Annex VIII) 
☐ 
Map indicating the location of the project/programme (Annex IX) 
☐ 
Timetable of project/programme implementation (Annex X)  
 
Additional information  
☐          Programme/Project Confirmation (Annex XI) 
☐           Economic Analysis (Annex XII (a)) 
☐           Cost-benefit Analysis (excel) (Annex XII (b)) 
☐           Procurement Plan (Annex XIII (a)) 
☐           Operations and Maintenance Plan (Annex XIII (b)) 
☐           Gender Assessment and Action Plan (Annex XIII (c)) 
☐           Stakeholder Consultations (Annex XIII (d-1)) 
☐           Stakeholder Engagement Plan (Annex XIII (d-2)) 
☐           UNDP Micro-Assessments (Annex XIII (e))  
☐           Detailed Budget and Workplan (Annex XIII (f)) 
☐           AE Fee request (Annex XIII (g)) 
☐           IRR Worksheet – Project Ranking (Annex XIII (h-1)) 
☐           IRR Worksheet – Flood Control (Annex XIII (h-2)) 
☐           IRR Worksheet – Irrigation (Annex XIII (h-3)) 
☐           IRR Worksheet – Rural Roads (Annex XIII (h-4)) 
☐           IRR Worksheet – Water Supply (Annex XIII (h-5)) 
☐           Responses to GCF comments on Funding Proposal (Annex XIV) 
☐           UNDP Letter of endorsement (Annex XV)

=== PAGE 101 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 99 OF 99 
 
 I 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents. 
 
 
☐           Responses to iTAP comments

=== PAGE 102 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 103 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or 
programme 
title 
Safeguarding rural communities and their physical assets from climate 
induced disasters in Timor Leste 
Existence of 
subproject(s) 
to be 
identified 
after GCF 
Board 
approval 
No 
Sector (public 
or private) 
Public 
Accredited 
entity 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Environmenta
l and social 
safeguards 
(ESS) category 
Category B 
Location – 
specific 
location(s) of 
project or 
target country 
or location(s) 
of programme 
Timor Leste 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website 
Monday, January 21, 2019 
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
English and Tetum 
Explanation on 
language 
Tetum is an official language in Timor Leste and spoken by the beneficiary 
communities 
Link to 
disclosure 
English:  
http://www.tl.undp.org/content/dam/timorleste/docs/Publication/FP-
UNDP-171218-5910-Annex%20VI%20_b_.pdf 
 
Tetum:  
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/timorleste/docs/TetumTranslation/
ENV/FP-UNDP-171218-5910-Annex%20VI%20_b_TETUN.pdf 
 
Other link(s) 
NDA Website 
 
English: 
http://nda.gov.tl/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/FP-UNDP-171218-5910-
Annex-VI-_b_-17-1.pdf

=== PAGE 104 ===
Tetum: 
http://nda.gov.tl/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/FP-UNDP-171218-5910-
Annex-VI-_b_TETUN-7.pdf 
 
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B project is 
contained in the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website 
Monday, January 21, 2019 
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
English and Tetum 
Explanation on 
language 
Tetum is an official language in Timor Leste and spoken by the beneficiary 
communities 
Link to 
disclosure 
English:  
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/timorleste/docs/Publication/FP-
UNDP-171218-5910-Annex%20VI%20_b_.pdf 
 
Tetum:  
https://www.undp.org/content/dam/timorleste/docs/TetumTranslation/
ENV/FP-UNDP-171218-5910-Annex%20VI%20_b_TETUN.pdf 
 
Other link(s) 
NDA Website 
 
English: 
http://nda.gov.tl/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/FP-UNDP-171218-5910-
Annex-VI-_b_-17-1.pdf  
 
Tetum: 
http://nda.gov.tl/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/FP-UNDP-171218-5910-
Annex-VI-_b_TETUN-7.pdf 
 
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B project is 
contained in the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) 
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of 
disclosure on 
accredited 
entity’s website 
N/A  
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on 
language 
N/A 
Link to 
disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable)

=== PAGE 105 ===
Description of 
report/disclosu
re on 
accredited 
entity’s website 
Monday, January 21, 2019 
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
English and Tetum 
Explanation on 
language 
Tetum is an official language in Timor Leste and spoken by the beneficiary 
communities 
Link to 
disclosure 
English:  
http://www.tl.undp.org/content/dam/timorleste/docs/Publication/FP-
UNDP-280518-5910-Annex%20VI%20_a_.pdf 
  
Tetum:  
http://www.tl.undp.org/content/dam/timorleste/docs/TetumTranslation
/ENV/FP-UNDP-280518-5910-Annex%20VI%20_a_TETUN.pdf 
Other link(s) 
NDA Website 
 
English: 
http://nda.gov.tl/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/FP-UNDP-280518-5910-
Annex-VI-_a_-2-2.pdf  
 
Tetum: 
http://nda.gov.tl/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/FP-UNDP-280518-5910-
Annex-VI-_a_TETUN-2.pdf  
Remarks 
Annex VI (a) – Social and Environmental Screening Template  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Tuesday, January 1, 2019 
Place 
UNDP, Ministry of State Administration and Municipality Administration 
Offices (Lautem, Viqueque, Baucau, Aileu, Ermera, Liquiça) 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of 
accredited 
entity’s Board 
meeting 
Not applicable 
Date of GCF’s 
Board meeting  
Saturday, July 6, 2019 
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above. 
 
 
________

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 106 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP109 
Proposal name: 
Safeguarding rural communities and their physical and economic 
assets from climate induced disasters in Timor-Leste 
Accredited entity: 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Country/(ies): 
Timor-Leste 
Project/programme size:  
Medium 
I. 
Overall assessment of the Secretariat 
1. 
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks: 
Strengths 
Points of caution 
The project is in a Small Island Developing 
State and Least Developed Country and has a 
strong climate rationale and theory of change 
Good technical oversight through 
partnership with key agencies will be 
required for successful implementation 
Most of the budget is aimed at direct on-the-
ground interventions, including enhancing 
the resilience of small-scale infrastructure 
and catchment management 
Management of the multi-stakeholder 
process will require proper attention 
The comprehensive approach links climate 
information to planning and 
investment/budgeting processes. It utilizes 
innovative eco-disaster risk 
reduction/climate risk management 
solutions that integrate multi-hazard early 
warning system approaches and are based on 
robust assessment and evidence 
Water supply interventions should be 
accompanied by improved sanitation and 
hygiene, which is to be provided in parallel 
by a number of partners coordinated by the 
Government of Timor-Leste 
The proposal includes significant investment 
in capacity development in the target areas 
Currently there is a local technical capacity 
deficit in some core areas of the proposed 
interventions 
For a least developed country and small 
island developing State, the proposal features 
a high level of co-financing from different 
government ministries (over 1.5 times the 
GCF grant contribution) 
 
The proposal includes extensive community 
involvement that will help create ownership, 
efficiency and commitment 
 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XIII  titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 107 
 
 
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment 
2.1 
Project background and climate rationale 
3. 
Timor-Leste is a small island developing State that is highly vulnerable to the impacts of 
climate variability and change and is currently experiencing increasing frequency and intensity 
of extreme weather and related disasters. It has fragile socioeconomic and ecological systems, 
which combine with extreme weather events to cause severe damage to infrastructure, 
including small-scale rural infrastructure like water supply and drainage systems, 
embankments, roads and bridges.  
4. 
The proposal has undertaken a comprehensive assessment (feasibility study) on the 
areas of intervention and demonstrated robust results that are aligned with the GCF investment 
criteria and articulated in the project design.  
5. 
The main multi-hazards of landslides, floods, erosion and drought cause on average 
yearly economic losses of USD 203 million, USD 37 million, USD 10 million and USD 12.5 million, 
respectively. As climate change gathers pace, mid-century projections of these losses are 
expected to increase by 26 per cent, 21 per cent, 55 per cent and 58 per cent, respectively, and 
account for about 11.5 per cent of the gross domestic product. Rural communities are 
disproportionately affected, with damaged roads and related infrastructure leading to 
disruptions in their daily lives, isolation, and lack of basic services. The situation is further 
complicated by gaps in technical capacity and knowledge of climate change and vulnerability, 
which have become major barriers to adequately integrating adaptation and risk management 
considerations into the broader development planning processes, particularly those relating to 
infrastructure, social protection, land planning and budgeting.  
6. 
The project aims to improve the resilience of rural communities by addressing the 
underlying causes of vulnerability of social and physical rural infrastructure. These 
vulnerabilities are characterized by limited capacity to generate and use information on climate 
risks and vulnerability for early warning and action, as well as inadequate response capabilities 
and financing to safeguard physical assets. The proposal articulates a theory of change that is 
grounded in robust climate rationale and thus provides a strong case for GCF intervention.  
7. 
This project will directly benefit 175,840 people from rural communities, who will gain 
access to better climate risk information for dynamic decision-making and response, and build 
climate-resilient infrastructure, such as water supply and irrigation systems, roads, bridges and 
flood defences. A total of 130 small, on-the-ground interventions are planned, which will be 
designed and implemented with financing from GCF and the Government of Timor-Leste with 
the active participation of the rural communities. Communities will benefit from the improved 
land use and land management in 1,500 hectares (ha) through a combination of agroforestry, 
reforestation and catchment management measures, contributing to the protection of a wide 
catchment area and local communities from landslide, drought and flood episodes.  
8. 
In addition to direct on-the-ground interventions, infrastructure will be made more 
resilient by mainstreaming/embedding climate resilience standards into the broader 
development planning processes, starting with how small-scale rural infrastructure is designed, 
constructed and maintained. The technical capacity to be established by the project for 
generating and analysing climate risk and early warning information (activity 1.1) is expected to 
contribute effectively to better policy and decision-making through the integration of climate 
risk reduction measures in the planning and budgeting cycles at the village and municipal levels 
(activity 2.1) and the creation of a knowledge database for managing climate-induced disasters 
(activity 1.2).

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 108 
 
 
Project financing 
9. 
The proposal provides a good financial proposal for an adaptation project from a least 
developed country and small island developing State with significant socioeconomic 
development challenges. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) has requested a 
USD 22.95 million grant from GCF, which will be supplemented by a USD 36.69 million co-
financing contribution from the Government of Timor-Leste (to be obtained from budgets of a 
number of ministries) and a USD 0.4 million contribution from UNDP to cover project 
management costs. The Government of Timor-Leste will contribute: (1) USD 7.187 million 
(annually over five years) for operation and maintenance (O&M) costs for the 130 resilient 
infrastructure units; (2) USD 12.5 million from the Ministry of State Administration (MSA) for 
climate-proofing small-scale infrastructure; (3) USD 12.0 million (over five years) through the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (MAF) for agroforestry and reforestation of approximately 
137 ha in the six target municipalities; (4) USD 5 million through the Ministry of Social 
Solidarity (MSS) for disaster risk management activities in the six municipalities; and (5) USD 
0.4 million as UNDP co-financing for project management costs.  
10. 
GCF funding will cover activities 1.1, 1.3 and 2.1, which are associated with capacity-
building for climate information and early warning services, risk management, adaptation 
planning and the revision of national building codes. The cost of on-the-ground interventions 
(activities 2.2 and 2.3, which together account for over 80 per cent of the project cost) will be 
jointly covered by GCF and co-financing at a ratio of nearly 1:2. The budget includes 
infrastructure maintenance costs during the lifetime of the project, which will be covered by co-
financing from the Government of Timor-Leste. In addition, the accredited entity (AE) is in the 
process of securing a commitment letter that extends O&M coverage by the Government to 20 
years.  
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis 
Component 1: Climate risk information generation and integration into planning and 
management (total cost: USD 7.72 million; GCF cost: USD 3.25 million, or 42 per cent) 
11. 
Activities under output 1 seek to address gaps in the capacities of sectoral institutions to 
generate climate information and assess, track and respond to vulnerability, a fundamental step 
in integrating adaptation into wider decision-making processes throughout the administration.  
12. 
Activity 1.1 will develop and deliver climate risk information services and vulnerability 
mapping that will provide the basis for informed decision-making. This will involve the 
introduction of socioeconomic risk models and cost-benefit analysis tools for adaptation 
solutions – which will incorporate existing data on infrastructure, land use, property and other 
economic data – as well as technical staff trainings in climate risk modelling, mapping and 
vulnerability assessments, cost-benefit analyses, and project appraisal with a focus on 
infrastructure planning for adaptation. Local field officers will be trained in surveying 
techniques to ensure adequate geographic information system mapping. 
13. 
Activity 1.2, largely financed by the Government of Timor-Leste, will establish a 
database to monitor, record and take account of climate-induced damages. This addresses a key 
knowledge gap (in combination with activity 1.1) that will facilitate the understanding of 
climate risks and associated costs and result in better informed policy and dynamic decision-
making. Activity 1.3 will refine ordinances, regulations and building code standards, which will 
enable the climate-proofing of small-scale infrastructure. This ensures climate considerations 
are mainstreamed in infrastructure resilience planning for new infrastructure development in 
the country. Specific interventions are described in good detail in the funding proposal.

=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 109 
 
 
Component 2: Climate risk reduction and climate-proofing measures for small-scale rural 
infrastructure (total cost: USD 50.13 million; GCF cost: USD 18.44 million, or 37 per cent) 
14. 
This output focuses on building resilience at the municipal and village levels in six 
priority districts, with a combined population of 522,000, by:  
(a) 
Building the capacity of local governments to incorporate adaptation measures into the 
regular planning and budgeting processes of the village and municipal development 
plans; and  
(b) 
Directly undertaking on-the-ground infrastructure resilience and ecosystem-based 
adaptation interventions to reduce the vulnerability of people and communities. 
15. 
Activity 2.1 seeks to mainstream adaptation considerations all the way down to the 
village and municipal level, where critical planning related to land use and small-scale 
infrastructure takes place. Capacity will be built in administrative posts to utilize information on 
climate hazards and risks generated in activity 1.1 to identify projects and enhance the ability to 
incorporate climate risk considerations into technical and financial feasibility studies, tools, 
such as socioeconomic cost-benefit analyses, optioneering, appraisal methods, and 
environmental impact assessments under climate change impact scenarios. 
16. 
Activity 2.2, which at USD 33.8 million constitutes 55 per cent of the overall investment 
cost, includes 130 small-scale infrastructure resilience actions across four categories: 
(a) 
Protection of rural water supply systems through land revegetation, formalization of 
informal sources of water, installation of standpipes, and other climate-resilient 
approaches; 
(b) 
Rehabilitation of rural bridges and slope stabilization of rural road corridors with bio-
engineering methods (e.g. vetiver grass for the protection of bridge openings and slope 
stabilization) and other sustainable structural measures;  
(c) 
Installation of rural flood defences to withstand climate change impacts, with 
bioengineering methods where possible to prevent erosion; and 
(d) 
Formalization of existing and new rural irrigation and storage systems to mitigate 
against intensified droughts that are projected to occur with climate change. 
17. 
The four types of activities have a clear climate change rationale and a direct positive 
impact on the resilience of the local communities, individually and collectively. The economic 
analysis provided by UNDP appears to indicate that while some irrigation activities have a very 
high economic internal rate of return (EIRR) (115 per cent), others such as flood protection 
systems have a very small EIRR (2 per cent). It should be noted that the economic analysis of 
such small-scale infrastructure on an asset-by-asset basis is complicated, and that synergies and 
the key social and environmental benefits of the investments are not captured. As such, the 
Secretariat considers that the overall EIRR is more relevant in informing the merits of the 
intervention as a whole.  
18. 
Activity 2.3 comprises catchment management and rehabilitation measures following an 
ecosystem-based adaptation approach, with communities actively participating in agroforestry. 
Restored catchment functions will help further safeguard infrastructure. The target areas, 
comprising a total of 1,500 ha (of which 20 per cent will have interventions financed by GCF) 
will be selected on the basis of the vulnerability maps developed. GCF funding will target 
agroforestry strategy development, the purchase of agricultural inputs, rehabilitation works, 
and O&M during the lifetime of the project. This activity, in addition to its potential to reduce 
vulnerability, also has relevant potential adaptation co-benefits in terms of generating economic

=== PAGE 110 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 110 
 
 
activity and improving the health of ecosystems, and possible mitigation co-benefits in terms of 
carbon sequestration.  
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria  
3.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
19. 
The project targets the most vulnerable districts of the country that have been identified 
based on poverty indices, infrastructure deficits, gaps in basic public services and social 
vulnerabilities, and high exposure to climate-induced disasters. It proposes building the 
resilience of physical assets to climate variability and change through direct on-the-ground 
interventions that target 130 infrastructure units (47 road slope stabilization projects with a 
combined length of 216.94 kilometres); 38 water supply systems; 25 irrigation systems with a 
combined length of 54.18 kilometres; and 20 flood defences along 14.15 kilometres of river, for 
a total value of USD 25.68 million. The resilience of ecosystems will also be improved: 300 ha of 
land will benefit from agroforestry and restoration activities (100 ha of reforested state lands, 
100 ha of agroforestry on state lands, and 100 ha of agroforestry on private land), resulting in 
improved livelihoods for 23,412 households. A further 1,200 ha will be improved through 
reforestation and agroforestry with co-financing from MAF.  
20. 
By making rural irrigation systems climate-resilient and developing new, robust 
systems (including water storage) to secure water for prolonged consecutive dry days/seasons, 
the project will help reduce impacts of the projected intensified droughts. The proposed 
improved efficiency and sustainability of the rural water supply for agriculture strengthen the 
resilience of local agricultural livelihoods and well-being. More predictable rice production is 
expected to result in an increase in yield of 5,550 million tonnes per year, as the impacts of the 
dry season/droughts will be mitigated by irrigation. 
21. 
The collective impact of the interventions on the population will be significant in terms 
of lives, livelihoods and assets for the 175,840 direct beneficiaries of the on-the-ground 
activities in output 2 (15 per cent of the total population). The broader community in the six 
districts (a total of 522,000 people) will benefit from improved institutional capacity and 
informed decision-making. Broader benefits include overall avoided costs, job creation, and 
revenues from the effective use of climate information and early warning to manage risks to 
lives, livelihoods and assets of communities. 
22. 
In order to realize the benefits from water supply interventions, they must be 
implemented with improved sanitation and hygiene systems in place. There are a number of 
partners implementing water and sanitation interventions in the country. UNDP has presented 
a plan by which the Government of Timor-Leste, through its relevant Directorate General, will 
coordinate interventions of the different partners, ensuring that they go hand-in-hand with the 
water supply investments from the GCF project.  
3.2 
Paradigm shift 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
23. 
The proposal clearly articulates and responds to the broader capacity gaps that exist in 
Timor-Leste to enable it to manage the climate risks to its low-emission, climate-resilient 
development. These gaps include:  
(a) 
Limited knowledge and information on climate risks, damages and vulnerability;

=== PAGE 111 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 111 
 
 
(b) 
Inadequate or incomplete policies, institutions and standards to safeguard 
infrastructure from climate-induced damages;  
(c) 
Limited capacity at the local level to integrate adaptation into plans and budgets; and  
(d) 
Limited technical capacity to engineer climate-proof infrastructure.  
24. 
It proposes addressing them through an integrated and comprehensive ecosystem-
based climate risk reduction approach to climate-resilient small-scale rural infrastructure 
development that improves the availability of critical rural services.  
25. 
As a result of the project, climate change considerations will be embedded within the 
current infrastructure planning framework at the national and, most importantly, municipal and 
village levels, where planning and budgeting for critical small-scale infrastructure takes place. 
Simultaneously, climate risk management capacity at key technical agencies and at the local 
level will be strengthened. Thanks to this double-pronged approach, it is expected that local 
governments will be able to adequately identify climate risks, plan adaptation interventions, 
and access public financial resources to protect and maintain infrastructure in the face of 
climate change impacts. 
26. 
The technical innovation proposed is envisaged to transform the policy and decision-
making process through the development of a decision support system for climate risk-proofing 
rural infrastructure and through capacity-building for local engineers and communities in the 
design and application of ecosystem-based risk reduction interventions.  
27. 
Innovative interventions on agroforestry are envisaged to create a positive paradigm 
shift through behavioural change. They will provide livelihood alternatives to existing farming 
practices that currently exacerbate the climate-induced stresses on land and related natural 
resources.  
28. 
Establishing the envisaged systems and processes will require good oversight by the AE, 
as the critical national capacity for effective implementation is yet to be effectively established. 
Adequate oversight should ensure that the relevant local capacity needed to sustain the project 
beyond its life cycle is built during implementation. 
3.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
      Scale: High 
29. 
Overall, the proposal demonstrates a good business case for securing community lives, 
livelihoods and assets, addresses some of the core elements of the Paris Agreement, and is well-
aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals and Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk 
Reduction (2015–2030). Specific assessments are provided below. 
3.3.1. 
Social benefits 
30. 
Revegetating land around rural water supply systems will strengthen community access 
to a more climate-resilient water supply system. The proposed intervention will provide 10.3 
million cubic metres per year of constant supply, resulting in reliable water supplies for areas 
that currently have no potable water or experience erratic access and are impacted by a number 
of drought-related climatic extremes. This would create benefits for local communities in terms 
of reduced water-related diseases and improved overall well-being and productivity of 
communities.  
31. 
Road rehabilitation would result in an improvement in year-round motor vehicle access 
of road and bridge infrastructures, reducing estimated travel times by half and creating

=== PAGE 112 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 112 
 
 
opportunities such as 24-hour emergency services (fire, ambulance, security) that are currently 
lacking in certain areas.  
3.3.2. 
Economic benefits 
32. 
UNDP estimates that the economic losses from a single multi-hazard event (e.g. 
involving floods, landslides and/or erosion) could be up to USD 141 million in the six target 
municipalities, which would not be fully covered by existing budgetary allocations of USD 12.5 
million over five years. This intervention is therefore critical for the communities, reducing 
asset vulnerability directly through the small-scale resilience interventions and indirectly 
through better planning and building codes. 
33. 
Rehabilitation of rural bridges and slope stabilization of rural road corridors using 
ecosystem-based approaches will increase their availability year-round and reduce overall 
operational cost as the approach has been proven to be cost-effective, climate-resilient, 
environmentally friendly and last longer than most traditional approaches. More importantly, 
access to critical rural infrastructure will improve safety of life, productivity and sustainable 
livelihoods.  
3.3.3. 
Environmental benefits 
34. 
The proposed ecosystem-based rural flood defences approach has been proven to be 
resilient to the estimated increasing frequency and intensity of climate-induced floods and 
protect flood embankments from climate-induced erosion. This includes creating the incentives 
for local communities to rehabilitate degraded watersheds and pursue livelihood practices that 
ensure sustainable natural resources management (land, water and forests). It consolidates 
field-proven methods and practices and implements them at a scale that is essential for 
transforming small-scale rural infrastructure development in the target municipalities while 
providing a strong basis for national upscaling and replication.  
3.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
   
 
 
     Scale: High 
35. 
Timor-Leste is a small island developing State with a high level of vulnerability to 
climate change-related landslides, floods, erosion and droughts, as shown by the current and 
expected economic losses under climate change scenarios described in paragraph 3. 
Furthermore, Timor-Leste is also a least developed country with 49 per cent of the population 
living in poverty. It has a fragile socioeconomic and political situation, and food security is an 
issue for close to half of the population, due to poverty, vulnerable infrastructure and 
inadequate public services, as well as climate change impacts. Financial resources for 
adaptation are scarce, and as such, GCF intervention is critical to make the project viable and 
sustainable.  
36. 
The proposal has undertaken extensive consultations at the national, municipal and 
community levels, and the specific needs of the multiple recipients were considered in the 
design. It clearly outlines the capacity gaps and barriers to effective climate risk management 
and the broader development challenges at all levels. The interventions are also designed to 
meet these specific needs. 
37. 
However, the narrative could be further strengthened by exploring what benefits could 
be derived through considerations of demographic dividends in designing the activities so as to 
maximize impacts of the interventions in the communities.

=== PAGE 113 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 113 
 
 
3.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
       Scale: High 
38. 
The proposal articulates the strategic vision of the country’s climate change strategy, its 
nationally determined contribution and its broader disaster risk reduction strategy. It is clearly 
aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals (targets 1, 2, 3, 6, 12 and 13) as well as the 
Sendai Framework and hence demonstrates the effectiveness of the interventions in addressing 
in a comprehensive and integrated manner the broader low-emission, climate-resilient 
development challenges.  
39. 
The proposal builds on the experience of a number of earlier projects in the country that 
have built capacity at the community and institutional level, most relevant of which is the 
“Strengthening the Resilience of Small-Scale Rural Infrastructure and Local Government 
Systems to Climate Risk” project, which worked with facility management groups for 
community-based O&M financing. Using and expanding upon this capacity is critical for the 
implementation of a complex project in often remote settings that rely on the participation of 
communities in the implementation of activities and the maintenance of infrastructure. This will 
ensure buy-in at all levels, particularly at the community level where the project will be 
implemented and owned.  
40. 
An extensive stakeholder consultation process, with specific attention to gender 
needs/priorities, was an integral part of the project design, informing aspects ranging from the 
prioritization of asset resilience interventions to the design of water irrigation and agroforestry 
schemes.  
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
     
        Scale: High 
41. 
GCF is requested to provide a grant of USD 22.953 million to finance a project with a 
total cost of USD 60.04 million. The proposal features a significant contribution from national 
and local government institutions and ministries, amounting to USD 36.687 million (of which 
USD 7.187 million is O&M costs over the project life cycle), and a USD 0.4 million contribution 
from UNDP in the form of project management costs, for total co-financing of USD 1.60 for each 
USD 1.00 from GCF. GCF financing will cover 100 per cent of the costs of capacity-building 
activities 1.1, 1.3 and 2.1. The costs for on-the-ground activities 2.2 and 2.3 will be split, with 
GCF financing 42 per cent and 21 per cent of these, respectively. The proposed GCF amount was 
reduced from the original USD 35.453 million request by splitting the cost of on-the-ground 
interventions between GCF and MSA.  
42. 
Most of the investments funded through the project will provide public goods, such as 
climate information services and flood protection, which clearly justify grant funding. For public 
infrastructure, such as rural roads, water supply and irrigation, grant funding is justified 
because many of the economic benefits accrue to users over the long term through avoided 
losses and expenditures due to climate-related disruptions. Although the UNDP financial 
analysis shows the project to be financially viable if GCF funding were replaced by commercial 
loans, it is not clear whether these loans would materialize without robust oversight, given the 
nature of the project. In addition, the Public Debt Law of Timor-Leste only allows concessional 
loans to be considered for the purpose of financing strategic infrastructure projects. 
43. 
The proposed financial structure is considered adequate, and the inclusion of a well-
articulated O&M budget and strategy – with long-term commitment from government and 
communities to sustain the infrastructure (reflected in budgets, policies and legislation) – helps 
guarantee the sustainability of the project in the long term.

=== PAGE 114 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 114 
 
 
44. 
The proposed ecosystems-based approaches are envisaged to have low maintenance 
costs compared to traditional approaches and could lead to significant savings in seven to nine 
years. Overall, the project demonstrates cost effectiveness, with an EIRR of 16.2 per cent over 
25 years. The sensitivity analysis shows that the EIRR remains above the UNDP 10 per cent 
hurdle rate even in a case where costs are 15 per cent higher and benefits 15 per cent lower. 
The project seeks to integrate this type of cost-benefit analysis into local investment and 
maintenance planning, which would also contribute to the project’s paradigm shift potential. 
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
45. 
The project aims to improve the resilience of vulnerable communities and their physical 
assets against the impacts of climate change. It will support capacity-building of the mandated 
government agencies and finance the rehabilitation and/or climate-proofing enhancements of 
small-scale rural infrastructure in six priority municipalities, including water supply systems, 
rural roads and bridges, flood defences, irrigation systems, and catchment management 
activities such as reforestation and agroforestry. The project will be implemented by the 
Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Environment (MCIE). 
46. 
The AE has assessed the environmental risk of the project to be moderate as the impacts 
are generally localized, limited in scale, and readily manageable through the application of 
standard mitigation measures. GCF agrees with this categorization and has assessed the same 
level of risks for the social safeguards, given that the interventions are not only small-scale but 
are also community-based. The project is thus given an overall category B risk rating. 
47. 
The AE has provided to GCF a completed environmental and social screening form and 
an environmental and social management framework (ESMF). The ESMF provides that all 
subprojects will undergo the environmental licensing process under Timor-Leste’s 
Environmental Licensing Law, which includes an obligatory screening, commensurate impact 
assessment and government review. The ESMF has identified the potential impacts of the 
planned interventions and the corresponding generic control/mitigation measures. It also 
provided clear responsibilities for the units involved, including regular inspection/audit and 
reporting. 
48. 
The project’s environmental and social impacts would come mainly from the 
construction/rehabilitation and catchment management activities. These include 
disturbance/loss of vegetation at worksites; erosion and sedimentation; contamination of water 
during construction; generation of noise, vibrations and dust; worker and public safety risks; 
clearing of native vegetation for agroforestry; possible spread of non-native weed species; 
possible impacts to cultural heritage/sacred sites; potential conflict associated with land tenure; 
and possible benefit exclusion of, or adverse impacts to women, indigenous people and other 
vulnerable groups. GCF concurs with the AE that the levels of risk associated with these impacts 
are low to moderate. However, GCF has asked the AE to give more attention to the issues 
described below.  
49. 
Ecological impacts of agroforestry and revegetation/landscape restoration. 
Without clear guidelines, these activities could inadvertently result in the introduction and 
spread of invasive plant species and/or new pests. Also, primary forests could end up being 
converted into agroforestry areas under the programme. The project should use only native 
species or species that are already present in the area and have been proven to be non-invasive.

=== PAGE 115 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 115 
 
 
Agroforestry should be undertaken strictly in existing agricultural areas and should not be 
expanded into existing forests. 
50. 
Land tenure-related conflicts. The potential for conflicts, particularly those associated 
with land tenure, is a concern because of the prevailing land tenure system issue and the post-
conflict situation of Timor-Leste. The ESMF indicated that disputed lands would be avoided 
through the subproject screening. Any potential land issues would be identified and formal 
documentation of land-use agreements (i.e. owner’s consent, deed of donation, etc.) would be 
obtained before the subproject is allowed to proceed.  
51. 
Indigenous peoples. The Indigenous People’s Standard of the AE is applied to this 
project because the population at the project site may consist of members of one or several of 
Timor-Leste’s indigenous ethnic groups. The subprojects, however, are all community-based, 
and prior consent and broad support are assured through consultation and voluntary 
participation. The AE should ensure that genuine informed consultations within the influence 
area of the subproject, including with people who are not members of the beneficiary 
communities, are undertaken and properly documented. The AE has provided an Indigenous 
Peoples and Ethnic Minorities Planning Framework describing the processes that will be 
undertaken to protect the rights of indigenous peoples pursuant to the Indigenous People’s 
Standard of the AE and the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy. The Indigenous Peoples and Ethnic 
Minorities Planning Framework sets out further screening and assessment of impacts in areas 
where ethnic minority households may be present, provides the principles and processes for 
meaningful participation and consultation, lays out country policies and laws pertaining to 
indigenous peoples, and presents the framework for mitigating unintended adverse impacts and 
ensuring access to the social and economic benefits of the project. The framework also sets out 
the process and strategy for obtaining free, prior and informed consent as well as the outline of 
the indigenous peoples plan that will need to be prepared.  
52. 
Impacts on protected areas of natural habitat. The ESMF has ruled out any 
subprojects in protected areas. To ensure that none of the subprojects will fall within any 
protected areas, the AE has agreed to screen out subprojects that would include activities inside 
protected areas. 
53. 
Potential involuntary resettlement impacts. The construction and rehabilitation of 
small infrastructure will likely need land/right of way acquisition, particularly for roads, 
irrigation canals and water supply systems. In addition, economic dislocation is not a remote 
possibility with the inevitable land-use change/restrictions that accompany catchment 
management strategies, which may result in loss of income, food gardens or pasture. 
Consultations and community consent will minimize these impacts but would be inadequate 
safeguards when those adversely affected are minorities or constitute only a subgroup of the 
proponent community. To rule out any involuntary resettlement impacts, the AE has agreed to 
exclude subprojects that would involve involuntary land acquisition and/or involuntary 
resettlement impacts (i.e. involuntary loss of land, homes, structures and/or trees, and 
involuntary land-use restrictions). Any land acquisition or land-use restrictions, including 
participation in agroforestry, shall be strictly voluntary and require the owner’s consent, a 
waiver or deed of donation.  
54. 
To ensure that high-risk subprojects are not funded, the AE has agreed to adopt a simple 
screening checklist/form that shall, among other things, be used to determine eligibility/non-
eligibility as well as the level and scope of the assessment study to be undertaken. The following 
subprojects shall not be funded:

=== PAGE 116 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 116 
 
 
(a) 
Subprojects that would involve construction activities inside any protected areas of 
natural habitat; 
(b) 
Subprojects that would require displacement of homes and people and/or involve 
involuntary land acquisition or involuntary loss of structures and crops; involuntary 
loss/disruptions of livelihood; or land-use restrictions or restrictions of access; 
(c) 
Subprojects involving civil works or revegetation activities on lands whose ownership 
are being disputed or have unresolved tenure issues; 
(d) 
Subprojects that would convert primary growth forests into agroforestry areas; and 
(e) 
Subprojects that would displace, damage or render inaccessible any national or specific 
community’s cultural heritage/property. 
55. 
The Environmental Licensing Law vetting process that the subprojects will undergo 
would likely proceed according to the law and hence cannot guarantee subproject compliance 
with the requirements in the ESMF. Moreover, the current environmental and social 
management capacities in Timor-Leste have not been assessed. To ensure that ESMF 
requirements, including screening, are complied with, the AE has agreed to review and approve 
each subproject prior to implementation.  
56. 
Extensive consultations were undertaken in developing the project and supporting the 
environmental and social due diligence. Discussions were held at various levels, including with 
national/municipal governments and communities and other stakeholders through consultation 
events held in 2016–2017. A stakeholder engagement plan was also prepared that described the 
various stakeholders of the project, the principles and strategies for engagement, and the 
various roles and means of participation. Consistent with the Indigenous Peoples and Ethnic 
Minorities Framework, the stakeholder engagement plan will need to incorporate the process 
for meaningful participation and for obtaining and maintaining the free, prior and informed 
consent throughout the project life. Further, in communities where indigenous peoples are 
present, the project decision-making process at the community level will need to ensure the 
representation of indigenous peoples or ethnic minorities to allow their concerns and views to 
be considered in the project. 
57. 
The ESMF described a project-level mechanism for receiving and resolving complaints 
from affected and potentially affected people. The project-level grievance redress mechanism 
describes the eligibility criteria, the process by which the local communities can communicate 
grievances to the Project Management Unit of the MCIE, the grievance register, and the feedback 
and resolution process. The project-level grievance redress mechanism is complemented by the 
stakeholder response mechanism of the AE that is made available to any community or 
individual with concerns about the impacts of the UNDP project. 
58. 
The MCIE will be the implementing agency and is responsible for implementation and 
compliance with the ESMF through the collaborating partners and contractors. The ESMF will 
be part of any tender documentation. The MCIE will be responsible for the revision or updates 
of this document during the course of work.  
4.2 
Gender policy 
59. 
The proposal contains a gender analysis and therefore complies with the operational 
guidelines of the GCF Gender Policy and Action Plan. It also contains a gender action plan.  
60. 
The assessment indicates that Timor-Leste has a favourable environment to promote 
gender equality through its constitution and the various strategies and strategic development

=== PAGE 117 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 117 
 
 
plans it has developed. The implementation of these commitments, however, is hampered by 
technical capacity limitations and prevailing norms.  
61. 
The gender assessment provides detailed gender-related information based on 
literature reviews and on-the-ground consultations with communities. It recognized that 
women face more vulnerabilities as a result of violence against women, which prevents them 
from engaging actively in development work and reduces their participation in the labour force 
and formal employment. Further, there are gender disparities in access to and control over 
resources.  These disparities are detrimental to women and include barriers to women’s access 
to property ownership, due to patriarchal norms and customary systems. These pose challenges 
for women to inherit and access land and finance. However, climate change affects both women 
and men but has differential impacts as a result of the differentiated roles in societies, with 
women facing many more vulnerabilities.  
62. 
Women have to spend on average two to three hours a day on fetching water either 
directly from the source or from the nearest communal tap. In addition, the project has 
identified patriarchal norms and customary systems as the major impediment for women to 
engage in and benefit equally from the project. Through consultations with women, the project 
has developed interventions that address the practical needs of women. Securing water for 
household and farming purposes through climate-resilient water supply systems will bring 
considerable opportunities for improving women’s daily lives, health and livelihoods. 
Furthermore, post-disaster recovery and mobility is also impeded due to impassable roads and 
damaged bridges. As women mainly stay home and do household chores and home gardening, 
they and their children predominately remain isolated after extreme climate events or disasters. 
This creates a high level of risk to the lives and health of women and children. Therefore, in 
addition to improving water supply infrastructure and livelihoods through agroforestry 
interventions, the project also addresses the issue of mobility by installing climate-proofed and 
stabilized roads and bridges. The need to implement this intervention as a priority has been 
verified during consultations, interviews and community meetings with all women groups. The 
gender analysis has identified various interventions that would allow for increased 
participation of women as well as the mainstreaming of gender issues in the various policy 
documents and processes. 
63. 
The gender action plan includes action, targets and indicators, and there are a host of 
activities identified that will ensure the mainstreaming of gender in the data gathering 
processes, monitoring and evaluation frameworks on damage and loss accounting, rural 
infrastructure standards, guidelines and specifications, and guidelines for trainings and 
capacity-building work. With regard to trainings and capacity-building work, the gender action 
plan has provided specific targets, including that women should make up 30 per cent of 
participants in trainings against 14 per cent baseline. The project is also targeting one eligible 
woman-led contracting company for the construction of infrastructure projects, but the baseline 
assessments could not identify women-led contracting companies in the infrastructure 
engineering sector. Given the current level of women’s empowerment in Timor-Leste, the 
emergence of at least one such company through the incentives set by the project and the 
provision of a series of trainings to companies could have a catalytic effect. The training series 
planned is expected to catalyse an upsurge in women’s empowerment through their 
involvement in setting up micro, small and medium-sized enterprises as contractors. The 
gender action plan also included activities that promote gender parity policies in the 
construction companies. The project will prioritize qualified companies whose employment 
balance is at least 30 per cent women. 
64. 
UNDP has strong expertise in gender and small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) 
and has been implementing the Social Development Programme since 2012 with a particular

=== PAGE 118 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 118 
 
 
focus on SME incubation. UNDP has the experience in Timor-Leste and the gender and SME 
expertise needed to implement the action plan effectively. 
4.3 
Risks 
4.3.1. 
Overall program assessment (medium risk):  
65. 
GCF is requested to provide a grant of USD 22.9 million to safeguard rural communities 
and their assets from climate change-induced disaster by strengthening the capacity of relevant 
institutions and improving small-scale rural infrastructure in the target areas. The GCF funds 
will be complemented by co-financing of USD 37.1 million from the Government of Timor-Leste 
and the AE. This project is building on existing projects (the “Strengthening the Resilience of 
Small-Scale Rural Infrastructure and Local Government Systems to Climate Risk” and Dili-
Ainaro Road Development Corridor projects), considering lessons learned and scaling up 
interventions, especially for the identification and cost estimation of 130 infrastructure 
interventions under component 2; and  
66. 
The success of the project depends on the political will to consider climate risks in cross-
sectoral policies and legislation. In addition, capacities of relevant government ministries to 
procure and oversee the service provider for the construction of 130 infrastructure schemes 
(output 2.2, the main output with 63 per cent of the total project budget and 74 per cent of the 
total GCF financing), will influence the output. 
4.3.2. 
Capability of accredited entity/executing entity to execute the current programme 
(medium risk): 
67. 
The AE (UNDP) has been operating in Timor-Leste since 1999. In addition, it has been 
collaboratively implementing the projects with the executing entity (EE) in the areas of 
environmental policy and protection; and 
68. 
The MCIE is the EE for the project. It has a track record in implementing the Global 
Environment Facility’s Least Developed Countries Fund project and other donor-funded 
projects. However, most of the projects recently implemented by the EE are micro-scale (less 
than USD 10 million). The AE will be relied upon to strengthen the capacity of the EE and 
provide necessary support during the implementation of the project.  
4.3.3. 
Programme-specific execution risks (medium risk): 
69. 
Erratic internet connection and power supply: the funding proposal and feasibility 
studies addressed the issue of the erratic internet connection and unstable power supply. This 
may interrupt the expansion of the database management system, which requires internet 
connection, and some of the infrastructure, which needs a power supply. The AE stated that the 
existing database already has internet connectivity and backup power systems. In terms of the 
infrastructure, while most of the water supply and irrigation systems are gravity-fed systems, 
there are four water supply systems that require the installation of pumps. It is recommended 
that GCF resources not be used to finance fossil fuel-powered pumping systems. According to 
the information provided by the AE, the installation of solar electrification has been considered 
for the design of the pumping systems, and training for maintaining the solar electrification 
systems at the community level will be included in the project; and 
70. 
Absorption and operational capacities of responsible parties: the EE will coordinate 
closely with relevant ministries and experts to implement subactivities and specific outputs. 
This will include MSA, MSS and MAF. The result of the capacity assessment shows a risk rating

=== PAGE 119 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 119 
 
 
of “significant” for MSA and “moderate” for MSS and MAF. All ministries have difficulties in the 
areas of staffing, fixed assets management, and financial reporting and monitoring. The funding 
proposal states that the project will pay close attention to the capacity-building of all relevant 
agencies via training-of-trainers and the provision of on-the-job training for the staff in the 
ministries.  
4.3.4. 
Project viability and concessionality: 
71. 
The AE conducted a financial analysis for output 2.2 and provided justifications as to 
why the financial analysis is not considered pertinent for other outputs. The savings are 
calculated in the form of avoided losses. It demonstrates that GCF financing in the form of a 
grant is much needed to strengthen the financial viability compared to the scenario when the 
grant is replaced with debt financing; and 
72. 
The proposal included an economic analysis. While certain interventions show a 
negative net present value, the overall project results in an EIRR of 16.2 per cent over 25 years. 
The viability of the project will depend on the O&M commitment from the Government of 
Timor-Leste beyond the duration of project implementation.  
4.3.5. 
Compliance risk (medium risk): 
73. 
The GCF Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism Policy 
(AML/CFT Policy) stipulates that AEs shall be responsible for identifying and mitigating the 
risks of money laundering and terrorist financing in deploying and managing GCF resources. 
The funding proposal does not highlight the result of the preliminary money laundering and 
terrorist financing risk assessment undertaken in the project development phase. However, the 
AE is bound by relevant provisions in the accreditation master agreement to adopt international 
best practice standards in its AML/CFT risk control mechanisms and undertake appropriate 
AML/CFT due diligence consistent with its own policies and procedures. Furthermore, the AE is 
obligated to ensure the same standards are applied by EEs contracted to implement aspects of 
GCF funded activities. Given the contractual role of the AE in enforcing and monitoring 
AML/CFT compliance, it is expected that the associated risk exposure will be effectively 
mitigated to safeguard GCF resources from misuse; and 
74. 
The Compliance team at GCF has requested additional information from the AE 
highlighting the project-specific risks and strategic mitigation measures. Pending feedback from 
the AE addressing these matters. Due diligence has been conducted to check for sanctions and 
adverse media involving the key parties in the implementation structure. The outcome of the 
due diligence did not produce any red flags. 
4.3.6. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk): 
75. 
in case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio risk remains non-
material and within the risk appetite in terms of concentration level, results area or single 
proposal. 
4.3.7. 
Conclusion (medium risk): 
76. 
It is recommended that any approval by the Board be made after considering the above 
points. 
Summary risk assessment 
Rationale

=== PAGE 120 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 120 
 
 
Overall programme 
Medium The capacity of the EE and the 
commitment of the Government of 
Timor-Leste to cover operation and 
maintenance will be critical for the 
success of the project. The AE is 
requested to ensure the timely co-
financing from the Government and 
provide the necessary assistance for the 
EE during the implementation of the 
project 
Capability of accredited entity 
(AE)/executing entity (EE) to 
implement this programme 
Medium 
Project-specific execution 
Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  
Low 
Compliance 
Medium 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
77. 
The EE for the project is the General Directorate for Environment at MCIE. The MCIE is 
also the project sponsor, whose mandate is the responsibility for environment and climate 
change-related policies. As the EE, MCIE will take overall responsibility for the implementation 
and success of the project and will establish necessary planning and management mechanisms 
to oversee project inputs, activities and outputs. 
78. 
As the AE, UNDP will require the EE to implement the project in compliance with UNDP 
rules and regulations and policies and procedures, including its National Implementation 
Modality Guidelines. These will include relevant requirements relating to fiduciary, 
procurement, environmental and social safeguards, and other performance standards which 
will be legally binding via the signing of the UNDP Standard Basic Assistance Agreement by the 
Government of Timor-Leste as well as a UNDP project document to govern the use of the funds.  
79. 
MCIE will be accountable to UNDP for managing the project, including the monitoring 
and evaluation of project interventions, achievement of project outcomes and effective use of 
UNDP resources. In addition, the Government of Timor-Leste has requested UNDP to provide 
direct project services for this project. These services cover both technical and administrative 
support and are specified in the draft letter of agreement. The direct project services follow 
UNDP policies on the recovery of direct project costs relating to GCF-funded projects.  
80. 
UNDP will disburse funding (received from GCF in accordance with the funded activity 
agreement disbursement schedule) to the MCIE, as the EE, for the purposes of implementing the 
project. The MCIE will conclude agreements with the three ministries that will be made 
Responsible Parties, which are responsible for delivering particular project activities in 
accordance with their institutional mandates (to be detailed during the formulation of the 
project document).  
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
81. 
As an adaptation project, the proposal reports that the project is expected to impact an 
anticipated 175,840 direct beneficiaries (89,643 men, 86,197 women; 19,751 households), 
which is an estimated 15 per cent of the total population. Benefits include increased climate 
resilience for small-scale infrastructure as well as 300 ha of reforested and rehabilitated land to 
buffer against climate-induced disasters. 
82. 
The timetable of implementation in section C.8 has been revised as per earlier 
comments and conforms with the standard GCF format.

=== PAGE 121 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 121 
 
 
83. 
The logic framework in section H.1 is in line with the Fund’s PMF. 
84. 
The monitoring and reporting timeline in section H.2 complies with GCF reporting 
requirements. 
4.6 
Legal assessment 
85. 
The accreditation master agreement with the AE was signed on 5 August 2016 and 
became effective on 23 November 2016. 
86. 
The AE has provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.  
87. 
The proposed project will be implemented in Timor-Leste, a country in which GCF is not 
provided with privileged and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not 
protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, the risks of which need to be 
further assessed. The Secretariat submitted a draft privileges and immunities agreement to the 
government of Timor-Leste on 7 April 2016. So far, no response has been received. 
88. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have 
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or 
investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with relevant privileges 
and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by GCF are made only after 
GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in the country, or 
has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities. 
4.7 
List of proposed conditions (including legal) 
89. 
In order to mitigate risk, it is recommended that any approval by the Board is made 
subject to the following conditions:  
(a) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and 
(b) 
Completion of legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the Secretariat. 
  
DISCLAIMER: 
This assessment sheet is a working draft and contains a preliminary assessment by the Green 
Climate Fund (“GCF”) Secretariat of the funding proposal to which it refers, which remains 
expressly subject to further due diligence and review by the GCF Secretariat.   
Any draft assessment sheet prepared and provided by the GCF Secretariat to the independent 
Technical Advisory Panel of the GCF is a deliberative document and, therefore, is to be treated as 
information not to be publicly disclosed pursuant to the information disclosure policy of the 
GCF.  This draft assessment sheet is intended for use as a reference by the independent TAP 
members only and may not be disclosed to any third party, nor be cited or quoted in part or in 
whole.

=== PAGE 122 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 122 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP109 
Proposal name: 
Safeguarding rural communities and their physical and 
economic assets from climate induced disasters in Timor-Leste 
Accredited entity: 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Project/programme size: 
Medium 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
 
Scale: High 
1.1.1 
Adaptation impact 
1. 
Timor-Leste is a least developed country with a heavy reliance on agriculture for 
subsistence and income generation (approximately 75 per cent of its population is employed in 
the agriculture sector). Thus, the country is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, 
which include higher rainfall variability (predicted to decrease in the dry season and increase in 
the wet season), temperature increases and more frequent extreme climatic events. These 
changes would result in an increase of soil erosion, flood occurrence, landslides, crop failure, 
water shortages and damage of public and private infrastructure in a business-as-usual scenario. 
2. 
The project seeks to safeguard rural communities from the impacts of climate change by 
enhancing the climate resiliency of small-scale rural infrastructure, including water supply 
systems, rural roads and bridges, flood defences and irrigation systems in the six more 
vulnerable municipalities of the country. 
3. 
The project consists of two main components. Component 1 includes the development of 
climate risk information services and vulnerability mapping; the creation of a database system 
for monitoring, recording and accounting for climate-induced damages; and the integration of 
climate resiliency into policies, regulations and institutions to inform climate-resilient small-
scale rural infrastructure planning and management. Component 2 focuses on the 
implementation of climate-proofing measures for small-scale rural infrastructure, which would 
include the re-vegetation of land around rural water supply systems; formalization and 
enhancement of existing and new water supply and rural irrigation systems; rehabilitation of 
rural bridges and slope stabilization of rural road corridors; installation of climate-resilient 
rural flood defences; and implementation of agroforestry and reforestation as ecosystem-based 
adaptation activities to re-establish ecosystem functions. Climate risk reduction criteria would 
be integrated into the ongoing District Investment Development Plan (PDIM) at the municipal 
level and the National Programme for Suco Development (PNDS) at the village level.1 
4. 
The design and implementation of rural infrastructure under activity 2.2 would be 
guided by cost-benefit assessments, vulnerability mapping, and other tools to be introduced by 
the project under component 1. 
5. 
The proposed interventions on rural infrastructure (activity 2.2) would directly benefit 
approximately 119,000 people (almost 15 per cent of the population of Timor-Leste). 
                                                                
1Funding proposal, paragraph 28.

=== PAGE 123 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 123 
 
 
Agroforestry and reforestation activities (activity 2.3) would cover approximately 300 hectares 
and benefit 56,000 people. When questioned by the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
(iTAP) on the possibility of double-counting beneficiaries of individual infrastructure works and 
ecosystem-based adaptation activities (for example, people benefiting from water supply 
schemes, flood defences and/or agroforestry activities at the same time), the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP) responded that the number of beneficiaries was carefully 
estimated for each activity, based on community consultations, to avoid double-counting.2 The 
total indirect beneficiaries are estimated as the whole population of the targeted districts, which 
is 522,000 and represents 44 per cent of the total national population.  
6. 
The proposed interventions will reduce the climate risk vulnerability of targeted 
populations. Direct benefits would include improved water availability for domestic use and 
irrigation purposes during drought periods, better and more diverse crop yields, increased 
water quality,3 reduced damages to private and public infrastructure due to flooding and 
extreme climatic events, and enhanced livelihoods. 
7. 
Regarding the strengthening of institutional and regulatory systems, the project will 
develop and deliver climate risk and vulnerability assessments; cost-benefit assessments for 
adaptation alternatives; project appraisal techniques; a set of revised standards, guidelines and 
specifications for rural infrastructure; and training courses to public institutions on 
infrastructure planning and development and climate-induced disaster risk management 
(activities 1.1 and 1.3). 
8. 
To support the generation and use of climate risk information, the project will invest in 
developing a risk management application for the storage, analysis and management of disaster 
data, allowing users to estimate the economic damages caused by climatic events and evaluate 
the efficiency of the adopted measures (activity 1.2). 
9. 
Although the proposal recognizes that the availability of hydro-meteorological data is 
limited, and that for this reason the design of water supply systems do not consider climatic 
hazards,4 the project does not include interventions directed towards supporting hydro-
meteorological data generation. When questioned by iTAP on this matter, the proponent 
responded that the limitations of the hydro-meteorological network in the country are being 
addressed by other organizations and entities that are supporting the Government of Timor-
Leste in enhancing the observation network. 
10. 
The preliminary design of water supply and irrigation systems included the 
identification of water sources and the determination of their capacity to supply water to the 
communities through site reconnaissance and initial surveys on elevations, total hectares of 
lands that could potentially be irrigated, types of agricultural activities and crops that farmers 
were engaged in, and cropping patterns. 
11. 
All project interventions are coupled with capacity-building activities. This would help 
to create awareness of climate threats and risk reduction processes among public institutions 
and the general population, and support the sustainability of project outcomes. 
12. 
In responses to questions from iTAP raised prior to the twenty-second meeting of the 
Board (B.22), the accredited entity (AE) indicated that:  
Decree Law 3/2016 now embeds [operation and maintenance (O&M)] responsibility 
under the respective Municipal Service with [Ministry of State Administration] having 
overall financing and implementation responsibility for small scale rural infrastructure 
O&M.  
                                                                
2 “UNDP response to iTAP Assessment, 25feb2019.docx”, page 3. 
3 See comments on water, sanitation and hygiene in the following paragraphs. 
4 Feasibility study, page 63.

=== PAGE 124 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 124 
 
 
13. 
Furthermore, the AE indicated that: 
With regard to long-term O&M financing, the project will embed financing models for 
investment maintenance costs (e.g. of community-based schemes that involve the use of 
tariffs or in-kind contributions to establish municipal maintenance programmes, and 
will seek to engage the private sector in infrastructure maintenance financing) 
and that: 
 Setting up willingness-to-pay surveys is embedded into the PDIM and PNDS (baseline 
development investment programs) infrastructure prioritization exercise. 
14. 
The proponent clarified that preliminary willingness-to-pay data was obtained from the 
previously implemented “Strengthening the Resilience of Small-Scale Rural Infrastructure and 
Local Government Systems to Climate Risk” (SSRI) project, the Community Score Card process 
(run in eight trial communities across Timor-Leste), and from informal surveys. 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
 
Scale: Medium 
1.2.1 
Potential for knowledge and learning 
15. 
The project is not the first effort to support the implementation of community-led 
agroforestry activities in Timor-Leste. The feasibility study in section 7.1, describes previous 
governmental and non-governmental interventions. 
16. 
The monitoring and evaluation plan would comply with the UNDP Programmes and 
Operations Policies and Procedures, the UNDP Evaluation Policy and the GCF additional 
requirements. The procedures to monitor and evaluate project impacts, as described in the 
funding proposal, are deemed adequate. 
17. 
The damage database system planned under activity 1.2 and the consequent capacity to 
evaluate the efficiency of adaptation measures would serve as the main tool to facilitate the 
sharing of climate risk knowledge so that such knowledge can be used in other projects. Other 
than that, the funding proposal does not describe specific activities aimed at disseminating 
lessons learned throughout the country or region.5 
1.2.2 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
18. 
To ensure the sustainability of outputs beyond the project lifespan, the funding proposal 
includes the following components: (1) capacity-building for public institutions on climate risk 
management and adaptation alternatives; (2) mainstreaming of climate resiliency knowledge 
and related assessment tools in legal frameworks, policies and planning frameworks, and 
specifically in the PDIM and PNDS programmes; and (3) the income generation capacity of the 
proposed agroforestry activities. 
19. 
The increased diversity and volume of agricultural production due to the 
implementation of agroforestry activities has the potential to expand the market for agricultural 
products. The project would reduce disruption to product transportation thanks to rehabilitated 
and climate-proofed roads and bridges. The draft Agricultural Policy and Strategic Framework 
described on section 4.5.1 of the feasibility study includes actions aimed at strengthening 
market opportunities through inclusive and efficient value chain development and improved 
community and private sector participation in all subsectors.6 
                                                                
5 See recommendation from iTAP to the AE in paragraph 24. 
6 Feasibility study, page 84.

=== PAGE 125 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 125 
 
 
1.2.3 
Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
20. 
Climate risk information services, vulnerability mapping and the damage database 
would help promote the development of climate-resilient rural infrastructure. 
21. 
The project would specifically support the mainstreaming of climate change 
considerations into policies, regulatory frameworks and decision-making processes through 
activity 1.3. This activity includes the revision and enhancement of the existing normative 
framework and the creation of a new set of standards, guidelines and technical specifications for 
climate-resilient rural infrastructure; the integration of the new and revised specifications into 
sectoral plans such as the Rural Roads Master Plan & Investment Strategy 2016–2020 and the 
National Water Supply Policy and Strategic Plan; and the delivery of related training courses to 
technical staff and groups of engineers.7 
1.2.4 
Scalability and replicability 
22. 
The strong focus on capacity-building for governmental institutions at village, municipal 
and national levels gives the project a high replication potential in the six targeted 
municipalities as well as in the rest of the country. 
23. 
Also, the implementation of a climate risk information system that can be applied at a 
national level and the set of standards, guidelines and technical specifications for climate-
resilient rural infrastructure would support the climate resiliency of infrastructure to be 
designed in the future. 
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
  Scale: High 
1.3.1 
Environmental co-benefits 
24. 
Environmental co-benefits generated from the implementation of agroforestry and 
reforestation activities include 300 hectares of rehabilitated forest cover through GCF financing 
and a further 1,200 hectares from government co-financing, which will benefit over 200,000 
people. Co-benefits include reduced soil erosion, land stabilization, improved water quality, 
enhanced biodiversity, and regulated hydrological flows (buffer runoff, soil infiltration, 
groundwater recharge, maintenance of base flows). 
1.3.2 
Social co-benefits 
25. 
Project interventions will help to increase the safety and protection of the local 
population from climate events by enhancing the climate resiliency of rural infrastructure. 
26. 
Agroforestry activities will improve food security and promote climate-resilient 
livelihoods. 
27. 
A secure water supply has the potential to reduce public health expenditures and avoid 
income loss due to illness and time dedicated to procure safe water. However, this potential can 
be diminished or even reversed without simultaneous sanitation and hygiene measures.8  
28. 
Based on the information provided in this funding proposal, only 27 per cent of the 
population in rural areas has access to improved sanitation. Even though the funding proposal 
                                                                
7 Funding proposal, paragraph 53. 
8 “… whilst substantial benefits can be realised from providing access to water, sanitation and hygiene, there may also 
be some “disbenefits” along the way, depending on the sequencing of investments (for example, if access to water is 
provided without simultaneous access to sanitation)”. OECD (2011), Benefits of Investing in Water and Sanitation: An 
OECD Perspective, OECD Publishing.

=== PAGE 126 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 126 
 
 
does not consider the inclusion of improved sanitation activities, several ongoing water, 
sanitation and hygiene (WASH) initiatives will promote hygiene awareness, which, as stated by 
the proponent, would cover almost 100 per cent of the beneficiaries of the present proposal.9 
29. 
In reference to improved sanitation, iTAP evaluated the table presented by the project 
proponent. The analysis indicated that improved sanitation projects by other entities would be 
taking place in three out of the seven targeted municipalities, covering 100 per cent of the 
drinking water interventions by this funding proposal. However, the timing and extent of these 
projects were unknown. With respect to the other four municipalities, the improved sanitation 
interventions by third parties did not seem to cover the area addressed by this funding proposal. 
1.3.3 
Economic co-benefits 
30. 
The implementation of resilient irrigation systems and agroforestry practices will 
promote improved crop productivity and diversity, thus increasing household incomes. 
1.3.4 
Gender-sensitive development impact 
31. 
The project would include activities aimed at mainstreaming gender aspects into the 
PDIM and PNDS programmes to ensure women’s involvement in the prioritization and design 
processes. The Gender Action Plan would draw lessons learned from the SSRI project. 
32. 
Women are traditionally in charge of fetching water and usually have to walk long 
distances. The implementation of new water supply systems with public taps would 
considerably reduce this burden, which in turn will free time for activities of economic value. 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
1.4.1 
Vulnerability of the country, vulnerable groups and gender aspects 
33. 
Timor-Leste is highly vulnerable to climate risks such as rainfall variability, increased 
temperatures, and extreme events, which would be exacerbated by climate change. The degree 
of isolation and the socioeconomic conditions of the rural population make them even more 
vulnerable. 
34. 
Women are considerably disadvantaged in relation to access to resources such as land, 
capital and credit, as well as access to agricultural inputs and technology, training, information 
and marketing services.10 
35. 
The project targets the most vulnerable in terms of poverty, infrastructure and basic 
public service deficits, social vulnerabilities, and levels of exposure to climate risks. The 
identification and prioritization of rural infrastructure projects was based on the “Analysis of 
Climate Change Risks, Impacts and Vulnerability for Baseline and Projected Climate Change 
Scenarios” study carried out in 2016.11 
1.4.2 
Economic and social development 
36. 
Timor-Leste is a post-conflict low-income country, with a poverty rate estimated at 49 
per cent. Over 70 per cent of the population is engaged in subsistence agriculture (80 per cent 
for women). Due to high poverty and defective infrastructure and public services, 20 per cent of 
the population suffers from food insecurity, and an additional 24 per cent are vulnerable to food 
                                                                
9 FP-UNDP-130519-5910-responses to iTAP comments.pdf, answer to question 4.2 and table 1. 
10 Funding proposal, paragraph 161. 
11 Feasibility study, page 207.

=== PAGE 127 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 127 
 
 
insecurity. Increased climate variability and extreme events are expected to worsen the 
situation. 
37. 
Timor-Leste gained its independence from Indonesia in 1999 and since then has been 
facing great challenges in rebuilding its infrastructure, strengthening institutions and 
generating jobs. 
38. 
The villages with the lowest living standards are the most remote and least populated. 
Between the 89 villages with the lowest living standards, the average share of households with 
electricity is only 3 per cent, while in villages with higher living standards the average share is 
66 per cent. Access to improved water and sanitation is also much higher in villages with high 
living standards. In rural areas, 57 per cent has access to improved drinking water (main source 
of drinking water is from a well or spring (25 per cent), and 25 per cent has access to improved 
sanitation facilities. Water shortages are common in many areas in the dry season.12 
1.4.3 
Absence of alternative sources of financing 
39. 
The value of the indicator “domestic credit provided by financial sector” is negative for 
the country (–53.6 per cent of gross domestic product as per the funding proposal; –7.2 per cent 
as per World Bank data for 2017). This indicates a weak domestic financial framework and 
reflects limited access to finance. 
1.4.4 
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity 
40. 
The proposal recognizes and addresses a series of barriers to the implementation, 
operation and maintenance of climate-resilient small-scale rural infrastructure, including 
incomplete policies, standards and regulations, limited technical capacity, and weak capacity of 
municipal and village-level institutions. Approximately 15 per cent of the total project budget of 
USD 59 million would be allocated to activities aimed at overcoming these barriers (activities 
1.1, 1.2, 1.3 and 2.1). All in all, the proposal has a strong focus on institutional strengthening and 
capacity-building. 
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
       Scale: High 
1.5.1 
Alignment with national climate strategy and policies 
41. 
The project is aligned with the adaptation priorities concerning climate risk reduction, 
protection of forests and watershed rehabilitation described in the national adaptation 
programme of action. 
42. 
The project is also in line with several Sustainable Development Goals, the Government 
of Timor-Leste’s Strategic Development Plan for 2011–2030, the draft National Climate Change 
Policy, the revised draft of the National Forest Policy, and the Strategic Development Plan 2014–
2020 of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (MAF).  
1.5.2 
Capacity of accredited entities or executing entities to deliver 
43. 
UNDP has extensive experience in the implementation of climate adaptation projects, 
including projects related to climate-resilient livelihoods, ecosystem-based adaptation, food 
security, climate-resilient infrastructure and public services. UNDP has been working in Timor-
Leste since they gained their independence in 1999. In 2017 UNDP managed a climate change 
and disaster risk reduction portfolio of USD 18 million. 
                                                                
12 Feasibility study, pages 11 and 12.

=== PAGE 128 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 128 
 
 
44. 
The executing entity (EE) would be the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and 
Environment (MCIE). The GCF, Global Environment Facility (GEF) and United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) focal points and designated national 
authority for Timor-Leste sit within MCIE. The main programmes implemented by MCIE 
together with United Nations agencies include Cross Cutting Capacity Development, GCF 
Readiness Support to Timor-Leste, Local Government Systems to Climate Variability and Risk, 
Renewable Energy Project, Second National Communication Project, SSRI and Strengthening 
Community Resilience to Climate-induced Disasters in the Dili to Ainaro Road Development 
Corridor. 
45. 
Beneficiary institutions also include MAF, the Ministry of Public Works, Transport and 
Communication, the Ministry of Social Solidarity, MSA and subnational authorities (Aileu, 
Baucau, Ermera, Lautém, Liquiçá and Viqueque municipalities). The MSA was the main 
implementing agency, together with MCIE, for the SSRI project and it would be responsible for 
the integration of climate risk reduction methods into the planning and budgeting cycles of 
village and municipal development plans, and for the implementation of climate-proofing 
measures for small-scale rural infrastructure (activities 2.1 and 2.2). 
1.5.3 
Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
46. 
The project was designed in close collaboration with the national designated authority 
since the inception phase and included consultations with relevant governmental institutions at 
national, municipal and community levels.  
47. 
Even though community leaders were consulted about the acceptability of the project, 
community consultations did not include workshops for the participation of the general public. 
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
        Scale: Medium to High 
1.6.1 
Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
48. 
Ecosystem-based adaptation interventions are more effective in the long-term than hard 
engineering measures and would help to reduce the cost of maintaining new and rehabilitated 
infrastructure by diminishing its exposure to climate hazards.  
49. 
The integrated approach, covering capacity-building, institutional strengthening, risks 
and vulnerability assessments, infrastructure development and ecosystem-based adaptation 
measures, adds to the efficiency and sustainability of project activities. 
50. 
Given that rural infrastructure activities comprise 130 individual subprojects in various 
sectors (roads, irrigation, drinking water, etc.), it was not possible to assess the expected related 
costs and cost-effectiveness of each intervention. The cost of infrastructure was estimated based 
on the unit costs of the SSRI project.13 
1.6.2 
Amount of co-financing 
51. 
The Government of Timor-Leste would provide financing for 62 per cent of the total 
project cost. 
52. 
During the assessment of the funding proposal at B.22, iTAP concluded that “the 
efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed interventions are reduced to a low rating due to 
uncertain operation and maintenance cost estimations and sources to secure their financing.” 
For the present revision of this proposal for B.23, operation and maintenance (O&M) estimates 
                                                                
13 Funding proposal, paragraph 66.

=== PAGE 129 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 129 
 
 
are included in the project budget. The financial analysis estimates O&M costs from year 3 to 
year 20 at a total of approx. USD 29.4 million. In addition, the proponent included a co-financing 
commitment letter confirming the Government of Timor-Leste’s intention to allocate USD 29.4 
million for the O&M of the 130 infrastructure subprojects from year 3 to year 20.  
1.6.3 
Financial viability 
53. 
Being of a public goods nature, project outputs do not involve cost recovery. Indirect 
revenue generation would come from the enhanced income of households implementing 
agroforestry practices and reduced health expenditure and income loss. 
54. 
Preliminary cost-benefit analyses were carried out for each of the 130 infrastructure 
schemes. For the estimation of avoided damage, the same frequency was used for all four 
considered hydro-meteorological hazards. 
55. 
Due to the lack of historical data on damage caused by climatic events and to allow for 
the comparison of costs and benefits of all rural infrastructure, losses were assumed for each 
scheme with the same frequency. For this reason, the internal rates of return (IRRs) are only 
useful for ranking scheme viability. 
56. 
Approximately 50 per cent of all flood control infrastructure are not reported to avoid 
damage to property or crops. It is not clear if this assumption is based on a lack of data and 
conservativeness.14 
57. 
The financial analysis includes costs saved by avoiding economic losses, transportation 
losses, disruption losses, and erosion losses on an annual basis. It showed an IRR of 13 per cent 
and a net present value of USD 41 million. 
1.6.4 
Best practices 
58. 
The designs for the small-scale rural infrastructure included under activity 2.2 (flood 
defences, water supply and irrigation systems, and roads and bridges) were based on tested 
climate-proofing prototypes from the GEF-funded SSRI project. For this reason, the description 
of this infrastructure does not present detail on the technical aspects or design processes.15 For 
example, to be able to evaluate the potential of the proposed irrigation and water supply 
systems to cope with drought periods, it would be necessary to analyse spring and ground 
water availability during normal and drought periods, availability of surface water for irrigation, 
and sizing of storage tanks. However, iTAP considers that the large number of small-scale 
interventions would make this analysis cumbersome at this stage. 
59. 
The incorporation of physical protection, settlement chambers and filter membranes in 
intake structures of springs and the stabilization of catchment area and erosion control through 
tree planting would help to ensure water quality. A description of intake structures showing 
these features was submitted as a response to iTAP questions.16 
60. 
The project builds upon the lessons learned during the implementation of the SSRI 
project and reinforces the interventions in the PDIM and PNDS programmes in order to fully 
achieve the integration of climate resilience considerations into infrastructure design, 
implementation and O&M. The SSRI project delivered capacity-building to policymakers and the 
public and involved a series of rural infrastructure interventions, including water supply and 
irrigation systems, roads and bridges, and flood defences. The capacity-building components of 
the present project would be guided by the capacity development needs assessment and 
                                                                
14 See “Project List Summary” of the “FP-UNDP-301118-5910-Annex XIII _h-2_ IRR Flood Control.xlsx”. 
15 See Feasibility Study, section 11.11. 
16 FP-UNDP-130519-5910-responses to iTAP comments.pdf, page 15.

=== PAGE 130 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 130 
capacity development strategy formulated under the SSRI project and would scale up and 
complement the trainings under the SSRI project. 
61.
Other best practices come from the lessons learned through the UNDP-supported Dili-
Ainaro Road Development Corridor Project which focused on strengthening the institutional 
and technical capacities of subnational government officials to plan and implement ecosystem-
based adaptation approaches, specifically agroforestry projects. 
62.
The proposed project will provide only water supply systems/infrastructure with no
physical intervention/infrastructure for sanitation. Actions related to raising awareness on 
hygiene practices in the target communities would be implemented in coordination with other 
ongoing projects in the region, covering 100 per cent of the targeted populations, as described 
in the response to the iTAP questions.17 Annex XIII d-2 includes a letter of commitment to 
cooperate with WASH forum members in Timor-Leste. The proponent will have to coordinate 
with third parties for the provision of improved sanitation in the targeted areas.18 
II.
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel
63.
The iTAP recommends that the Board approve this funding proposal.
64.
To make sure the whole set of benefits deriving from water supply schemes from this
funding proposal materialize, the AE must meet the following: 
(a) 
Condition precedent to all disbursements for drinking water supply interventions under 
activity 2.2: 
(i) 
Delivery to the GCF by the accredited entity of evidence, in form and substance 
satisfactory to GCF, that hygiene and improved sanitation interventions to be provided 
by third parties are in place before, or are put in place simultaneously with, the drinking 
water intervention, as described in the funding proposal. For the avoidance of doubt, 
evidence may include, but not be limited to, the letter of commitment by a third party 
including a description of the project, availability of funding, project budget, schedule 
and area of influence; and 
(b) 
Covenant: 
(i) 
The accredited entity shall ensure that the GCF Proceeds will not support or finance, 
directly or indirectly, any activities in relation to drinking water supply intervention in 
targeted municipalities that do not satisfy the requirements of the condition precedent 
to all disbursement set out above. 
65.
With this condition, the iTAP considers that both project impact and contribution to
sustainable development can be rated as high. 
66.
The iTAP recommends that the AE develop and describe specific activities aimed at
disseminating lessons learned throughout the country or region. 
17 FP-UNDP-130519-5910-responses to iTAP comments.pdf, answer to question 4 and table 1. 
18 See iTAP comments under (b) Social Co-benefits in Section 1.3 Sustainable Development Potential.

=== PAGE 131 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 131 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent 
Technical Advisory Panel's assessment (FP109) 
Proposal name: 
Safeguarding rural communities and their physical assets from climate 
induced disasters in Timor-Leste 
Accredited entity: 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Impact potential 
The High rating is noted. 
Paradigm shift potential 
The Medium rating is noted. 
Related to the assessment of the ‘Potential for knowledge and learning’, the AE would like to 
clarify that the project will facilitate the dissemination and sharing of common and definitive 
climate risk information needed by all sectors to embed climate risk considerations into their 
functions as well as develop skills and capacities for systematic generation and provision of 
climate risk information to the local investment programmes (PDIM and PNDS) and beyond. 
More specifically, under the Output 1, the project will establish an information platform which 
will consist of a national e-Library, databases, information systems and knowledge portal with 
integration with social media and mobile application to increase community engagement and 
allow two-way flow of information. The project will develop and disseminate manuals, tools, 
and methodologies related to climate hazard and risk assessment, climate risk management, 
risks and vulnerability assessments, engineering practices for climate-proofing of small rural 
infrastructure, among others. A series of trainings to mandated institutions will be conducted 
to disseminate this knowledge and relevant institutions at national and sub-national level will 
be strengthened to embed such knowledge and skills for continuity of the learning process. The 
learning and capacities for the social resilience of communities will be strengthened through a 
robust knowledge management approach at the community level, utilizing existing CCAPRID - 
Capacity Development on Climate Change Adaptation Planning for Rural Infrastructure 
Development and CAMP - Community Action Management Plan processes. 
The project provides many opportunities for formal learning, awareness raising and capacity 
building cut across almost all outputs and activities. These sets of measures will catalyse 
longer-term learning and short-term professional training/retraining programs targeting all 
stakeholders, including vulnerable communities, local governments, universities and relevant 
authorities. The project will also undertake impact evaluation to systematically generate 
lessons learned and the evidence base for project interventions at the community level. 
Sustainable development potential

=== PAGE 132 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 132 
The High rating is noted. 
Needs of the recipient 
The High rating is noted. 
Country ownership 
The High rating is noted. 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
The Medium to High rating is noted. 
The GoTL has provided an overall financial commitment for O&M of 20 years in total (Annex 
IV(b)). The project develops the O&M costing, budgeting and implementation capacities for the 
PDIM and PNDS process as integral to climate proofing of infrastructure development and long- 
term investment planning for all small scale rural infrastructure. Asset inspection and 
condition monitoring measures that are new to Timor Leste will include monitoring of hazard 
incident on asset, damages and losses accounting to determine remedial measures and 
associated costs, are all new tracking methods which will iteratively inform O&M costing and 
budgeting in the future. Hence, the project is developing long-term, climate risk-informed 
infrastructure investment strategies which will help government to identify the infrastructure 
O&M needs and mechanisms, and can contribute to the reduction in O&M costs due to the 
climate proofing of infrastructure by this project. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
AE acknowledges the iTAP’s recommendation of the project to the Board. 
Related to the condition and covenant, the AE notes that during project formulation, under the 
leadership of Director General, and as part of the National Water Forum set up at the 
Department of Water and Sanitation of the Ministry of Public Works, consultations were held 
and cooperation agreed with WaterAid, UNICEF, WHO and other agencies who have sanitation 
and hygiene interventions in rural communities. A signed the letter of commitment for 
cooperation has been obtained (Annex XIII (d-2) – Annexure 1). All consulted organizations 
confirmed that the key limitation to sanitation is a lack of water delivery infrastructure. Hence, 
the increased availability and reliability of water supply to households through the climate 
proofed water supply units to be implemented by the GCF project means that households will 
be more inclined to install improved sanitation methods that require the use of water, such as 
the pour-flush toilets, and additionally benefit from interventions from NGOs and other 
organizations that are actively supporting sanitation practices. This is fully in line with the 
government’s National Sanitation Strategy that aims at full CLTS targets by 2020-21. 
The AE, with the Director General as part of the project steering committee, will ensure 
continued, active participation in the National Water Forum that houses the coordination 
mechanism across all WASH initiatives in the country. AE will continue tracking and collecting 
sanitation  data   and  will  provide  the  updated  information  on   complementary  sanitation 
investments at the inception stage of the project implementation, and annually, as required. In

=== PAGE 133 ===
GCF/B.23/02/Add.03 
Page 133 
addition, the AE will sequence implementation of climate proofing of infrastructure to ensure 
that complementary investment in sanitation is in place. 
AE also notes the recommendation related to dessimination of lessons and will further develop 
the series of project activities (e.g. 1.1.5, 1.1.9, 1.2.4,1.3.6, 1.3.7, 2.1.1, 2.1.2, 2.1.7) that are 
specifcally focused on training (including TOTs), learning of new skills and methods, 
knowledge generation (e.g. hazard and socio-economic modelling for risk knowedge) and 
building capacities across all levels of decentralized governance for public investment into the 
small-scale rural infrastructure.

=== PAGE 134 ===
I
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL
Annex XIII (c) 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
Safeguarding communities and their physical assets from 
climate induced disasters in Timor Leste 
Gender documentation for FP109

=== PAGE 135 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
1 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Background 
 
The proposed project is designed to safeguard vulnerable communities and their physical and 
economic assets from climate change induced disasters in Timor-Leste. The proposed project 
aims to address the existing barriers and shift the baseline scenario towards climate 
resilience. The project will directly benefit 19,751 households, comprising 15% of the total 
population. The direct beneficiaries of the project are 175,840 (89,643 males, 86,197 females) 
and the indirect beneficiaries are 346,160 (176,473 males, 169, 687 females) living in the six 
municipalities. The proportion of men and women benefitted by the project is almost the 
equally balanced – 51% males and 49% females.  
 
Previous assessments undertaken to understand the gender roles and the differential impact 
of climate induced disaster risks and climate shocks have underscored the established notion 
that women, children and elderly are more vulnerable to the negative impacts of climate 
change. To assess if this widespread notion holds true in case of Timor-Leste or not, UNDP 
had undertaken a four-way gender analysis in six municipalities to assess: 
a) the overall differential impact of climate change and disaster risks and existing 
coping mechanisms and adaptive capacity in six municipalities on men and women;  
b) impact of the climate resilient small scale rural infrastructures and community based 
adaptation measures on the lives and livelihood of men and women and; 
c) role of women in contributing towards gender responsive planning and building 
resilience at the community level; 
d) policy gaps that need to be addressed to strengthen and foster mainstreaming 
gender into climate and disaster risk management interventions. 
 
This gender assessment1 provides an overview of the gender situation in Timor-Leste in the 
context of the impact of climate change, coping mechanisms, climate vulnerabilities, policy 
gaps, institutional capacities and the need assessment to better address the existing gender 
based differential challenges and opportunities. The assessment explored both existing and 
potential mechanisms to aid in mainstreaming gender into the overall development activities, 
with emphasis on climate resilient development. 
 
The gender assessment was based on primary data collection through site visits, where key 
informant interviews and focused group discussions were conducted along with consultation 
workshops with the key stakeholders at both national and sub-national levels. This was 
                                                 
1 While women are the largest vulnerable group that suffer from discrimination and exclusion, other minority groups such as disabled 
people, elderly, youth, LGBTI and ethnic minorities often suffer similar issues and therefore actions described in the GAP may also be 
applicable to them.  Where an action can have benefits beyond purely gender aspects, it should be read to include and apply to other 
vulnerable groups as relevant.

=== PAGE 136 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
2 
 
complimented by further analysis of the gender related documents, policies and climate 
change policy instruments through a desk review. 
 
a) 
Primary Data collection: 
With the insights from the secondary information, primary data collection was 
prepared, such as checklists for interviews, identification of appropriate & context 
specific gender assessments tools, and other participative approaches to support 
the gender assessment. 
 
Throughout the community engagement, the study team undertook several 
initiatives to ensure integration of women such as holding women-only focus 
group discussions, or separating women and men. These enabled women to 
express their concerns and perspectives freely. A concluding 2-day validation 
workshop held between 23rd- 24th March 2017 also served to obtain some 
additional information that was not possible to obtain during the field visit and 
consultations with stakeholders. 
 
b) 
Desk Review:  
The assessment made use of available resources and insights from primary data 
collection to inform and strengthen the analysis with specific focus on the core 
components of the climate change (adaptation, resilience and disaster risk 
management) aspects. Documents and literature consulted primarily consist of:  
i) 
Literature (international) on gender and climate change and DRR;  
ii) Literature on climate change and disaster risks on Timor-Leste; and  
iii) Key relevant documents pertaining to existing policies and gender 
mainstreaming instruments and tools adopted in Timor-Leste  
iv) Programme documents, narrative reports, country report on risks analysis and 
other documents and various materials produced within the scope of the two 
projects

=== PAGE 137 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
3 
 
II. GENDER EQUALITY AND SOCIAL INCLUSION IN TIMOR-LESTE 
Gender Inequality Index 
Timor-Leste’s Gender Development Index (GDI)2 value and its components are comparative 
to selected countries and groups; the GDI reflects gender-based inequalities in three 
dimensions – reproductive health, empowerment, and economic activity and calculated for 
161 countries. 
Timor-Leste’s GDI value and its components relative to selected countries and groups 
 
Life expectancy 
at birth 
Expected 
years 
of schooling 
 
Mean years of 
schooling 
 
GNI per capita 
 
HDI values 
 
F-M 
ratio 
F 
M 
F 
M 
F 
M 
F 
M 
F 
M 
GDI 
value 
Timor-Leste 
70.1 
66.5 
 
11.3 
 
12.0 
3.6 
 
5.3 
 
3,122 
 
7,530 
 
0.548 
 
0.631 
 
0.868 
Fiji 
73.2 
 
67.2 
 
16.0 
15.5 
9.8 
 
10.0 
 
4,274 
 
10,592 
 
0.699 
 
0.743 
 
0.941 
East Asia and 
the Pacific 
76.0 
 
72.2 
 
13.0 
 
12.8 
 
6.9 
 
8.0 
 
9,017 
 
13,780 
 
0.692 
 
0.730 
 
0.948 
Medium HDI 
70.6 
 
66.8 
 
11.5 
 
11.8 
 
4.9 
 
7.3 
 
3,333 
 
9,257 
 
0.574 
 
0.667 
 
0.861 
UNDP. 2015. Human Development Index. Work for Development. Briefing note for countries on the 2015 Human 
Development Report. Timor-Leste 
 
The following sections illustrate the sector specific gender disparities. For example, in the 
economic sector, the existing patriarchal system in Timor-Leste undermines women vis-à-vis 
men and subsumes their contribution to society even when they are educated or come from 
wealthy households.3 Women’s contribution to the economic sector is significant, yet their 
contributions are not fully acknowledged and made ‘visible’.  
• 
Violence against women and girls in Timor-Leste, is a widespread problem and has 
largely prevented women in participating actively in all aspects of development.4 This 
is evident from police data of high incidence of reports of gender-based violence and 
specifically domestic violence, which was the most frequently reported crime across 
all districts of the country between 2000 and 2009.5 The 2009-2010 Demographic 
                                                 
2 UNDP. 2015. Human Development Index. Work for Development. Briefing note for countries on the 2015 Human 
Development Report. Timor-Leste; Note: Gender Development Index (GDI), introduced in 2014 is a new measure based on 
the sex-disaggregated Human Development Index, defined as a ratio of the female to the male HDI. The GDI measures 
gender inequalities in achievement in three basic dimensions of human development: health (measured by female and 
male life expectancy at birth), education (measured by female and male expected years of schooling for children and mean 
years for adults aged 25 years and older); and command over economic resources (measured by female and male 
estimated GNI per capita). 
3 USAID- ADAPT Asia Pacific.2014. Strengthening Community Resilience to Climate Induced Natural Disasters in Timor-
Leste. Gender Report. P.16 
4 OECD Development Centre. 2014.Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI). P.4. Accessed on 16th January 2016. 
http://www.genderindex.org/country/timor-leste 
5 Harris-Rimmer, S. (2010). Sexual and gender-based violence. In R. Muggah and E. Lebrun (Eds), Timor-Leste armed 
violence assessment final report (pp. 37-52). Geneva: Small Arms Survey. Retrieved from 
http://www.internaldisplacement.org/8025708F004CE90B/%28httpDocuments%29/87C23BB27D31653AC12577F500556A
5D/$file/full_report.pdf

=== PAGE 138 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
4 
 
Health Survey (DHS) found that 35% of women aged 15-49 have experienced physical 
violence in their lifetime, with 29% of women experiencing physical violence often or 
sometimes in the past 12 months.6 The DHS survey also reported that about 3% of 
women aged 15-49 have experienced sexual violence.7  Social acceptance of domestic 
violence also impedes the implementation of the law.8 
 
• Participation in Labour Force within the existing patriarchal system in Timor-Leste 
undermines women vis-à-vis men and subsumes their contribution to society even 
when they are educated or come from wealthy households.9 Women’s contribution 
to the economic sector is significant, yet their contributions are not fully 
acknowledged and made ‘visible’. This is exemplified by data showing gender 
disparities in labour force participation rate, that varies significantly by age: 10  
o Among men, the participation rate is above 80% for those aged 30–49, and it 
is also higher for those in urban areas than those in rural areas.  
o Among women, the participation rate is higher for relatively older age groups: 
those aged 55–59 in urban areas and those aged 45–49 and 55–59 in rural 
areas.  
o Compared with men, labour participation among women aged 30–34 and 35–
39 (in rural areas) is low, showing the largest gender gap in these age groups. 
This large gender gap suggests that women of prime childbearing and 
childrearing ages including women’s household responsibilities, especially 
child care, are likely to constrain their engagement in the labour market. 
 
The disparities in labour force participation with lower participation of women 
illustrates a statistical bias of the term as adopted in most labour force surveys; for 
example, people engaged in work solely for household consumption, such as tending 
to the family garden, are not counted as “employed” to capture primarily market-
oriented jobs and track trends in the labour market.  
 
o Gender disparities in the formal sector means only 39 percent of females are 
employed or available for work, compared to 69 percent of males. Whilst over 55 
percent of men aged 10 years and above are employed compared to only 28 percent 
of females. Women are less likely than men to be self-employed or employers, as men 
hold most jobs in both the private and public sectors.11 While women in decision-
                                                 
6 Demographic Health Survey (2010), p.228 
7 Demographic Health Survey (2010),p. 233 
8 OECD Development Centre. 2014.Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI). Pp.6-7. Accessed on 16th January 2016. 
http://www.genderindex.org/country/timor-leste 
9 USAID- ADAPT Asia Pacific.2014. Strengthening Community Resilience to Climate Induced Natural Disasters in Timor-
Leste. Gender Report. P.16 
10 ADB et al. 2014. Timor-Leste. Country-Gender Assessment. P. 72. 
11 Timor-Leste Census Report-2010

=== PAGE 139 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
5 
 
making positions had a comparatively higher level of education than their male 
counterparts. Most of the unemployed were male (63%). 
A general observation noted that of all women primarily economically inactive, more 
than one third (42%) were making some sort of economic contribution. Predominately 
in unpaid farming activities (29.5%) or through making tais (weaving), tablecloths, 
kurse or necklaces (7.1%). While Only 23 percent of inactive men were making an 
economic contribution, doing unpaid farming work (17.8%).12 
 
According to the 2010 Business Activity Survey, the private sector employs almost 47,000 
people across the country, with nearly one third (30%) of those being women.13 The most 
profitable industry in the private sector is retail and wholesale trade, contributing more than 
USD108 million in added value to the economy in 2010. Women hold 38% of jobs in this 
industry and it employs 4,600 (33%) of the 13,900 women who work in the private sector.14 
Construction is the next most profitable industry, where women hold 13% of jobs. The highest 
concentration of women in the private sector is in the accommodation, food and services 
industry, in which more than two thirds (68%) of employees are women.15 
• In case of access and control over the resources, including property and assets, 
women face serious economic constraints.  The prevailing patriarchal norms, and 
customary law systems (commonly referred to as ‘lisan’ in Tetun), greatly influence 
the access to and control over resources, which tend to favour boys/men., 16  and 
these norms translate further into rights to inheritance and property, or obtaining 
business finance, etc.  This is despite provision in the 2011 Civil Code for women and 
men to enjoy equal rights to inheritance of land, as well as succession,17 customary 
law prevails.  
 
The inheritance system continues to follow traditional matrilineal and patrilineal lines, 
especially in rural areas. In Timor-Leste, ‘matrilineal’ communities do not exceed 
12.5% of the population.18  Even within the matrilineal community, mostly traditional 
patriarchal asset control prevails, with all assets (land, house etc.) belonging to a 
husband, and being inherited by male descendants only. 
 
                                                 
12 Timor-Leste Census Report-2010 
13 Secretary of State for the Promotion of Equality (SEPI). 2014. Beijing Platform For Action National Review and Appraisal 
Report. 2014. P. 37 
14 ibid. 
15 ibid. 
16 Land tenure, in Timor-Leste is extremely complex and compounded by the fact that it does not have precise information 
on landownership and agricultural land use. The landownership and titling is a major issue in the country with its long 
history of transformation. Historical events such as independence in 1999, wherein most of land was occupied without 
official title deeds, conflicts in 2006, have pushed people to remote and unsuitable land (steep slopes), which is a critical 
factor that influences the social vulnerability of the communities; see World Bank. 2015. Building Climate and Disaster 
Resilience in Communities along Dili-Ainaro and Linked Road Corridors Project. Component 1: Natural Hazard Risk 
Assessment. Synthesis Report 
17 OECD Development Centre. 2014.Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI). P.6. Accessed on 16th January 2016. 
http://www.genderindex.org/country/timor-leste 
18 Narciso et al. (2012). “Land and Gender in Matrilineal Timor-Leste”

=== PAGE 140 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
6 
 
Furthermore, as stated in Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI); while there are 
no reported legal restrictions on women’s access to financial services, including credit, 
women have virtually no access to it. Moreover, Women often need references, 
husband’s signature or face difficulties filling out the forms due to illiteracy and, as 
such, experience barriers in applying for loans.19 
 
• The gender (in)equality scenario and gender dynamics is similar in the case of climate 
change and disaster risk realm. Climate change and disaster risks have been found to 
have differential impact on men and women, mainly emanating from differences in 
the gender-based roles. The magnitude of the impact is usually a factor of level of 
vulnerability of the communities in addition to the level of dependence on the natural 
system for livelihood. Women, in general, face different levels of risk and have 
different vulnerabilities and coping capacities resulting from gender-based political, 
cultural and socioeconomic differences and inequalities that persist throughout the 
world. Irrespective of gender, the causal effect of climate change and disaster risks is 
expected to increase proportionally with the level of human development, coping 
mechanisms and policy instruments that contribute towards creation of enabling 
environment. In the case of countries like Timor Leste where the staple source of 
household income is still agriculture-based activities, where sustenance farming 
prevails extensively and where rural infrastructures are either non-existent or need 
major overhaul, the lives of rural communities, especially women and girls are more 
sensitive to climate change and disaster risks.   
 
In rural Timor-Leste, the burden of agricultural work, coffee harvesting and caring for 
home gardens is generally shared between men and women. However, domestic 
responsibilities such as child-rearing, cooking, cleaning and overall family wellbeing, 
reflects traditional gender roles. This implies that women’s vulnerabilities to climate 
change and disaster, while similar to men, include specific additional concerns such 
as: 
• Access to water and firewood; 
• destruction of and damage to the home gardens; 
• damage to seeds; 
• hindered access to markets and hence sale of products/ generation of cash; 
• diseases and access to clinics; and 
• closing of schools. 
• Post-disaster health care 
Due to the social and family roles of women, the lack of access to water is a critical 
limitation imposed on women by climate change. Women have to spend on average 
2-3 hours a day on fetching water either directly from the source or from the nearest 
communal tap. Therefore, securing water for household and farming purposes 
                                                 
19 OECD Development Centre. 2014.Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI). P.7. Accessed on 16th January 2016. 
http://www.genderindex.org/country/timor-leste

=== PAGE 141 ===
I
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL
7 
through climate resilient water supply systems will bring considerable opportunities 
for improving women’s daily lives, health and livelihood. The need and priority of this 
intervention has been verified during consultations, interviews and community 
meetings with all women groups. 
In general, male-headed households have higher incomes than female-headed 
households and overall there is a considerable difference in the income of male-
headed households, which emphasises the increased vulnerability of female-headed 
households.  Pregnant and nursing mothers are particularly vulnerable because of 
their increased need for food and water and their decreased mobility. As the primary 
caretakers of their homes, women tend to the needs of children, elderly and the 
disabled. This increases their workload and reduces their mobility in cases where quick 
evacuations are required or where they live a long distance to water supply facilities. 
It is known that the consequences for the balance between productive and 
reproductive activities of women is severely altered during and after flood event and 
has impacts on the resilience and income of a household.  
•
Education in Timor-Leste has succeeded in achieving gender-parity in primary and
secondary school with girls’ rate exceeding boys: in 2010, 94% of primary school age
girls and 92% of boys were enrolled in school. Net enrolments in presecondary school
were 34% for girls and 27% for boys.20 Thus in Timor-Leste, the difference between
females and males’ education in terms of numbers is not significant; but the largest
gender gap in education attendance is at tertiary level with almost 60 percent of
university and polytechnic/diploma students being male.21
As for fields of study at tertiary institutions, most women get their qualifications in 
areas such as economics and management (54% of graduates in 2010 were women) 
or teaching (41%). In 2010, fewer women graduated from the fields of engineering 
(21% of graduates were women), law (29%), public administration (31%), and 
agriculture (38%). While there has been an increase in the proportion of women 
studying economics and public administration, whereas their representation has fallen 
in law and agriculture.22 
Whereas female literacy has risen from 43 per cent in 2007 to 70 per cent now but 
this is still below the 80 per cent literacy rate for males.23 In Timor-Leste, especially in 
the rural areas, a reason attributed to the high drop-out rate among female students 
is attributed to ‘the great distances between home and schools serve as an obstacle 
for female students, especially those who live in rural areas. Parents do not normally 
allow their daughters to travel too far from their homes, as girls are thought to be 
20 ADB et al. 2014. Timor-Leste. Country-Gender Assessment. P.xiii 
21 Timor-Leste Population and Housing Census 2010; Analytical Report on Gender Dimension. Volume 4.   
22 ADB et al. 2014. Timor-Leste. Country-Gender Assessment. P. 26 
23 O’Dwyer Barbara & Kelly Marion. 2013. Timor-Leste Health Program. Gender Analysis. P. 9. Cited from CEDAW 2009

=== PAGE 142 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
8 
 
vulnerable’.24Early marriage could be a factor for the high drop-out rates as also other 
consequences including participation in productive activities, and health. Wide 
disparities in education results in different abilities for women and men to acquire and 
process information and to communicate in face of disasters as well as to CCA 
measures. 
 
• Early marriage and reproductive health- early marriage continues to take place in 
Timor-Leste, mainly in cases where a marriage has been arranged at birth or because 
of extreme poverty where ‘barlake’ (bride-price) can be agreed.25 As per the United 
Nations reports, (based on 2009 data), 8.1% of girls between 15 and 19 years of age 
were married, divorced or widowed (down from 10.6% in 2003); compared to 0.4% of 
boys in the same age range (down from 0.6% in 2003).26 Traditional attitudes and 
limited economic opportunities encourage women to marry and begin childbearing at 
a relatively young age, leading to high fertility rates. In terms of reproductive health 
high fertility, limited access to health services, safe water, and improved sanitation 
facilities increase the risk of maternal and child mortality.27 Although showing a 
declining trend, maternal (decreased from 660 per 100,000 live births in 2003 to 557 
in 2009-2010, is the highest in the world) and child mortality (decreased from 60 
deaths per 1,000 live births in 2003 to 45 in 2009–2010,) are key issues for women, 
and have been identified as the top public health priorities by the Ministry of Health 
(MoH)28. 
 
• Decision making- Timorese women face significant inequality as compared to men in 
respect to decision making 29  and restricted both at private and public sphere. 
Women’s participation in the decision-making process is limited by time constraints, 
gender stereo-types and patriarchal attitudes. In daily life, cultural norms in Timor-
Leste assign the dominant role to men (patriarchal system) in planning or decision-
making, with tradition and customary law favouring men over women.30 Men as head 
of the household make decisions especially those having economic implications while 
women about their health & minor purchase; senior women hold a higher status than 
other women. Thus, in households all major decisions pertaining to economic 
decisions are made by men.  
                                                 
24 USAID. 2014. Patriarchal Barriers to Women’s Political Participation in South-East Asia: Lessons from the Philippines, 
Cambodia, Malaysia, Indonesia, and Timor-Leste on Patriarchy and the Rise of Women’s Participation in State Politics.  P. 
13 
25 OECD Development Centre. 2014.Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI). P.1. Accessed on 16th January 2016. 
http://www.genderindex.org/country/timor-leste 
26 OECD Development Centre. 2014.Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI). Accessed on 16th January 2016. 
http://www.genderindex.org/country/timor-leste 
27 ADB et al. 2014. Timor-Leste. Country-Gender Assessment. P.xiv 
28 ibid 
29 Timor-Leste Population and Housing Census 2010; Analytical Report on Gender Dimension. Volume 4.  Note- the data on 
education and work employment is also from this source 
30  USAID- ADAPT Asia Pacific.2014. Strengthening Community Resilience to Climate Induced Natural Disasters in Timor-
Leste. Gender Report. P.16

=== PAGE 143 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
9 
 
Similarly, the public sphere too is dominated by males with limited participation of 
women in decision making process (Details in Chapter -III under Women’s 
participation and Leadership).  
The common barriers for women to enter leadership position in Timor-Leste include:31 
• lower education and literacy compared to men;  
• discrimination in recruitment;  
• negative stereotypes and attitudes towards women’s participation in public 
life; 
•  attitudes to women’s traditional role in the home;  
• little support from families and political parties, especially little support for 
women to engage in politics as independent candidates without political party 
support; 
• decision making; 
• low solidarity between women;  
• low civic awareness, and low confidence to put themselves forward as 
candidates. 
 
• Agriculture: Over 80% of Timor-Leste’s rural population depends on agriculture and 
natural resources for their livelihoods.32 The geographic characteristics of Timor-Leste 
make it less than ideal for agricultural production with rugged, erosion-prone terrain, 
poor soils, and varying, often unpredictable rainfall.33 With more than 90% of the 
agriculture systems in rural areas are rain-fed, 34 and is currently shaped by a 
predominance of small subsistence farms with low levels of production and 
productivity.35  
Households rely heavily on the cultivation of staple crops such as maize, rice, cassava, 
and sweet potato; Crop yields are well below the average for East Asia, leading to 
problems of food security in many communities, especially during the country’s dry 
seasons as other sources of income are limited and irrigated areas are lower.36 As 
reported in a study, poorer households are more vulnerable to increased food 
insecurity because their livelihoods are more reliant on a staple food crop that is 
sensitive to climate hazards, such as maize production for food and income than other 
households.  This clearly demonstrates a linkage between poverty and vulnerability to 
climate change.37 
                                                 
31 Op.cit. USAID- ADAPT Asia Pacific.2014.  
32 Care. 2015, Food, water, rain, risk: the uphill struggle to adapt. Final evaluation of the MAKA’AS project on community-
based adaptation in Timor-Leste p. 1 
33 World Bank. 2009. Timor-Leste: Country Environmental Analysis. P. 1 
34 Care. 2015, Food, water, rain, risk: the uphill struggle to adapt. Final evaluation of the MAKA’AS project on community-
based adaptation in Timor-Leste p. 1 
35 ADB et al. 2014. Timor-Leste. Country-Gender Assessment. P. 76. Cited from Government of Timor-Leste. 2011. Timor-
Leste Strategic Development Plan 2011–2030. Dili. 
36 World Bank. 2009. Timor-Leste: Country Environmental Analysis. P. 7 
37 Care International. (nd). Livelihood security in a changing climate

=== PAGE 144 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Key challenges include a lack of road and power infrastructure to get produce to 
markets, as well as limited access to finance and skills to develop more commercial 
operations.38 Mobility through stable and passable local roads and bridges not only 
reduces the risk of casualties during extreme climate events, but also directly 
contributes to increased livelihood opportunities. Climate resilient roads are also of 
high significance for both women and men, particularly those in disadvantaged and 
remote communities.  
 
 
 
                                                 
38 ADB et al. 2014. Timor-Leste. Country-Gender Assessment. P. 78. Cited from Government of Timor-Leste. 2011. Timor-
Leste Strategic Development Plan 2011–2030. Dili.

=== PAGE 145 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
11 
 
III. MECHANISMS TO ADDRESS GENDER INEQUALITY IN TIMOR-
LESTE - LEGAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE FRAMEWORK  
The government of Timor-Leste’s consistent political commitment to gender equality is 
demonstrated through the priorities given to the gender equality and gender inclusion at 
political and programmatic levels. The gender equality priorities are enshrined in the 
constitution as well. Article 17 of the Constitution, calls for equality between sexes in all areas 
of family, political, economic, social, and cultural life, while Article 16, calls for 
nondiscrimination on various grounds, including gender.39 The government also adopted 
formal strategies to advance gender equity, namely: 
• Gender mainstreaming is mandatory across all government laws, policies, 
programmes, processes and budgets, at the national as well as local level; 
• Policies and frameworks to be developed to empower women socially and 
economically 
through various livelihood support measures; 
 
• Basic services to protect women from risks to be improved; 
• Mechanisms to provide financial support to women leading households strengthened 
• Education programmes will be introduced to promote the retention of girls at higher 
levels, particularly at the secondary and tertiary levels; 
• More women to be employed across the civil service, also in senior positions; 
• Policies, training and leadership programmes to be developed to support women in 
taking on decision-making roles in the public and private sectors; 
• In addition, national zero-tolerance policy for violence in schools and homes will be 
introduced. 
 
The government's commitment is also reflected in Timor-Leste Strategic Development Plan 
(SDP) 2011–2030. The SDP acknowledges women’s contribution to the country’s 
communities, farming-sector, economy and homes, despite lacking in proper recognition and 
without adequate support. In addition to ambitious agenda for the nation’s future, with 
emphasis on social capital, infrastructure development, and economic development, focuses 
on achieving gender equality goals through the adoption of the following strategies:40 
 
Some of the national gender considerations are influenced by the international 
commitments that Timor-Leste has made in a capacity of a signatory or party to international 
conventions and protocols. 
 
The internationally agreed Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA 2005- 2015) makes special 
references to the following as priorities and general considerations 41: "A gender perspective 
should be integrated into all disaster risk management policies, plans and decision-making 
processes, including those related to risk assessment, early warning, information 
                                                 
39 Constitution of the Democratic republic of Timor-Leste. Part II, Fundamental Rights, Duties, Freedom and Guarantees. 
Title I General Principles- section 16 (Universality and Equality); Section 17 (Equality between women and men) 
40 Timor-Leste Strategic Development Plan. 2011-2030. Pp. 50-51 
41 Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to 
Disasters’,www.unisdr.org/eng/hfa/hfa.htm.

=== PAGE 146 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
12 
 
management and education and training."  Similarly, the guiding principles of Sendai 
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (2015–2030) that has superseded HFA, states that “A 
gender, age, disability and cultural perspective should be integrated in all policies and 
practices, and women and youth leadership should be promoted”42  
 
More generally, the UN system has taken action toward achieving gender equality, such as by 
adopting the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination (CEDAW) against 
Women in 1979 and the Beijing Platform for Action in 1995 at the Fourth World Conference 
on Women in Beijing, which established gender mainstreaming as a global strategy for the 
promotion of gender equality.43  
 
The Incheon Declaration on Disaster Risk Reduction in Asia and the Pacific 201044 recognizes 
the need to protect women, children and other vulnerable groups from the disproportionate 
impacts of disaster and to empower them to promote resiliency within their communities and 
workplaces; Thus gender serves as an important dimension of both vulnerability and 
adaptation, that is, whether and how women, men, boys, and girls from all minority, 
marginalized and diverse groups are affected by and respond to climate change and disasters. 
45 
As a party to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and ratifying Paris 
Agreement, Timor-Leste has recognized the importance of involving women and men equally 
in UNFCCC processes and in the development and implementation of national climate policies 
that are gender-responsive by establishing a dedicated agenda item under the Convention 
addressing issues of gender and climate change and by including overarching text in the Paris 
Agreement46 and the two goals included are:47 
• Improving gender balance and increasing the participation of women in all UNFCCC 
processes, including in delegations and in bodies constituted under the Convention 
and its Kyoto Protocol, and; 
• Increasing awareness and support for the development and effective implementation 
of gender-responsive climate policy at the regional, national and local levels. 
Under the Lima work programme on gender, parties agreed to review progress towards 
achieving these two goals in 2016 at COP 22 in Marrakech.48 
                                                 
42 Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 – 2030. Guiding principles -d 
43 See further: UN Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, Gender Mainstreaming: An 
Overview, 2002, www.un.org/womenwatch/osagi/pdf/e65237.pdf 
44 The Heads of Governments, the Ministers, and the Heads of Delegations of the countries of Asia and the Pacific, 
attending the Fourth Asian Ministerial Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction (AMCDRR) in Incheon, Republic of Korea, on 
25-28 October 2010; 
45 WEDO & Global Gender and Climate Alliance (GGCA). 2016. P.4 cited from Pettengell C (2010) Climate change 
adaptation: enabling people living in poverty to adapt (Oxfam GB). 
46 UNFCCC. 2017. What is the connection and why is Gender and Climate Change important? Accessed on 25th; April 2017. 
https://unfccc.int/gender_and_climate_change/items/7516.php 
47 The twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties (COP) and the eleventh session of the Conference of the Parties 
serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) took place from 30 November to 11 December 2015, in 
Paris, France. http://unfccc.int/meetings/paris_nov_2015/session/9057/php/view/decisions.php ; accessed on 17th January 
2017 
48 UNFCCC. Gender and Climate Change - Intergovernmental Process. accessed on 17th January 
2017https://unfccc.int/gender_and_climate_change/items/9619.php;

=== PAGE 147 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
13 
 
Though the gender equality is enshrined in the Constitution and given adequate consideration 
in the SDP, gender disparity and need for a better social inclusion is felt across the sectors. 
One of the fundamental causes of gender disparity is gender stereotypes. Existing gender 
stereotypes in the Timorese society limit livelihood & income generating opportunities, 
including developing skills in non-traditional areas, access to productive resources for women 
and men (girls and boys). Men, for example were more concentrated in occupations such as 
protective service workers, builders and car, taxi and van drivers. While women were more 
often working as housekeepers, weavers and gardeners.49 Gender sterotypes are also 
reflected in the types and levels of work that men and women take and the trainings that 
women and men receive in the technical and vocational education and training (TVET) 
Programmes, which in turn channels women and men into different jobs.50  
Institutions: In Timor-Leste, the Secretary of State for the Promotion of Equality (SEPI) was 
established as an institution and legal agency and a central Government body with the 
objective of strengthening women’s rights and gender equality.51  Now known as Secretary 
of State for the Support and Socio-Economic Promotion of Women (SEM), is the overarching 
national machinery for gender equality. SEM is to provide technical support and coordinate 
government efforts to gender equality across all sectors, as well as to monitor the 
implementation of the commitments. SEM also coordinates with the Gender Working Groups 
(GWGs) to ensure effective collaboration and integration of gender mainstreaming in 
government activities. The GWGs mechanism is implemented both at the national and 
municipality levels, is to ensure increased inclusion of gender priorities in Ministerial Annual 
Action Plans and budgets.52 
 
The SEM and the GWGs have the basic competencies on general gender issues, but require 
technical support to integrate gender in project implementation. have the following 
shortcomings: 
• Lack of technical capacity to mainstream gender specific to CCA and DRR agenda or 
related projects. This is especially in the use of gender analysis tools, in combination 
with climate vulnerability risk assessment and providing policy support to projects 
pertaining to gender mainstreaming in CCA and DRR initiatives; 
• Lack of influence within their respective institutions. Whilst not being consulted on 
project design, planning or in implementation of projects. 
 
So far SEM’s, support to CCA and DRR related work has been limited.  Similarly, the GWGs in 
each ministry has not been instrumental in gender mainstreaming because of their weak 
technical capacity specifically on gender related CC and DRR work.  
 
                                                 
49 Timor-Leste Population and Housing Census 2010; Analytical Report on Gender Dimension. Volume 4.  Note- the data on 
education and work employment is also from this source 
 
50 ADB et al. 2014. Timor-Leste. Country-Gender Assessment. P.xiv 
51 Secretary of State for Promotion of Equality (SEPI). 2014. Beijing +20 National Review, Timor-Leste; p. 5. 
http://iknowpolitics.org/en/knowledge-library/report-white-paper/beijing-20-national-review-timor-leste 
52 Secretary of State for Promotion of Equality (SEPI). 2014. Beijing +20 National Review, Timor-Leste; p. 7. 
http://iknowpolitics.org/en/knowledge-library/report-white-paper/beijing-20-national-review-timor-leste

=== PAGE 148 ===
I
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL
14 
Consultations for this assessment also showed gender capacity gaps in institutions, such as 
Institute of Public Administration (INAP) who have a responsibility for training civil servants 
lack technical capacity on gender, and gender is not included in their curriculum. Moreover, 
courses on CCA and DRR which is being developed, should look to providing specific content 
on gender, CC and DRM/DRR as a separate course and integrated into other courses as well. 
The findings underscore that the main actors in e Timor-Leste’s institutional framework for 
gender equality, needs capacity strengthening, especially on gender work related to climate 
change and disaster risks.  
Measures and Instruments to Promote Gender Equality, Women’s and Youth’s Empowerment 
1. 
Ratification of the UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) and its 
accompanying Optional Protocol without reservation (16 April 2003); 
2. 
Adoption of the Millennium Development Goals; 
3. 
Establishment of the Office of the Advisor to the Prime Minister for the Promotion of Gender Equality (2002) which 
was then replaced by the Secretary of State for the Promotion of Equality (2007); 
4. 
Establishment of Secretary of State for the Promotion of Equality in 2007 through (Decree Law No.16/2008 of 4 June)53 
5. 
Establishment of Gender Focal Points in all 13 Districts54 
6. 
The adoption of the National Youth Policy by the Council of Ministers in 2007 
7. 
Establishment of a Gender Affairs Unit and a Vulnerable Persons’ Unit (VPUs) in the National Police at the national and 
district levels; 
8. 
Adoption of Dili Declaration (“Dili Komprimisu”) by the National Parliament, Government and civil Society during the 
celebration of International Women’s Day 2008 (March 2008) as an acknowledgement and a political commitment to 
gender equality and investing in women and girls, to achieve sustainable development, address poverty and 
strengthen society.  
9. 
Establishment and integration of a parliamentary Gender Resource Centre as a formal organisational structure of the 
National Parliament under the new Parliamentary Law (15/2008, December 2008); 
10. 
Integration of a gender-responsive budgeting statement into the National Budget (since 2008); 
11. 
Establishment of Timor-Leste Youth Parliament; 
12. 
Submission of Timor-Leste first CEDAW compliance report (July 2009), for the first time in history, as part of their 
commitment to and accountability for gender equality and women’s empowerment in the country;  
13. 
Adoption of Parliamentary Resolution on Gender-Responsive Budgeting (14 July 2009) 
14. 
Adoption of a Law against Domestic Violence in 2010; 
15. 
The formulation of a Working Group to draft the National Action Plan on Gender-based Violence (2011); 
16. 
Adoption of the National Action Plan on Gender-Based Violence by the Council of Ministers (29 May 2012); 
17. 
Adoption of SEPI Five Years Strategic Plan 2010-2015; 
18. 
Implementation of the UN Security Council Resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and Security, such as through a 
Trilateral Conference and Cross-Learning session with Liberia and Ireland (2009-2010); 
19. 
Establishment of the National Gender Working Group in all ministry/Secretary of State at the national and district level 
(2012); 
53 SEPI was established by the Fourth Constitutional Government of Timor-Leste to replace its predecessor: The Office the Advisor on the 
Promotion of Gender Equality to strengthen Timor-Leste’s commitment to gender equality and women’s empowerment. SEPI is the 
government’s main body responsible for the design, execution, coordination, and assessment of policies related to gender equality. 
54 The Gender Focal Points structure has been replaced by the National Gender Working Group since 2012 through Council of Ministers 
Resolution 27/2011

=== PAGE 149 ===
I
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL
15 
20. 
Integration and implementation of a gender mainstreaming strategy into various programmes within the ministries 
and Secretaries of State;  
21. 
Integration of a gender perspective into the Electoral Law at the national and Suco levels; 
22. 
Inclusion of women’s and youth’s representation in Suco Council; 
23. 
 Increase of women’s quota in the candidate lists for the Parliamentary Election from at least one in every four (4) 
candidates on the party list must be a woman (Electoral Law 2006) to one in every three (3) candidates on the party 
list must be a woman (Amendment to Electoral Law 2006 in June 2011); 
25. 
Inclusion of a gender perspective into Timor-Leste Strategic Development Plan (SDP) 2011-2030; 
26 
Integration of gender equality and Gender-Based Violence in the Programme of the Fifth Constitutional Government 
2012-2017 Legislature. 
Source: GIZ. Gender Analysis- “Building Peace by Improving the Employability and Income Opportunities of Marginalized 
Groups” Timor-Leste. pp. 8-10 
Administration Framework 
Timor-Leste has recently endorsed Decentralization Decree Law, which has strengthened and 
empowered sub-national administration units, mainly municipal authorities, municipal 
administrations, administration posts, sucos (villages) and aldeias (sub-village). With the 
additional authority and decision-making power, the sub-national administration units have 
a bigger role to play in engendering development process.  
Hence, in addition to the national level, government authorities at municipal and suco levels 
are best placed to provide the necessary support for a gender responsive resilience-building 
agenda that has communities at its centre.  There are two existing mechanism, namely, (i) 
Municipality Integrated Development Plan (PDIM) or Plano Desenvolvement Integrado 
Municipal, and (ii) National Programme for Village Development or Programmea PNDS 
(nasional Desenvolvimentu Suku). 
The PDIM process 
PDIM is one of the Government programme implemented throughout the country aimed at 
harmonizing the implementation of programmes conducted at the district level. The most 
notable change in terms of climate impacts and disaster risk reduction that PDIM will be faced 
with is the need to increasingly address the underlying causes of vulnerabilities in face of 
climate change and disaster risk. This is fundamentally relevant for gender issues, which link 
the vulnerabilities seen in climate adaptation and disaster response with the vulnerabilities 
that present challenges in development. 
The PDIM has a planning mechanism integrated in its organisational structure and process 
established and implemented starting from Aldeia to Suco, Administrative post and 
Municipality level; the numerous stakeholders involved are: (i) Community members (ii) Suco 
Councils (iii) territorial delegations (iv) Sub-district Development Commission (v) The 
Ministries responsible for local Administrations (vi) Line Ministries and (vii) The National 
Development Agency.

=== PAGE 150 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
16 
 
During the field visits, as well as KIIs held on mainstreaming gender in the PDIM process, 
government representatives in the municipalities visited underscored that the project 
proposal review process based along the line of its organisation structure ensures that gender 
is integrated. Figure 2 shows the graphic depiction of the perspective of gender integration in 
the PDIM process. There were others who argued that despite the appearance of 
participation of women in the proposal review process there are certain gaps: 
 
• It was revealed during discussions that proposals submitted by women’s groups - 
mostly related to water and livelihoods - often get eliminated at the end of the process 
by the committee. Community members underscored the need to provide training to 
support woman on developing good proposals, based on sound planning including 
identifying their need;  
• There are no provisions and guidance on how females’ and males’ needs and concerns 
are taken into consideration in project design, planning and implementation and 
tracking impact; 
• Allocation of budgets. 
 
PNDS process 
The PNDS is a new, nation-wide community development programme of the Government of 
Timor-Leste. The PNDS channel funds directly from the Government to communities which 
will plan, construct and manage small-scale infrastructure projects in their sucos (villages). 
The types of infrastructure to be built or refurbished includes irrigation canals, local bridges, 
motorcycle paths, market places, kindergartens and sports facilities, water supplies, schools 
and health posts. 
It was expressed that PNDS has more focus on gender from planning to implementation. 
Women from the village council submit proposals that are based on community discussion; 
although there is no specific fund for proposals from women’s groups. Generally, proposals 
from women groups are mostly related to water supply and livelihoods- such as agroforestry 
(for coffee, fruits and fuelwood), raising poultries, producing “tais”, setting up kiosks, and etc. 
Aldeias ; criteria=30 
people, females & 
males (proposals 
rejected if only from 
males or only females) 
submitted to Suco-
council
At Suco level; - Suco -
council = 50 people, 
females & males 
selected by 
communities in each 
Aldeias, submitted  to  
Administrative post
Administrative post= 
composed of  
representatives of 
Women Association, 
Youth group, Veterans, 
Church , local NGOs, 
Chefe Sucos and 
Government Officers 
from varies Department. 
Municipality level (i) 
Municipal coordination 
council- representative 
of chefe suco, 
Representative of Post 
Administrative, PNDS 
and others local 
organisation (ii) Local 
consultative council-
Chefe Suoco, women , 
youth & church
Figure 1 Perspective of perceived gender integration in the PDIM process

=== PAGE 151 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
17 
 
As such, these priorities expressed by women gorups have been fully affirmed and embedded 
into the GCF funding proposal.

=== PAGE 152 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
18 
 
IV. GENDER ISSUES IN RESPONSE TO IMMEDIATE CLIMATE 
INDUCED DISASTERS AND CLIMATE RISKS 
In Timor-Leste, rural populations are greatly exposed to a range of hazards, including flash 
floods, landslides, soil erosion, coastal flooding and drought due to unfavourable terrain, 
socio-economic factors and intensification of these climate-induced hazards over time. 
Disasters, related risks and vulnerabilities have social as well as physical dimensions. Climate 
change and disaster risks have been found to have differential impact on men and women, 
mainly emanating from differences in the gender-based roles. The magnitude of the impact 
is usually a factor of level of vulnerability of the communities and the level of dependence on 
the natural system for livelihood. The impact of disasters and related risks are different for 
women and men. Shaped by gender roles and relations this is reflected in their differential 
capacity to respond to disaster. Gender inequality and women’s disempowerment are the 
determining factors behind women and girls being disproportionately affected by climate 
change and disasters; and at the same time their ‘skills and life experiences are not identified 
as resources, and, therefore, are not incorporated into risk reduction and disaster 
preparedness, relief or recovery efforts’. Unless these inequalities are adequately assessed 
and incorporated into climate change adaptation and DRR measures, the disparities are likely 
to be exacerbated.  
 
Irrespective of gender, the causal effect of climate change and disaster risks is expected to 
increase proportionally with the level of human development, coping mechanisms and 
policy instruments that contribute towards creation of enabling environment. In the case of 
countries like Timor Leste where the staple source of household income is still agriculture-
based activities, where sustenance farming prevails extensively and where rural 
infrastructures are either non-existent or need major overhaul, the lives of rural 
communities, especially women and girls are more sensitive to climate change and disaster 
risks55 
 
As cited in a report ‘Gender serves as an important dimension of both vulnerability and 
adaptation, that is, whether and how women, men, boys, and girls are affected by and 
respond to climate change’.56  While vulnerability ‘is commonly understood as social, 
economic, political, cultural, or other factors which make specific groups more susceptible to 
adverse change’.57 Adaptation is understood as ‘the ability to change in response to the 
impacts of an event to minimize adverse consequences.’58  
 
There has been considerable evidence that attention to gender in disaster planning and 
recovery is essential, but limited attention paid to disasters and family violence; worldwide 
literature suggests that increased violence against women is characteristic of post-disaster 
                                                 
55 Term of Reference for this consultancy under the heading “Background” 
56 WEDO & Global Gender and Climate Alliance (GGCA). 2016. P.4 cited from Pettengell C (2010) Climate change 
adaptation: enabling people living in poverty to adapt (Oxfam GB). 
57 ibid. P.4 
58 ibid. P.4

=== PAGE 153 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
19 
 
recovery.59 Gender-based violence is found to increase due to disaster-induced stress and the 
temporary breakdown of law and order.60 Of the little available research on the gender 
implications of climate-change and disaster related impacts, it was found that it can 
exacerbate existing inequalities and create new vulnerabilities as well as leading to increased 
gender-based violence; for instance there are increased risk of assault and violence  for 
women and girls having to travel further to access water sources/fuels; or because of 
migration and community destabilization in areas affected by climate change – there are 
increased incidences of harassment, sexual abuse and domestic violence during the migratory 
cycle etc. 61 Furthermore, post-disaster recovery and mobility is also impeded due to 
impassable roads and damaged bridges. As women mainly stay home occupied with their 
household chores and home-gardening, they and their children mostly remain isolated after 
extreme climate events or disasters. This creates a high level of risk to the lives and health of 
women and children.  
For effective mainstreaming of gender considerations into Climate Change projects it is 
important to have gender-focused approach (instead of a woman focused approach) so that 
gender relations in CCA and in DRR be analyzed within a socio-economic and cultural context 
of Timor-Leste. Designing or redesigning interventions on an understanding as to what the 
norms and expectations are for women and men and how this might affect the projects, will 
enable to achieve long term sustainable outcomes. Therefore, in addition to water supply 
infrastructure and livelihoods (through agroforestry interventions), the project also addresses 
the issue of mobility via installing climate-proofed and stabilized roads and bridges. 
These issues were discussed and identified during the FGDs and community dialogues 
consultation. Most women in the municipalities visited for this assessment, are engaged in 
agriculture. In general, women spend more time performing household chores than men 
during both the dry and rainy seasons, harvesting/ sowing of crops. While both women and 
men are engaged in agricultural activities, because of additional reproductive and care works, 
women have less time for leisure, unlike men who may have more time for socialization and 
relaxation during the day. All the municipalities reported that reproductive roles such as 
cooking, washing, fetching water and firewood were regarded as women’s roles. Though not 
obligated, men and children (boys and girls) help in fetching water and firewood. Men, for 
example help if the source of water is too far away, in such instances women will stand in the 
queue and men help to bring the water home.   
 
To underscore the importance of developing and implementing gender responsive climate 
resilience programmes and projects in addition to ascertaining that gender is effectively 
mainstreamed into the climate resilient development, Timor-Leste drafted two related 
policies; National Climate Change Policy and National Disaster Risk Management Policy. 
                                                 
59 UN. 2015. Women’s Leadership in Risk-Resilient Development. Good Practices and Lessons Learned. P. 14 
60 Aguilar, L., Granat, M., & Owren, C. (2015). Roots for the future: The landscape and way forward on gender and climate 
change. Washington, DC: IUCN & GGCA. p. P.141 
61 Ibid. Pp. 146, 148

=== PAGE 154 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
20 
 
Gender dimensions forms an integral part of these policies and also one of the guiding 
principles guiding implementation of these policies. Though both these policies are pending 
approval from the Council of Ministers, considering that these policies were drafted in highly 
consultative and inclusive manner.

=== PAGE 155 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
21 
 
V. GENDER ANALYSIS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
The gender analysis undertaken at the onset and design of this project acts as an entry point 
for gender mainstreaming throughout implementation. Stakeholder consultations took place 
in May 2017. Results from the consultations are detailed in the Stakeholder Engagement 
Report and Stakeholder Action Plan annex included in full as an additional annex as part of 
the proposal. 
 
The gender analysis, through stakeholder engagement and consultation considered the 
following: 
• Ensuring men’s and women’s equal participation in its activities under projects 
components; 
• Identifying the socio-economic, cultural and institutional barriers that deterred 
women’s and men’s equal participation and their ability to equally benefit from its 
activities; 
• Identifying the differences in men’s and women’s ability to access and control the 
benefits derived from its activities; 
• Assessing the impacts of the project on women’s empowerment and well-being 
through the collection of high quality sex-disaggregated data.  
The consultations have identified the following areas as particularly important dimensions to 
be reflected in the implementation strategy of the project: 
 
• Tremendous improvements in increasing women’s active participation in the decision 
making, particularly during the PDIM and PNDS formulation process to ensure that 
climate responsive infrastructures are gender response too; 
• Gender analysis must be included as part of risk and vulnerability assessments, for the 
national and local governments to effectively collect sex and age disaggregated data.  
• Implementation of the Capacity Enhancement Strategy for Gender Mainstreaming in 
CC and DRR developed as part of this assessment; 
• Relevant analytical tools and frameworks must be simplified and made available in 
Tetun/other local languages.; 
• Systematic capacity building and empowerment of the Gender Focal Points appointed 
by the government in each line ministry. In order to enable them to contribute in 
mainstreaming climate responsive gender priorities into sectoral plans and 
programmes; 
• Critical to improve evidence informed knowledge generation, requires support in 
developing tools (or strengthening existing ones), procedures and capacity for 
systematic sex-age disaggregated data collection, analysis and storing on climate 
change and disaster impacts, capabilities and other relevant information;

=== PAGE 156 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
22 
 
• The assessment tools, mainly the vulnerability assessment tools and primary data 
collection methodology needs to improve and strengthen areas that has the potential 
to raise awareness and knowledge amongst CC and DRR practitioners supported by 
trainings and technical assistance;  
• The existing knowledge platform could also be used to share information, knowledge 
and experience in addressing gender issues;  
• Develop context specific conceptual policy guidelines on gender, CCA and DRR for 
national and local governments to bring more clarity on gender issues in development, 
CCA and DRR gendered-based analysis of access to resources. All which can be 
reflected in the engagement of women and youth in project activities; 
• Encourage implementation of Gender Action Plan and make conscious effort to 
generate gender responsive results; 
• Developing knowledge products and advocacy material which specifically mention 
about the benefits, mechanisms and process for systematic and consistent gender 
mainstreaming into climate responsive development interventions; 
• Support capacity building of elected women representatives, male representatives 
and leaders, and female community leader. Civil society working on gender including 
women’s groups whilst networking on gender related CCA and DRR to ensure it is 
actively engaged in planning and monitoring at the municipal level.  
• Introduce accountability mechanisms and specific progress monitoring indicators for 
all the stakeholders; 
• Foster the creation of women’s groups that contribute to diversifying local and 
specifically women’s livelihoods to increase their resilience.  Strengthen women’s 
access to the following livelihood dimensions:62  
o Social capital: Create and strengthen local women’s networks and groups, as 
well as representation in local institutions; 
o Economic capital: Promote women’s livelihoods through securing access to 
water, irrigation, and agricultural production; 
o Human capital: promote formal and non-formal education measures targeted 
to increase the employability of women, both self-employment and salaried 
employment (through training and incentivising women-led companies, or 
companies that employ women and apply gender parity as employment 
policy); 
o Physical capital: promote safe communication and transportation for women 
and equal access to information. Climate resilient roads and bridges improve 
mobility of women and their access to local markets and escape routes during 
and after the extreme climate events and disasters; 
o Natural capital: Promote stability of communal land for increasing overall 
climate resilience and land productivity.  
                                                 
62  For details see DFID, 1999, Sustainable livelihoods guidance sheets

=== PAGE 157 ===
I 
Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
23 
 
 
 
During project implementation, qualitative assessments will be conducted on the gender-
specific benefits that can be directly associated to the project. This will be incorporated in the 
annual Project Implementation Report, Mid-Term Report, and Terminal Evaluation. Indicators 
to quantify the achievement of project objectives in relation to gender equality will include 
women and youth who had access to affordable solutions, number of women and youth 
employed from the jobs created by the project, training opportunities, knowledge 
management and information dissemination.

=== PAGE 158 ===
I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
24 
 
VI. GENDER ACTION PLAN  
Programme level activities, inputs and baseline information have been used to develop gender action plan. The gender action plan presented 
below provides specific information on how the project will ensure that gender dimension is well integrated into the proposed activities.  
Activities 
Description 
Gender mainstreaming action 
Target and Indicators 
1.1. Climate risk knowledge 
base developed and climate 
information services developed 
and delivered to all sectoral 
institutions 
Surveys, data analysis, modelling, 
production of hazard, risk and 
vulnerability mapping.   
 
Purchase of software hazard, risk and 
vulnerability modelling and mapping 
 
Undertake hazard, modelling and 
mapping 
 
Undertaker risk and vulnerability 
modelling and mapping 
1.1.1 Develop and codify methods and tools for undertaking gender-
sensitive socio-economic surveys to fully map the socio-
economic conditions of the rural poor in TL to mainstream 
gender into DRR. 
 
1.1.2 Undertake socio-economic risk and vulnerability assessment to 
fully map existing vulnerability within TL using new gender 
mainstreaming survey techniques which provides a 
comprehensive analysis of differential impact of climate risks on 
male and female.    
 
 
1.1.3 Develop a built-in checking mechanism into the survey 
methodology to enable the surveyors to monitor the desired 
level of gender integration during the survey 
 
I 1.1.1 Number of methods and tools for collecting gender-
disaggregated socio-economic data and gender-
disaggregated hazard perception  
T 1.1.1 At least two tools (e.g., questionnaires, gender 
specific consultation meetings) implemented 
 
I 1.1.2 Number of reports on gender responsive 
vulnerability surveys using gender mainstreaming tools 
T 1.1.2 Report on gender-specific vulnerability to 
mainstreaming 
 
 
I 1.13 Ratio of women in stakeholder consultations on 
floodplain zoning   
T 1.1.3 At least 30% participants of consultations are 
women (against 14% of baseline value) 
 
 
1.1.4 Integrate gender disaggregated and gender-vulnerability data 
into the hazard, risk and vulnerability modelling to ensure that 
the sex-disaggregated information is captured and transmitted 
for gender responsive decision-making process. 
1.1.5 Enable gender-disaggregated vulnerability output analysis and 
reporting in the hazard, risk and vulnerability modelling to enable 
ready availability of gender-specific data on hazard, risk and 
vulnerability 
1.1.6 Mandatory provision of including at least 20% relevant female 
staff when training in hazard, risk and vulnerability modelling will 
be provided at national and local government level to MSS staff 
I 1.1.4 GIS-based socio-economic risk and vulnerability 
model data input include gender data 
T 1.1.4 All relevant gender-disaggregated data and gender 
parameters as primary input data to model 
 
I 1.1.5 Number of gender-disaggregated hazard, risk and 
vulnerability model reports  
T 1.1.5 Pro-forma for hazard, risk, vulnerability and CBA 
reporting for baseline, progress and final report on social 
and gender vulnerability 
 
I 1.1.6 Ratio of women in stakeholder consultations on 
floodplain zoning   
T1.1.6 At least 30% participants of consultations are 
women (against 14% of baseline value) 
 
 
1.1.7 Develop and introduce a gender responsive GIS-based tool to 
integrate various spatial socio-economic data with the hazard 
I 1.1.7 Number of gender-responsive risk management tool

=== PAGE 159 ===
I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
25 
 
maps, perform risk and vulnerability modelling, produce risk and 
vulnerability maps which will include damages and loss of life 
estimates and to test risk management interventions options 
(CBA Analysis).   
1.1.8 Provide training in new tools and methods for risk and 
vulnerability modelling and CBA. 
T 1.1.7 GIS-based tool embeds functionality for analysis of 
gender-dimensions to hazard, risk and vulnerability and the 
analysis of proposed risk management measures and CBA 
of intervention measures.   
 
I 1.1.8 Training  
T 1.1.8   At least 30% of the participants are the female 
staff from relevant entities (against 14% of baseline value)   
1.2. Damage and Loss 
accounting methods and 
databases established 
Review of all damage and loss 
accounting systems, design and 
development of a harmomised/unified 
system 
1.2.1 Develop gender responsive monitoring and evaluation 
framework and data collection systems to systematically 
document differential losses and damages on male and female 
provided all other underlying causal parameters remain same 
I 1.2.1 Number of gender-responsive damage and loss 
proformas for documenting gender-specific damage and 
loss 
T 1.2.1 Pro-forma for gender-responsive damage and loss 
 
T 1.2.2 
Development and delivery of training programme 
in damage and loss and asset management methods and 
tools to MSS staff in which at least 30% of the beneficiaries 
would be relevant female staff (against 14% of baseline 
value) 
T 1.2.3 Development and delivery of training programme in 
damage and loss and asset management methods and 
tools to MSS staff in which at least 30% of the beneficiaries 
would be relevant female staff (against 14% of baseline 
value) 
 
1.3 Ordinances, regulations and 
associated codes and standards 
defined to climate proof small-
scale rural infrastructure 
Development of codes and standards 
1.3.1 Develop Gender Responsive Climate Change Strategy and 
Action Plan which encompasses the priorities endorsed in the national 
documents as indicated in the upcoming National Climate Change 
Policy. 
T 1.3.1 Gender Responsive Climate Change Strategy and 
Action Plan 
 
 
1.3.2 Review and improve all standards, guidelines and specifications 
for rural infrastructure, encompassing both technical and functional 
standards to respond to climate risk reduction requirements and make 
gender responsive, based on international best practices.  
T 1.3.2 Gender responsive standards, guidelines and 
specifications for rural infrastructure, encompassing both 
technical and functional standards based on international 
best practices 
 
 
1.3.3 Input to the development of the Rural Roads Master Plan & 
Investment Strategy 2016–2020 to help embed gender responsive 
climate resilience measures into road master planning. 
T. 1.1.3 Gender considerations are reflected in planning 
and investment strategy for Rural Roads 2016-2020 
 
 
1.3.4 Input to the development of a National Water Supply Policy and 
Strategic Plan to provide the medium to long-term vision for the sector 
and to provide a framework for the institutional arrangements, overall 
operation and management of DNSA and coordination with other 
sectoral agencies and partners, to ensure that gender responsive 
climate resilience approaches are embedded in the policy and strategy 
for water supply 
T. 1.3.4 Gender considerations are reflected in the National 
Water Supply Policy and Strategic Plan 
 
 
1.3.5 Develop guidelines and SOPs for all infrastructure investments to 
be carried out under the municipal (PDIM) and village (PNDS) 
development plans to make these plans climate and gender 
responsive 
T 1.3.5 Gender considerations are reflected in the municipal 
infrastructure investments to be carried out under the 
municipal (PDIM) and village (PNDS)

=== PAGE 160 ===
I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
26 
 
 
 
1.3.6 Develop a capacity building plan and roadmap for national and 
regional authorities to integrate new policies, plans and strategies and 
guidelines into PDIM and PNDS which are gender and climate 
responsive.  This would include the development of tools that will be 
needed for implementation and enforcement of new methods and 
guidelines for CR infrastructure development planning and 
implementation 
I 1.3.6 Gender considerations are reflected in PDIM and 
PNDS policy, planning and strategy documents and 
technical guidance  
 
T 1.3.6 All PDIM and PNDS policy, planning and strategy 
documents include gender considerations  
  
 
 
 
1.3.7 Implement capacity building and training based on CDP for 
national and regional authorities  
I 1.3.7 Decision makers and practitioners are trained on 
gender mainstreaming in DRR.   
 
T 1.3.7 At least 50% beneficiaries are female would be 
strictly followed 
 
 
1.3.8 Support the National Institute for Public Administration (INAP) to 
implement gender responsive Disaster Risk Management Training 
Manual, which has recently been launched by Ministry of Social 
Solidarity and INAP. 
I1.3.8 Gender mainstreaming in CCA and DRM training 
course material developed to support INAP  
 
T 1.3.8 At least 1 gender-response training course 
developed 
2.1 Village and Municipal 
development plans (PDIM and 
PNDS) fully integrates climate 
change risk considerations into 
their annual planning and 
budgeting cycle for small scale 
rural infrastructure 
 
2.1.1 Develop step-by-step guidelines for climate risk reduction 
measures for all categories of small-scale rural infrastructure (water 
supply, road and bridges, irrigation, flood defenses) through PDIM 
manual – CAMP; Community-based management and maintenance – 
GMF manual, KAM – municipal procurement guidelines and 
administrative post and the Ministerial Technical Committee review 
checklists and ensure that these guidelines are gender responsive 
I 2.1.1 Gender mainstreaming incorporated into CAMP, 
KAM and EVAS guidelines 
 
T. 2.1.1 CAMP, KAM and EVAS guidelines gender 
responsive 
 
 
 
2.1.2 Strongly advocate to enhance the capacity of the female staff as 
and when possible during the trainings designed for the municipal level 
technical monitoring teams 
 
2.1.3 Liaise with the National University of Timor Lorosae (UNTL) and 
MSA and MoPTC to increase the intake and consequent capacity 
enhancement trainings for the female engineers and architects. 
T. 2.1.2 At least 30% of females undergo capacity 
development as part of municipal level technical monitoring 
teams (against 14% of baseline value) 
 
 
 
2.1.4 Conduct information campaign on linkages of gender and climate 
change and the benefits of using gender responsive tools in the 
development of PDIM and PNDS 
 
 
 
2.1.5 Design the trainings based on the findings of the differential 
impact of climate risks on male and female which accounts for gender 
dimensions in the climate responsive local level planning process. 
 
2.1.6 Provide trainings and develop a critical mass of national/ local 
trainers on using gender responsive CC guidelines/ tools involved in 
PDIM and PNDS planning process. 
T 2.1.5 At least two trainings on differential impact of 
climate risks on male and female which accounts for 
gender dimensions in the climate responsive local level 
planning process as part of gender mainstreaming 
campaign under PDIM and PNDS 
 
 
2.1.7 Customized technical assistance and support for the municipal, 
administrative post and suco level officials involved in PDIM and PNDS 
process to establish mechanisms and implement structural change 
that will help balance the representation of women and men in different

=== PAGE 161 ===
I
  Annex XIII (c) – Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FULL PROPOSAL
27 
roles and opportunity to share and contribute to the PDIM planning 
process. 
2.1.8 Engender Environmental impact assessment (EIA) process to 
account for the differential impact and consequent differential risk 
mitigation measures at the detailed design stage, in line with 
international good practice 
2.2 Municipal finance made 
available for the design and 
deployment of climate resilient 
infrastructure at a scale that 
directly benefits 175,840 people, 
15% of the country population 
2.2.1 Support the eligible women led contractors to build their capacity 
and make provisions to prioritize these eligible women led companies 
for the construction of 130 CR infrastructure projects 
2.2.2 Provision of prioritizing eligible contractors whose workforce 
includes at least 30% women. 
T 2.2.1 At least 1 eligible women led contractors (against 0 
at the baseline) engaged to build their capacity and make 
provisions to prioritize these eligible women led companies 
for the construction of 130 CR infrastructure projects and/or 
prioritization of eligible contractors whose workforce 
includes at least 30% women 
T 2.2.2. Infrastructure units prioritized by women such as 
water supply and irrigation has been climate proofed in 
each target municipality. 
2.3 Supporting catchment 
management and rehabilitation 
measures to enhance climate 
resilient infrastructure and 
communities. 
2.3.1 Support in establishing and consequently building capacity of 
women led community organizations and community nurseries to help 
in implementation of ago-forestry and reforestation activities for 
catchment management 
T 2.3.1 At least 50% of female led households engaged in 
agro-forestry and afforestation schemes implemented by 
the project 
____________________________
