=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: Sunny Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.10.20069
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro DC 19.10.20069
creationDate: D:20190131110628+09'00'
modDate: D:20190201171109+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum IX 
Funding proposal package for FP105 
GCF/B.22/10/Add.09 
1 February 2019 
Meeting of the Board 
26– 28 February 2019 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 34 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following six parts: 
a)
A funding proposal summary titled “BOAD Climate Finance Facility to Scale Up Solar Energy
Investments in Francophone West Africa LDCs” submitted by the Banque Ouest Africaine de
Développement;
b)
No-objection letters issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s);
c)
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
d)
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
e)
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s
assessment; and
f)
Gender documentation of the funding proposal.
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated 
authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled “BOAD Climate Finance Facility to Scale Up Solar 
Energy Investments in Francophone West Africa LDCs” submitted by the Banque Ouest Africaine de 
Développement is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board Members and 
Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged or 
commercially sensitive information of the entity.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.22/10/Add.09 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity                                                                               1 
No-objection letters issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s);            76 
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure                                                                                         83 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment                                                                             85 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s                 98 
assessment  
Gender documentation                                                                                                                                      99

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme Title: BOAD Climate Finance Facility to Scale Up Solar Energy 
Investments in Francophone West Africa LDCs 
Country/Region: Benin, Burkina Faso, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger and Togo 
Accredited Entity: West African Development Bank (BOAD) 
Date of Submission: 20/07/2018

=== PAGE 4 ===
Contents 
 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
 
Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 
 
Section C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
Section F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
Section G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
Section I 
ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
 
• 
Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document. 
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“[FP]-[Agency Short Name]-[Date]-[Serial Number]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
List of Abbreviations 
 
ABREC  
African Biofuel and Renewable Energy Company 
ACCF 
 
Africa Climate Change Fund 
AE 
 
Accredited Entity 
AECF 
 
Africa Enterprise Challenge Fund 
AEMP 
 
Africa Energy Market Place 
AFD 
 
French Development Agency 
AfDB 
 
African Development Bank 
AMA 
 
Accreditation Master Agreement 
AREF 
 
Africa Renewable Energy Fund 
BAU 
 
Business as Usual 
BCEAO  
Central Bank of West African States 
BOAD 
 
West African Development Bank 
CCAC 
 
Climate & Clean Air Coalition 
CDM 
 
Clean Development Mechanism 
CEB 
 
Communauté Electrique du Bénin 
COP 
 
Conference of the Parties 
CSP 
 
Concentrated Solar Power 
DAC 
 
Development Assistance Committee 
DAO 
 
Tender Dossiers 
DBSA 
 
Development Bank of South Africa 
DFI 
 
Development Finance Institution 
ECOWAS 
Economic Community of West African States 
ECREEE  
Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency 
EDM 
 
Energie du Mali 
EE 
 
Energy Efficiency 
EE 
 
Executing Entity 
EF 
 
Emission Factor 
EIB 
 
European Investment Bank 
ElectriFi 
Electrification Finance Initiative 
EREI 
 
Renewable Energy Investment Initiative 
EREP 
 
Renewable Energy Policy 
ESAP 
 
Environmental and Social Action Plan 
ESIA 
 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
EU 
 
European Union 
EU-AITF 
EU-Africa Infrastructure Trust Fund 
FAA 
 
Funded Activity Agreement 
FDE 
 
Energy Development Fund 
GCF 
 
Green Climate Fund 
GDP 
 
Gross Domestic Product 
GEF 
 
Global Environment Facility 
GHG 
 
Greenhouse Gas 
IFC 
 
International Finance Corporation 
IMF 
 
International Monetary Fund 
IPP 
 
Independent Power  
IRED 
 
Regional Initiative for Sustainable Energy 
IRENA  
International Renewable Energy Agency 
KfW 
 
German Development Bank

=== PAGE 6 ===
kWh 
 
kilowatt per hour 
LDC 
 
Least Developed Country 
MAI 
 
Notice of Expression of Interest 
MDGs 
 
Millenium Development Goals 
MRV 
 
Monitoring, Reporting and Verification 
MW 
 
MegaWatt 
NAMA  
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action 
NDA 
 
National Designated  
NDC 
 
Nationally Determined Contributions 
NEAP 
 
National Environmental Action Plan 
NEMP  
National Environmental Management Plan 
NEPAD-IPPF 
New Partnership for Africa Development –  
NFI 
 
National Financial Institutions 
NGO 
 
Non-Governmental Organisation 
NREAP  
National Renewable Energy Action Plan 
NREPs  
National Renewable Energy Policy 
NSDP 
 
National Sustainable Development Policy 
ODA 
 
Official Development Assistance 
OFID 
 
OPEC Fund for International Development 
PDA 
 
Detailed Project Study 
PIDG 
 
Private Infrastructure Development Group 
PPA 
 
Power Purchase Agreement 
PPIAF  
Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility 
PRODERE 
Regional Program for the Development of RE and EE 
PV 
 
PhotoVoltaic 
RCC 
 
Regional Collaboration Centre 
RE 
 
Renewable Energy 
REF 
 
Rural Energy Fund 
SAGSD  
Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Sustainable Development 
SDGs 
 
Sustainable Development Goals 
SE4ALL  
Sustainable Energy for All 
SEFA 
 
Sustainable Energy Fund for Africa 
SF-SLM  
Strategic Framework for Sustainable Land Management 
SOGEM  
Société de Gestion de l’Energie de Manantali  
TA 
 
Technical Assistance 
TWh 
 
Terawatt per hour 
UNFCCC 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
USADF  
United-States African Development Foundation  
VAT 
 
Value-Added Tax 
WAEMU 
West African Economic and Monetary Union 
WAPP  
West African Power Pool 
XOF 
 
CFA Franc

=== PAGE 7 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 75 B 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information
A.1.1. Project / programme title
BOAD Climate Finance Facility to Scale Up Solar Energy 
Investments in Francophone West Africa LDCs 
A.1.2. Project or programme
programme 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region
Benin, Burkina Faso, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger and Togo 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies)
Benin: Ministry of Living Environment and Sustainable 
Development 
Burkina Faso: Prime Minister’s office 
Guinea-Bissau: Secretariat of State of the 
Environment/General Direction of the Environment 
Mali: The Environment and Sustainable Development 
Agency 
Niger: National Council of the Environment for Sustainable 
Development 
Togo: Directorate of Environment, Ministry of Environment 
and Forest Resources and Forests Resources 
A.1.5. Accredited entity
West African Development Bank (BOAD) 
A.1.5.a. Access modality
☒Direct
☐International
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary
Executing Entity: West African Development Bank (BOAD) 
Beneficiary: Project developers, primarily from the six 
beneficiary countries, local public institutions and BOAD 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million
USD)
☐Micro (≤10)
☒Medium (50<x≤250)
☐Small (10<x≤50)
☐Large (>250)
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus
☒Mitigation 
☐  Adaptation ☐  Cross-cutting
A.1.9. Date of submission
20 July 2018 
A.1.10.
Project
contact
details
Contact person, position 
Yacoubou BIO-SAWE, Director for Environment and Climate 
Finance 
Ibrahim Traore, Head of Climate Finance Division 
Organization 
BOAD 
Email address 
itraore@boad.org 
Telephone number 
+228 22 23 26 92
Mailing address 
68 Avenue de la Libération 
1172 Lomé 
Togo  
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)
Reduced emissions from: 
☒
Energy access and power generation 
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.) 
☐
Low emission transport 
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)  
 ybiosawe@boad.org

=== PAGE 8 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 75 
 
B 
☐ 
Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ 
Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.) 
 
Increased resilience of: 
☐ 
Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.) 
☐ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.) 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.) 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
 
☐

=== PAGE 9 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 75 
 
B 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words) 
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objectives and primary measurable 
benefits (see investment criteria in section E). The detailed description can be elaborated in section C. 
 
About half of the population in the West Africa Region do not have access to electricity. Countries from this region face 
interrelated challenges of energy access, energy security and high cost of electricity. This is attributed to the high 
dependence on fossil fuels, the insufficient availability of public funds to invest in energy infrastructure to meet the 
growing electricity demand, the inability to attract private capital in power generation at scale, and the inefficiencies 
along the value chain. This situation hampers the social, economic, and industrial development of the region.  
 
The region’s energy mix mostly comprises diesel and heavy fuel oil (76%). Hydropower and solar represent 
respectively 19% and 5%. Given the continuous decline in the cost of solar electricity generation1, the region would 
benefit from investing massively in solar technologies to reduce its dependence on expensive fossil fuels for power 
generation, while supporting a shift towards cheaper, cleaner and reliable sources of electricity generation. With large 
financing needs over the sector’s entire value chain, the solar sector increasingly relies on the private sector to deploy 
grid-connected solar power generation projects. While the region is endowed with high solar irradiation especially in the 
Sahel2, the total installed solar PV capacity in the countries targeted by the proposed programme was only around 70 
MW at the end of 20173, which is far below the national plans and NDC targets of 1,192 MW solar energy capacity by 
2030.  
 
The rationale of the proposed GCF programme “BOAD Climate Finance Facility to Scale Up Solar Energy Investments 
in Francophone West Africa LDCs” (hereafter the “programme”) is to decarbonise the energy mix of the Francophone 
West Africa Region and to improve access to clean energy by scaling up cost-competitive solar technologies through 
private capital leveraging. The programme aims to accelerate private sector investments in the medium/large scale on 
grid-connected solar sector and to create a market for investments in solar technologies (PV and CSP) in the 
Francophone West African region. Initially, the programme will focus on the six Least Developed Countries (LDC) of 
this region, namely Benin, Burkina Faso, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger and Togo.  
 
BOAD will play a catalytic role with a blended finance approach to increase solar investment by providing long term 
debt financing to qualifying private sector companies for solar projects that are commercially viable but that cannot 
currently attract affordable financing at scale. The programme will contribute to a paradigm shift to low-emission 
development pathways through the mobilisation at scale of private climate finance to add 215 MW of new solar energy 
capacity; equivalent to a 400% increase of the regional solar capacity in the targeted six LDCs. 
 
The total programme cost is EUR 122 million, of which EUR 61 million is GCF financing and EUR 61 million is co-
financing from BOAD. The proposed programme envelope is expected to leverage another EUR 125 million from 
project developers and other lenders (private and public sector banks in the region). The total programme capital cost is 
expected to result in the reduction or avoidance of approximately 4.8 million tCO2e during the lifetime of the programme. 
This increased investment will help fill the current investment shortfall to achieve West Africa’s Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDCs). 
 
 
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone 
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) 
25/02/2019 
                                                             
1 Solar PV module prices dropped by more than 80 percent since 2009 (IRENA, 2018. Renewable Power 
Generation Costs in 2017). 
2 The average solar radiation is of 5-6 kWh/m2 per day throughout the year (ECOWAS renewable energy 
policy, 2013) 
3 IRENA, Renewable Energy Statistics, 2018

=== PAGE 10 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 75 
 
B 
Expected financial close (if applicable) 
 
Estimated implementation start and end date 
Start: 01/06/2019 
End: 01/06/2026 
Project/programme lifespan 
20 years  
 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme 
 
The proposed programme envelope aims to provide EUR 117 million of senior debt and standby loans (tenor extension 
instrument) to selected solar projects in Least Developed Countries (LDCs) from the Francophone West Africa region 
and EUR 5 million of technical assistance to local stakeholders (from private and public sectors).  
 
The GCF contributions will account for 50% of the total funding of EUR 122m required to deliver the Programme. The 
GCF financing will include a loan to BOAD for on-lending to selected projects in solar PV and CSP technologies. BOAD 
will provide 50% co-financing and blend GCF funds with its existing funds.  
 
The programme is designed to maximize total investment, using limited public funds to leverage greater private 
investment. The total commitment is expected to leverage a substantial amount of financing from project developers 
and private sector banks.  
 
Table 1: Financial structure of the proposed programme  
Components 
GCF 
Financing 
(EUR) 
BOAD Co-
financing 
(EUR) 
Total   
co-
financing 
amount 
(EUR)  
Private sector leverage  
Equity from 
Private 
Sector 
Actors 
(EUR) 
Loans from 
Commercial 
and Public 
Banks 
(EUR) 
Component 1: To scale up commercial and sustainable financing for solar investments - Direct lending (loan  
component) 
Component 1.1: Senior Loan Facility 
   45 000 000     60 000 000   105 000 000     50 000 000     78 100 000  
Component 1.2: Standby Loan Facility 
(credit enhancement in the form of tenor 
extension)  
   12 000 000    
   12 000 000    
  
Component 2: Technical assistance (grant component) 
Component 2.1 Technical assistance to 
BOAD and local project developers 
     2 000 000          250 000       2 250 000    
  
Component 2.2 Technical assistance to 
national institutions to address legal and 
regulatory barriers in the market 
     2 000 000          250 000       2 250 000    
  
Component 2.3 Marketing and Awareness 
Raising 
  
        500 000          500 000    
  
TOTAL (EUR) 
   61 000 000     61 000 000   122 000 000     50 000 000     78 100 000  
 
Financial barriers are a significant obstacle to the mobilization and scaling up of climate finance (i.e. inadequate pricing, 
inflexible grace periods and loan tenors that are not adapted to the characteristics of renewable energy investments). 
The lack of sufficient private financing and the short tenor (5-7 years from local commercial investors) have been 
identified as key barriers for renewable energy (RE) project financing in the West Africa region.

=== PAGE 11 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 75 
 
B 
Participation of local investors in solar projects has been hindered by their limited capacity to source and assess solar 
projects, limited track record in the sector, and high-risk perception. The Progamme financing scheme will address 
financial barriers specific to each country’s market context and contribute to increasing market confidence, reducing risk 
perception and attracting private investors into the target market segment.  
 
Under this programme, BOAD’s financing scheme will primarily bridge the financing gap for solar projects by providing 
an adequate volume of finance with longer tenors. An important feature of the financing scheme is that it leverages a 
tenor extension instrument (standby loans) from BOAD and the GCF to crowd-in participation from interested and 
credible commercial banks. The participation of commercial banks in the loans for each project will be determined on 
the basis of the terms offered, while the final arrangement will be up to the decision of selected project sponsors. 
 
The proposed financing structure will create a sustainable market for private investment with strong local participation, 
supported by credit enhancement instruments to make the overall price and tenor competitive. The concessional funds 
from the GCF will also allow to bring the electricity tariff to an attractive level that is competitive with electricity produced 
from fossil fuels. This financial structure is expected to 1) kick-start the market for private capital investment into the 
target sector by leveraging the potential of commercial banks and project developers for solar project financing and 2) 
enhance the countries ownership as it paves the way for active participation from local financial institutions and local 
project developers. 
 
B.2. Project Financing Information 
 
Financial Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing 
(a) = (b) + (c) 
122 
Options 
 
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient 
 
(i) Senior loans and 
standby loans 
(ii) Grants * 
 
57 
 
4 
million euro 
(€) 
 Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
 
 
  
 
 
 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1 for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E. 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi) 
61 
Options 
 
(c) Co-
financing to 
recipient 
 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Name of 
Institution 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Senior 
Loans 
Grant 
60 
1* 
 
million euro 
(€) 
million euro 
(€) 
Options 
Options 
BOAD 
BOAD 
 
 
 
 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Lead financing institution: BOAD

=== PAGE 12 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 75 
 
B 
* BOAD’s grant will be in-kind contribution. 
 
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co-financing institution. 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable) 
In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deploys the GCF financing directly to the recipient, (i.e. the GCF financing 
passes directly from the GCF to the recipient through the AE) or if the AE is the recipient itself, in the proposed 
financial instrument and terms as described in part (b), this subsection can be skipped. 
If there is a financial arrangement between the GCF and the AE, which entails a financial instrument and/or financial 
terms separate from the ones described in part (b), please fill out the table below to specify the proposed instrument 
and terms between the GCF and the AE. 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
      
…………………. 
Options 
(  )  years 
(   ) %  
Please provide a justification for the difference in the financial instrument and/or terms between what is provided by 
the AE to the recipient and what is requested from the GCF to the AE. 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable) 
BOAD is the development finance institution of the member countries of the West African Economic and Monetary 
Union (WAEMU) which includes Benin, Burkina-Faso, Côte d'Ivoire, Guinea Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal and Togo. 
The Central Bank of West African States (Banque Centrale des États de l'Afrique de l'Ouest - BCEAO) is the central 
bank serving the eight west African countries (Benin, Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal 
and Togo) which share the common West African CFA franc currency and comprise the WAEMU.  
In addition to centralizing the cash reserves of the Union, the main mandates of the Central Bank are: to issue currency, 
to manage monetary policy, to organize and monitor banking activities and to provide assistance for the WAEMU 
member States. 
Overview of commercial market interest rates 
Commercial market interest rates in the region are high, and in most cases steady as can be been in Table 2 below. In 
terms of average lending rates according to the type of borrower, rates remained unchanged for all types of borrowers 
in Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Senegal and Togo, with the exception being Niger from 
November to December 2017.  
Table 2: Average lending rates according to the type of borrower (%) – for tenors mainly below 5 years.

=== PAGE 13 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 75 
 
B 
 
Overall lending in West Africa remains difficult for most banks due to particularly challenging conditions and internal 
vulnerabilities. Credit conditions are reflected in high interest rates from the commercial banks. The region is 
characterized by inadequate pricing, inflexible grace periods and loan tenors that are not adapted to the characteristics 
of a solar investment. The local commercial banks are unable to extend loans with tenors of no more than 5-7 years 
due to the short-term maturity profile of their deposit and the absence of deep capital markets to source long-term 
financing. The limited borrowing capacity and the lack of available and accessible commercial finance by local financial 
institutions hinders the ability of businesses to invest in renewable energy, and in particular solar energy. These 
financial barriers are a significant barrier to the mobilization and scaling up of climate finance. 
Given that the current market conditions in the target region are not favorable and that commercial banks are risk 
adverse, the GCF’s participation will be critical to bring private investors onboard. The programme is designed to 
address these financial barriers by providing affordable and long-term financing to scale up solar energy in the LDC 
countries of the region: 
• 
To overcome the barrier of high capital cost, external climate finance support is necessary, combined with 
private financing and public funding. The access to concessional financing from the GCF and BOAD will crowd 
in private sector capital to develop and implement solar investment. By providing concessional loan to BOAD at 
an attractive interest rate, the blended cost of borrowing for BOAD will be reduced compared to the cost of 
borrowing of BOAD on capital markets. Therefore, BOAD will be able to lend to projects at long tenors and 
more attractive rate than the rate applied without GCF support.  
• 
To overcome the barrier of the length of tenor which is a key limitation encountered by project developers 
seeking local financing, the GCF will incentivise the participation of local commercial banks in the Programme 
by providing up to EUR 12 million of Standby Loans to BOAD which will be on-lent to sub-projects for extension 
of the commercial banks loan tenor. A standby loan facility will be provided when commercial banks cannot 
extend the tenor beyond the year 5-7, as a tenor extension instrument. The repayment of the outstanding 
commercial bank loan at the end of its tenor shall either be rescheduled by the commercial lenders/banks or 
repaid as scheduled by drawing down on the standby loan facility. Standby loan facility will not cover the risk of 
a commercial bank tranche during their initial tenor. Commercial banks will provide senior debt, backed by the 
standby loan facility as a tenor extension instrument provided by BOAD. The standby loans will automatically 
provide a credit enhancement to the underlying sub-project by extending the tenor of the outstanding 
commercial bank loan at maturity to match the tenor of BOAD’s loan to the sub-project .

=== PAGE 14 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 75 
 
C 
Please fill out applicable sub-sections and provide additional information if necessary, as these requirements may vary 
depending on the nature of the project / programme. 
C.1. Strategic Context 
The Paris Agreement, the Marrakech agreements (COP 22) and the SE4ALL initiative have all emphasized the urgency 
to restore balance in the energy mix globally and in the region by scaling-up Renewable Energy (RE) projects, in particular 
through Public-Private-Partnerships and private investment. The international community as a whole now pushes for 
private-led green growth, as public and national financial institutions cannot bear the investment costs alone.  
In West Africa, there is an urgent need to increase electricity supply and access for the population as almost half of it are 
without access to electricity. In recent years, countries from West Africa have renewed their commitment to the promotion 
of clean energy as well as regional cooperation in order to meet their Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). In 
particular the governments from West Africa have demonstrated a growing interest to large-scale, grid-connected solar 
technology which constitutes the best alternative to fossil fuels considering the region’s potential4.  
The ECOWAS region is made up fifteen member countries that are located in the Western African region: Benin, Burkina 
Faso, Cabo Verde, Ivory Coast, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Liberia, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra 
Leone and Togo. These countries have both cultural and geopolitical ties and shared common economic interest. The 
proposed programme focuses on six LDCs of West Africa region, namely: Benin, Burkina Faso, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, 
Niger and Togo. 
The ECOWAS region has developed its RE strategy, which complements the ECOWAS White Paper (2006) to promote 
“access to energy services for populations in rural and peri-urban areas” and improve “the business environment for a 
competitive private sector”. The EREP (ECOWAS Renewable Energy Policy) strategy (2013) came following the 
realization that the demographic transition and climate change were significant threats to African economies and aims at 
overcoming the various market barriers by translating regional pledges into national initiatives and targets. EREP 
ambitious objective is to achieve nearly 30% of installed RE capacity in the energy mix – totally 7,606MW – by 20305.  
Based on the EREP baseline, the ECOWAS Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (ECREEE) has provided 
national governments with guidelines to develop a RE strategy encompassing legal, technical and financial aspects fitting 
their national needs and challenges. In addition, national governments were strongly encouraged to take steps towards 
the alleviation of market barriers for private investment through the simplification of the regulatory framework and 
additional fiscal incentives6.  
As indicated in Tables 3 and 4, the regional and national targets of the beneficiary countries are to increase significantly 
the share RE in the energy mix by 2020 and by 2030. Table 6 highlights the specific targets for solar energy by 2030 
and 2030 and is a clear evidence of the strong commitment of the target countries to develop the market for solar 
energy. 
Table 3: EREP Regional objectives for grid-connected renewable energies (Guiding NREPs in UEMOA/ECOWAS 
countries) 
Type of target 
Expected result 
EREP RE options in % of peak load 
2020: 10 % 
2030: 19 % 
RE share in the electricity mix (including medium and 
large-scale hydro) 
2020: 35 % 
2030: 48 % 
RE share in the energy mix (excluding large hydro) 
2020: 10% 
2030: 19% 
Added installed RE capacity from wind, solar, 
bioenergy and small-scale hydro 
By 2020: 2,424 MW 
By 2030: 7,606 MW 
                                                             
4 Rapport d’Étape sur les Énergies Renouvelables et l’Efficacité Énergétique de la CEDEAO, 2014, p. 12 
5 ECREEE.org  
6 ECREEE, ECOWAS Renewable Energy Policy (EREP), 2015, p. 47-49

=== PAGE 15 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 75 
 
C 
Possible contribution of each RE technology to the 
targets  
Wind: 13% 
Solar: 28% 
Hydro: 33% 
Biomass: 26% 
Production using RE 
2020: 8.350 GWh 
2030: 29.229 GWh 
RE share of energy demand 
2020: 5 % 
2030: 12 %  
Total RE production (including medium and large-scale 
hydro) 
2020: 23 % 
2030: 31 % 
Target for regional manufacture of RE equipment 
2020: 7% of installed RE equipment, by value 
2030: 20% of installed RE equipment, by value 
 
Table 4: National targets for grid-connected RE in the target countries  
Country  
Share of RE in total installed capacity 
(including medium and large-scale 
hydro) 
Share of RE in electricity mix (including 
medium and large-scale hydro) 
 
2020 
2030 
2020 
2030 
Benin7 
10.5% 
18.8% 
64.7% 
35% 
Burkina Faso8 
24% 
36% 
17% 
27% 
Guinea-Bissau9 
26% 
52% 
24% 
75% 
Mali10 
59.5% 
58.3% 
49.3% 
37% 
Niger11 
27% 
28% 
40% 
57% 
Togo12 
41.9% 
45.3% 
17% 
20% 
 
Table 5: Expected installed RE capacity in ECOWAS region in 2020 and 2030 (in MW and related %, excluding medium 
and large-scale hydro)13 
 
2020 
2030 
Wind 
318 (18%) 
993 (13%) 
Solar PV 
686 (28%) 
1,156 (15%) 
Solar CSP 
N/A 
1000 (13%) 
Small scale hydro 
787 (33%) 
2,449 (32%) 
Biomass 
634 (26%) 
2,008 (27%) 
Total 
2,425 
7,606 (30%) 
 
Table 6: Current and planned installed solar capacity in 2020 and 2030 in WAEMU countries (source: 2017 data for 
total installed solar capacity from IRENA (2018) Renewable Energy Statistics; data for planned solar installed capacity 
from National Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Action Plans) 
                                                             
7 Plan d’Action National des Énergies Renouvelables du Benin, July 2015 
8 Plan d’Action National des Energies Renouvelables du Burkina Faso, Juillet 2015 
9 Plan de Açao Nacional no Sector das Energias Renovàvies (PANER) para a Guiné-Bissau, October de 
2017 
10 Plan d’Action National des Énergies Renouvelables du Mali, Novembre 2015 
11 Plan d’Action National des Énergies Renouvelables du Niger, Mars 2015 
12 Plan d’Action National des Énergies Renouvelables du Togo, Octobre 2015 
13 Grid-connected RE scenario of ECOWAS 2020/2030.

=== PAGE 16 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 75 
 
C 
Country 
Total installed solar 
capacity (MW) 
Planned solar 
installed capacity 
2020 (MW) 
Planned solar 
installed capacity 
2030 (MW) 
Benin 
8 
50 
227 
Burkina Faso 
44 
107 
205 
Guinea-Bissau 
0 
15 
15 
Mali 
6 
308 
528 
Niger 
9 
75 
150 
Togo 
3 
45 
67 
Total MW 
70 
600 
1,192 
 
The total installed solar capacity in the six target countries was 70MW by the end of 2017 and the sum of the 
national targets by 2030 is 1,192MW. 
Other existing sustainable energy initiatives operating in Africa 
There are a wide range of sustainable energy funds covering African countries. They usually differ in terms of type of 
support provided, geographical areas supported, type of funding provided and funding level. Types of technical assistance 
provided vary greatly and can include: dialogue and networking (e.g. SE4All, AEMP); studies such as feasibility, due 
diligence, mapping, investment report, etc. (e.g. DBSA); policy support and reform (e.g. PPIAF, Energy Africa Campaign); 
institutional capacity building and training (e.g. ACCF, Rural Energy Fund, Power Africa); technical assistance for project 
preparation (e.g. DevCo, GEF, Powering Agriculture); or technical assistance for project implementation (e.g. EU-Africa 
Infrastructure Trust Fund, NEPAD IPPF). An increasing number of funds such as the Rural Energy Fund (REF), Africa 
Climate Change Fund (ACCF), Africa Energy Market Place (AEMP), SE4All, Energy Africa Campaign and Public-Private 
Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) help governments facilitate private sector investment and achieve targets in their 
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) by providing technical assistance in the form of policy dialogue, capacity 
building, networking, policy and reform support as well as knowledge sharing. 
The type of funding provided is also diverse and can include grants, repayable grants, equity (direct, intermediated, 
quasi), senior debt, subordinated debt, mezzanine debt, guarantees, loans (debt, concessional, direct, long-term, short-
term, bridging), interest rates subsidies, risk-sharing, risk capital and risk-mitigation products, or low-interest credit. For 
instance, the Electrification Finance Initiative (ElectriFI) funded by the European Union (EU) offers flexible support 
options, including technical assistance, junior debt, senior debt, and equity. In terms of size of investment, there is no 
clear gap in funding across the different ranges (<1 million /1 million -10 million/>10 million) while in terms of type of 
funding provided, within the different ranges, findings indicate that funding below 1 million USD tends to be in the form of 
grants, whereas larger investments above 10 million USD tend to be a mixture of equity and debt. For the middle range, 
a combination of grants, equity and debt is provided. Some funds like ABREC only provides TA for private sector and 
governments facilitate entry of private investors for renewable energy projects in Africa. The Africa Renewable Energy 
Fund (AREF), a Sub-Saharan Africa (excl. South Africa) is a private equity fund solely focused on small and medium 
sized (5-50 MW) independent power projects utilizing solar, wind, biomass, hydro, as well as geothermal and stranded 
gas technologies. In practice, AREF is more active in small hydro and also in geothermal and biomass. The Sustainable 
Energy Fund for Africa (SEFA) is another existing initiative. It is a USD 90m multi-donor trust fund administered by the 
African Development Bank (AfDB) to support small- and medium-scale Renewable Energy (RE) in Africa. SEFA operates 
under three financing windows: project preparation (grants), equity investments and enabling environment support 
(grants). SEFA does not invest in projects and only focuses on project development phase. It has also distinguished itself 
from other funds with regards to its focus on more innovative technologies in small/medium scale projects.  
In terms of technology, the largest beneficiary sector is the off-grid solar sector, then come hydro, biomass and wind 
energy, while more innovative technologies are under covered. Several funds have chosen to focus on off-grid solutions 
such as the United-States African Development Foundation (USADF), the ResponsAbility Innovative Investment Fund, 
the Africa Enterprise Challenge Fund (AECF), the Rural Energy Fund (REF), the Energy Africa Campaign and this 
confirms the growth potential of decentralized energy solutions in Africa. The DfID-led Energy Africa campaign channels 
funding to accelerate off-grid solar power generation for households. Only a few programmes such as OFID Energy

=== PAGE 17 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 75 
 
C 
Poverty Program will explicitly emphasize their willingness to support projects that demonstrate technology or business 
model innovation. The larger the funding available, the more likely the projects supported will be grid-connected (Power 
Africa, EU-Africa Infrastructure Trust Fund (EU-AITF), PIDG and subsidiaries, IFC Infraventures). Accordingly, the smaller 
the funding available, the more likely the projects supported will be off-grid. 
Although there are several other similar funds, there are sufficient important differences that the field is not too crowded 
and the proposed GCF programme does not face strong competition. As explained above, several funds focus on solar 
off-grid solutions while other funds will tend to look to the more challenging route to market (such as AREF or SEFA). In 
terms of type of funding provided there are many funds providing TA through grants, and the proposed programme will 
complement the existing programmes by also providing concessional loans and standby loans to private sector actors. 
No other similar support has been provided to BOAD. The Bank has received financial supports from the Adaptation Fund 
in the agriculture sector and from the Global Environment Facility (GEF) but the projects supported were at a smaller 
scale and at the country level.  
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
The current status of the energy system hampers the social, economic and industrial development of the West African 
region. The countries from West Africa are challenged with threatening factors of energy security such as poor system 
reliability, limited infrastructure, fuel import dependence, and heavy reliance on fossil fuels, hydropower, and traditional 
biomass resources. Fossil fuels account for 76% of the energy mix in the targeted countries, while hydropower 
and solar energy respectively account for 14% and 5%. These factors have made the region have the lowest 
modern energy consumption rates in the world with average electricity consumption of 11614kWh/capita compared to 
the continental and global averages of 529 and 2570 kWh/capita, respectively. In the context of climate change, 
diversification of energy sources is necessary to transit to the clean energies.  
In the RE sector, the institutional, regulatory, legal, and tariff structures and frameworks are weak or insufficiently. So 
far there are only a few incentives for private capital to invest in the renewable energy (RE) sector in West Africa. 
Investments in RE power projects have had a predominant share of Official Development Assistance (ODA) funding. 
The policy environment has not helped improve the situation significantly, but there has been a growing realisation over 
the last few years that drastic action is required to ensure adequate generating capacity in the region, and to develop 
renewable energy sources to make them an important share of the region’s energy and electricity mix.  
Although hydropower has been used throughout the region for many decades, deployment of non-hydro renewables—
including wind, solar PV and to a lesser extent CSP, and biomass—is accelerating. Within WAEMU countries, electricity 
has traditionally been provided through conventional grid systems. As of the end of 2017, there was an estimated of 
354 MW of grid-connected renewable installed capacity15 in the target countries comprising hydropower and solar 
power. Although the target region is well endowed with RE resources, their share in the countries’ energy mix is very 
little when large hydro power generation is excluded.  
Table 7: Breakdown of MW capacity installed by technology and by country (in MW) 
Country 
Thermal16 
Hydro 
Solar 
Total generation capacity 
Benin 
288 
1 
8 
297 
Burkina Faso 
258 
32 
44 
334 
Guinea-Bissau 
12.517 
0 
- 
12.5 
Mali 
124 
184 
6 
314 
Niger 
174 
- 
9 
183 
Togo 
263 
67 
3 
333 
Total target countries 
1,119.5 
284 
70 
1,473.5 
                                                             
14 Source: https://www.se4all-africa.org/seforall-in-africa/country-data/mali/ 
15 IRENA (2018) Renewable Energy Statistics 
16 2017 data from ECREEE (2018) Regional Off-Grid Solar Market Assessment & Private Sector Support 
Facility Design, Country Reports, August. 
17 Poor network maintenance and planning result in an irregular electricity supply. Total grid capacity of 
around 5MW (ECREEE, 2018)

=== PAGE 18 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 75 
 
C 
Including 354 MW of RE 
 
Installed solar capacity 
Technologies to convert solar energy into electricity generally fall into one of two categories: photovoltaic (PV) modules 
that convert light directly into electricity and concentrating solar thermal power (CSP) systems that convert sunlight into 
heat energy that is later used to drive an engine. Although solar power can be generated at any scale, PV technology is 
modular and can be scaled for anything from household use to a large network of PV farms, whereas CSP is typically 
considered viable only as a utility-scale plant. The resource potential for solar PV is generally good and relatively 
homogenous throughout all of West Africa, except in Mali and northern Niger, where the resource potential is 
particularly strong and deemed “highly suitable”18. 
There is a huge technically and economic feasible potential for RE development in the target countries. Market trends 
indicate a price decrease for RE technologies on the one hand and a price increase for fossil fuel costs on the other 
hand. Among the RE solutions, PV system is noted to be the best option in many cases. In addition, after originally 
considering CSP as suitable only in the Sahel region19, ECREEE has recently helped implement a utility-scale CSP 
project in Ghana20, in line with the 1,000 MW installed CSP capacity target for the ECOWAS region as a whole by 
2030. CSP technology would offer excellent results in zones endowed with high solar potential, as in Mali and northern 
Niger. Furthermore, CSP technologies can be operated through the day, unlike PV without battery storage, which 
makes it attractive for large-scale solar production. In favour of its geographical location, solar power – either PV or 
CSP – appears to be good for increasing access to electricity in West Africa and to improve people’s living conditions. 
Recently, several Member States have demonstrated a growing interest in grid-connected and large-scale solar 
projects. As of 2018, the region’s use of solar PV technology is split between distributed, on-grid and off-grid functions, 
including for rural electrification and to power community centers, health clinics, and individual homes, as well as street 
lights. Distributed solar PV generation has often been linked to development-orientated projects implemented by 
governments or donor partners to supply schools, health centers, or rural communities. In the last couple of years, 
large-scale solar PV projects have blossomed in Senegal (through the Scaling Solar Initiative), Burkina Faso and 
Mali21. However, these developments have been slow as the total installed solar capacity in the six target 
countries was only around 70MW by the end of 2017 while the national targets in these countries by 2030 is 
1,192 MW for solar energy.  
Table 8: Total solar installed capacity by country (in MW)22 
Country 
Total solar installed capacity 
Benin 
8 
Burkina Faso 
44 
Guinea-Bissau 
0 
Mali 
6 
Niger 
9 
Togo 
3 
Total solar installed capacity in the 
target LDCs 
70 
 
Market barriers 
                                                             
18 IRENA (2016) Investment opportunities in West Africa: Suitability Maps for Grid-connected and Off-grid 
Solar and Wind projects 
19 ECOWAS (2014) Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Status Report, p. 37 
20 https://www.solarpaces.org/ghana-tap-abundant-solar-thermal-energy-potential/ 
21 https://www.pv-tech.org/editors-blog/large-scale-solar-blossoms-in-africa 
22 IRENA (2018) Renewable Energy Statistics

=== PAGE 19 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 75 
 
C 
A number of barriers continue to hold back solar investment at scale, despite the dynamism of the sector, the proven 
performance of solar technologies worldwide and the increased number of national policies supporting solar market 
development. The barriers to solar private-led development can be found throughout the region and seem to impact 
similar areas. These barriers impede and delay the development of solar projects and therefore increase the difficulty to 
achieve national targets in terms of solar generation and grid-connected capacity.  
The proposed GCF programme is designed to overcome the challenges facing the target countries by providing financial 
support to private sector actors as well technical support to private sector actors and national institutions. 
The table below describes the main market barriers and how the proposed programme will address them. 
Table 9: Market barrier analysis  
Type 
of 
barrier 
Description of the barrier 
Objectives of the proposed programme 
Financial 
barriers 
The lack of climate finance for West Africa’s private 
sector is the main barrier and it is due to  
• 
unattractive risk-return balance because of 
high perceived risk of solar lending or 
insufficient risk-taking capacity of local 
financial institutions,  
• 
maturity and liquidity risk (local commercial 
banks are unable to extend loans with 
tenors of no more than 5-7 years) 
• 
inappropriate 
financial 
instruments 
(interest rate and tenor) to incentivize 
investments,  
• 
lack of financing structures and systems,  
• 
limited local capital which contributes to 
bankers’ conservatism.  
Together, these translate into inadequate sources 
of necessary concessional long-term debt finance. 
The specific objectives of the Programme will 
address financial barriers by scaling up long-
term and affordable climate finance and by 
providing local financial institutions with a 
liquidity guarantee for extension of loan tenor 
that will encourage them to invest in the solar 
sectors. 
 
Technical 
barrier 
Technical barriers are related to the firm size, the 
ownership structure, the insufficient experience of 
private sector actors in originating commercially 
viable RE projects; the lack of technical knowhow 
among private sector actors to assess the financial 
and technical feasibility of solar investment; lack of 
awareness among private sector actors about the 
benefits of solar projects on energy costs saving 
opportunities and on the positive impacts that 
sustainable energy production and consumption 
have on energy security, environmental benefits, 
health and livelihoods in general. 
The specific objectives of the Programme will 
address the technical barriers  
• 
by supporting private sector actors in the 
development 
phase 
of 
their 
project. 
Effective project preparation is key to attract 
and mobilize private sector capital. Given 
the risks and uncertainties of project 
preparation, the private sector has been 
hesitant to get involved during the early 
stages of a project. 
• 
by disseminating technical know-how and 
good practices and awareness raising 
activities among private sector actors about 
the benefits of solar projects. 
Legal 
barriers 
The creation of an enabling environment is of 
crucial importance to ensure the attractiveness of 
the solar energy sector to prospective private 
sector investors. Most UEMOA countries have 
implemented some form of regulatory framework 
The specific objectives of the Programme will 
address policy and regulatory barriers by 
participating 
in 
institutional 
debates 
and 
carrying out policy dialogue activities that will be 
informed by the activities of the proposed 
programme to support the creation of simplified

=== PAGE 20 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 75 
 
C 
and financing mechanisms, though this does not 
constitute a guarantee of result.  
Legal barriers are related to the lack of legal 
structures and systems to push the market and 
open up the sector; the lack of legal and binding 
targets which is often the hindrance for progress 
in the RE sector; the lack of planning, policy and 
regulation capacity in energy planning and 
modelling integration of solar into energy 
planning; and lack of incentives mechanism.  
regulatory 
frameworks 
for 
Feed-in-Tariff 
schemes for on-grid solar solutions, support on 
standard PPAs development, support on IPP 
tenders and procurement process, on tariff 
structure, support on the national regulatory 
and legal frameworks to drive investment in low 
emission technologies.  
C.3. Project / Programme Description 
The goal of the proposed programme is to create a market for investments in solar technologies in the six LDCs of 
West Africa, namely Benin, Burkina Faso, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger and Togo. The programme aims to incentivize 
and leverage private sector actors based in these countries to scale up private investment in solar technologies. The 
programme is fully aligned with regional and national efforts to drive low-carbon development in West Africa.  
 
While the region has a huge solar potential capacity, market development has been slow because of the unattractive 
business environment. Even where the policy and regulatory framework are in principle supportive of the goals of 
increasing RE investment, the magnitude of the barriers to doing business effectively and in a timely manner has meant 
that progress has been slower than expected. The proposed programme is aimed at removing or reducing the financial, 
technical and legal barriers faced by the private sector of LDC countries in West Africa looking to invest in the solar 
sector. The programme is expected to increase by 400% the existing solar capacity in the target countries and this is 
expected to benefit to around 2.9m people23.  
 
By removing the multiple barriers that are preventing the development of the solar market in West Africa, the 
programme will facilitate project funding in the target countries and will develop the capacity of local investors to deploy 
solar technologies widely. Without addressing these barriers, the market for solar investments is likely to remain limited 
in these countries and private sector actors will not be willing to take the risk to invest.  
 
Structure of the proposed programme 
The Programme will set up a new direct lending facility for the purpose of supporting private sector actors to make 
viable solar investments. The programme will enable BOAD to offer tailor-made debt financing with credit enhancement 
in the form of tenor extension to private sector investors alongside technical assistance for local project developers and 
public institutions. The total programme cost is EUR 122 million, of which EUR 61 million is GCF financing and EUR 61 
million are co-financing from BOAD. The GCF finance includes EUR 4 million in grants, EUR 57 million in senior loans 
and standby loans to BOAD. The BOAD finance includes EUR 1 million in grants and EUR 60 million in senior loans.  
 
BOAD will offer an integrated approach that is based on a combination of financial and technical support to facilitate 
access to finance to private sector actors and assist them in structuring their solar investments. It is expected that the 
Facility will support at least 6 projects in the six target LDCs. The programme will have two main objectives and 
interrelated components: 
1. To scale up commercial and sustainable financing for solar investments through senior debt and standby loans 
2. To develop technical capacity of private and public sector actors and raise awareness about the benefits of 
solar technologies 
 
Component 1: To scale up commercial and sustainable financing for solar investments - Direct lending (loan 
component) 
Sub-component 1.1: Senior loans facility  
Financial barriers are a significant barrier to the mobilization and scaling up of climate finance i.e. inadequate pricing, 
inflexible grace periods and loan tenors that are not adapted to the characteristics of renewable energy investments. 
                                                             
23 Assuming an electricity consumption per capita of 116 kWh/ person-year (SE4ALL)

=== PAGE 21 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 75 
 
C 
The lack of available and accessible commercial finance by local banks hinders the ability of businesses to invest in 
solar projects. The Programme will address financial barriers to private sector investment specific to each country’s 
market context and contribute to increasing market confidence, reducing risk perception and attracting private investors 
into the target market segment. 
 
The programme will address financial barriers by providing affordable and long-term debt financing for medium to large-
scale solar investments. BOAD will provide long term affordable debt to qualifying private sector companies for solar 
projects that are commercially viable but that cannot currently attract affordable financing at scale. The GCF funding will 
be on concessional terms and will be blended with BOAD own funding to cover barriers and risks, and thereby catalyse 
private sector investment in the target region at scale. The programme will provide appropriate financial resources to 
selected private sector companies in order to reduce the barriers and risks and thus make these investments attractive 
to commercial project developers. The outcome will be an increased investment portfolio of medium to large-scale solar 
projects leading to an increased capacity of 215MW as indicated in Table 10. 
 
The financial arrangements between BOAD and the project developers will be structured in a way that it will not crowd 
out other private sector investors. In order to catalyse additional private finance, the blending of GCF financing will be 
tailored to make a project viable. BOAD will ensure that concessionality levels are as low as possible so as to produce 
the desired market effect while minimising undesirable market distortion with highly concessional loans. GCF’s 
concessionality will be passed down to projects.  
  
The GCF will provide senior loans to BOAD for on-lending to solar projects. BOAD will provide its own commercial 
financing priced at market terms based on risk factors on a case-by-case basis using clear and established evaluation 
criteria. The projects funded under this programme will have to comply with a set of technical and financial criteria 
which are described hereafter. In terms of technical criteria, eligible projects should be located in the six LDCs from 
West African region and target solar grid connected power generation projects  with a capacity of approximately 10 MW 
to 70 MW. Eligible technologies include: solar photovoltaic (PV) and Concentrated Solar Power (CSP).  
 
In terms of financial criteria: 
• 
Sub-Projects will be required to apply cost-benefit analysis techniques that adequately evaluate all (positive and 
negative) externalities to ensure holistic cost-effectiveness and the highest possible climate and social return;  
• 
Sub-Projects shall be financially structured such that the present value of cash inflows is greater than the present 
value of cash outflows – both discounted at the weighted average cost of capital;  
• 
Sub-Projects shall generate an adequate risk adjusted rate of return by identifying and assessing relevant project 
risks to attract commercial investment;  
• 
BOAD will appropriately size the blending of GCF funds in the financing of Sub-Projects to make them bankable 
with limited concessionality to minimise the risk of market distortion with highly concessional loans;  
• 
Sub-Projects shall provide clarity on the ultimate source of revenue that would cover operating costs, in order to 
mitigate risks and ensure financial viability. All Sub-Projects must be backed by power purchase agreements 
(PPA) covering the tenor of the loans to be provided by BOAD;  
• 
Sub-Project’s developer will be required to contribute to the cost of the Sub-Project as equity participation; 
• 
Sub-Project’s developers will have to estimate the expected cost of the investment per lifetime impact potential 
in tonnes of CO2eq reduced.  
 
 
BOAD has identified a number of projects in its pipeline which are listed below. The total expected MW to be installed is 
215 MW. 
 
Table 10: Indicative pipeline of projects to be funded under the programme 
  
Country 
Project 
1 Burkina Faso 
Construction of a solar PV power plant of 10MW in Banfora

=== PAGE 22 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 75 
 
C 
2 Burkina Faso 
Construction of a solar PV power plant of 25MW in the North Western part of the 
country in Ouahigouya 
3 Burkina Faso 
Construction of a solar PV power plant of 50 MW in the South East of the 
country at Tenkedogo 
4 Niger 
Construction of a solar PV power plant of 20 MW 
5 Mali 
Construction project for a Solar PV power plant of 50MW in Koulikoro 
 
6 Mali 
Construction of a solar PV power plant of 20 MW 
7 Togo 
Construction of a solar PV power plant of 20 MW in Blitta 
8 Togo 
Construction of a solar PV power plant of 30 MW in Dapaong 
9 Guinea Bissau 
Construction of a solar PV power plant of 10MW in Bissau 
10 Benin 
Improvement of the energy in Cotonou City of Cotonou with the construction of 
10 MW solar PV power plant 
Note that the total capacity to be installed based on this list of projects is 245MW. However, the conservative estimate 
of 215MW has been considered for the calculation of the GHG emission reductions.  
 
BOAD Solar Project Example  
BOAD has recently participated in the financing of the largest private PV power plant in West Africa located in Kita, 
Mali. In January 2018, BOAD, the Emerging Africa Infrastructure Fund (EAIF), National Agricultural Development Bank 
of Mali (BNDA), Green Africa Power (GAP) and GuarantCo have secured a €77 million credit facility to finance the 
construction and operation of a 50MW PV power plant24.The financing will be used to develop the project, which will be 
built under a Build-Own-Operate and Transfer (BOOT) contract by local company Akuo Kita Solar SA, a subsidiary of 
French IPP Akuo Energy25.Funding for the project was co-arranged by both BOAD and EAIF, with the 50MW 
installation standing as the first PV plant owned and operated by an independent producer in Mali. 
 
Please see five concepts of Sub-projects in the pipeline in the supporting documents for the Funding Proposal.  
Sub-component 1.2: Standby loan facility (credit enhancement in the form of tenor extension)  
One of the biggest challenges for commercial banks in the region is the maturity and liquidity risk. The length of tenor is 
a key limitation encountered by project developers seeking local financing in the RE sector. The local commercial banks 
are unable to extend loans with tenors of no more than 5-7 years due to the short-term maturity profile of their deposit 
and the absence of deep capital markets to source long-term financing. To overcome this barrier, the GCF can 
incentivise the participation of local commercial banks in the Programme by providing up to EUR 12 million of Standby 
Loans to BOAD which will be on-lent to sub-projects for extension of the commercial banks loan tenor to reasonably 
match the project’s maturity. 
For example, assuming the project developer is seeking a 14-year loan, but local banks can only provide 7-year money. 
The commercial bank loan can be structured as a 7-year loan partly amortized over the tenor with a bullet payment at 
maturity. If prior to the final maturity date of the local commercial bank loans, such lenders are unable to sufficiently 
extend the tenor of the outstanding bullet payment by another 5-7 years considering the cash flow of the sub-project; 
GCF shall guarantee the repayment of the final bullet instalment due from the sub-project to the relevant commercial 
                                                             
24 https://www.boad.org/en/boad-participates-in-the-financing-of-the-largest-private-photovoltaic-power-
plant-in-west-africa-located-in-kita-mali/ 
25 https://www.pv-tech.org/news/akuo-solar-secures-financing-for-50mw-pv-project-in-mali

=== PAGE 23 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 75 
 
C 
banks by providing a standby loan facility  (“Standby Loans”) to BOAD which shall be on-lent to the sub-borrower (sub-
project) to repay the scheduled final bullet instalment only.  
The standby loans will automatically provide a credit enhancement to the underlying sub-project by extending the tenor 
of the outstanding commercial bank loan at maturity to match the tenor of BOAD’s loan to the sub-project. Note that the 
standby loan facility will apply only when commercial banks cannot extend the tenor at maturity. 
Component 2: To develop technical capacity of private and public sector actors and raise awareness - 
Technical assistance (Grant Component) 
Component 2 will provide capacity building to private sector companies while supporting the enabling environment 
through marketing and awareness raising activities and TA to national institutions in order to stimulate the demand for 
solar projects.  
 
Sub-component 2.1: Technical assistance to BOAD and local project developers for investment preparation 
Local project developers do not always have sufficient skills to prepare feasibility studies and offer attractive and bankable 
projects. Development cost is a key barrier to project developers. The programme will address the technical barriers 
faced by local project developers by building the capacity of mid-size project developers to structure their investments 
(project preparation and management).  
This will include capacity building and training for project developers to build their capacities during the development 
phase of their projects. For this sub-component, BOAD will hire qualified long-term international and local consultants for 
the implementation of the TA activities, based on its procurement policies as approved by the GCF. Training will target 
local developers active in target countries and include support:  
• 
to originate commercially viable solar related projects;  
• 
to develop technical and financial feasibility studies to develop bankable solar projects; 
• 
to develop a financial & commercial framework and risk mitigation strategy for the solar energy projects; 
• 
to develop environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) and environmental and social action plan 
(ESAP); and 
• 
to prepare to reach financial closure for the Sub-Projects 
 
It is expected that approx. 300 people from the private sector will be trained. The transfer of knowledge will be ensured 
through the provision of proper operational manuals and guidelines and practical tools. 
 
TA to local project developers will be complemented by capacity building to BOAD staff during the development and 
implementation of the project portfolio. BOAD experience in solar project investment and in mitigation and adaptation 
projects in general is relatively new. There is a significant need to strengthen BOAD staff expertise in several areas. TA 
will be provided to remove the technical barriers faced by BOAD staff. TA will include:  
• 
Support for the development of eligible and bankable solar projects: This will include support to build BOAD 
pipeline of projects, to assess the eligibility sponsors’ projects, to screen project financial and technical feasibility 
studies, to review and improve projects’ business models carried by project developers, etc.  
• 
support in the implementation of the solar projects: This will include support to track progress of projects 
implementation and in the monitoring of project performance indicators (e.g. MW installed capacity, tCO2eq 
avoided, etc.); in the management of environmental and social risks and in the implementation of the gender 
action plan; support for marketing and communication activities (defining a marketing plan and providing 
communication tools to promote the programme with the aim to stimulate the demand for solar projects) 
• 
support for the integration of climate change considerations into BOAD project cycle: This will include support to 
enhance BOAD capacities on how to integrate mitigation and adaptation dimensions into the project activities. 
Training participants will learn how climate change is interlinked with development cooperation, where to find 
relevant climate information and how to use it, how to plan and support processes of mainstreaming mitigation 
and adaptation in BOAD project cycle and how climate change measures should be integrated in development 
planning.

=== PAGE 24 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 75 
 
C 
The recruitment of long term local and international consultants will allow for a ‘hands-on’ approach to accompanying 
BOAD staff through project identification, development, implementation, management and monitoring. This ‘hands-on’ 
approach will help to ensure the long-term sustainability of BOAD interventions in terms of impacts achieved. 
 
Technical trainings will be provided to around 50 operational permanent staff from BOAD (including financial analysts, 
environmentalists, engineers, economists, etc.). The aim will be to strengthen their operational skills in terms of 
formulation and development of mitigation and adaptation projects and on how to integrate the climate dimensions in 
BOAD operations (in the private and public sectors). The knowledge acquired through the trainings will be captured and 
institutionalised in proper operational manuals and practical tools such as financial model guidelines or GHG emission 
calculation tool. 
 
Sub-component 2.2: Technical assistance (TA) to national institutions to address legal and regulatory barriers 
in the solar market 
The small installed capacity of solar PV in the Region reveals important regulatory, structural, and technical constraints 
such as inadequate Independent Power Producer (IPP) regulatory framework, limited planning and dispatch capacity, 
and overall grid integration challenges. The programme will also support the enabling environment for solar investment 
through BOAD’s policy dialogue activities with governments in the region to improve the regulatory environment for 
solar investments. The outcome will be an increased pipeline of fundable solar projects. 
 
BOAD will carry out policy dialogue activities that will be informed by the activities of the proposed programme. BOAD 
will hire qualified long-term international and local consultants for the implementation of the policy dialogue activities, 
based on its procurement policies as approved by the GCF. The rationale of this sub-component is to remove the 
market barriers to the development of solar projects by supporting the implementation of regulatory and policy regimes 
that provides clear and predictable rules for solar project development in the region. The aim of this sub-component is 
to prepare the way for the entry of solar private investment and to create clarity and a stable reliable environment for 
solar investment. TA under this sub-component will be focused on aspects of the enabling environment that have an 
immediate impact on stimulating solar private sector investment. Support can include  
• 
Support to the creation of a simplified regulatory framework for feed-in-tariffs for on-grid solar solutions;  
• 
Support on the development of standard power purchase agreements (PPAs);  
• 
Support on Independent Power Producer (IPP) tenders and procurement process;  
• 
Support on tariff structure; and 
• 
Support on a framework of financial and technical incentives. 
 
Sub-component 2.3: Marketing and awareness raising activities on the benefits of solar system technologies, 
and broad dissemination of experiences and good practices:  
BOAD will work to ensure that relevant information relating to the deployment of solar technologies is publicised to 
demonstrate the viability of these technologies. This will be done mainly through awareness raising campaign, BOAD 
website and business networks.  
BOAD will develop, manage and maintain organizational brand and execute a communications and outreach effort that 
promotes the objectives of the programme; lead direct outreach to project developers, commercial banks, DFI’s and 
other relevant stakeholders; build the reputation and brand of the programme with donors, foundations, corporations, 
the media and public officials and agencies; establish strategic partnerships with lenders, contractors, developers, 
government agencies, utilities, business and industry associations, and community groups. 
 
Programme benefits 
In creating favourable market environments for investment in the solar sector, the programme is expected to increase 
by 400% the existing total solar installed capacity which will lead to sizable greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 
reductions (4.8 million tCO2e over the 25-year average lifetime of the investments) and to green job creation and private 
sector business growth. Better access to green finance will enable private sector actors to have access to new markets 
related to green growth. Potential co-benefits include increased access to more sustainable energy, more affordable 
energy and reduced costs. The programme will also directly contribute to achievement of countries Nationally 
Determined Contributions (NDCs) and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

=== PAGE 25 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 75 
 
C 
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity) 
The West African Development Bank (BOAD) is the common development finance institution of the member countries 
of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), including Benin, Burkina-Faso, Côte d'Ivoire, Guinea 
Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal and Togo. It was established by an Agreement signed on 14 November 1973, and 
became operational in 1976. By Treaty of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) signed on 10 
January 1994 and entered into force on 1st August 1994, BOAD is a specialized and autonomous institution. It 
contributes “in full independence to the attainment of the objectives of the WAEMU without prejudice to the objectives 
assigned to it under the WAMU Treaty”. BOAD is an international public institution whose purpose, as provided under 
Article 2 of its Articles of Association, is to promote the balanced development of its member countries and foster 
economic integration within West Africa by financing priority development projects. 
 
BOAD delivers on its mandate by contributing towards the mobilization of domestic resources in its member state 
countries, outsourcing foreign capital through loans as well as providing funding through equity investments, loans, 
guarantees, and interest rebates. BOAD uses the financial resources that it mobilizes to invest in public and private 
sector projects and programmes aimed at building basic and modern infrastructure, improving rural livelihoods, 
generating energy, and climate change adaptation and mitigation. 
 
BOAD and the private sector  
Convinced that the private sector is a real development vector and a key source of economic growth, wealth and job 
creation in the WAEMU countries, BOAD continuously adjusts, intensifies and diversifies its action towards the 
promotion and financing of private productive investments. BOAD has a number of strategies for the promotion and 
financing of the private sector. Since 2013, BOAD has organized capacity building activities and outreaches with IFI 
such as the World Bank, AfDB and the UNFCCC secretariat to bring more awareness to the West African NFIs and 
commercial bankers in the financing of energy transition projects. In June 2017 BOAD launched the creation of the 
West African network for climate finance. BOAD is also promoting the use of green bonds and green credit line 
mobilization throughout the region. Out of FCFA 4,202.1 billion of total net commitments as at 30 September 2016, 
BOAD devoted to the private sector about 24.3%, representing FCFA 1,022.4 billion for 319 projects. 
  
BOAD’s private sector financing operations and the promotion of financial inclusion are carried out through the "Private 
Sector" window. The Private Sector Window prioritizes the fight against poverty and support for inclusive growth in the 
member states. The portfolio of the Bank's shareholding capital of companies and financial institutions includes 82 
transactions. BOAD has set a number of initiatives as explained below:  
 
The Regional Initiative for Sustainable Energy (IRED): In order to better overcome recurrent energy crises in many 
of the WAEMU member countries, the Conference of Heads of State and Government decided in January 2008 to set 
up a committee tasked with proposing a strategy called “Regional Initiative for Sustainable Energy (IRED)”. The 
initiative aims to provide, by 2030, 100% access to electricity in the WAEMU region at lower cost and as part of a large 
integrated and harmonized power pool market in West Africa. This regional market will be based on a dynamic public-
private partnership. It also targets an increase by 82% of renewable and sustainable energies in the WAEMU’s power 
generation base. The financial and institutional mechanism for the implementation of the initiative includes a 
concessional Energy Development Fund (FDE), and an investment fund operating as a private infrastructure 
development facility. 
 
The Energy Development Fund (Fonds de Développement Energie - FDE): Established on 25 September 2009, the 
Fund aims to contribute to improved access to energy in the WAEMU member countries and promote the development 
of sustainable energy under concessional conditions in order to finance projects eligible for IRED initiative. It is 
managed by BOAD. The Fund started its operations in the first quarter of 2010. As of the July 2018, 18 projects and 1 
programme were financed through loans accounting for a total amount of XOF 239,205 billion (EUR 364 million). The 
status of implementation of FDE financed operations is summed up in the table below.

=== PAGE 26 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 75 
 
C 
 
Table 11: List of projects financed by the FDE26 
 
Country 
Name of project 
Date of 
approval 
Technology 
Status 
Amount 
committed 
(million 
Euro) 
1 
Benin 
Construction project of 
161 kV Bembèrèkè-
Kandi-Malanville line 
January, 
2011 
Network 
construction 
Works ongoing 
with expected 
due date 
October/Decem
ber 2018 
30.5 
2 
Benin 
Strengthening of SBEE 
distribution networks 
N/A 
Network 
improvement 
N/A 
N/A 
3 
Benin 
Construction of 120 
MW thermal plant in 
Mari Gléta 
N/A 
Diesel and 
HFO 
N/A 
N/A 
4 
Burkina 
Faso 
Project to strengthen 
the production capacity 
of the Komsilga power 
station 
September
, 2010 
Diesel and 
HFO 
Works 
completed. 
Power station in 
operation since 
June 2014 
30.5 
5 
Burkina 
Faso 
Strengthening/reinforce
ment of Burkina Faso 
National 
Interconnected 
Network (PR-RNI) 
Project 
May, 2017 
General 
network 
improvement 
Works have not 
started. BOAD 
had meeting in 
April 2018 to 
support start of 
project 
implementation 
phase 
14.5 
6 
Ivory Coast  
Project for 
implementation of the 
emergency phase of 
reinforcement program 
to strengthen the 
electricity sector 
January 
2011 
Network 
improvement 
Works ongoing. 
Completion rate 
95% 
38.1 
7 
Ivory Coast 
Project for the 
reinforcement and 
rehabilitation of electric 
power transmission 
and distribution works 
of CI-ENERGIES 
June, 2013 
Network 
improvement 
Works 
completed. 
Operational 
since December 
2015 
19.8 
8 
Ivory Coast 
Project of extension in 
combined cycle of 
production capacity of 
AZITO thermal plant  
N/A 
Diesel and 
HFO 
N/A 
N/A 
9 
Ivory Coast 
Project to extend the 
capacity of the CIPREL 
SA thermal plant  
N/A 
Diesel and 
HFO 
N/A 
N/A 
10 
Guinea-
Bissau 
Project to strengthen 
electricity production 
through the 
construction of a 15MW 
thermal power plant 
June, 2011 
Diesel and 
HFO 
Works are 
delayed 
ESIA/ESAP 
complete 
20.8 
11 
Mali 
Construction project of 
the Center National 
Code of Conduct 
(CNC) of Bamako and 
doubling of production 
January, 
2011 
Hydro 
Works have 
started 
30.5 
                                                             
26 Etat de mise en œuvre des projets financés par le Fonds de Développement Energie, 2018

=== PAGE 27 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 75 
 
C 
capacity of Sotouba 
Hydroelectric plant  
12 
Mali 
Rehabilitation of 
hydroelectric power 
plants of Sélingué and 
Sotouba 
N/A 
Hydro 
N/A 
N/A 
13 
Niger 
Strengthening of 
production capacity of 
Goudel plant 
April, 2012  
Diesel and 
HFO 
Works are being 
finalised 
30.5 
14 
Niger 
Construction of 100 
MW thermal plant in 
Gorou Banda/Niamey: 
first 30 MW 
N/A 
Diesel and 
HFO 
Works are being 
finalised 
19.8 
15 
Senegal 
Construction project to 
build the 225 kV loop of 
Senelec Phase I 
June, 2011 
Network 
construction 
Works 
completed in 
November 2014 
15.2 
16 
Senegal 
Construction project to 
build the 225 kV loop of 
Senelec Phase II 
March, 
2015 
Network 
construction 
 
38.1 
17 
Togo 
Project to strengthen 
and construction of 
electric power supplies 
system 
June, 2011 
Network 
improvement 
Works ongoing 
8.8 
18 
Togo 
Decentralized of rural 
electrification of 62 
localities by SPV in the 
5 regions in 
substitution for the 
reinforcement and 
construction of the 
power supply. 
Sept 2016 
Solar PV 
Loan agreement 
not signed 
21.6 
19 
UEMOA 
Regional Program for 
the Development of 
Renewable Energies 
and Energy Efficiency 
(PRODERE) - Part 2 of 
Phase 1 
March 
2016 
Renewable 
energy – solar 
PV among 
others 
Ongoing 
22.8 
 
Total  
 
 
341.5 
 
 
The Infrastructure Development Fund: It is dedicated to private investments. It is a profit-making fund meant for 
financing access to electricity in the WAEMU region according to market terms and conditions. In addition, it aims to 
support the restructuring of electricity companies, the emergency programme and the medium and long-term projects. It 
will be a lever for public-private partnerships in the energy sector in the WAEMU region. The due diligence towards its 
implementation is underway at the level of BOAD. The Bank participated in the implementation of major projects 
including: 
• 
Mali-Côte d’Ivoire electric power interconnection of by Energie du Mali (EDM); 
• 
Electrification of the townships of Bakel, Selibaly and Goureye in Senegal by Société de Gestion de l’Energie 
de Manantali (SOGEM); 
• 
Expansion of CIPREL SA’s power plant capacities in Côte d’Ivoire (CIPREL IV A); 
Expansion in combined cycle of the generation capacities of AZITO power plant by SOCIETE AZITO ENERGIE SA in 
Côte d’Ivoire. 
BOAD and climate change  
Like most of other African countries, the WAEMU countries are increasingly facing the adverse effects of climate 
change (floods, prolonged droughts, strong winds, coastal erosion, etc.). These phenomena have, over the last years, 
exacerbated vulnerability of both populations and natural ecosystems useful to life. BOAD shares concerns raised by 
climate change. Thus, it finances climate-related projects, a true lever for economic and social development of WAEMU 
member countries. Thus, it mapped out an environmental and climate strategy for the 2015-2019 period, whose aim is

=== PAGE 28 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 75 
 
C 
“making environment a new growth area for the Bank”. To achieve this goal, BOAD’s action is structured around three 
specific directions or strategic areas, namely: 
• 
strengthening the capacities of operational units in the area of environmental assessments; 
• 
developing effective tools and mechanisms for financing and resource mobilization in order to support 
environmental management and combat climate change; 
• 
strengthening the Bank’s leadership in the sub-region on environmental and climate issues. 
In conformity with its statutory missions and as part of the implementation of directions included in the 2015-2019 
strategic plan, BOAD has committed itself to providing support to member countries in order to make them resilient to 
climate shocks and help them achieve sustainable and inclusive growth. In this regard, the Bank promotes climate 
change mitigation and adaptation projects in various sectors: agriculture, fisheries, handicraft, energy, natural resource 
rehabilitation and preservation, agroforestry. At last, it promotes resource mobilization by forging ad hoc partnerships 
with financial institutions such as KfW, AFD, EIB, etc., as well as with the UNFCCC financing mechanisms. BOAD 
seeks to raise, at international level, funds dedicated to environment and climate, such as the Climate Change 
Adaptation Fund, the Global Environmental Facility, and the GCF.  
 
Since 2009, the Bank sits as an observer to the UNFCCC and actively participates in discussions relating to the 
establishment of an international architecture for climate finance. In 2011, the Bank was accredited as the first regional 
implementing entity of the Adaptation Fund. In addition, since January 2013, BOAD has hosted the first Regional 
Collaboration Centre (RCC) on Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and climate change with the UNFCCC.  The 
aim of the RCC is to provide direct support to governments, NGOs and the private sector to identify and develop CDM 
projects and mitigation activities such as NAMA while supporting BOAD climate finance resource mobilization. This 
centre has already provided direct support to projects under execution in areas like energy, improved cook stoves, 
efficient power lighting, solar water heating, etc.  
 
Since January 2015, BOAD has set up at internal level a new department in charge of environment and climate finance 
to closely look at climate finance aspect in projects that involve environment. In addition to the environmental 
component, this new department aims to prepare and finance adaptation and mitigation projects, as well as carbon 
finance. 
 
BOAD Financial Position 
BOAD is a traditional regional multilateral bank that serves the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU). 
It provides loans to sovereigns of the WAEMU primarily, as well as to its broader public sector and private sector.  
 
Some key facts are given below: 
Number of operations  
1138 
Total commitments 
5 293,5 billion FCFA 
Total assets 
2 667 870 Million FCFA 
Total loans  
1 806 283 Million FCFA 
Total equity 
677 905 Million FCFA 
 
Since 2015, BOAD is rated « investment grade » by Moody’s (Baa1) and Fitch (BBB), reflecting the solid financial 
position of BOAD which has one of the highest financial institution credit ratings in the region. Moody's Investors 
Service has affirmed the BOAD Baa1 long-term issuer and senior unsecured ratings and maintained the stable outlook.  
 
 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
Electricity access in the target countries 
The energy systems within the targeted countries are facing interrelated challenges of energy poverty, energy security 
and climate change. The region has one of the lowest access rates to modern energy services in the world. Although 
much progress has been achieved towards increasing electricity access in the west African countries, particularly in 
Senegal and Côte d’Ivoire, electricity access remains insufficient in most countries. Furthermore, electricity networks are 
outdated and prone to significant transmission losses and interruptions in supply. The resultant high tariffs and loss of 
productivity are costly to the households of the target countries and to the regional economy as a whole.

=== PAGE 29 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 75 
 
C 
Table 12: Access to electricity rates in target countries (in % of total, rural or urban population) 
Country 
Access to electricity 
(% of population) 
Access to electricity, 
rural (% of rural 
population) 
Access to electricity, 
urban (% of urban 
population) 
Benin 
41.4 
18.0 
70.8 
Burkina Faso 
19.2 
0.8 
60.7 
Guinea-Bissau 
14.7 
- 
29.8 
Mali 
35.1 
1.8 
83.6 
Niger 
16.2 
4.7 
65.4 
Togo 
46.9 
19.4 
87.4 
Source: World Bank, 2016 
 
Electricity tariffs in the target countries 
Electricity tariffs show important differences among the target countries. In Guinea-Bissau, where major infrastructure 
and capacity difficulties occur, the average tariff is around $0.40/kWh, while in Mali and Niger, prices are significantly 
lower with an average retail price is at $0.16/kWh. Regarding the regional average, it stands at around $0.23/kWh which 
is substantially higher than in most African countries.  
 
Table 13: Electricity tariffs in WAEMU countries  
Country 
Electricity tariffs in 2017 
Benin 
$0.22/kWh for all end users 
Subsidy for low-income households 
Burkina Faso 
Average retail price $0.24/kWh 
Guinea-Bissau 
$0.40/kWh for on-grid consumers 
Mali 
Average retail price $0.16/kWh for on-grid 
consumers 
Niger 
$0.16/kWh on average for on-grid consumers 
Consumers below 3kWh per day $0.11/kWh 
$0.11/kWh for industrial consumers 
$0.07/kWh for agricultural facilities 
Togo 
$0.22/kWh for all end users 
$0.31/kWh for residential 
$0.20/kWh for commercial/industrial 
Regional average 
retail price 
$0.2333/kWh 
Rounded: $0.23/kWh 
Source: ECREEE (2018) Regional Off-Grid Solar Market Assessment & Private Sector Support Facility Design, 
Country Reports 
 
Electricity demand in the target countries 
Scaling up renewable energy generation capacity is of crucial importance to enable the target countries to sustain 
economic growth and development, and to prepare for the upcoming population boom. Indeed, electricity demand is 
expected to increase fivefold by 2030 to 250 TWh in West Africa27, and the energy sector will not be able to meet the 
electricity demand in its current state. The figure below shows the projected electricity demand by country in West Africa 
up to 2030. 
 
                                                             
27 IRENA (2015) Africa Power Sector Synthesis

=== PAGE 30 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 75 
 
C 
 
Figure 1: Projected Electricity Demand by country – West Africa 
Source: IRENA (2015) Africa Power Sector: Planning and Prospects for Renewable Energy 
 
Energy mix in the target countries 
Despite the considerable potential of RE and the dynamism of WAEMU economies, RE resources remain largely 
untapped. Scaling up RE investment is of crucial importance considering the direct correlation between sustained 
economic growth, social progress and energy access. Among other challenges, which are discussed by country below, 
national energy sectors in WAEMU states are affected by the monopoly of one corporation over the electricity supply, 
issues related to the insufficient energy supply compared to the demand, and sometimes severe infrastructure 
deficiencies. Low electricity access rates have negatively impacted the modernization of the economy and social 
development. Improving electricity access rates and scaling up non-hydro renewable energy will diversify the countries’ 
energy mix while providing clean access to electricity to the population.  
 
Table 14: Energy mix by target country (in %) (See Table 7 for the breakdown in MW) 
Country 
Thermal28 
Hydro 
Solar 
Benin 
97 
0 
3 
Burkina Faso 
77 
10 
13 
Guinea-
Bissau 
100 
0 
- 
Mali 
36 
53 
11 
Niger 
95 
- 
5 
Togo 
79 
20 
1 
Source: IRENA (2018) Renewable Energy Statistics (unless otherwise specified) 
 
                                                             
28 2017 data from ECREEE (2018) Regional Off-Grid Solar Market Assessment & Private Sector Support 
Facility Design, Country Reports, August.

=== PAGE 31 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 75 
 
C 
Many clean energy projects in West Africa are technically and commercially viable but have yet to become bankable 
investment opportunities. High initial development costs, lack of start-up capital, limited know-how of project financing, 
and inadequate enabling environments all present barriers to such progress. As a result, RE projects in West Africa tend 
to be financed by a combination of private and public financing, with the public sector contributing the lion’s share. 
Traditionally, the public-private financing models being used do not necessarily guarantee timely or efficient investments. 
The procedures associated with these financing models are bureaucratic, complex and prolonged. The commitment from 
investors is not consistent and is largely influenced by global dynamics and perceptions beyond the control of project 
developers.  
 
The potential private sector finance for RE projects in West Africa is significant. However, the challenge is to provide 
affordable and attractive financing frameworks that sustainably exploit commercial lending and investment opportunities 
in the private sector. RE technologies often have high upfront costs and low rates of return. The consequent high-risk 
profiles of investments and little access to affordable financing in West Africa make RE unattractive and challenging for 
investors.  
 
Renewable energy investment scenario 
In the six target countries, financial instruments are the predominant means of supporting the renewable energy sector. 
Tax incentives take a number of forms, including investment or production tax credits, as well as reduction or elimination 
of taxes such as import duties, sales, and value-added tax (VAT). In Burkina Faso and Mali, import duties on RE 
components have been reduced or removed and value-added tax reductions for RE projects have been established. In 
addition, Niger and Togo all offer some form of tax incentives for RE. In Mali additional financial support has come from 
public financing mechanisms such as public investment, project grants or low interest loans.  
 
Both public and private financing have played an important role in the sector’s development to date. While data on private 
finance flows in the region is not widely available, an analysis of regional projects such as the Cabeolica Wind Farm 
Project shows that private financing has played a key role in project development.  
 
As mentioned above, millions of dollars of support have been lined up through specialised regional and Africa-wide funds 
and programmes such as the ECOWAS-led Renewable Energy Investment Initiative (EREI) and Renewable Energy 
Facility (EREF), the Sustainable Energy Fund for Africa (SEFA), the African Renewable Energy Fund (AREF), and the 
Power Africa Initiative. International financing through mechanisms established under the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) process—such as the Global Environment Facility (GEF), Climate Investment 
Funds (CIF), Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), and Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs)—have all 
supported RE development in the region and offer an opportunity to continue scaling up future investments. While public 
and private funding from national, regional, and international institutions has been instrumental in the funding of RE 
development in West Africa, it has yet to significantly penetrate the private sector market.  
 
An overview of the energy sector in each target country is provided below, along with key indicators demonstrating the 
need to scale up RE investment in target countries.  
 
Table 15: Overview of the energy sector in each target country 
Country 
Overview of the energy sector 
Benin 
Benin’s electricity sector faces significant challenges in terms of regulatory arrangements, financial 
sustainability and technical capacity. Benin’s electricity needs are not met by its 288 MW of non-
renewable energy capacity and 9 MW of renewable energy capacity. The missing electricity supply is 
covered by the cross-country grid shared with Ghana, Nigeria and Ivory Coast. One of the country’s major 
energy challenges is its heavy dependence on electricity imports from its neighbours, and its insufficient 
non-renewable generation capacity.  
 
Indeed, Benin is locked in its fossil fuel dependency unless an enabling environment is implemented to 
allow for the private sector to invest and scale up the country’s generation capacity. When in 2014, 
electricity production from oil sources represented 99.5% of the total, it still accounted for over 94% a 
year later. Electricity production from renewable energies represented a mere 1.5% in 2015, though 
showing a 1-point increase from the past year, and energy imports accounted for 46.6% of the country’s 
total energy use in 2014. Nonetheless, while in 2011, the national electrification rate was low at around

=== PAGE 32 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 75 
 
C 
28%, significant progress has been made as the electricity access rate now is 41.4% of the total 
population (2016). However, there is an important disparity between rural and urban electricity access 
rates, with 18% and 70.8% respectively. These results show that efforts have been made to scale up 
electricity access, but little has changed in terms of the diversification of Benin’s energy mix. A number 
of outstanding issues have hampered clean energy development in Benin: 
 
• 
Despite objectives stated in the Electricity Code (2007) to open the energy market to private actors, 
the CEB (Communauté Électrique du Bénin) remains the sole actor responsible for buying and 
supplying the electricity produced. Recently, the CEB has implemented a feed-in tariff for renewable 
energy sources fixed at 73XOF/kWh, applied to all RE technologies.  
• 
Even though national authorities agree on the potential of renewable energies in Benin, no national 
targets for RE project development have been defined.  
• 
The CEB financial balance rests on currency exchange from USD$ for cross-country connections 
with Nigeria, Ghana and Ivory Coast 
• 
Overall ambitions have not been translated into actions in terms of creating an enabling environment 
for private-led RE project development, though a handful of small-scale solar projects are currently 
under consideration 
Burkina Faso 
 
Burkina Faso has one of the lowest rankings in terms of electricity access, with only 19.2% of total 
population with access to electricity in 2016, a figure mainly accounted by urban areas, with 60.7% of 
urban population having access to electricity. The rural electricity access rate is among with lowest in 
Africa with less than 1% (0.8%) as of 2016. The country’s energy supply is heavily dependent on imported 
hydrocarbons from neighbouring countries, such as Ghana, Togo and Ivory Coast for use in electricity 
production, transport and other industries. Dependence on imports is exacerbated by high production 
costs, fluctuating oil prices and a steadily increasing demand for electricity.  
Furthermore, in recent years, Burkina Faso’s power utility, SONABEL has faced system transmission 
and distribution losses of over 20%, much higher than the internationally accepted norm of 10%.  In 
addition, the high tariffs barely cover the operating costs of the expensive SONABEL power. The resultant 
disruptions in supply and the high cost of energy for consumers constitute significant barriers to private-
led energy development and negatively impact productive capacity. These hidden costs represent a 
significant burden for the expansion of the private sector and national growth. While recent initiatives 
have placed an emphasis on improving energy access through off-grid solar solutions, much remains to 
be done to achieve SE4All objectives by 203029 with regard to energy access and diversification of the 
energy mix. 
Guinea-Bissau 
 
The RE market has emerged rather recently in Guinea-Bissau due its difficult economic and political 
environment. Should the political scene remain stable, the RE market offers good potential even though 
the vast majority of the population lives on less than 1USD$/day and therefore cannot afford electricity. 
Currently, a few solar panels are installed in urban areas (for public lighting), but there is almost no 
electrification in rural areas, for which data is not available.  
 
The national electricity service struggles immensely to meet the electricity demand, with national capacity 
standing at 12.5 MW while demand for the capital alone is around 30MWh. Guinea-Bissau is one of few 
countries in the world which has seen its electricity access rate decline in recent years, from 17.2% in 
2014 to around 14.7% in 2016. The urban electricity access rate is estimated to be around 29.8% as of 
2016. The distribution network suffers from significant losses ranging from 30 to 40%. They ought to be 
extensively renovated before focusing on attracting private investment because the deficiencies may 
result in the deterioration of newly installed equipment. This constitutes an important barrier to private 
investment in the energy sector.  
 
Another barrier to private investment is the systemic theft of electricity and fraud. National authorities are 
currently developing a regulatory framework for the energy sector and have confirmed the considerable 
potential for the development of RE projects in the NREAP. The greatest barrier to the development of 
the RE sector remains the lack of finances and facilities available (credit access for RE firms, poverty of 
the population, insufficient resources of local banks, VAT scrapped for solar panels but fully applied to 
all other solar components: batteries, controllers, inverters etc.).  
Mali 
Mali has a strong renewable energy potential, especially for solar power thanks to its above average 
irradiation levels. The country has seen its national average rate of access to electricity increase steadily, 
from 22.3% in 2010 to 35.1% in 2016. However, rural and urban electricity access rates show a significant 
disparity, with 1.8% of the total rural population with access to the grid against 83.6% of the total urban 
                                                             
29 65% national electricity access, 32% national access to clean cooking.

=== PAGE 33 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 75 
 
C 
population. In Mali, the electricity consumption per capita is about 90 kWh, against an average of 116 
kWh in ECOWAS countries and 500 kWh on average in Sub-Saharan Africa. The average consumption 
is also characterised by a strong disparity between rural and urban areas. 
 
Key constraints and challenges in the energy sector faced by the private sector include:   
• 
The national electricity access rate is still very low, especially in rural areas 
• 
Mali exempts solar panels, solar lamps, and other renewables from import levies and duties, 
however, the current regulatory framework does not adequately promote private investment in 
renewable energy, though the local private sector has been increasingly involved in rural 
electrification. 
• 
The impacts of climate variability are making the country’s electricity supply – which depends 
on hydroelectric power for about 59% of its on-grid supply – increasingly vulnerable. 
• 
Regulatory (including tariffs) and legal frameworks do not favour RE investment by the private 
sector on a large scale. 
• 
The financial status of the electricity utility EDM SA is extremely weak. 
 
Private sector contributions to RE are currently not accounted for in national statistics. However, it is 
estimated that there are more than 20 local, private operators active in the RE sector. These include 
decentralised energy service companies operating a few pilot RE rural electrification schemes, and 
retailers and distributers involved in the sale of electrical (mainly SHS), lighting and energy efficiency 
equipment. 
Niger 
Electricity, in terms of both quality and access, is a key challenge for Niger. The existing power 
infrastructure is underdeveloped, and the country continues to rely heavily on imported electricity from 
neighbouring Nigeria. There are occasional power-supply interruptions from Nigeria due to failing 
electricity infrastructure, highlighting Niger’s dependence and vulnerability. In 2016, the electricity access 
rate stands at 16.2% of the total population, with important disparities between rural and urban areas 
(4.7% and 65.4% of the population respectively). The country’s energy mix is characterised by a carbon-
intensive energy production, despite having significant RE potential, particularly for solar in the north.  
 
The Renewables Readiness Assessment, carried out by IRENA, has highlighted several technical 
opportunities and barriers facing Niger’s private sector and the renewable energy generation and 
transmission infrastructure. It also brought to light some of the institutional, financial and capacity issues 
associated with PV and wind-based power generation to feed the grid. These are listed below.  
• 
Lack of information on solar and wind energy resources is a major obstacle to investment due to the 
difficulties in developing robust project proposals. 
• 
At present, there is little in the way of private sector participation and incentives to draw investors to 
the development and distribution of solar products in Niger. 
• 
The market is limited by Niger’s small size and constrained by taxes of over 52% (import tariffs and 
VAT), a lack of regulation on poor quality products smuggled from neighbouring countries, and the 
absence of a meaningful government renewables stimulus. 
• 
Lack of institutional coordination and collaboration between financial institutions and other 
stakeholders 
• 
Technical, legal and administrative barriers reducing investor confidence. 
Togo 
As of 2016, 46.9% of Togo’s total population had access to electricity, with 19.4% of the total population 
in rural areas and over 87.4% in urban centres.  
The energy sector in Togo can be characterized by the following: 
• 
A dominance of traditional sources of energy (biomass consisting of wood energy and 
agricultural residues). Strong energy dependence on biomass energy in a context of scarcity of 
wood resources; 
• 
Widespread poverty and low purchasing power of populations for access to electricity and 
modern fuels; 
• 
The predominance of hydroelectricity and biomass based renewable energies; 
• 
Strong dependence on imports (electricity and hydrocarbons - 100% of miscellaneous 
petroleum products needs and 79% of electricity needs are covered by imports). and limited 
control over the economic and energy policies of the countries of supply (Ghana, Côte d'Ivoire 
and Nigeria); 
• 
Virtually no upgrading of new and renewable sources of energy (solar, wind, conventional 
biomass energy applications, etc.);

=== PAGE 34 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 75 
 
C 
• 
Very low overall energy efficiency due to the predominance of biomass, with poor energy yields 
for traditional carbonisation (charcoal production through traditional wheels: 12 to 20% weight) 
and final consumption (yields energy use of wood and charcoal equipment between 7 and 15%).   
 
The development of private-led RE in Togo faces the following capacity and financial barriers: 
• 
Lack of specialised institutional and operational structures for the governance of rural electrification 
and the promotion of more efficient domestic fuels;  
• 
Lack of financial capacity to meet investment needs and high dependence on international financing;  
• 
Poor exploitation of domestic and international private sector financing potentials (including banking 
and microfinance institutions);  
• 
Low national financing capacity (public and private) and high dependence on public and private 
external financing (financial obstacle);  
• 
Enormous technological delays in renewable energy, energy efficiency and the exploitation of new 
and renewable sources of energy and a high dependence on the transfer of technology and know-
how (technological obstacle);  
• 
Poverty of populations, especially rural populations and its impact on purchasing power (poverty and 
affordability of modern energy services). 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable) 
BOAD is an international public institution whose purpose is to "promote the balanced development of its Member States 
and foster economic integration within West Africa" by financing priority development projects. Created in 1973 by the 
member states of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), BOAD has a legal status of a development 
finance institution. With this status, BOAD is exempt from tax, therefore interest to the GCF will be free of any taxes 
including withholding. This it outlined in the text depicting the legal status of the Bank30:  
• 
Section 2.2: privileges and immunities, Article 4, H) the assets and operations of the bank benefit from the tax 
exemptions specified in Article 44.  
• 
Article 44 stipulates that “The Bank, its revenues, its property and other assets, as well as transactions and 
operations that it carries out under its present status, are exempt from all direct or indirect taxes”. Additionally, “it 
will not be levied on the bonds issued by the bank or the interests which come from them regardless the holder 
of these securities, nor tax by states or collectivities of the union” 
With regards to taxes applicable to solar technologies, in the WAEMU member states, fiscal incentives have been 
unanimously chosen as a tool to create incentives to invest in the RE sector. These measures take the form of tax credits 
on investment or production, taxes on sales and Value Added Tax (VAT). In Burkina Faso, Benin, Ivory Coast, Niger, 
Togo and Mali, customs and import tax have been reduced or even scrapped for solar PV products, solar panels and/or 
solar system components.31 Burkina Faso has reduced VAT on RE projects and has entirely suppressed it for solar 
energy projects. Niger has introduced a tax exemption on domestic solar systems and solar lamps.  
The project operators will have to provide a letter of authorization for the construction of the project in the site, a 
preliminary permit from the electrification agency, the Environmental and Social Permit for category B project, the 
agreement between the regulatory authority and the operator, the authorization from the Minister in charge of energy, 
the specifications for the operation in the site, the tariff structuring and the PPA.  
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements 
BOAD as part of its AE role will among others carry out the following:  
• 
BOAD will be responsible for the overall oversight of the framework implementation and will report to GCF as per 
the terms to be agreed under the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA); 
• 
BOAD will report to GCF as per the terms to be agreed under the AMA and the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA).  
• 
BOAD will prepare environmental and social impact analysis reports in line with the bank’s environmental and 
social safeguards (including ensuring that the sub-project is within allowed environmental impact classification, i.e. 
only up to category B)  
                                                             
30 Status de la Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement (B.O.A.D), 2016, pp.2, pp. 13 
31 Ibid.

=== PAGE 35 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 75 
 
C 
• 
BOAD will ensure that a robust climate rationale is in place for all projects.  
• 
BOAD will ensure that an MRV framework will be established to ensure activities of the facility and other relevant 
stakeholders are in compliance with all applicable policies, procedures and other requirements of the GCF to 
enhance transparency. An independent party will be procured by BOAD for Monitoring, Reporting and Verification 
(MRV); BOAD will be ultimately responsible for reporting to the GCF. 
 
Component 1: To scale up commercial and sustainable financing for solar investments 
The GCF will provide concessional debt financing of EUR 57 million to BOAD for on-lending to medium/large scale on-
grid solar projects in the target countries. The GCF loan facility can be drawn down for two (2) purposes, respectively 
presented under sub-components 1.1 and 1.2. BOAD shall blend the proceeds of the GCF loan with its own funding to 
on-lend to the projects in a single blended tranche. 
Sub-component 1.1:  Senior loans facility 
Of the total EUR 57 million GCF loan, a minimum of EUR 45 million shall be drawn down by BOAD to finance the 
construction of solar energy projects for on-lending to solar energy projects (sub-projects) in Francophone West Africa 
(“Senior loan Facility”).  
 
Sub-component 1.2:  Standby loan facility (credit enhancement in the form of tenor extension)  
Of the total EUR 57 million GCF loan, a maximum of EUR 12 million can be drawn down by BOAD to be used for credit 
enhancement in the form of tenor extension to solar projects financed under the programme (“Standby Loan Facility”). 
Such tenor extension instrument is intended to crowd-in participation from interested and credible local commercial banks. 
If less than the maximum cap has been committed for standby loans by the Accredited Entity at financial close, the 
remaining amount shall be drawdown for the purpose of sub-component 1.1. 
It is expected that local commercial banks are unable to extend loans with tenors of more than 5-7 years. To overcome 
this barrier, the GCF will incentivise the participation of local commercial banks in the Programme by providing Standby 
Loans to the sub-project for extension of the commercial banks loan tenor (as described in Section C3. of the FP).  
Component 2: Technical assistance (grant component) 
BOAD as part of its EE role will be responsible for the implementation of the grant component. BOAD will hire qualified 
local and international consultants for the implementation of the technical assistance (component 2), based on its 
procurement policies as approved by the GCF. The consultants will work under the supervision of BOAD and will 
provide technical assistance:  
• 
to local private sector actors to build their capacities during the development phase of their projects (Sub-
component 2.1); 
• 
to BOAD staff to build their capacities during the development and implementation of the project portfolio (Sub-
component 2.1);  
• 
to national institutions to support them in the implementation of regulatory and policy regimes that provides 
clear and predictable rules for solar project development (Sub-component 2.2).

=== PAGE 36 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 75 
 
C 
Financial Management (Flow of Funds) 
 
Figure 2: Flow of Funds Diagram

=== PAGE 37 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 75 
 
C 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation 
Please provide a project/programme implementation timetable in section I (Annexes). The table below is for illustrative purposes. If the table format 
below is used, please refer to the activities as numbered in Section H. In the case of outputs, please mark when all the required activities will be 
completed. 
TASK 
2019 
Q2, Q3, Q4 
2020 
Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4 
2021 
Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4 
2022 
Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4 
2023 
Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4 
2024 
Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4 
2025 
Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4 
2026 
Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4 
Component 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub-Component 1.1 Senior Loans Facility  
• 
Origination of eligible solar projects  
• 
Financial appraisal and technical feasibility, 
due diligence 
• 
Approval by BOAD Executive Committee and 
financial close 
• 
Disbursement of Senior loans  
• 
Construction of solar power plants  
X 
(START Q2) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
(END Q2) 
Sub-component 1.2 Standby Loans Facility 
• 
Reach out to commercial banks to participate 
in originated solar projects 
• 
Structuring of standby loans at financial close 
 
X 
(START Q2) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
(END Q2) 
 
 
Component 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub-component 2.1: Technical assistance to 
BOAD and local project developers 
• 
Recruitment of consultants to carry out the 
TA activities under this sub-component 
• 
Trainings of project developers 
• 
Trainings of BOAD staff 
X 
(START Q2) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X (END Q2) 
 
 
Sub-component 2.2: Technical assistance to 
national institutions 
• 
Recruitment of consultants to carry out the 
TA activities under this sub-component 
• 
Trainings of national institutions 
X 
(START Q2) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X (END Q2)

=== PAGE 38 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 75 
 
C 
Sub-component 2.3: Marketing and awareness 
raising activities 
• 
Organisation of events to raise awareness on 
the benefits of solar system technologies 
• 
Communications and outreach effort that 
promotes the objectives and good practices 
of the programme 
X 
(START Q2) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X (END Q2) 
 
 
 
The programme implementation period is 7 years including the construction of solar projects (from Q2 2019 to Q2 2026).

=== PAGE 39 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 75 
 
 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement 
 
 
The GCF involvement in the programme is critical for the following reasons:  
Triggering private investment in the solar sector at scale through the appropriate risk-return profile  
As explained in previous sections, the solar potential is significant in West Africa but the installed capacity remains low 
because of an unattractive business environment. The national governments have made substantial commitments to 
address climate change by investing massively in RE. The policy and regulatory frameworks are in principle supportive 
of the goals of increasing RE investment, however the magnitude of the barriers to doing business effectively and in a 
timely manner has meant that progress has been slower than expected. 
 
In West Africa, financing for solar projects has traditionally been dominated by the Development Finance Institutions 
(DFIs) with little space of participation from commercial and local financial players. Technological progress and 
associated cost reductions have created opportunities for the private sector. However, these technology solutions are 
still new, currently limited in scale and operating in an unstable regulatory environment. Furthermore, solar projects 
usually have a long-term investment horizon of over 10 years and as such require long-term financing. Commercial 
banks are not able to provide long-term credit for solar projects partly because they depend largely on short-term 
deposits for loan transactions. This mismatch of using short-term deposits for long-term loans and the financing 
constraints it presents to the project developers of solar projects will persist without availability of long-term credit facility. 
Further, the cost of financing from local commercial banks is high. This crowds out private investment from the solar 
sector. Still, maintaining the status quo cannot bring a transformative change that is required for dramatically increasing 
access to energy in the region with stable and sustainable energy source like solar energy.  
 
The partnership created with the support from the GCF is required to provide private sector debt financing with support 
and comfort to enter into financing this new asset class. The GCF’s involvement in supporting the proposed Programme 
will directly allow BOAD to offer more attractive lending to project developers and to crowd private banks in the solar 
sector, therefore, mobilizing and increasing private sector leverage. Involvement of the GCF will enable a financing 
scheme that will offer long-term and reasonably priced loans to solar investments, which will at the same time open up 
the market for participation of local private financiers. The provision of adapted financial tools such as concessional 
loans and standby loans will give private sector actors the confidence to invest in solar technologies. Standby loan facility 
is proposed to enable the participation of commercial banks who are not capable of making long-term investment into 
solar projects. It will give confidence to commercial banks, incentivizing their participation to the projects. Without 
addressing the financial barriers, the market for solar investments is likely to remain limited in the West African region 
and private sector actors will not be willing to take the risk to invest in the target sector. 
 
The proposed financial structure will allow BOAD to “crowd in” private sector investors and support solar interventions 
on a significant scale. By blending its own financing with the GCF concessional funding and the mobilized private investor 
funding, the risk exposure will be lower for private sector developers and the increased participation of private sector 
will over time lead to sustainable private sector support without GCF participation.  
 
Project developers require training and capability building measures to prepare bankable solar related 
businesses 
Market barriers continue to hold back solar related investment at scale, including insufficient access to finance, low 
internal capacity and a limited pipeline of bankable projects. Local private sector companies have insufficient experience 
in originating commercially viable solar related projects and lack technical knowhow to assess the financial and technical 
feasibility of solar investment proposals. The programme will address these technical barriers to scaling up the market 
for solar investments by building the capacity of project developers to structure their investments (project preparation 
and management).  The GCF funds, through the financing of TA, will provide support to mid-size local project developers 
for developing and appraising projects. Trainings will include support to private sector actors to develop technical and 
financial feasibility studies and to prepare bankable projects (more information on the type of trainings provided can be 
found in section C.3).

=== PAGE 40 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 75 
 
 
 D 
The relevance of this type of support has been confirmed by a study from IRENA (“Unlocking Renewable Energy 
Investment”, 2016) which highlights the lack of funds to support project preparation and development phase. The 
proposed TA support is therefore filling a crucial gap in the availability of funding to support early stage development 
projects.  
 
No alternative source of public sector funding at scale is available  
Given the large investment needs in the sector, a significant volume of investments into the solar market in West 
Africa is required. Currently, only the GCF is able to provide such finance within the given timeframe. BOAD’s strategic 
objective is to increase its portfolio of investments in the solar directly to private sector actors, but so far this has been 
low because of the lack of alternative source of public sector funding available. The involvement of the GCF is 
required as it will allow a combination of concessional lending and grant for technical assistance required to achieve 
the objectives of the programme and the consequent paradigm shift in the target countries.    
The programme will further contribute to a paradigm shift to low-emission development pathways through the 
mobilisation at scale of private climate finance and through the creation of a replicable model for eventual scale-up of 
the Programme’s success into the region. Transformational impacts will be achieved through the growth in 
commercially viable solar investments and the scaling up of financial products and services offered to the private 
sector in the region.   
Without GCF’s contribution, it would take considerably longer for existing market barriers to be removed. In the 
meantime, access to finance for climate investments would remain limited to a certain number of borrowers and 
remain too costly for many others. GCF’s contribution will unlock the considerable solar potential in LDC countries 
from Francophone West Africa. The total solar installed capacity in the NDC countries of West Africa will be increased 
twofold thanks to the GCF contribution. This will therefore help to operationalize the commitments made by these 
countries in the Paris Agreement.  
 
D.2. Exit Strategy 
 
Projects financed under the programme will benefit from long-term power purchase agreements (PPA) that guarantee 
income over most of the asset life and longer than the tenor of the GCF and BOAD loans. Financial viability of projects 
is expected to be backed by the PPA that is longer than the tenor, creating a tail of at least 5 years. Solar technology 
is well proven and highly durable. Overall therefore, sustainability of the projects throughout their operating lives will be 
assured. 
 
At the market level, the deal flow under this programme will support mobilise private sector actors with experience at 
scale in the region. Furthermore, supporting the implementation of regulatory and policy regimes that provides clear 
and predictable rules for solar project development in the region will ensure that the programme will have a lasting 
transformative (“paradigm shifting”) impact on the medium-large scale solar sector in the region. 
 
For individual sub-projects, the loans (both standard loans and standby loans) will be paid back according to the 
repayment schedule. At the programme level, once the facility is provided, GCF does not need to be highly involved in 
program operations. BOAD will report on the facility disbursement to GCF periodically on the usage of the facility. The 
GCF will gradually exit as BOAD will be repaying the GCF loan facility. Exit risk is minimal.

=== PAGE 41 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 75 
 
 E 
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance of the 
proposed project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity-specific sub-criteria and 
indicative assessment factors, which can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework, should be addressed where 
relevant and applicable. This section should tie into any request for concessionality made in section B.2. 
 
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas 
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential 
Energy access are key to the development of the NDC countries from West Africa. Given that the energy mix in the 
target region already heavily depends on fossil-fuel based electricity, further adding fossil-fuel based emissions is not 
an option from a climate perspective. Low-carbon energy production can be achieved by scaling up the use of solar 
sources given the significant potential in the region.  
  
The climate impact potential of the Programme will be the reduction of CO2 emissions through displacement of 
fossil-fueled electricity use at the user level by implementing and installing of clean and solar energy sources. 
It is expected that the implementation of the programme will deliver approx. 215 MW of new generating capacity in 
the solar sector, generating approx. 339 GWh of clean electricity annually and thereby directly avoiding emissions of 
193,398 tCO2e per year (equivalent to approx. 4.8mtCO2e over 25 years). 
Based on per capita electricity consumption for the region (116 kWh/ person-year32), the programme will deliver 
clean energy services for approximately 2.9 million beneficiaries. 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below. 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only) 
Annual 
193,398 tCO2e (once all projects will be 
in operation) 
Lifetime 
4,834,955 tCO2e 
• 
Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by 
gender (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
• 
Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only) 
Total 
2.9 million 
Percentage 
(%) 
NA 
Other 
relevant 
indicators 
Examples include: 
• 
Expected increase in the number of households with access to low-emission energy: 700 000 
households with improved access to low-emission energy sources 
• 
Expected increase in the number of medium and large low-emission power suppliers, and 
installed effective capacity: the programme expects to support at least 6 projects and to add 
215MW of new solar capacity installed into the grid. 
                                                             
32 https://www.se4all-africa.org/seforall-in-africa/country-data/mali/

=== PAGE 42 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 75 
 
 E 
BOAD developed a methodology to conservatively assess CO2 reductions driven by the Programme. The 
methodology calculates the CO2 savings based on the total estimated installed capacity of PV power plants expected 
to be deployed by the programme. Based on the pipeline of projects to be funded under the programme (See Table 
10), the total solar capacity to be installed in the six target LDCs is 215MW. 
The calculation uses the grid emission factor (EF) from the CDM methodology “Standardized baseline - Grid 
emission factor for West African Power Pool” (ASB0034: Grid emission factor for West African Power Pool (version 
01.0) for the five countries included in the programme connected to the Power Pool: Benin, Burkina Faso, Mali, Niger 
and Togo. This standardized baseline provides the values for grid emission factors (i.e. the carbon dioxide (CO2) 
emission factors) for the West African Power Pool (WAPP) – interconnected electricity system of nine countries: 
Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, and Togo. The grid emission factor used is 
0.561 tCO2/MWh. More information on the assumptions used can be found on the Standardized baseline - Grid 
emission factor for West African Power (available at: 
https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/standard_base/2015/sb102.html).  
 
For Guinea-Bissau, the emission factor has been calculated using a bottom up approach to find emissions per unit of 
MWh produced based on certain assumptions. The grid emission factor used is 0.76 tCO2/MWh. 
 
Table 16: Grid emission factor (EF) for West African Power Pool as defined in the CDM methodology ASB0034 
 
 
For the capacity factor, a conservative approach has been used for the 2 technologies (solar PV and CSP) of 18%. 
The operational lifetime of solar technologies is 25 years.

=== PAGE 43 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 75 
 
 E 
The annual emission avoidances of the Programme are calculated as follow: 
 
 
 
 
 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale) 
In recent years the six target countries have grown economically. Evidence shows, however, that economic growth 
alone does not automatically increase access to sustainable, clean and reliable energy. Availability of inexpensive 
clean energy solutions in urban and rural areas, is a prerequisite for inclusive development. Individual solutions are 
not adequate to tackle the dual issues of energy poverty. In order to achieve a paradigm shift in these economies, 
systemic change is necessary in the availability of, and access to, affordable RE finance and technical support. The 
proposed programme will initiate this systemic change and contribute to a paradigm shift towards a low-emission 
development pathway through the mobilisation of the private climate finance at scale for the solar market. 
Accelerating private sector involvement in the solar sector will enable market transformation that is required for the 
paradigm shift. 
 
Medium and large solar project financing in the six LDC countries is still at an early development stage. Private 
sector companies have limited opportunity to invest into solar projects in the region, and the current demand for debt 
of businesses is not met by local financial institutions due to the market barriers listed in section C.2. Given the 
ambitious solar generation targets in the region as specified in the NDC and other national strategies, systematic 
market failure must be avoided and the GCF involvement can make a critical contribution.   
 
Under the programme, BOAD will address the market barriers by playing a catalytic role using a blended finance 
approach to provide long-term financing at affordable rates to increase the bankability of projects and attract private 
sector investments. The involvement of the GCF is required as it will allow a combination of senior debt, standby 
loans (tenor extension instrument) and TA to up to 215MW of solar projects to support their financial closures, a 
comprehensive and innovative financing package that can be replicated in other countries of the region.  
 
The programme will contribute to creating a replicable model for eventual scale-up of the Programme’s success into 
the region as it is expected to showcase a viable model for all upcoming solar projects across the continent. 
Following the successful track-record in lending to these projects gained through the programme, it is expected that 
there will be a greater demand for financing solar projects and that local financial institutions will start using their own 
resources for climate lending.  
 
Furthermore, supporting the implementation of regulatory and policy regimes that provides clear and predictable 
rules for solar project development in the region will ensure that the programme will have a lasting transformative 
(“paradigm shifting”) impact on the medium-large scale solar sector in the region.  
 
Transformational impacts will be achieved through the growth in commercially viable solar investments and the 
scaling up of financial products and services offered to the private sector in the region. This will essentially accelerate 
the GHGs emission reduction thereby contribute to national low-carbon development pathways.

=== PAGE 44 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 75 
 
 E 
 
 
Figure 3: Theory of Change 
 
 
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning

=== PAGE 45 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 75 
 
 E 
The Programme will disseminate technical know-how and good practices and consist of a significant amount of 
capacity development for private sector actors and national institutions. Transfer of expertise and skills is an 
important objective of this programme under Component 2. In this context, the following learning and know-how 
transfers and benefits will be achieved: private sector companies will benefit from technical support on how to 
structure their business plans to make them bankable. Trainings will include support to originate commercially viable 
solar related projects, to develop technical and financial feasibility studies and to prepare bankable projects. 
 
BOAD will also benefit from the technical assistance to improve its capacity to develop, manage and implement the 
programme portfolio. TA will include: 
• 
Support for the development of eligible and bankable solar projects: This will include support to build BOAD 
pipeline of projects, to assess the eligibility sponsors’ projects, to screen project financial and technical 
feasibility studies, to review and improve projects’ business models carried by project developers, etc.  
• 
support in the implementation of the solar projects: This will include support to track progress of projects 
implementation and in the monitoring of project performance indicators (e.g. MW installed capacity, teqCO2 
avoided, etc.); in the management of environmental and social risks and in the implementation of the gender 
action plan; support for marketing and communication activities (defining a marketing plan and providing 
communication tools to promote the programme with the aim to stimulate the demand for solar projects) 
• 
support for the integration of climate change considerations into BOAD project cycle: This will consist in training 
BOAD on how to integrate mitigation and adaptation dimensions into the project activities.  
 
The interventions will be bolstered by marketing and awareness raising activities among private sector actors on the 
benefits of solar system technologies, on the positive impacts that sustainable energy production have on energy 
security, environmental benefits, health and livelihoods. BOAD will develop, manage, and maintain organizational 
brand and execute a communication and outreach effort that promotes the objectives of the programme, disseminate 
good practices and experiences.  
 
 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
The programme will contribute to creating an enabling environment for solar investments through targeted capacity 
building, awareness raising activities and connecting a diverse range of private sector stakeholders. Activities will 
include organizing various marketing and networking opportunities as well as consultation with local stakeholders in 
the solar technology supply chain (from manufacturers, suppliers and installers, to buyers, to finance providers, and 
to other stakeholders like the NGOs). By raising awareness among a diverse range of private sector stakeholders 
about the benefits of solar technologies at market levels and building the capacity of the private sector actors, the 
programme will stimulate demand for solar investments and directly contribute to the creation of the solar market in 
the target countries.  
 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies

=== PAGE 46 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 75 
 
 E 
Although the target LDCs are well endowed with renewable energy resources, their share in the countries’ energy 
mix is almost zero when large hydro power generation is excluded. The policy environment has not helped improve 
the situation significantly, but there has been a growing realisation over the last few years that drastic action is 
required to ensure adequate generating capacity in the region, and to develop both conventional and renewable 
energy sources.  
 
A stable policy and enabling regulatory framework is a prerequisite to attract and capitalize on the interest from the 
private sector. Investors want transparency, longevity, certainty and consistency. Such frameworks would have to be 
developed. The ECOWAS Renewable Energy Policy (EREP, pp.26) emphasizes that weak policy frameworks are a 
significant barrier to the development and proliferation of solar energy in the region. In the six target countries, the 
institutional, regulatory, legal, and tariff structures and frameworks are weak or insufficiently implemented. So far 
there are only a few incentives for private capital to invest in the RE sector in West Africa. Investments in RE projects 
have had a predominant share of Official Development Assistance (ODA) funding.  
 
The six target countries of this programme are characterized with similar market and policy barriers. Constraints vary 
from lack of clear institutional roles between different agencies, weak planning capacity, the absence of a clear 
framework for PPPs and IPPs, the mismatch between tariffs in urban and rural areas (with a necessary 
harmonization of tariffs), and capacity to channel funds for systematic large-scale projects, lack of legal structures 
and systems to push the market and open up the sector, the lack of legal and binding targets which is often the 
hindrance for progress in the RE sector, and lack of incentive mechanisms. 
 
To address the regulatory and legal barriers in the market, BOAD will carry out policy dialogue activities that will be 
informed by the activities of the proposed investments. The rationale of sub-component 2.2 is to remove the market 
barriers to the development of solar projects by supporting the implementation of regulatory and policy regimes that 
provides clear and predictable rules for solar project development in the region.  
 
The aim of sub-component 2.2 is to prepare the way for the entry of solar private investment and to create clarity and 
a stable reliable environment for solar investment. TA under this sub-component will be focused on aspects of the 
enabling environment that have an immediate impact on stimulating solar private sector investment. Support can 
include the creation or revision of a simplified regulatory frameworks for Feed-in-tariffs for on-grid solar solutions, 
support on standard PPAs, support on IPP tenders and procurement process, on tariff structure, on a framework of 
financial and technical incentives and capacity building. 
 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential 
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive development impact 
The programme is aligned with, and will broadly contribute to achieving, a number of the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) in each target country including:  
• 
Goal 1. No Poverty – end poverty, in all forms, everywhere 
• 
Goal 5. Gender Equality – achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls 
• 
Goal 7. Affordable and clean energy – ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for 
all 
• 
Goal 8. Industry Innovation and Infrastructure - build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable 
industrialization and foster innovation; 
• 
Goal 10: Reduced Inequalities - reduce income inequality within and among countries 
• 
Goal 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities - make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and 
sustainable 
• 
Goal 12: Responsible Consumption and Production - ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns

=== PAGE 47 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 75 
 
 E 
• 
Goal 13: Climate Action - Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts by regulating emissions 
and promoting developments in renewable energy 
• 
Goal 17: Partnerships for the Goals - Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global 
partnership for sustainable development 
 
The programme is expected to deliver wider environmental and socio-economic benefits on top of adding solar 
generation capacity to the grid and diversifying the energy mix in the target countries. Such co-benefits will contribute 
to achieving the SDGs as outlined below.  
 
Economic and social co-benefits 
The six target countries have abundant renewable resources that present commercial opportunities to generate 
clean electricity at relatively low cost. The programme will contribute to increasing the share renewables have in the 
respective national energy mix. This will reduce the requirement to import fossil fuel carriers and therefore reduce 
existing trade deficits that are caused by the import of refined oil products and secure energy supply through 
diversified energy sources. The increased, stable, and affordable energy access will bring about a positive impact to 
the sustainable growth of the region.  
In addition, the programme will create new job opportunities during the construction and operations of solar power 
plants. Among other development impacts, this programme will contribute to the economy by creating about 500 
green jobs during the construction phase ranging from highly skilled (field technicians, operators, corporate staff, 
etc.) to unskilled labour work (support and service), and additional ~200 jobs for operations and maintenance. This 
will be a starting point of building the ecosystem of technicians and skilled experts in solar technologies in the LDC 
countries of West Africa. 
 
Environmental co-benefits 
The programme will have the following key environmental co-benefits. The reduced reliance on fossil-fuel based 
generation will lead to the cleaner air quality by reducing the emission of pollutants including GHGs. Finally, the 
stable supply of electricity will reduce the dependency on charcoal and firewood for cooking, contributing to the 
reduction of deforestation and associated carbon emissions. This will have additional positive health impact to the 
population.  
 
Gender co-benefits  
Improved and more reliable access to electricity will have strong co-benefits for gender-sensitive development. The 
programme will take into account the different ways that women and men access energy, and the role that energy 
can play in increasing opportunities for women from the initial design of the programme and through the provision of 
technical support on the promotion of gender equality throughout the programme lifetime. The programme will add 
significant value in the target sector where gender equality is poorly addressed. By mainstreaming gender throughout 
the programme lifetime, the programme will be in line with the Gender Policy and the Gender Action Plan of GCF. 
Activities targeting women’s participation and training as part of component 2 will make sure that the program is 
gender-sensitive and the benefits are shared among men and women. More information can be found in the Gender 
Assessment and Action Plan.

=== PAGE 48 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 75 
 
 E 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient 
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only) 
About half of the population in the West Africa Region do not have access to electricity. All target countries are 
classified as Least Developed countries33 and according to the ND-GAIN Country Index, they are all among the most 
vulnerable countries to climate change. The target countries face interrelated challenges of energy access, energy 
security and high cost of electricity. This is attributed to the high dependence on fossil fuels, the insufficient availability 
of public funds to invest in energy infrastructure to meet the growing electricity demand, the inability to attract private 
capital in power generation at scale, and the inefficiencies along the value chain. This situation hampers the social, 
economic, and industrial development of the region.  
 
The target LDCs’ energy mix mostly comprises diesel, heavy fuel oil and hydropower. While they are endowed with 
high solar irradiation especially in the Sahel region, the installed solar PV capacity in the target countries was around 
70 MW at the end of 2017, representing only 5% of the total installed electricity generation capacity. Given the 
continuous decline in the cost of solar electricity generation, the target LDCs would benefit from investing massively in 
solar technologies to reduce its dependence on expensive fossil fuels for power generation, while supporting a shift 
towards cheaper, cleaner and reliable sources of electricity generation. With large financing needs over the sector’s 
entire value chain, the solar sector increasingly relies on the private sector to deploy grid-connected solar power 
generation projects. 
 
The proposed programme will address the needs of the beneficiary countries by improving the access to clean and 
reliable energy for approximately 2.9 million people. In creating favourable market environments for investment in the 
solar sector, the programme is expected to increase by 400% the existing total solar installed capacity which will lead 
to sizable GHG emissions reductions (approx. 4.8 million tCO2e over the 25-year average lifetime of the investments) 
and to green job creation and private sector business growth. Better access to green finance will enable private sector 
actors to have access to new markets related to green growth. Potential co-benefits include increased access to more 
sustainable energy, more affordable energy and reduced costs. The programme will also directly contribute to 
achievement of countries NDCs and the SDGs. 
 
Table 17: Ranking of the beneficiary countries in terms of poverty and vulnerability to climate change 
 
Country 
LDC 
ND-GAIN 
INDEX 
Ranking34 
Score 
Vulnerability 
Readiness 
Ranking 
Score 
Ranking 
Score 
Benin 
Yes 
155 
35.5 
163 
0.577 
147 
0.288 
Burkina Faso 
Yes 
164 
34.6 
166 
0.582 
157 
0.274 
Guinea-
Bissau 
Yes 
171 
32.2 
176 
0.625 
158 
0.268 
Mali 
Yes 
166 
33.6 
173 
0.614 
149 
0.286 
Niger 
Yes 
175 
30.5 
181 
0.680 
146 
0.290 
Togo 
Yes 
143 
38.2 
143 
0.540 
137 
0.303 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
33 United Nations, List of Least Developed Countries (as of March 2018): 
https://www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/wp-content/uploads/sites/45/publication/ldc_list.pdf 
34 https://gain.nd.edu/our-work/country-index/rankings/, scores for 2016

=== PAGE 49 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 75 
 
 E 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
Economic and social development level of the country and affected population 
In recent years the six target countries have grown economically. Evidence shows, however, that economic growth 
alone does not automatically increase access to sustainable, clean and reliable energy. Availability of inexpensive 
clean energy solutions in urban and rural areas, is a prerequisite for inclusive development. Individual solutions are 
not adequate to tackle the dual issues of energy poverty. In order to achieve a paradigm shift in these economies, 
systemic change is necessary in the availability of, and access to, affordable RE finance and technical support. The 
proposed programme will initiate this systemic change and contribute to a paradigm shift towards a low-emission 
development pathway through the mobilisation of the private climate finance at scale for the solar market. 
Accelerating private sector involvement in the solar sector will enable market transformation that is required for the 
paradigm shift. 
 
Table 18: Overview of the economic and social development in the target countries 
Country 
Overview of the economic and social development in the target countries 
Benin 
In 2017 Benin had a population of 11,175,692 million, with a GDP per capita (current US$) of 829. The 
country performed well in terms of economic growth rates with 5,6% while the inflation stood at around 
0.1%. Important economic and structural reforms financed by the IMF and World Bank have helped the 
country sustain this growth rate over the past decade. However, poverty remains widespread throughout 
the country and the economy is vulnerable, due to a lack of diversification and exogenous shocks.   
 
Politically, Benin continues to benefit from a stable and democratic regime, though terrorist acts occur in 
the north of the country. President Patrice Talon has pledged to tackle terrorism and to promote national 
unity.  
 
Over the past decade, Benin has considerably reinforced its macroeconomic stability, which resulted in a 
fast-increasing growth rate, though it is modest. GDP growth stood at 3,7% between 2007 and 2011, it 
increased to 5,4% in 2012 to then reach 5,6% in 2013. It is expected to remain steady.  
 
However, economic growth has not contributed to reduce poverty rates significantly, resulting from both 
the uneven distribution of resources and the rapid growth rate of the population. The share of the 
population living under the national poverty line has increased, from 37,5% in 2006 to 40.1% in 2015. To 
remedy this, the government has developed and implemented its third Stratégie de Croissance pour la 
Réduction de la Pauvreté (2011-2015), which aims to make Benin an emerging country by 2025. In order 
to achieve its objectives, the government ought to sustain economic growth on the medium-term while 
meeting the MDGs targets. The GoB counts on its agricultural potential as well as its central position for 
regional trade, but developing affordable energy is the key to achieving these targets. 
Burkina Faso 
In 2017 Burkina Faso had a population of 19.2 million, a GDP of USD 12.87 billion, an estimated 
economic growth rate of 6.7% and 40.1% of the population lived below the national poverty line in 2014.  
In 2016, national access to electricity was estimated at 19.2%, with an urban electricity access rate of 
60.7% of total urban population and a rural electricity access rate of 0.8% of total rural population.  
After a period of social and political unrest, the economy was expected to bounce back strongly in 2018, 
driven by extractive industries and public investment. The Africa Development Bank (2017) concluded 
that the country needs to underpin this revival by improving its ability to absorb investment costs. 
Furthermore, economic reforms under the 2011-20 plan for the industry, commerce and small producers 
sector have created more entrepreneurs, but new industrial sector firms are in extractive industries rather 
than agro-food. Significant physical, technical and socioeconomic constraints have been limiting the 
performance of the agricultural sector.   
Guinea Bissau 
Guinea Bissau is one of the most fragile countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, with a population of around 1.8 
million (2017). It has a long history of political and institutional instability and is highly coup-prone, which 
results in significant difficulties creating a favourable environment for investment and economic 
development.  
 
The country’s economy continues to grow despite the political turmoil, with a real GDP growth rate above 
5.9% in 2017. However, because of the high political and institutional instability the economic outlook 
remains uncertain and reducing poverty rates as well as promoting sustainable development will be 
challenging without political incentives.  
Niger 
In 2017 Niger had a population of 21.47 million, a GDP of USD 8.1 billion and an estimated economic 
growth rate of 4.9%. As of 2014, 44.5% of the total population lived under the national poverty line. In

=== PAGE 50 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 75 
 
 E 
2016, national access to electricity was estimated at only 16.2%, with an urban electricity access rate of 
65.4% of total urban population and a rural electricity access rate of 4.7% of total rural population.  
 
The government of Niger has long recognized that lack of energy access seriously handicaps 
development, and efforts to remedy this problem need to be scaled up. Indeed, in many of these 
successful cases elsewhere, energy intervention in the social and economic sectors namely health, water, 
agriculture and education were made as part of a comprehensive development strategy. 
Mali 
In 2017 Mali had a population of 18.5 million, a GDP of USD 15.28 billion, and an estimated economic 
growth rate of 5.3%. In 2016, national access to electricity was estimated at 35.1%, with an urban 
electricity access rate of 83.6% and a rural electricity access rate of 1.8%.   
 
The economy of Mali is based to a large extent upon agriculture, with a mostly rural population engaged 
in subsistence agriculture. A security crisis prior to 2015 slowed economic growth however, medium-term 
macroeconomic prospects are good, with overall growth forecast as 5.0% in 2017, driven partly by more 
public investment and foreign aid and by the agricultural and service sectors.  There are considerable 
constraints holding back economic development in Mali, particularly factors facing the private sector. 
Mali’s financial system is under-developed and does not allow the financing and thus the emergence and 
development of dynamic employment-generating private sector. Steps have been made towards creating 
these enabling environments in 2008 where a Financial Sector Development Strategy was developed. 
One aim of the FSDS was to broadening access to financial institutions and products, in particular in rural 
areas. The Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategic Framework (GPRSP) cover all relevant country 
development policies and strategies 2012-2017. The GPRSP will be updated in the coming years. 
Economy-wide constraints help explain the slow progress in financial deepening and financial sector 
outreach. These include weaknesses in the legal framework and judicial system that result in a slowdown 
in loan recovery, shortcomings in the financial reporting of private sector actors, and lack of collateral for 
bank loans due to problems with land tenure and land registry. 
 
Also, poor physical access and infrastructure, including a limited electricity supply, poor road conditions, 
and distance from central bank offices, which deter rural branch expansion, along with difficulty in finding 
skilled human resources, increase the costs of extending credit or offering financial services. Owing to 
these unfavorable conditions, Mali’s economy remains under-diversified and the country is still over-
dependent on cotton and agriculture in general as well as extractive/mining industry. It is therefore very 
exposed to exogenous factors such as the price of raw materials, the euro and dollar exchange rate, the 
price of oil and climate change.  
Togo 
In 2017 Togo had a population of 7.7 million, a GDP of USD 4.8 billion, and an estimated economic 
growth rate of 5.6%. In 2015, 55.1% of population lived below the national poverty line.   In 2016, national 
access to electricity was estimated at 46.9%, with an urban electricity access rate of 87.4% and rural 
electricity access rate of 19.4%.  By 2030, Togo will have about 9.5 million inhabitants, 5.9 million of 
whom live in urban areas, compared with 3.5 million people living in rural areas. This demographic growth 
and above all the change in the distribution of the population between rural and urban areas will have a 
very strong impact on the volume of energy needs and on the structuring of energy consumption in 2030. 
The rate of access to electricity in Togo is in progression (from 17% in 2000 to 46.9% in 2016) but with 
huge disparities between urban areas. Renewable energies (solar, wind, etc.) are present in the electricity 
generation capacity of the country. The productive economy is dominated by agriculture and in 2015, still 
90.1% of the total population lived under $5.50 a day, making it one of the world's poorest countries. 
Togo’s Strategy for Boosting Growth and Promoting Employment (SCAPE—Stratégie de Croissance 
Accélérée et de Promotion de l’Emploi) offers a medium-term development framework for implementing 
the Government’s General Policy Statement, the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), and the 
Government’s vision for making Togo an emerging economy in 15 to 20 years. 
 
The Togolese financial system plays a minor role in mobilizing resources for the economy, particularly 
private sector actors, with total financial system assets amounting to about 30 percent of GDP. The cost 
of energy and communications since the 1990s, as well as market weakness and limited access to 
funding, are serious obstacles to the growth of towns and cities and to the country’s structural 
transformation and poverty reduction. The Government intends to establish an Autonomous National 
Investment Fund (FINA—Fonds d’Investissement National Autonome) for financing private sector actors, 
particularly where young people are involved. Other measures taken to assist the private sector and allow 
it to act as an engine of growth pertain to gradually establishing banking and financial guarantee 
mechanisms in support of private sector actors in their search for financing at preferential rates, and 
capacity-building for microfinance institutions.

=== PAGE 51 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 75 
 
 E 
 
Absence of alternative sources of financing  
The six target countries are characterized by low market share of RE technologies (excluding large hydro). Despite 
the substantial economic, social and environmental co-benefits of RE investment, these have not been prioritized by 
private sector actors due to a number of barriers described in section C.2, in particular the limited local debt funding 
with the required tenors and interest rates.  
 
Given the large investment needs in the sector, a significant volume of investments into the solar market in West 
Africa is required. BOAD’s strategic objective is to increase its portfolio of investments in the solar directly to private 
sector actors, but so far this has been low because of the lack of alternative source of public sector funding available. 
Currently, only the GCF is able to provide such finance within the given timeframe. Without GCF’s contribution, it 
would take considerably longer for existing market barriers to be removed. In the meantime, access to finance for 
climate investments would remain limited to a certain number of borrowers and remain too costly for many others. 
GCF’s contribution will unlock the considerable solar potential in LDC countries from Francophone West Africa by 
providing a combination of concessional lending and grant for technical assistance. The total solar installed capacity 
in the NDC countries from West Africa will be increased twofold thanks to the GCF contribution. 
 
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity. 
In the renewable energy sector, the institutional, regulatory, legal, and tariff structures and frameworks are weak or 
insufficiently implemented. So far there are only a few incentives for private capital to invest in the RE sector in West 
Africa. Investments in RE projects have had a predominant share of ODA funding. The policy environment has not 
helped improve the situation significantly, but there has been a growing realisation over the last few years that drastic 
action is required to ensure adequate generating capacity in the region, and to develop renewable energy sources to 
make them an important share of the region’s energy and electricity mix.  
The six target countries of this programme are characterized with similar market and policy barriers. To address the 
regulatory and legal barriers in the market, BOAD will carry out policy dialogue activities that will be informed by the 
activities of the proposed investments. The rationale of component 2.2 is to remove the market barriers to the 
development of solar projects by supporting the implementation of regulatory and policy regimes that provides clear 
and predictable rules for solar project development in the region. The aim of component 2.2 is to prepare the way for 
the entry of solar private investment and to create clarity and a stable reliable environment in for solar investment. TA 
under this sub-component will be focused on aspects of the enabling environment that have an immediate impact on 
stimulating solar private sector investment. Support can include the creation or revision of a simplified regulatory 
frameworks for Feed-in-tariffs for on-grid solar solutions, support on standard PPAs, support on IPP tenders and 
procurement process, on tariff structure, on a framework of financial and technical incentives and capacity building. 
 
E.5.  Country Ownership 
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs 
Alignment with country’s national climate strategy 
Each country in the target region has adopted national climate strategies which highlight the crucial role of RE 
deployment in mitigating climate change. The national strategies also recognize the private sector’s important role in 
deploying RE investments to support the NDCs, and its potential to contribute to the paradigm shift to a low-carbon, 
climate resilient economy. 
As indicated in the table below, each country has the promotion of RE sources high on their political agenda. The 
proposed programme aims to provide EUR 117 million of senior debt and standby loans (tenor extension instrument) 
to selected solar projects in LDCs from West Africa region which are expected to result in the reduction or avoidance 
of approximately 4.8 million tCO2e during the lifetime of the programme. The proposed programme therefore is in line

=== PAGE 52 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 75 
 
 E 
with national climate policies and action plans of the target countries and it will help fill the current investment shortfall 
to achieve West Africa’s NDCs. 
 
Table 19: Common priorities as stated in the national climate strategies of the target countries 
Country 
National targets 
Basis for Execution 
Benin 
Mitigation (all targeted sectors in BAU scenario): 
The measures envisaged in the sectors of Energy and 
Agriculture are likely to contribute to reduce the cumulative 
GHG emissions (without LULUCF) by approximately 49.49 
Mt CO2 eq in the BAU scenario, that is a reduction of 
16.17 % over the period 2021-2030, including 12.55% of 
conditional contribution and 3.62% of unconditional 
contribution.  
Measures relating to the energy sector: 
Developing electric power generation using natural gas and 
RE: 
- 
Construction of thermal biofuel power plants (500 
MW by 2030) 
- 
Construction in Port of Cotonou of a Liquified 
Natural Gas regasifying floating terminal 
- 
Operating with natural gas the installed thermal 
generation capacity 
- 
Construction of hydroelectric power plants of 
Adjarala (147MW) and Dogo (128MW) 
- 
Establishing solar PV farms for 95MW 
- 
Structuring a biomass fuel investment for 15MW 
Increasing households’ access to electric lighting in place of 
kerosene lighting: 
- 
Electrification of localities by connecting them to 
the network (600 localities between 2021 and 
2030) 
- 
Promoting the access of 424,000 kerosene-lighting 
using households to electric lighting in the localities 
which will be connected to the grid 
- 
Pursuing actions for EE in all sectors 
Promoting low wood-energy consuming technologies 
Promoting partial substitution of firewood-energy 
consumption with butane gas  
Addressing current shortcomings as regards energy 
databases  
Emissions reduction for the energy sector: 
The implementation of these measures will contribute to 
reduce the cumulative GHG emissions in this sector in the 
BAU scenario by 23,35 Mt CO2 eq over 2021 to 2030 
period, that is 11,51 % including 9,53% of conditional 
contribution and 1,98 % of unconditional contribution. The 
avoided cumulative emissions are distributed as follows:(i) 
power generation 7,80 % including 7,06 % of conditional 
contribution;(ii) promotion of electric lighting in households 
3,62 % including 2,42 % of conditional contribution;(iii) 
saving in wood-energy by promoting cleaner cookstoves 
0.084% including 0.056 % of conditional contribution;(iv) 
partial substitution of charcoal with butane gas 0,001%. 
INDCs 
CCNUCC (Convention-Cadre des Nations Unies 
sur les Changements Climatiques) 
FNEC (National Fund for the Environment and 
Climate) 
MECGCCRPRNF (Ministère de l’Environnement 
Chargé de la Gestion des Changements 
Climatiques du Reboisement et de la Protection 
des Ressources Naturelles et Forestières) 
CNCC (Comité National sur les Changements 
Climatiques) 
CMEICB (Commission de Modélisation 
Économique des Impacts du Climat et de 
l’Intégration des Changements Climatiques dans 
le Budget Général de l’État 
Burkina 
Faso 
Mitigation: Basis year 2014 
Reduction of emissions at the 2030 horizon: 
- 
21,574.63 GgCO2 eq. 
- 
18.2% reduction 
- 
Investment cost: 1,840,953,571 US$ 
INDC (2015) 
National Climate Change Learning Strategy 
(SNACC) (2017) 
Programme National de Développement 
Economique et social (PNDES) (2016)

=== PAGE 53 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 75 
 
 E 
In line with SE4ALL objectives, Burkina Faso aims to 
achieve: 
• 
Universal access to modern energy services. 
• 
Double the rate of improvement of energy efficiency. 
• 
Double the share of renewable energy in the world 
energy mix. 
 
Burkina Faso in its INDC analyses scenarios for reductions 
according to contributions. In an Unconditional scenario for 
2030 aims to reduce 6.6% of emissions. In a Conditional 
Scenario, the goal is 11.6%. 
 
In 2007, the agricultural sector contributed 88% of the 
national GHG emissions. 
 
In the conditional scenario, Burkina Faso expects to reduce 
GHG emissions in electricity production by 5% in 2020, 4% 
in 2025 and 4% in 2030.  
 
Guinea-
Bissau 
Guinea-Bissau is an absolute sink of GHG, given the high 
potential for sequestration of its forest sector. 
Main mitigation measure to be adopted is related to 
reforestation. The second sector that contributes more to 
GHG emissions is the energy sector. In this sector an 
increase in electric power capacity of at least 90MW by 
2020 using petroleum products (diesel and HFO) is 
planned.   
Guinea Bissau’s key aspects/key mitigation measures to 
meet its energy Intended Nationally Determined 
Contributions (INDCs) 
Conduct studies on the energy potential and set the energy 
development incorporating the largest possible potential of 
RE in the energy mix 
Attain 80 per cent renewable energy in the national energy 
mix by 2030; 
Improve energy efficiency by reducing energy losses up to 
10 per cent in the 2030-time span; 
Reach 80 per cent of universal access to electricity by 2030 
Investment required: at least 200 million USD by 2020 and 
500 million USD between 2020 and 2030 
INDCs 
National Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRSP II) 
National Strategic Plan – TERRA RANKA 2015-
2025 
National Action Plan for Climate Change 
Adaptation (NAPA, 2006) 
  
Mali  
Significant RE potential, but GHG emissions in progression: 
83.63% between 2000 and 2012, accounted for by the 
residential use of wood (82.20%). Between 2007 and 2014, 
GHG emissions from production and consumption of energy 
progressed from 3,434 kTeq CO2 to 5,268 kTeq CO2, or 
6.44% annually.  
Mitigation measures: 
• 
Reduction of GHG of 29% for agriculture, 31% for 
energy, and 21% for forestry and land use. Overall, the 
level of reduction expected for 2030 is of 27%. 
• 
Installation of at least 100 MW renewable energy 
sources, with a goal of having 10% of renewables in the 
energy matrix for 2020. 
 
For the energy sector: 
 
- 
Large-scale valorisation of RE for an amount of 
258 million USD 
- 
Manantali II project between 2016 and 2021 will 
cost 150 million USD 
INDC (2016) 
NAPA (2007), National Policy for Climate Change 
(2011), Strategic Framework for a Resilient and 
Green Mali.  
Mali has set in place several sectoral policies 
including, National Policy for the Protection of the 
Environment, Energy National Policy, Water 
National Policy. 
Global Summit for Climate in New York (2014)

=== PAGE 54 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 75 
 
 E 
- 
Villages’ electrification project using RE will cost 
7.2 million USD between 2015 and 2020 
- 
Kénié hydroelectric power plant implemented 
between 2015 and 2020 will cost 165 million USD 
 
GHG emissions reductions: 4,750 kTeq CO2 by 2020, 
6,336 kTeq CO2 by 2030, or 31.6% by 2030.  
Niger 
Reduction goals: 
• 
Unconditional reduction of 2.5% (BAU 2020) and 3.5% 
(2030) of GHG. 
• 
Conditional reduction 25% (BAU 2020), and 34.6% 
(2030) of GHG. 
 
Energy: 2000 base year: Energy sector accounts for 8.5% of 
GHG emissions 
Mitigation potential of the sector: 700 GgCO2e or 0.7% of 
national emissions.  
Note: a reduction in this emission is noted in the electricity 
for all scenario beginning in 2025, explained by the growth of 
production from gas and by the entry of nuclear power 
production into the system.  
• 
Electricity: Improvement of the rate of access to 
electricity (overall, exceed 10% in 2010, 60% in 2030, of 
which 47% to 100% is in the urban zone and 0.4% to 
30% in 2030 is in the rural zone.  
 
• 
Cooking energy: reduction in the demand for wood 
energy per inhabitant by the mass spread of improved 
cook stoves, with a rate of penetration of 100% in urban 
areas and 30% in rural areas; promotion as domestic 
gas of biogas and biofuels at both the industrial and 
family level.  Spread of multifunctional platforms.  
 
Renewable energy:  
• 
Unconditional mitigation options: rural electrification, 
replacement of wood energy, management of the sector 
concerned with the demand for and transformation and 
dissemination of renewable energies, promoting solar 
PV for pumping and electrification 
• 
Exceed a capacity of 4 MW in 2010, 250 MW in 2030, 
130 MW of which comes from the Kandadji 
hydroelectric plant and 20°MW comes from wind energy 
(currently 0.035 MW).  
• 
Double the rate of energy mix to reach 30% energy mix 
in the primary and final energy balance.  
 
INDC (2015)  
Strategic Framework for Sustainable Land 
Management (SF-SLM) 
Economic and Social Development Plan (2016-
2020) 
Sustainable Development and Inclusive Growth 
Strategy Niger 2035 (SDDCI) 
National Policy on Climate Change (PNCC) 
National Strategy and Plan of Action for Climate 
Change and Variability (SNPA-CVC). 
Togo 
With a 2010 baseline, the Unconditional reduction target for 
2030 is 11.14%, and the conditional target is of 31.14%. 
Funding needs: US$ 3.54 billion (Adaptation = 1.54; 
Mitigation = 1.10; Tech transfers = 0.5; Capacity building = 
0.4) 
Targets: The conditional target for additional GHG 
emissions reduction, according to the most ambitious 
scenario, is estimated at 20% compared to the dynamic 
BAU. The conditional target for the total reduction would 
therefore be 31.14% in 2030, compared to the projections if 
no measures were to be applied. 
GHG mitigation measures and options: 
In the energy sector: 
INDC (2015) 
Togo Vision 2030 
Strategy for accelerated growth and employment 
promotion (SCAPE) 2013-2017 
National Environmental Action Plan (NEAP) 
National Sustainable Development Strategy 
(NSDS)  
National Strategy for Reducing the Risk of 
Catastrophes in Togo  
National Programme for Reducing GHG from 
Deforestation and forest Degradation

=== PAGE 55 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 75 
 
 E 
- 
Solar electricity: emphasis will be placed on the 
introduction of solar equipment in households and 
on capacity-building for the various actors 
concerned.  
Thanks to measures already in progress, Togo will 
unconditionally reduce its emissions by 11.14% compared 
to the baseline scenario in 2030. 
 
Benin 
In order to meet its targets and achieve a climate-resilient economy, Benin has introduced a Commission Nationale du 
Développement Durable (CNDD). The country has pledged to combine climate-resilient, sustainable development and 
poverty reduction via the implementation of mitigation and adaptation measures. As 68% of Benin’s GHG emissions 
are accounted by the agriculture sector and the sequestration capacity keeps on decreasing, mitigation measures aim 
at reducing cumulated GHG emissions by 21,4% based on the BAU scenario by 2030 (conditional contribution). The 
unconditional contribution involves reducing GHG emissions by 3,5% by 2030 based on the BAU scenario. Another 
measure envisions to increase the sequestration potential by 5,7% based on a similar scenario, through the reduction 
of the deforestation rate by 41,7%. This would enable Benin to reduce GHG emissions by 110 Mt E-CO2 over the 
2021-2030 period.  
Benin has developed a set of mitigation measures relating to the energy sector. Among others, Benin has pledged to 
increase the share of renewable energies in the country’s energy mix, using natural gas, biofuel, hydropower and 
solar power; and to increase the national electricity access rate by connecting 600 localities to the grid. These 
measures demonstrate the country’s commitment to invest in clean energy to contribute to the reduction of GHG 
emissions and follow a low-carbon development pathway.  
Burkina Faso 
Burkina Faso’s National Assembly on the Environment and Sustainable Development, held in November 2011, 
strongly recommended the development of a National Sustainable Development Policy (NSDP) accompanied by a 
law. Prepared in 2013, the NSDP was an effective framework for the Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Sustainable 
Development (SAGSD). This economic framework document, together with “Outlook Burkina 2025” and policy 
framework instruments, contributes to placing the concept of sustainability at the heart of public action and the 
activities of other non-state actors (technological and financial partners, civil society organisations, non-governmental 
organisations and the private sector) (Government of Burkina Faso, 2015). 
On the mitigation side, three scenarios have been considered for evaluating the emissions trends and the possible 
reductions on the basis of a reference situation and the potential for financing:  
• 
A “trend” scenario (Business as Usual - BAU), which corresponds to continuation of the past under the 
assumption that economic development continues without interruption.  
• 
An “unconditional” scenario, taking into account all the public policies adopted after 2007, technological 
developments and recent studies, with financing that has been acquired or is being acquired.  
• 
A “conditional” scenario that takes into account all the mitigation projects that have been developed and/or are 
being developed, but without any acquired financing. 
• 
On the mitigation side, the measures foreseen in the country’s INDC are to double the share of renewable 
energies in the energy mix, and to provide universal access to electricity by 2030, in line with SE4ALL objectives. 
 
Guinee-Bissau 
Guinea-Bissau has integrated mitigation and adaptation measures as integral parts of its National Agricultural 
Investment Plan – Programme 4.7 – Adaptation of agriculture to climate change. A wide array of policies was 
developed and adopted, among which a NREAP (National Plan for Renewable Energy - 2014) and the Sustainable 
Financing Strategy of Adaptation to Climate Change in the short, medium and long-term (2013). The country also 
aims at mainstreaming climate change into strategies and policies in order to achieve the MDGs (Millennium

=== PAGE 56 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 75 
 
 E 
Development Goals). Guinea-Bissau is an absolute sink of GHG, because of the high sequestration potential of its 
forests, according to the GHG Inventory (2006) and the CARBOVEG-GB (2010). The successful implementation of 
the following measures will largely depend on IFIs and development partners’ capacities to sufficiently fund them.  
 
As deforestation accounts for the majority of GHG emissions, the main mitigation measure to be adapted is related to 
reforestation. This contribution includes: i) Establish and schedule a new forestry policy to enhance a socio-economic 
balance that meets the needs of communities, ii) conduct studies on the energy potential of the country and set 
energy development to make the economy increasingly resilient to climate change and iii) develop and establish a 
legal framework through a national strategy for long-term, low-carbon development. 
 
Mitigation measures with regards to the energy sector are aligned with SE4ALL objectives and Guinea-Bissau’s 
NREAP. These are to attain an 80% share of renewable energies in the national energy mix, to improve energy 
efficiency by reducing energy losses by 10%, and to reach universal access to electricity by 2030.  
 
Mali 
In terms of mitigation of climate change, Mali has developed an unconditional scenario (where Mali is the only country 
financing climate projects). The forestry sector plays a major role due to the level of sequestration. The GHG 
reduction ambition levels are 29% for agriculture, 31% for energy and 21% for forests, taking into account the 
baseline of 2015. The overall cost for mitigation goals is $34.68 billion (Republique du Mali, 2015). While the focus of 
mitigation measures is primarily on the agriculture and forestry sectors, Mali has developed a set of measures with 
regards to the energy sector. These measures place an important emphasis on the diversification of the country’s 
energy generation mix and the increase of the share of renewable energies.  
Niger 
Since Niger is a non-Annex I Party to the UNFCCC, it has no quantitative obligations with respect to emission 
reductions. However, Niger is contributing to the reduction of worldwide climate change impacts through a double 
results approach. In 2000, emissions represented 2.8 tons per inhabitant and 0.07% of the worldwide emissions of 
CO2. Niger`s ambition is to limit its emissions to 2.1% in 2030. 
The objectives of Niger`s INDC are to assure food security, combat poverty and contribute to the reduction of world 
greenhouse gas emissions. For Niger’s INDC, the adaptation options considered top priority are those that will permit 
the higher co-benefits with respect to climate change mitigation, particularly good adaptation practices and techniques 
which, at the level of the country’s six regions, will permit carbon sequestration and a reduction of GHG emissions at 
the same time. These adaptation options have already been clearly defined in the existing strategic frameworks, such 
as the Economic and Social Development Plan (PDES 2012-2015 and 2016-2020), which flows from the Sustainable 
Development and Inclusive Growth Strategy - Niger 2035 (SDDCI), the 3N Initiative (Nigerans Feed Nigerans), the 
National Policy on Climate Change (PNCC), the Strategic Framework for Sustainable Land Management (SF-SLM), 
and the National Strategy and Plan of Action for Climate Change and Variability. 
The National Communications indicate that the AFOLU (agriculture/animal husbandry and land use) and energy 
sectors represent on average 89% and 9% respectively of Niger’s total GHG emissions. Given the potential of the 
country’s resources, the national concerns are focussed on issues related to adaptation, particularly in the AFOLU 
sector, and on issues related to mitigation, principally in the AFOLU sector and the energy sector (transportation and 
residential and industrial energy). The strategy is based on the vision of climatically intelligent agriculture and on 
access to modern energy services for everyone in 2030. However, while the AFOLU and energy sectors are the 
priority action areas of the INDC on climate change in Niger, the implementation of the INDC actually represents 
cross-sectoral support for all sectors of the economy (Government of Niger, 2015).  
Regarding mitigation measures for the energy sector, Niger has emphasised the need to use renewable energies 
applied to the agricultural sector, for pumping and rural electrification. In addition, Niger has a target to double the 
overall share of renewable energy in the energy mix to reach 30% in the primary and final energy balance.

=== PAGE 57 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 75 
 
 E 
Togo 
The national strategic orientations underlying sectoral programmes and policies can be found in the document Togo 
Vision 2030, currently under production, and in the Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Employment Promotion 
(SCAPE) 2013-2017. Togo’s SCAPE defines a development framework for the medium term in order to fulfil its 
General Policy Declaration (DPG). It is based on the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) covering the 2006-2015 
period. It aims to transform Togo into an emerging country within the next 15 to 20 years. 
For several years, Togo has been engaged in a proactive strategy for sustainable development and against global 
warming. Its efforts focus mainly on bad production practices in the economic sectors; lack of population control; and 
the high poverty rate. The poverty rate is exacerbated by the negative impacts of climate change, further reinforcing 
the vulnerability of the production sectors and the pressure on natural resources. This political will can be seen, 
amongst others, in the National Environmental Action Plan (NEAP), the National Environmental Management 
Programme (NEMP), the National Sustainable Development Strategy (December 2011), the National Environmental 
Management Capacity-building Strategy (October 2008), the National Programme for Reducing Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) 2010-2050, the National Strategy for Reducing the 
Risk of Catastrophes in Togo (December 2009), the National Medium Term Priority Framework (NMTPF) for Togo 
(2010-2015), and the National Action Plan for Marine and Coastal Environmental Resources Management. Further, 
Togo’s membership of the Climate & Clean Air Coalition (CCAC) means it could raise funds to finance its short-term 
GHG and climate pollutant mitigation actions (Republic of Togo, 2015). 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
Please describe experience and track record of the accredited entity and executing entities with respect to the 
activities that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme. 
 
This programme is in line with BOAD’s priority to intensify its activities in favour of the private sector by providing 
adequate support to private sector development in the LDCs of West Africa region. The sections below highlight the 
experience and track record of BOAD - as the accredited entity – with respect to financing private sector actors. 
 
In order to maximise the programme impact, technical assistance to BOAD staff will be provided to improve its 
capacity to develop, manage and implement the programme portfolio and to integrate climate change dimensions into 
project activities. Further details on the type of trainings provided are described in section C.3. 
 
BOAD ability to promoting and financing private sector actors 
BOAD uses the financial resources that it mobilizes to invest in public and private sector projects and programmes 
aimed at building basic and modern infrastructure, improving rural livelihoods, generating energy, and climate change 
adaptation and mitigation. 
  
BOAD’s contribution to promoting and financing private sector actors has materialized into promoting financing 
vehicles and funding through commercial banks and financial institutions as well as direct loans to projects and 
financing of studies. To provide for the needs of private sector actors that are customarily facing difficulty in mobilizing 
adequate equity and guarantees to make their projects bankable, BOAD has, in conjunction with several partners like 
Agence Française de Dévelopment (AFD), German Development Agency (DEG), European Investment Bank (EIB) 
and African Development Bank (AfDB), contributed to setting up specific vehicles including GARI Fund (providing 
guarantee for private investments in West Africa) and CAURIS Investissement, a venture capital company.  
 
BOAD continuously adjusts, intensifies and diversifies its action towards the promotion and financing of private 
productive investments. BOAD has a number of strategies for the promotion and financing of the private sector. Since 
2013, BOAD has organized capacity building activities and outreaches with IFI such as the World Bank, AfDB and the 
UNFCCC secretariat to bring more awareness to the West African NFIs and commercial bankers in the financing of 
energy transition projects. In June 2017 BOAD launched the creation of the West African network for climate finance.

=== PAGE 58 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 75 
 
 E 
BOAD is also promoting the use of green bonds and green credit line mobilization throughout the region. Out of FCFA 
4,202.1 billion of total net commitments as at 30 September 2016, BOAD devoted to the private sector about 24.3%, 
representing FCFA1,022.4 billion for 319 projects. 
  
BOAD’s private sector financing operations and the promotion of financial inclusion are carried out through the 
"Private Sector" window. The Private Sector Window prioritizes the fight against poverty and support for inclusive 
growth in the member states. The portfolio of the Bank's shareholding capital of companies and financial institutions 
includes 82 transactions. BOAD has set a number of initiatives as explained below:  
 
• 
The Regional Initiative for Sustainable Energy (IRED): In order to better overcome recurrent energy crises in 
many of the WAEMU member countries, the Conference of Heads of State and Government decided in January 
2008 to set up a committee tasked with proposing a strategy called “Regional Initiative for Sustainable Energy 
(IRED)”. The initiative aims to provide, by 2030, 100% access to electricity in the WAEMU region at lower cost 
and as part of a large integrated and harmonized power pool market in West Africa. This regional market will be 
based on a dynamic public-private partnership. It also targets an increase by 82% of renewable and sustainable 
energies in the WAEMU’s power generation base. The financial and institutional mechanism for the 
implementation of the initiative includes a concessional Energy Development Fund (FDE), and an investment fund 
operating as a private infrastructure development facility. 
 
• 
The Energy Development Fund (FDE): Established on 25 September 2009, the Fund aims to contribute to 
improved access to energy in the WAEMU member countries and promote the development of sustainable 
energy under concessional conditions in order to finance projects eligible for IRED initiative. It is managed by 
BOAD. The Fund started its operations in the first quarter of 2010. As of the July 2018, 18 projects and 1 
programme (PRODERE) have been financed in the form of loans involving a total amount of EUR 341.5 million 
(more details in section C.4). 
 
• 
The Infrastructure Development Fund: It is dedicated to private investments. It is a profit-making fund meant for 
financing access to electricity in the WAEMU region according to market terms and conditions. In addition, it aims 
to support the restructuring of electricity companies, the emergency programme and the medium and long-term 
projects. It will be a lever for public-private partnerships in the energy sector in the WAEMU region. The due 
diligence towards its implementation is underway at the level of BOAD. The Bank participated in the 
implementation of major projects including: 
• 
Mali-Côte d’Ivoire electric power interconnection of by Energie du Mali (EDM); 
• 
Electrification of the townships of Bakel, Selibaly and Goureye in Senegal by Société de Gestion de l’Energie 
de Manantali (SOGEM); 
• 
Expansion of CIPREL SA’s power plant capacities in Côte d’Ivoire (CIPREL IV A); 
• 
Expansion in combined cycle of the generation capacities of AZITO power plant by SOCIETE AZITO 
ENERGIE SA in Côte d’Ivoire. 
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
Consultations are on-going with many stakeholders in the region and particularly in the six targeted countries. On-
going consultations continue to take place with the NDAs of the six countries, as well as potential project developers.  
 
Stakeholder consultations have been conducted so far with a number of organizations. BOAD plans to organize 
stakeholder workshops in the target countries to introduce the programme to local project developers as well as local 
commercial financial institutions. BOADs regional presence will ensure a strong on-the-ground presence with 
networks that enable the programme to develop solutions adapted to local contexts and needs. 
Table 20: BOAD engagement with key stakeholders 
Main actors 
BOAD engagements with each actor

=== PAGE 59 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 75 
 
 E 
Private sector 
BOAD has reached out and engaged with several local project developers in the 6 target LDCs 
as well as local financial institutions who have expressed strong interest in participating in the 
programme.   
The African Guarantee Fund (AGF) and the ECOWAS Bank for Investment and Development 
(EBID) have confirmed their interest in participating in the programme. The Letters of Interests 
of AGF and EBID have been included in the annexes of the FP. Furthermore, Orabank has 
indicated its interest in co-financing solar projects through the proposed Facility. 
NDAs 
BOAD has already engaged with the NDAs of the six target countries. The NDAs have 
communicated that they are willing to support the programme. All letters of non-objection of the 
six target countries have been obtained. 
National authorities 
BOAD works very closely with governments and authorities to uphold the principle of country 
ownership via direct partnerships; via country representatives on BOAD’s Board of Directors 
(all member countries are represented), and via the provision of country and sector strategies 
that are developed with the relevant country’s involvement and in consultation with key 
stakeholders.  
West African Economic and 
Monetary Union (WAEMU), 
Economic Community of 
West African States 
(ECOWAS) and ECREEE 
BOAD works closely with WAEMU and ECOWAS on a number of regional initiatives. BOAD 
has consulted with ECOWAS and ECREEE who have both provided key inputs to the design of 
the programme. 
Members of West Africa 
Network for Climate Finance 
(WANCF) 
BOAD has been an active participant in climate finance dialogue with key stakeholders in the 
region since the bank inception. The WANCF was established in June 2017 as a leader in 
climate finance initiatives in the region and to ensure stakeholders have a platform to provide 
inputs to initiatives such as the proposed programme and to help identify climate finance 
opportunities. BOAD began consultations with WANCF in June 2017 and consultations are 
ongoing. 
 
 
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
As described in section B there is a strong need to mobilise long term debt capital to private sector to scale up cost-
competitive solar technologies. Public sector funding through development institutions will not suffice to serve the capital 
needed to reach a transformative scale towards low-emission pathways. As already explained, the main financial 
barriers that continue to hold back solar private sector capital are the high-risk perception of private sector investors 
and the maturity and liquidity risk of local commercial banks which are unable to extend loans with tenors of no more 
than 5-7 years. 
 
The programme has been designed to overcome these barriers by incentivising the participation of private sector actors 
and commercial banks: 
- 
private sector actor mobilisation will be achieved through the provision of concessional loans to BOAD 
(component 1.1). The optimal level of concessionality will be targeted in order to avoid providing excess subsidy 
to the private sector or crowding out private sector investors. It is expected that the concessionality received from 
the GCF will enable BOAD to offer a final blended cost of capital which will be below commercial rates. GCF’s 
contribution will allow to trigger access to private investment by providing an adequate risk-return and stable 
revenues to project developers. The concessional funds from the GCF will also allow for bringing the electricity 
tariff to attractive level that are competitive with electricity produced from fossil fuels energy.

=== PAGE 60 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 75 
 
 E 
- 
Private banks crowd in will be achieved through the standby loan facility (component 1.2). One of the objectives of 
the programme is to crowd-in the private sector investment from commercial banks into the solar sector by providing 
a tenor extension instrument that can remove the barrier for commercial banks’ participation. The length of tenor is 
a key limitation encountered by project developers seeking local financing. The local commercial banks are unable 
to extend loans with tenors of no more than 5-7 years due to the short-term maturity profile of their deposit and the 
absence of deep capital markets to source long-term financing. To overcome this barrier, the GCF will incentivise 
the participation of local commercial banks in the Programme using a liquidity guarantee for extension of the 
commercial banks loan tenor. 
 
The efficiency of the programme is measured based on two indicators: 
- 
The amount of private sector leveraged: The GCF’s support is critical to secure private sector investors.  
Projects developers are expected to contribute their own capital to the projects financed by BOAD. Local private 
and public banks will also contribute to the total project cost in the form of loans. The programme is expected 
to leverage EUR 128.1m of private investment.  
 
- 
The amount of GHG emissions being mitigated in absolute numbers: BOAD will track the amount of tCO2e 
emissions being mitigated by the solar investments financed. Considering an expected lifetime of emission 
reductions of 25 years (most likely the impacts will continue beyond that period) the abatement cost of the 
programme for the GCF is of EUR 12 per tCO2e. The projects supported are expected to contribute to savings 
of approx. 4.8m tCO2 over their life. 
 
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only) 
The programme will be designed to maximize total investment, using limited public funds to leverage greater private 
investment. The GCF contributions will account for 50% of the total financing of EUR 122m required to deliver the 
Programme. BOAD will provide co-financing of EUR 61m from its own resources. The co-financing ratio is therefore 1:1 
 
BOAD Co-financing (m EUR) 
GCF (m EUR) 
Co-financing ratio  
 61 
61 
1:1 
 
In addition, this funding is expected to leverage a substantial amount of financing from project developers and private 
sector banks. The leverage ratio is calculated based on funding brought by the equity investments from project 
developers (EUR 50m) and the debt finance from local banks (EUR 78.1m).  
GCF  
(m EUR) 
BOAD  
(m EUR) 
Equity  
(m EUR) 
Local banks 
(m EUR) 
Total Leverage 
ratio 
61 
61 
50 
78.1 
1:3 
 
 
E.6.3. Financial viability  
BOAD depends on the participation of the GCF without which the programme would not come into realisation. The 
financial return without and with GCF contribution is as follow: 
• 
Without GCF: IRR of 11% with an NPV of EUR -5.4m. At this return levels, the private sector would not be 
willing to invest in this sector. 
• 
With GCF: IRR of 18% with an NPV of EUR 14.3m. This level of return is expected to secure private investment 
at scale.

=== PAGE 61 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 75 
 
 E 
BOAD is the borrower of GCF funds. The GCF will gradually exit as BOAD will be repaying the GCF loan facility. At 
maturity (within 20 years), GCF principal commitments will be fully repaid. Exit risk is minimal.  
 
E.6.4. Application of best practices 
Equipment and technology will be selected from the best options available on the market. During the appraisal 
process of the projects to be funded under the programme, BOAD will support the application of best available 
technologies by requiring projects to demonstrate that they use solar technologies that are 1) effective in addressing 
climate-related goals, 2) market-tested, technically performing and commercially viable; and 3) contribute to market 
transformation in terms of demonstrating the viability and commercial application of new technologies.  
 
BOAD will ensure that all solar systems will be sized appropriately for anticipated loads, localized irradiation, and 
annual seasonality. Best practices in terms of system design, installation, and maintenance will be ensured through 
rigorous quality testing and trainings for employees.  
 
 
Under component 2.1, TA can support project developers in selecting the technology fitting the needs identified, to 
ensure the viability of the technology and the soundness of the investment, and in identifying the most adapted 
certifications. If needed, the TA can be asked to assess the quality of equipment available in the market to help 
project developers to select a robust technology and avoid underperformance of the equipment. TA may also help 
project developers in designing a monitoring system which will be used to assess the equipment’s performance and to 
identify any potential technical dysfunctions that may put impacts (carbon savings) and efficiency (€/tCO2eq) at risk. 
Project developers are also encouraged to engage maintenance contracts and may be advised by TA along this 
procedure. Maintenance contracts guarantee the effective reparation of the equipment and therefore are a 
complementary tool to ensure the overall investment effectiveness. TA team will secure continuous follow-up of the 
selection of technologies and equipment to avoid underperforming technologies. 
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only) 
 
(a) Total project financing 
EUR 122 000 000  
(b) Requested GCF amount  
EUR 57 000 000  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  
4 834 955 tCO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO2eq (d = a / c) 
EUR 25 / tCO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq removed (e = b / c) 
EUR 12/ tCO2eq 
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators (d) and (e) above. 
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in a 
comparable context.

=== PAGE 62 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 75 
 
 E 
  
Description of the assumptions 
• 
BOAD is seeking EUR 61 m of concessional loan financing from the GCF and will raise a further 
EUR 61 m from its own resources, hence the total commitment is EUR 122m. In addition, this 
funding is expected to leverage a substantial amount of financing from project developers and 
private/public sector banks, namely EUR 128.1m.  
• 
Using a figure of EUR 1,140,000 (IRENA, Solar PV in Africa: Costs and Markets, 2016) – equivalent 
to USD 1,300,000 CAPEX per MW using an exchange rate of 1 EUR= 1,149 USD, the total capex 
is EUR 245.1m given the total solar capacity to be installed of 215MW (See Table 10 Pipeline of 
projects to funded under the programme). 
• 
For the capacity factor, a conservative approach has been used for the two technologies (solar PV 
and CSP) of 18%. 
• 
The operational lifetime of solar technologies is 25 years. 
• 
The grid emission factor used for Benin, Burkina Faso, Mali, Niger and Togo is 0.561 tCO2/MWh. 
This emission factor has been calculated using the CDM “Tool to calculate the emission factor for 
an electricity system (version 05.0)”. It applies for Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, 
Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Togo. More information on the assumptions used can be found on 
the Standardized baseline - Grid emission factor for West African Power (available at: 
https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/standard_base/2015/sb102.html).  
• 
For Guinea-Bissau, the emission factor has been calculated using a bottom up approach to find 
emissions per unit of MWh produced based on certain assumptions. The grid emission factor 
used is 0.76 tCO2/MWh. 
 
The climate impact potential of the Programme will be the reduction of CO2 emissions through 
displacement of fossil-fueled electricity use at the user level by implementing and installing of clean and 
solar energy sources. The programme’s cost of mitigation (cost per t CO2eq) is described in table below: 
Table 21: Programme’s cost of mitigation 
10 Year Estimated 
GHG Reduction, 
tCO2e 
1 933 982  
  
15 Year Estimated 
GHG Reduction, 
tCO2e 
 
2 900 973  
  
25 Year Estimated 
GHG Reduction, 
tCO2e 
  
4 834 955  
  
Total Project cost, 
EUR 
122 000 000  
GCF investment, 
EUR 
57 000 000  
25 Year average 
GCF cost per tonne, 
USD/tCO2e 
12 
25 Year average 
project cost per 
tonne, USD/tCO2e 
25

=== PAGE 63 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 75 
 
 E 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only) 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above. 
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in a 
comparable context.   
The programme will be designed to maximize total investment, using limited public funds to leverage greater 
private investment. The GCF contributions will account for 50% of the total financing of EUR 122m required 
to deliver the Programme. BOAD will provide co-financing of EUR 61m from its own resources. 
This total commitment is expected to leverage a substantial amount of financing from project developers 
and private sector banks.  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)

=== PAGE 64 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 75 
 
 F 
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme appraisal document.  
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis 
An economic and financial model was produced to analyze the impact of the GCF’s funding in terms of financial 
return to private sector actors. 
Table 22: Assumptions of the financial model 
Wholesale electricity tariff (EUR/MWh) 
 €                     87.72 
Inflation rate on electricity tariff 
1% 
Annual O&M as % of capital costs 
1% 
Construction and drawdown period (years) 
                                  2  
Installed cost per MW (EUR) 
                   1,140,000  
Total installed capacity (MW) 
                        215  
Capacity factor 
18% 
Annual power generation (MWh) 
                         339 012  
  
Average corporate income tax rate 
25% 
 
Justification for concessionality:  
Concessional and grant funding from the GCF will bring a range of benefits to private sector actors. Concessionality 
will consist of reduced pricing compared to BOAD pricing and market finance. The provision of such reduced pricing 
is a key element attracting private sector actors. The concessional funds from the GCF will allow:  
• 
reducing the blended cost from borrowing from BOAD and from commercial banks  
• 
increasing the tenor and the grace period of lending from BOAD and from commercial banks 
• 
enhance the bankability of solar projects at electricity tariff that are competitive with electricity produced from 
fossil fuels energy.  
With the GCF funding included, the financial model presents a convincing financial case for the programme. Without 
GCF, the electricity tariff will need to increase to achieve bankability. The blended financing structure will assist the 
projects in achieving financial viability with a lower average electricity tariff and at an acceptable NPV and IRR level 
attractive to the private sector.  
 
All these factors will make solar projects financially attractive as indicated in table below.  
Table 23: Summary of the key performance indicators 
KPI 
Without GCF 
With GCF 
20-year Internal Rate of Return - leveraged 
(%) 
11% 
18% 
Discount rate (%) 
12% 
12% 
Net Present Value (EUR) 
-€ 5,400,000 
€ 14,300,000 
Payback period (Years) 
15 
7 
Minimum Debt Service Coverage Ratio 
  
0.86 
                            1.26

=== PAGE 65 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 75 
 
 F 
Overall, through this programme, GCF and BOAD financing will demonstrate and scale up commercially viable solar 
projects in the region while catalysing a paradigm shift within the electricity sector in the LDCs of West Africa.  
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
Under this programme, eligible projects should target solar grid connected power generation projects with a capacity 
of approximately 10 MW to 70 MW. Eligible technologies will include: solar photovoltaic (PV) and Concentrated Solar 
Power (CSP).  
 
Technologies to convert solar energy into electricity generally fall into one of two categories: photovoltaic (PV) 
modules that convert light directly into electricity and concentrating solar thermal power (CSP) systems that extract 
heat energy transferred by solar radiation. Although solar power can be generated at any scale, PV technology is 
modular and can be scale for anything from household use to a large network of PV farms. Due to the scarcity of 
transmission and distribution infrastructure in the region, ECREEE originally estimated that CSP is currently 
technically feasible only within a certain geographic band through the Sahel, though it has helped implement a solar 
thermal energy project in Ghana last year. Solar thermal technologies, unlike solar PV, can operate through the day, 
making it attractive for large-scale energy production. Heat can be stored during the daytime and excess daytime 
heat can potentially be stored and converted to electricity when required. Such thermal plants would improve storage 
capacities to optimise the economics and the dispatch-ability of solar electricity.  
Solar PV 
The solar PV sector is so dynamic that today’s cost of generation may become tomorrow’s benchmark. Prices have 
dramatically reduced over the last decade, combined with the availability of economic financing and policy pushes. 
IRENA estimates that by 2030, total installed costs could fall between 50% and 60%. Battery lifetimes and 
performance will also keep improving. Total installed costs for solar PV technology show regional cost differences 
because of different market maturity levels, differences in local labour, manufacturing costs and different support 
policy structures. Between 2010 and 2017, the global capacity weighted average total installed cost of newly-
commissioned utility-scale PV projects decreased by 68%, with a 10% decrease in 2017 from 2016. Projects in newer 
or undeveloped markets are being developed at costs that are increasingly at par, and sometimes even cheaper than 
the averages in most cost mature markets.  
The global weighted average capacity factor of utility-scale PV systems increased by 28% between 2010 and 2017, 
from an average of 13.7% to 17.6%. This has been driven by three major factors, the trend towards greater 
deployment in regions with higher irradiation levels, the increased use of tracking and improvements in the 
performance of systems as losses have been reduced.  
Concentrating Solar Thermal Power (CSP) 
Total installed costs for CSP plants that include thermal energy storage tend to be higher than those without, but 
storage also allows for higher capacity factors. For example, for parabolic trough systems (the technology with the 
highest share of installed projects so far), total installed plant costs can range between USD 2 550 and USD 11 
265/kW for systems with no storage. Adding four to six hours of storage, however, can see this range increase to 
between USD 6 050 and USD 13 150/kW.  
Capacity factors have increased over time as a shift towards newer technologies, with larger thermal storage 
capacities has coincided with a trend towards the growth of markets in higher irradiation locations. Similarly, higher 
levels of irradiance were likely the main factor behind lower levelized costs. During 2016 the capacity weighted 
average LCOE of CSP plants was estimated to be USD 0.27/kWh (a fifth lower than in 2009) although IRENA data 
suggests that the LCOE, although about 18% during 2017 to USD 0.22/kWh. 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations

=== PAGE 66 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 75 
 
 F 
In order to ensure a better consideration of environmental and social issues in the funded-operations, BOAD adopted 
in 2003, a document of policies and procedures for environmental and social management intervention in the 
financing of projects, an environmental and social procedures manual and a manual of environmental classification of 
projects. This allowed BOAD to participate effectively alongside its borrowers to the protection of populations, their 
ecosystems and their living environment. 
Such policies and procedures adopted in 2003 by BOAD recommend revising periodically the content of the 
documents based upon international evolution. Also, in order to comply with current international standards for 
environmental and social management, BOAD undertook an update of its safeguards, like institutions such as the 
World Bank, the African Development Bank, etc. with which BOAD cooperates closely in its operations. 
BOAD requires that projects that are submitted for funding are subject to environmental and social impact 
assessment (ESIA), which helps to ensure that the projects are environmentally sound and socially viable to facilitate 
decision making. 
In addition to the regulation of the countries of intervention, BOAD will refer to the rules, good practices and 
guidelines produced by international organizations such as: (i) United Nations Conventions on Environment and 
Development; (Ii) United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; (Iii) 
United Nations Universal Declaration on Human Rights; (Iv) International conventions of ILO on human rights and 
labor law; (V) Safeguard policies, guidelines and other relevant documents of the World Bank on environmental and 
social issues; (Vi) the safeguard policies of the IFC on environmental and social issues; (Vii) Good international 
sectoral practice, published by major trade associations on environmental and social issues; etc. 
Under this programme, environmental and social best practices will be applied by requiring all projects funded to 
follow BOAD environmental and social safeguard policies, standards and guidelines which follow best international 
practices such as the International Finance Corporation (IFC) environmental and social performance standards.  
Risks will be mitigated through technical assistance provided to project developers to undertake technical feasibility 
studies, Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) and environmental and social action plan (ESAP). These 
measures will identify potential environmental and social impacts and provide detailed mitigation measures. The 
project-level ESAP will be an integral part of the required agreement with the project developers. BOAD will only 
finance the projects classified under the category B or below and apply its highest standards in the screening and 
managing of E&S related issues.  
All subprojects funded will come under BOAD’s ESS policy and the agreed cooperation framework between GCF and 
BOAD. Individual subprojects will require site specific assessments consistent with the approach of BOAD and the 
GCF including E&S and Gender due diligence and the agreed disclosure requirements (where applicable), and will 
develop project specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP). Only category C (I3) or B (I2) projects 
will be funded under this facility, consistent with the GCF accreditation of BOAD. 
All projects to be financed by the Programme fit in Category B or C according to both GCF and BOAD 
categorization of projects. A project is classified as Category B if it may negatively impact environmental areas or 
human populations, while not being irreversible. For Category B projects, project developers will be required to 
develop all relevant environmental and social management frameworks needed to prevent, minimize, mitigate, or 
compensate for adverse impacts and to improve environmental performance. These environmental and social 
management frameworks can include, but are not limited to: Land Acquisition and/or Resettlement Action Plan 
(LARAP or RAP), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) and Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). A project is 
classified as Category C if the probability of its negative impacts on the environment and human populations is 
considered minimal. For Category C projects, no environmental and social management framework will be required 
once the environmental and social screening has been conducted and approved. Guidance and indicative templates 
for the development of relevant environmental and social management frameworks can be found in the Programme's 
ESMF.

=== PAGE 67 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 75 
 
 F 
Gender assessment 
The energy markets are essential to the economies of the participating countries and women can in particular benefit 
from opportunities connected to the development of renewable energy sources. Women in the participating countries 
currently work primarily in services and agriculture, and to a much more limited extent in the power sector.  
The Gender plan for the financing facility will ensure that all consultations with stakeholders will be designed in a 
gender responsive way and women will be equally consulted and participate in all discussions related to the 
subprojects. This approach will be incremental and would set a proper benchmark for other projects to follow. 
The programme will be accompanied by a Gender Action Plan template for subprojects. 
The ESMF for the program has been developed and submitted. All sub-projects will be assessed according to the 
relevant BOAD policies, and an environmental and social action plan (ESAP) will be developed during the 
implementation of each sub-project.  
 
 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement 
Financial resources from the GCF will be managed according to the general provisions of the AMA between the GCF 
and BOAD.  
BOAD as part of its AE role will among others carry out the following:  
• 
BOAD will be responsible for the overall oversight of the framework implementation and will report to GCF as per 
the terms to be agreed under the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA); 
• 
BOAD will report to GCF as per the terms to be agreed under the AMA and the Funded Activity Agreement 
(FAA).  
• 
BOAD will prepare environmental and social impact analysis reports in line with the bank’s environmental and 
social safeguards (including ensuring that the sub-project is within allowed environmental impact classification, 
i.e. only up to category B)  
• 
BOAD will ensure that a robust climate rationale is in place for all projects.  
• 
BOAD will ensure that an MRV framework will be established to ensure activities of the facility and other relevant 
stakeholders are in compliance with all applicable policies, procedures and other requirements of the GCF to 
enhance transparency. An independent party will be procured by BOAD for Monitoring, Reporting and Verification 
(MRV); BOAD will be ultimately responsible for reporting to the GCF. 
 
BOAD as part of its EE role will be responsible for the implementation of the grant component. Procurement under 
the facility will be managed according to BOAD’s procurement policies as detailed in BOAD’s AMA. BOAD will hire 
qualified local and international consultants for the implementation of the technical assistance (component 2), based 
on its procurement policies as approved by the GCF. The consultants will work under the supervision of BOAD and 
will provide technical assistance  
• 
to local private sector actors to build their capacities during the development phase of their projects (Sub-
component 2.1); 
• 
to BOAD staff to build their capacities during the development and implementation of the project portfolio 
(Sub-component 2.1);  
• 
to national institutions to support them in the implementation of regulatory and policy regimes that provides 
clear and predictable rules for solar project development (Sub-component 2.2).  
 
GCF and BOAD will sign a grant agreement for the implementation of these activities under Sub-components 2.1 and 
2.2. The details in terms of financial management and flow of funds has been elaborated section in C.7.

=== PAGE 68 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 75 
 G 
 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures 
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
 
Macroeconomic, regulatory and political risks can lead 
to a slowdown of the economy in the region and 
financial sector, increase regulatory / off-taker risks, 
and reduced investments.  
 
 
Other 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
BOAD operations are covered at certain point against political risks given its political mandate as a regional 
development Bank and its close coordination with host Governments. 
BOAD will closely monitor the upcoming events on the markets and the potential impacts on the financial 
performance of the project developers who will have an obligation to regularly report on financial performance. 
BOAD will maintain a close relationship with host governments through policy dialogue activities that aim to identify 
policy and regulatory bottlenecks and create enabling environments. 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
 
 
Credit and Currency risk  
 
Financial 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Credit risk: The GCF will bear the credit risk of BOAD which is an investment grade financial institution rated by 
Moody’s (Baa1) and Fitch (BBB). This reflects the solid financial position of BOAD which has one of the highest 
financial institution credit ratings in the region.  
 
Foreign exchange fluctuations: The GCF’s financing will be in EUR and repayments from BOAD to the GCF will also 
be EUR. The Franc CFA (XOF) is the common currency of the West African Economic and Monetary Union and is 
pegged to the EUR; therefore, currency risk is mitigated both for the GCF and the solar projects to be financed.  
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary 
It is considered that the programme might face risks in several different categories: macroeconomic, implementation, 
financial, environmental and social risks. The levels of these risks are considered moderate to low and expected to 
be mitigated by BOAD’s operational tools and control mechanisms. BOAD will regularly evaluate the overall potential 
risks related to the implementation of the project and will provide recommendations for procedures to mitigate and 
address the risks.

=== PAGE 69 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 75 
 G 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Implementation risk: Construction and operation risks  
 
 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Project construction risk (completion and cost overrun) will be mitigated by a thorough due diligence process led by 
the BOAD technical and financial experts, and by ensuring robust Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
contracts. 
Project operation risk will be mitigated by a thorough due diligence process led by the BOAD technical and financial 
experts and by ensuring robust O&M contracts. Resource risk (e.g. insufficient irradiation for solar PV projects) will 
be mitigated by ensuring high-standard technological studies in place. 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
 
Environmental and social Risks 
 
 
Social and 
environmental 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Environmental and social best practices will be applied by requiring all projects funded by the programme to follow 
BOAD environmental and social safeguard policies, standards and guidelines which are in line with GCF’s ESS and 
gender standards.  
 
Risks will be mitigated through technical assistance provided to project developers to undertake technical feasibility 
studies, Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) and environmental and social action plan (ESAP). 
These measures will identify potential environmental and social impacts and provide detailed mitigation measures. 
The project-level ESAP will be an integral part of the required agreement with the project developers. BOAD will only 
finance the projects classified under the category B or below, and apply its highest standards in the screening and 
managing of E&S related issues.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
 
Technological Risk: Investments are exposed to 
various levels of technological risk including but not 
limited to: equipment failure; supply chain failure such 
as delays or collapse of supply chain for technology or 
associated equipment; lack of qualified service 
technicians. 
 
Technical and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The risk will be mitigated by the project pre-selecting a list of eligible technologies. 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon

=== PAGE 70 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 75 
 G 
Please describe other potential issues which will be monitored as “emerging risks” during the life of the projects (i.e., 
issues that have not yet raised to the level of “risk factor” but which will need monitoring).  This could include issues 
related to external stakeholders such as project beneficiaries or the pool of potential contractors. 
* Please expand this sub-section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.

=== PAGE 71 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 75 
 
 H 
H.1. Logic Framework.  
 
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework under 
the Results Management Framework. 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level35 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Shift to low-emission 
sustainable development 
pathways 
Under the programme, BOAD will address the market barriers by playing a catalytic role 
using a blended finance approach to provide long-term debt at affordable rates to increase 
the bankability of projects and attract private sector investments.  
 
The programme will contribute to a paradigm shift to low-emission development pathways 
through the mobilisation at scale of private climate finance. Transformational impacts will 
be achieved through the growth in commercially viable solar investments and the scaling 
up of financial products and services offered to the private sector in the region. This will 
essentially accelerate the GHGs emission reduction thereby contribute to national low-
carbon development pathways. 
The programme will contribute to creating a replicable model for eventual scale-up of the 
Programme’s success into the region as it is expected to showcase a viable model for all 
upcoming solar projects across the continent. Following the successful track-record in 
lending to these projects gained through the programme, it is expected that there will be a 
greater demand for financing solar projects and that local financial institutions will start 
using their own resources for climate lending.  
 
Furthermore, the programme will support the implementation of regulatory and policy 
regimes that provides clear and predictable rules for solar project development in the 
region. This will ensure that the programme will have a lasting transformative (“paradigm 
shifting”) impact on the medium-large scale solar sector in the region.  
 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term  
(if applicable) 
Final 
Fund-level impacts 
 
Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced as a 
result of Fund-funded 
projects/ programmes 
 
 
 
Program 
report 
(midterm and 
final) 
Regular 
reporting from 
BOAD to 
GCF as 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.8 
million 
tCO2eq 
 
 
Successful 
completion of the 
plant construction 
 
Full disbursement 
of the approved 
financing 
                                                             
35 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement): 
http://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/239759/5.3_-
_Performance_Measurement_Frameworks__PMF_.pdf/60941cef-7c87-475f-809e-4ebf1acbb3f4

=== PAGE 72 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 75 
 
 H 
Financing leveraged 
through the programme 
agreed in the 
AMA  
0 
 
Total 
funding 
EUR 
128.1M 
Cost per tCo2eq 
decreased for achieved 
projects 
0 
 
EUR 12 
tCO2eq 
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low-emission 
energy access and 
power generation 
 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced as a 
result of Fund-funded 
projects/ programmes 
–gender-sensitive 
energy access power 
generation 
(sub-indicator) 
 
Program 
report 
(midterm and 
final) 
 
0 
 
4.8 
million 
tCO2eq 
 
Information to be 
further 
disaggregated 
provided by 
project, country 
and type of 
technology in 
relation to the 
programme 
performance. 
 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
(if applicable)  
Final 
Project/programme 
outcomes 
Outcomes that contribute to Fund-level impacts 
M6.0 Increased number 
of small, medium and 
large low-emission 
power suppliers 
6.1 Proportion of low-
emission 
power supply in 
a jurisdiction or market 
 
 
 
Program 
report 
(midterm and 
final) 
Regular 
reporting from 
BOAD to GCF 
as agreed in 
the AMA 
Solar 
energy  
is 5% of 
the 
regional  
energy 
mix 
(2017) 
 
19% solar in 
the regional 
energy mix 
of target 
countries  
 
The regulatory 
environment 
and financial 
profile for the 
solar project 
development is 
improving. 
Information to 
be further 
disaggregated 
provided by 
project, country 
and type of 
technology in 
relation to the 
programme 
performance. 
 
 
6.2 Number of 
households, and 
individuals (males and 
females) with improved 
access to low-emission 
energy sources 
 
0 
 
At least 2.9m 
people 
indirectly 
benefit 
(700 000 
household) 
 
6.3 MWs of low emission 
energy capacity installed 
0 
215 MW 
solar 
projects 
M5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and 
5.1 Institutional and 
regulatory systems that 
Reports from 
the TA 
recipients; 
Scarce 
private 
investme
 
One  
regulatory 
system that 
Close 
relationship with 
host

=== PAGE 73 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 75 
 
 H 
regulatory systems 
improve incentives for low 
emission planning and 
development and their 
effective implementation 
regular 
reporting from 
BOAD to GCF 
as agreed in 
the AMA 
nt in the 
solar 
sector 
due to 
lack of 
enabling 
environm
ent 
incentivises 
solar 
investment 
designed in 
each target 
country 
governments 
through BOAD 
policy dialogue 
activities  
Project/programme 
outputs 
Outputs that contribute to outcomes 
Component 1: To scale up commercial and sustainable loan financing for solar projects (senior debt and 
standby loans component) 
1.1 Solar projects financed 
and operational 
Number of solar 
projects supported 
Project 
monitoring 
and 
completion 
reports 
 
0 
(2019) 
3 
(2022 Q4) 
 
6 
(2026 Q2) 
Commercial 
banks interests 
and capabilities 
for the solar  
financing 
Component 2: To develop technical capacity and raise awareness of private sector actors - Technical 
assistance (Grant Component) 
2.1 Capacity built to BOAD 
and local project 
developers for investment 
preparation 
Within the local private 
sector companies, 
number of people 
trained, including  
number of women  
trained on project 
preparation phase 
Within BOAD, number 
of people trained, 
including number of 
women, to manage 
and implement the 
project portfolio 
Project 
monitoring 
and 
completion 
reports 
 
0 
 
300, 
including 75 
women 
 
 
50, including 
10 women 
No major 
external 
(economic, 
social, 
technological, 
etc.) issues that 
will have an 
adverse impact 
for solar on-grid 
interventions 
2.2 Capacity built to 
national institutions to 
address legal and 
regulatory barriers in the 
solar market 
Number of people 
trained provided to 
national institutions to 
improve incentives for 
solar development 
projects and their 
effective 
implementation 
0 
 
300 
including 
25% women. 
Relevant 
institutions 
ready for the 
activities 
2.3 Awareness raised on 
the benefits of solar system 
technologies 
Number of events 
organised to raise 
awareness on the 
benefits of solar 
system technologies 
disseminate  
experiences and good 
0 
 
8

=== PAGE 74 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 75 
 
 H 
practices with solar 
technologies 
Activities 
Description 
Inputs 
Description 
Component 1:  To scale up commercial and sustainable financing for solar investments - Direct lending (loan component) 
1.1 Senior Loan Facility  
 
 
Senior debt for medium to large 
scale solar projects 
GCF senior debt 
financing and BOAD 
co-financing 
 
Solar energy projects 
financed by the BOAD. 
1.2 Standby 
Loans Facility 
 
 
Senior debt and standby loans 
(tenor extension instrument) for 
medium to large scale solar projects 
GCF standby loans 
to BOAD, to be on-
lent to solar projects 
 
Commercial banks:  
senior debt 
Tenor extension credit 
enhancement to solar 
projects financed by the 
BOAD. 
Component 2: Technical assistance (grant component) 
2.1 Building technical 
capacities to BOAD staff 
and local project 
developers 
Technical assistance will be 
provided to enhance project 
developers capacity in following 
sectors: 
Technical and financial feasibility 
studies 
Financial & commercial framework 
and risk mitigation strategy. 
Environmental Impact Assessments 
(EIA) and environmental and social 
action plan (ESAP). 
Trainings to BOAD 
and local project 
developers  
Technical assistance 
consultant will be contracted 
by BOAD based on 
procurement process. 
Procurement under the 
programme will be managed 
according to BOAD’s 
procurement policies as 
detailed in BOAD’s 
accreditation. 
2.2 Building the capacity 
of national 
institutions to 
address legal and 
regulatory barriers in 
the solar market 
TA under this sub-component will 
be focused on aspects of the 
enabling environment that have an 
immediate impact on stimulating 
solar private sector investment. 
Support can include the creation or 
revision of a simplified regulatory 
frameworks for Feed-in-tariffs for 
on-grid solar solutions, support on 
standard PPAs, support on IPP 
tenders and procurement process, 
on tariff structure, on a framework 
of financial and technical incentives 
and capacity building. 
Trainings to national 
institutions 
 
2.3 Marketing and 
Awareness Raising 
In order to create demand, the 
activities will support awareness 
raising activities on the benefits of 
solar system technologies, and 
broad dissemination of experiences 
and good practices. 
Conduct awareness 
campaigns and 
promotional 
activities to potential 
project developers, 
commercial banks,

=== PAGE 75 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 75 
 
 H 
 
Activities will include among other 
communications and outreach effort 
that promotes the objectives and 
good practices of the programme 
and the benefits of solar system 
technologies. 
DFI’s and other 
relevant 
stakeholders (e.g.  
donors, foundations, 
corporations, the 
media and public 
officials and 
agencies) 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
Besides the arrangements (e.g. semi-annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please provide project/programme 
specific institutional setting and implementation arrangements for monitoring and reporting and evaluation. Please 
indicate how the interim/mid-term and final evaluations will be organized, including the timing. 
Please provide methodologies for monitoring and reporting of the key outcomes of the project/programme. 
 
Third-party monitoring, reporting, verification and evaluation of implementation of loans  
An MRV framework will be established to ensure activities of the facility and other relevant stakeholders are in 
compliance with all applicable policies, procedures and other requirements of the GCF to enhance transparency. An 
independent party will be procured by BOAD for Monitoring, Reporting and Verification (MRV); BOAD will be ultimately 
responsible for reporting to the GCF.   
 
BOAD is committed to the highest possible standards of monitoring, reporting and evaluation. BOAD’s Monitoring and 
Evaluation policy was refined in 2013 in order to meet international standards. As a part of its monitoring and evaluation 
strategy, BOAD undertakes systematic monitoring, reporting and evaluation at all sates of the review cycle. It draws on 
a variety of tools - including logical framework, monitoring and evaluation matrix - to monitor and evaluate project 
development results. BOAD’s monitoring and evaluation policy is comprised of 6 principles - (i) capitalization, (ii) 
accountability, (iii) partnership, (iv) credibility and independence (v) planning of monitoring and evaluation activities, (vi) 
dissemination. 
 
Monitoring and Evaluation of the programme will be aligned to the BOAD Reporting Framework and the requirements 
of GCF as detailed GCF AMA. Under BOAD’s policy, principle reports include: monitoring reports of development 
indicators for projects financed by the BOAD, performance reports of funded projects, and impact assessment reports 
of funded projects. With regards to this programme, the three main levels that quality assurance will occur: monitoring, 
reporting and evaluation.     
 
Monitoring 
• 
Project level monitoring: Undertaken as per the project specific log frame that will be compiled for each individual 
project funded by BOAD. Project implementation will be monitored on an ongoing basis by the relevant BOAD 
project managers.  
• 
Programme level monitoring: Information from projects will be collated into the annual project report and 
submitted to the GCF at the end of the calendar year. BOAD will compile the annual project report based on 
information received on individual projects.  
 
Reporting  
• 
Reporting – beneficiaries to BOAD: Under a contract agreement, beneficiaries of the project will provide BOAD 
with  (i) quarterly progress reports in a format consistent with BOAD’s project performance reporting system; and (ii) 
consolidated annual reports including (a) progress achieved by output as measured through the indicator's

=== PAGE 76 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 75 
 
 H 
 
performance targets, (b) key implementation issues and solutions; (c) updated procurement plan and (d) updated 
implementation plan for next 12 months. This will also include financial information on the performance of each of 
project as well as impact data (capacity installed, electricity generated/saved etc.). 
• 
Reporting – BOAD to GCF: GCF will receive bi-annual reports on individual projects. The programme log frame 
will be the backbone of this report and the report will be led by the relevant BOAD project manager and written in 
close collaboration with the beneficiary organization who has been provided a loan under the programme. 
Reporting to GCF will also include relevant information on the performance of the sub-loans and portfolio of sub-
projects financed under the programme (including country and technology information and contribution to the 
overall expected results of the programme). 
 
Evaluation  
The midterm and terminal evaluations will be undertaken by an independent consultant appointed by BOAD. BOAD will 
seek to enhance independence, including assessments, through transparency, largely through the use of experienced 
consultants through competitive bidding. The hired consultants will be invited to conduct their services and to deliver 
their opinions independently.  
• 
Independent interim evaluation: A mid-term evaluation will be undertaken on the performance of the programme 
as per the indicators identified in the log frame. The mid-term evaluation will take place within 3.5 years of the 
programme being effective or at any time that the BOAD consider it necessary. The interim review serves to:  (i) 
review institutional, administrative, organizational, technical, environmental, social, economic, and financial aspects 
of the programme based on the assumptions and risks included in the programme design; (ii) assess the need to 
restructure the programme’s design and the effects of this on the immediate objectives (purpose) and long-term 
goals of the programme; and (iv) update the programme’s design and monitoring framework if restructuring or 
reformulation is necessary or its immediate objectives will change.  
• 
Independent final evaluation: At the end of the term of the programme, a final evaluation will be undertaken on 
the programme performance as per the log frame indicators and other qualitative information. The consultant will be 
tasked with evaluating the impact of each project (economic, environmental, etc.) and writing a report that will be 
shared with all relevant stakeholders (central and local governments, companies, NGOs, etc.) and could also be 
made public. It is worth noting that the evaluation function within BOAD refers to the same evaluation principles and 
criteria developed by the OECD Development Assistance Committee (DAC) and its evaluation protocols are similar. 
BOAD adheres to its principles for evaluation, which are impartiality and independence, credibility, usefulness, 
participation (of local partners) and coordination (with other donors). The evaluations aim to improve future projects 
and programmes by deriving lessons from experience and to find ways to make aid more effective. 
 
In order to keep all the stakeholders informed of the projects financed under this programme, BOAD will use various 
means to communicate and disseminate the results, experience and best practices of the Programme as part of 
Component 2.3.

=== PAGE 77 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 75 
 
 I 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents. 
 
 
 
I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal 
☒ 
NDA No-objection Letter 
☒ 
Feasibility Study 
☒ 
Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if applicable)  
☒ 
Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co-financing commitment (If applicable) 
☒ 
Project/Programme Confirmation/Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, 
 
etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement, Annex I 
☒ 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Plan  
 
(If applicable) 
☐ 
Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (If applicable) 
☐ 
Evaluation Report of the baseline project (If applicable) 
☐ 
Map indicating the location of the project/programme 
☒ 
Timetable of project/programme implementation 
☒ 
Examples of Sub-projects in the pipeline  
☒ 
Capacity Building Action Plan

=== PAGE 78 ===
• I
MINISTERE DU CADRE DE VIE 
ET DU DEVELOPPEMENT DURABLE 
REPUBLIQUE DU BENIN 
N ° ]: 1.s,}?JOGEC/MCVDD/SA 
To: The Green Climate Fund ("GCF") 
01 BP 3502 - 01 BP 3621 
Cotonou 
Tel. : + 229 21 31 8045 
dgec_mcvdd@cadredevie.bj 
Cotonou November 21, 2018 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Banque Quest Africaine de Developpement {BOAD) regarding 
"BOAD Climate Finance Facility to Scale Up Solar Energy Investments in Francophone West Africa 
LDCs" 
Dear Madam, Sir, 
We refer to the program "BOAD Climate Finance Facility to Scale Up Solar Energy Investments in 
Francophone West Africa LDCs" as included in the funding proposal submitted by Banque Quest 
Africaine de Developpement (BOAD) to us on november 5, 2018. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Ministry of Living Environment and Sustainable 
Development, the National Designated Authority of Benin. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby 
communicate our no-objection to the program as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a) The government of Benin has no-objection to the program as included in the funding proposal;
(b) The program as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Benin's national priorities,
strategies and plans;
(c) In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the program as included in the
funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the program as included in 
the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within the 
scope of the program. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Kind regards, 
Name: Mr. Martin Pepin AINA "marnickson@yahoo.fr" 
Title: General Director of Environment and Climate/ National authority Designed 
Page 76

=== PAGE 79 ===
-
PREMIER MINISTERE 
SECRETARIAT GENERAL 
SECRETARIAT EXECUTIF DU FONDS VERT 
POUR LE CLIMAT AU BURKINA FASO 
BURI<INA FASO 
Unite-Progres-Justice 
Ouagadougou, le 2 7 OEC 2018 
\ 
N° 
-----,,,---'-T" <o,,,.- __ /PM/SG/SE-FVC/BF
k\ 
't 
The Focal Point 
To 
Green Climate Fund (GCF) Executive Director 
Songdo International Business District 
G-Tower, 175 Art Center daero
Yeonsu gu, Incheon 406 840
Republic of Korea 
Obj et :_Funding proposal for the GCF by Banque Ouest 
Africaine de Developpement (BO.AD) regarding 
"BO.AD Climate Finance Facjlity to Scale Up Solar 
Energy Investments in Francophone West Africa LDCs" 
Dear Madam, Sir, 
We refer to the program "BOAD Climate Finance Facility to Scale Up Solar 
Energy Investments in Francophone West Africa LDCs" as included in the 
funding proposal submitted by Banque Ouest Africaine de Developpement 
(BOAD) to us on november 5, 2018. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Prime 
Ministry, the National Designated Authority of Burkina Faso. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to 
have reviewed, we hereby communicate our no-objection to the 
programme as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that 
(a)The government of Burkina Faso has no-objection to the program as
included in the funding proposal ;
(b)
The program as included in the funding proposal is in
conformity with Burkina Faso's national priorities, strategies and
plans;
Page 77

=== PAGE 80 ===
-
(c) In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards,
the program as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with
relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to 
the program as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to 
be implemented within the scope of the program. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF 
website. 
Kind regards. 
Page 78

=== PAGE 81 ===
 ,,,..11 for,,_ GCF by Banque Ouut Afrlcalne de 06velopptment w,.,,...
Cit• IINlnce Feclllly to Scale Up Solar Enerr,y Investments In Francophone w..tAtfca 
* w 1h8 ,rogran BOAO Climate Fmance Faethty to Scale Up Solar Energy Investments M
Yftat Mica LDCs as included m the funding proposal subrmtted by Banque Ouest Africaine de
(80AD) _, us on november 5 2018 
Page 
79

=== PAGE 82 ===
To: Mr Javier Manzanarez, Executive Director a.i. 
Green Climate Fund 
Songdo Business District 
175 Art Center-daero 
Yeonsu-gu, lncheon 22004 
Republic of Korea 
Niamey, 2 1 JAN. 2019
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Banque Ou est Africaine de Developpement (BOAD) 
regarding "BOAD Climate Finance Facility to Scale Up Solar Energy Investments in 
Francophone West Africa LDCs" 
Dear Madam, Sir, 
We refer to the program "BOAD Climate Finance Facility to Scale Up Solar Energy 
Investments in Francophone West Africa LDCs" as included in the funding proposal 
submitted by Banque Quest Africaine de Developpement (BOAD) to us on november 5, 
2018. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Prime Minister of Niger, the 
National Designated Authority of Niger. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have 
reviewed, we hereby communicate our no-objection to the program as included in the 
funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a) The government of Niger has no-objection to the program as included in the
funding proposal;
(b) The program as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Niger's
national priorities, strategies and plans;
(c) In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the program
as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws
and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the program 
as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be 
implemented within the scope of the program. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Kind regards, 
Name: Dr. Kamaye MAAZOU "kamayemaazou@yahoo.fr" 
Title: FOCAL PONT/ National authority Designed 
Page 80

=== PAGE 83 ===
MINISTERE DE L'ENVIRONNEMENT 
ET DES RESSOURCES FORESTIERES 
SECRETARIAT GENERAL 
DIRECTION DE L'ENVIRONNEMENT 
N° .. 0. .. i . ./PF-FVC/2019
To: The Green Climate Fund ("GCF") 
REPUBLIQUE TOGOLAISE 
Travail - Liberte - Patrie 
, 0 3 JAN 2019
Lome ................................. . 
Re:_Funding proposal for the GCF by Banque Ouest Africaine de Developpement (BOAD) 
regarding "BOAD Climate Finance Facility to Scale Up Solar Energy Investments in 
Francophone West Africa LDCs" 
Dear Madam. /Sir. 
We refer to the program" BOAD Climate Finance Facility to Scale Up Solar Energy Investments 
in Francophone West Africa LDCs" as included in the funding proposal submitted by BOAD to 
us on October 27. 2018 .. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Directorate of Environment/Ministry 
of Environment and forestry resources of the National Designated Authority of Togo. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10. the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed. we 
hereby communicate our no-objection to the program as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection: it is implied that: 
(a) The government of Togo has no-objection to the program as included in the funding
proposal:
(b) The program as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Togo·s national
priorities. strategies and plans:
(c) In accordance with the GCFs environmental and social safeguards. the program as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the program as 
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented 
within the scope of the program. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
Kind regards. 
xtiementer 
Name: Mr. AGR
y
IGNAN Essa -Sam Abdou -Rassidou .&!!;>IQ[o.,.i
<Z, .... 
'6 
---
 
 
 
----
----
n 
 
\ :% 
i'S 
<:) 
G',;t,, . 
-l'E , -fi :I',.
;
 · '_,:.ovlf'! 
Title: FOCAL POINT / National Authority Designed" 
,,,.,z 
Page 81

=== PAGE 84 ===
Page 82

=== PAGE 85 ===
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Basic project/programme information 
Project/programme title 
BOAD Climate Finance Facility to Scale Up Solar Energy 
Investments in Francophone West Africa LDCs 
Accredited entity 
Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement (BOAD) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Intermediation 2 (I2) 
Specific project location or 
target country/ies of the 
programme, as the case 
may be 
Benin, Burkina Faso, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, and Togo 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
2019-01-24 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English, French and Portuguese 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://www.boad.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/ESMF-
Facility-to-Scale-Up-Solar-Energy-Investments-in-West-Africa-
LDCs-English.pdf 
French: 
https://www.boad.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/CGES-
Programme-Promotion-des-Investissements-Priv%C3%A9es-
Secteur-de-lEnergie-Solaire-BOAD-FVC-FRENCH.pdf 
Portuguese: 
https://www.boad.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/QGAS-
Amplia%C3%A7%C3%A3o-Investimentos-Energia-Solar-em-
PMA-da-%C3%81frica-Ocidental-_-Portugu%C3%AAs.pdf 
Page 83

=== PAGE 86 ===
An Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
consistent with the requirements for a category I-2 programme is 
contained in the ESMF. 
Other link(s) 
https://www.boad.org/en/environmental-and-social-
assessments/ 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples 
Date 
2019-01-24 
Place 
BOAD Headquarters in Togo and resident missions in Benin, 
Burkina Faso, Guinea-Bissau, Mali and Niger. Please refer to the 
link below for further information:  
https://www.boad.org/en/contacts/ 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above. 
________ 
Page 84

=== PAGE 87 ===
GCF/B.22/10/Add.09 
Page 85 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s review of FP105 
Proposal name: 
BOAD Climate Finance Facility to Scale Up Solar Energy 
Investments in Francophone West Africa LDCs 
Accredited entity: 
Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement (BOAD) 
Project/programme size: 
Medium  
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
1.1.1 
Brief description of the programme concept, goals and objectives 
1. 
Slightly less than 50 per cent of the population in West Africa do not have access to 
electricity. The target countries for this programme are all in West Africa and belong to the 
subgroup collectively referred to as francophone West Africa. Six of the countries in this 
subgroup are least developed countries (LDCs) and are targeted by this programme, namely: 
Benin, Burkina Faso, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, the Niger and Togo. These countries are affected by 
poor access to electricity, poor energy security, and a high cost of electricity delivered to 
consumers, the common causes of which include: 
(a) 
High dependence on fossil fuel, almost all of which is imported, for generating power; 
(b) 
Insufficient availability of public funds to invest in the development of energy 
infrastructure needed; 
(c) 
Inability to attract private capital to develop the necessary infrastructure for power 
generation; and  
(d) 
High inefficiencies along the value chain of existing energy, and specifically electricity, 
infrastructure value chain. 
2. 
As a group, the energy mix of the target countries is dominated by fossil fuel 
(76 per cent), followed by hydro (19 per cent) and solar (five per cent). In spite of the recent 
decline in the cost of solar electricity generation and the fact that many areas of the targeted 
countries are in the Sahel, which has high solar irradiation characteristics, solar photovoltaic 
(PV) power generation capacities in the six countries totalled only 70 megawatts (MW) at the 
end of 2017. Under their nationally determined contributions (NDCs) the targeted countries are 
expected to reach 1,192 MW by 2030. The actual capacity as of 2017 is therefore an 
underperformance, which if allowed to continue will mean the countries will not be able to meet 
that target. 
3. 
A strategic plan is therefore called for that will put these six countries on a path to 
ensure that the NDC plan for solar peak capacity in 2030 is met. Evaluation of the circumstances 
on the ground in each of these countries, and especially the barriers to meeting the solar power 
generation capacity foreseen under the NDCs, showed that the strategic plan must catalyse 
private sector funding for the development of solar power to the grid. In the development of this 
programme, concessional funding from GCF was seen as key to achieving this. The West African 
Development Bank (BOAD) is expected to provide financial stimulus by making available funds 
from its own sources to blend with the concessional GCF funds. This will provide a blended 
finance approach to increasing solar investments (photovoltaic (PV) and concentrated solar

=== PAGE 88 ===
GCF/B.22/10/Add.09 
Page 86 
 
 
power (CSP)) through long-term debt financing to qualifying private sector companies with the 
capacity to invest in commercial scale grid-connected projects that, under the current market 
conditions, would not attract affordable financing at scale. 
4. 
If successful, this blended finance approach is expected to deliver additional outcomes 
that will include: 
(a) 
Decarbonization of the energy mix of all the targeted countries;  
(b) 
Improvement in energy access in each of the countries through the scaling up of cost-
competitive solar technologies; and 
(c) 
Development of a strategic plan that can be used to catalyse private sector funding of 
solar technologies in other LDCs, beyond those targeted under this programme. 
5. 
It has been estimated that the total peak capacity of solar power projects to be delivered 
by this intervention will be about 215 MW. A summary of the expected funding is presented as 
follows: 
(a) 
The total funding that will be provided by both GCF and BOAD is estimated to be 
approximately EUR 122 million; 
(b) 
This total fund will be structured as follows: 
(i) 
A GCF loan of EUR 57 million as senior debt; 
(ii) 
A GCF grant of EUR 4 million; 
(iii) 
A BOAD loan of EUR 60 million as senior debt;  
(iv) 
A BOAD grant of EUR 1 million; and  
(v) 
A further EUR 128.1 million is expected to be leveraged by this blended 
GCF/BOAD loan as equity from project developers and other lenders (private 
and public sector banks) in the region; and 
(c) 
Of the GCF long-term loan, EUR 45 million will be senior loan facilities available for the 
funding of the solar power projects; EUR 12 million (also senior loan) will be a standby 
loan facility for credit enhancement for tenor extension of the commercial loan available 
for the project from local financial institutions, unable to offer long-term and low 
interest loans to solar power projects. This credit enhancement facility for tenor 
extension is expected to incentivize the participation of local commercial banks. The GCF 
standby loan of EUR 12 million to BOAD is for on-lending to subprojects by facilitating 
the extension of commercial bank loans available at maturity to match the tenor of 
BOAD loans to such subprojects.  
6. 
The structure of the programme as proposed in this funding proposal can be 
summarized as follows: 
(a) 
Component 1: to scale up commercial and sustainable financing for solar investments − 
direct lending (loan component): 
(i) 
Subcomponent 1.1: senior loan facility; and 
(ii) 
Subcomponent 1.2: standby loan facility (credit enhancement in the form of 
tenor extension); and  
(b) 
Component 2: to develop technical capacity of private and public sector actors and raise 
awareness − technical assistance (grant component): 
(i) 
Subcomponent 2.1: technical assistance to BOAD and local private sector actors 
for investment preparation;

=== PAGE 89 ===
GCF/B.22/10/Add.09 
Page 87 
 
 
(ii) 
Subcomponent 2.2: technical assistance to national institutions to address legal 
and regulatory barriers in the solar market; and 
(iii) 
Subcomponent 2.3: marketing and awareness-raising activities. 
1.1.2 
Climate impact potential of the programme  
7. 
 The primary impact potential will be the reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 
through the displacement of fossil fuel electricity generation by the solar power facilities 
implemented as a result of the programme. 
8. 
It has been estimated that the programme will deliver about 215 MW of new solar 
power generating capacity, which will deliver approximately 339 gigawatt hours (GWh) of clean 
electricity annually thereby directly avoiding emissions of more than 190,000 tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq) per year (equivalent to 4.8 MtCO2eq over 25 years), that would be 
emitted by the current fossil fuel system. 
9. 
The GHG emissions reduction (ER) methodology utilized in this calculation is 
summarized as follows: 
(a) 
The power supply systems in five of the six targeted countries, namely, Benin, Burkina 
Faso, Mali, the Niger and Togo, are connected to the West African Power Pool, while 
Guinea-Bissau’s system is not. Therefore, each kilowatt hour (kWh) of electricity 
generated by solar power plants under this programme in the five countries will be 
deemed to displace a kWh of electricity on the baseline West African Power Pool 
network; 
(b) 
The GHG emissions reduction as a result of the delivery of electricity from the five 
targeted countries has been calculated using the grid emission factor from the Clean 
Development Mechanism methodology “Standardized baseline − Grid emission factor 
for West African Power Pool” (ASB0034: Grid emission factor for West African Power 
Pool (version 01.0)). This standardized baseline provides the values for grid emission 
factors (i.e. the CO2 emission factors) for the West African Power Pool, the 
interconnected electricity system of nine countries: Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, 
Ghana, Mali, the Niger, Nigeria, Senegal and Togo. The grid emission factor used is   
0.561 tCO2/MWh; 
(c) 
For the solar project in Guinea-Bissau, the country’s emission factor, estimated as    
0.765 tCO2/MWh was used to calculate the GHG ER implication of the solar power 
project implemented to the grid in that country; and 
(d) 
The total GHG emissions reduction of the entire programme was estimated as the sum of 
the ER from the solar projects in the five countries connected to the West African Power 
Pool and the ER achieved by the solar facilities connected to the stand-alone grid of 
Guinea-Bissau. Total ER in the six selected francophone countries was estimated to be 
193,398 tCO2eq per annum. 
10. 
In addition to the impact of GHG emissions reduction, it is expected that the programme 
will deliver clean electricity to an estimated 2.9 million people. This number is calculated using 
the per capita electricity consumption for the region (116 kWh/person-year1), and the total of 
339 GWh of clean electricity expected to be delivered by the solar power projects created by the 
programme. 
11. 
Given these impacts, the independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) assessed the scale 
of the impact potential as “high”.  
                                                                
1 Available at <https://www.se4all-africa.org/seforall-in-africa/country-data/mali/>.

=== PAGE 90 ===
GCF/B.22/10/Add.09 
Page 88 
 
 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
1.2.1 
General overview  
12. 
The projects covered by this programme will involve the development of grid-scale solar 
power projects. In terms of the technologies that will be implemented, these cannot be 
considered to be new as they now operate successfully in many parts of the world. However, 
although similar technology has been deployed in the target region in the recent past, its 
development has not taken place at a rate that is consistent with the vast potential of the 
primary resources in the region. Barriers to implementation of solar power technologies and 
delivery of power to the grid in the target countries are well documented in the funding 
proposal and include technical, financial, regulatory and policy issues. A key goal of the 
proposed programme is the reduction and/or elimination of these barriers. For example, a key 
component of the proposed intervention is the utilization of concessional financing from GCF to 
incentivize participation of the private sector (local investors and local financing institutions) in 
the implementation of grid-connected solar power facilities in the six target countries. 
Removing or reducing the barriers to these investments may represent a sound paradigm shift. 
The potential of this paradigm shift is discussed in the following subsections. 
1.2.2 
Potential for scaling up and replication 
13. 
As stated in the previous section, the solar power technologies that will be employed by 
the programme are well developed and deployed internationally. Since the focus of the 
programme in this intervention is to put in place activities that will reduce or eliminate barriers 
that have prevented greater deployment of these technologies in the target countries, it can be 
safely concluded that effective mitigation of barriers will enhance the potential for replicating 
and scaling up activities in each country. The technical, regulatory, policy and market initiatives 
developed as a result of the programme implementation should be available to support scaling 
up or replication of the underlying projects. It is expected that the effects of the availability of 
concessional funding from GCF will include: more feasible solar power projects will be delivered 
because a major barrier, which has limited such projects in the status quo ante – high interest 
rate and short loan maturity – will be removed; and the introduction of better regulatory 
framework that will result will improve the skills of local project promoters, enabling local 
investors to replicate and scale-up solar power to the grid. 
1.2.3 
Potential for knowledge-sharing and learning 
14. 
The potential for knowledge-sharing and learning of the proposed programme will be 
enhanced by the activities in component 2 of the proposed programme. This component has 
been designed to develop the technical capacity of private and public sector actors who will be 
involved in the different aspects of the project (implementation of infrastructure, enhancement 
of regulatory framework, and relevant policy issues and communications) and to raise 
awareness regarding the intervention among stakeholders in each of the target countries. 
Training activities under component 2 include: technical assistance (TA) to BOAD and local 
private sector actors for investment preparation; and TA to national institutions to address legal 
and regulatory barriers in the solar market. Activities in both these areas will generate 
knowledge enhancement and capacity-building, thus promoting learning and skills in each of 
the target countries. It is expected that approximately 300 people from the private sector will be 
trained. The transfer of knowledge will be ensured through the provision of operational 
manuals and guidelines and practical tools. TA to local project developers will be complemented 
by capacity-building for BOAD staff during the development and implementation of the project 
portfolio. BOAD experience in solar project investment and in mitigation and adaptation

=== PAGE 91 ===
GCF/B.22/10/Add.09 
Page 89 
 
 
projects in general is relatively new. BOAD staff expertise in several areas will be strengthened 
by the TA, which will be provided to remove the technical barriers faced by BOAD staff. 
1.2.4 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment  
15. 
The intervention will provide an enabling environment that can be measured by the 
extent to which the capacity of relevant stakeholders within each of the target countries is 
developed and strengthened. Stakeholders from BOAD and local private sector actors will 
acquire critical knowledge on how solar power projects are identified and developed as a result 
of this intervention. Furthermore, the TA activities foreseen under subcomponent 2.2 will 
provide public sector stakeholders with skill sets that will enhance their capability of 
understanding and handling technical, regulatory and policy issues related to solar projects. 
Thus, TAP is of the opinion that the proposed intervention will create an enabling environment 
for continued solar project development in francophone West Africa. 
1.2.5 
Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
16. 
Subcomponent 2.2 of the proposed programme is specifically designed as a TA 
intervention aimed at building the capacity of national institutions to address legal and 
regulatory barriers in the solar market. It is expected that the regulatory and policy 
environment needed for development of grid-connected solar power projects will be achieved 
on completion of the programme. 
17. 
The TAP therefore concluded that, based on the expected performance of the proposed 
programme, it will deliver a paradigm shift ensuring that the countries targeted will achieve an 
accelerated departure from the use of fossil fuel to deliver electricity to the grid, and will 
increase the utilization of low carbon solar power options (PV and CSP). The TAP has therefore 
scored the paradigm shift metric as “high”. 
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
        Scale: High 
18. 
The project contributes directly to the achievement of the following Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs): 
(a) 
SDG 1– No poverty: end poverty, in all forms, everywhere; 
(b) 
SDG 5 – Gender equality: achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls; 
(c) 
SDG 7 – Affordable and clean energy: ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable 
and modern energy for all; 
(d) 
SDG 8 – Industry innovation and infrastructure: build resilient infrastructure, promote 
inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation; 
(e) 
SDG 10 – Reduced inequalities: reduce income inequality within and among countries; 
(f) 
SDG 11 – Sustainable cities and communities: make cities and human settlements 
inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable; 
(g) 
SDG 12 – Responsible consumption and production: ensure sustainable consumption 
and production patterns; 
(h) 
SDG 13 – Climate action: take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts by 
regulating emissions and promoting developments in renewable energy; and 
(i) 
SDG 17 – Partnerships for the goals: strengthen the means of implementation and 
revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development.

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.22/10/Add.09 
Page 90 
 
 
19. 
The major effort of this programme is expected to result in incentivizing the 
development of solar power to the grid in each of the six target countries through enabling good 
financing, regulatory and project development for the environment. The programme is expected 
to deliver environmental, economic and social co-benefits as well as gender-sensitive 
development impacts.  
1.3.1 
Economic and social co-benefits 
20. 
Renewable energy resources, most especially solar irradiation, are relatively abundant 
in each of the six target countries. Therefore, the opportunity to generate clean electricity at a 
relatively low cost can easily be created by the successful implementation of the proposed 
programme. This means that the pre-programme dependence on imported fossil fuel for 
electricity generation can be significantly reduced. Increased power generation with the solar 
facilities that will be connected to the country grids will reduce the need to import fossil fuel, 
reduce existing trade deficits caused by the import of refined oil products, and secure energy 
supply through diversified energy sources. Reduction of trade deficits in each of the target 
countries will improve their economies while also creating new job opportunities during the 
construction and operation of solar power plants. It has been estimated in the funding proposal 
reviewed that about 500 green jobs will be created during the construction phase ranging from 
highly skilled (field technicians, operators, corporate staff, etc.) to unskilled labour work 
(support and service), with an additional 200 jobs, approximately, for operations and 
maintenance. The increased, stable and affordable energy access that will be promoted by the 
proposed programme will bring about a positive impact to the sustainable growth of the region 
as a social co-benefit.  
1.3.2 
Environmental co-benefits 
21. 
Environmental co-benefits will also be delivered in each of the target nations due to the 
reduced use of fossil fuel for electricity generation; reducing the emission of pollutants, 
including GHGs, will deliver cleaner air. The stable supply of electricity will reduce dependence 
on charcoal and firewood for cooking, contributing to the reduction of deforestation and 
associated carbon emissions. This will have additional positive health impacts for the 
population. 
1.3.3 
Gender co-benefits 
22. 
Improved and more reliable access to electricity will produce strong co-benefits for 
gender-sensitive development. The initial design of the programme will take into account the 
different ways that women and men access energy, and the role that energy can play in 
increasing opportunities for women; technical support will be provided to promote gender 
equality throughout the programme’s lifetime. The programme will add significant value in the 
target sector, where gender equality is poorly addressed. By mainstreaming gender throughout 
its lifetime, the programme will be in line with the GCF Gender Policy and Action Plan. Activities 
targeting women’s participation and training as part of component 2 will ensure that the 
programme is gender sensitive and the benefits are shared among men and women. More 
information on gender mainstreaming in the programme is provided in the gender assessment 
and action plan included as annex 3 of the funding proposal. 
23. 
Based on the assessment above, TAP assessed the sustainable development potential of 
the proposed programme as “high”.

=== PAGE 93 ===
GCF/B.22/10/Add.09 
Page 91 
 
 
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
1.4.1 
Vulnerability of the countries and beneficiary groups 
24. 
All target countries are classified as LDCs2 and according to the Notre Dame-Global 
Adaptation Initiative Country Index, and they are all among the most vulnerable countries to 
climate change. Key challenges faced by all six countries include low access to electricity, a high 
cost for electricity and overdependence on imported fossil fuels for electricity generation, which 
will continue in the absence of this intervention. The inadequate availability of public funds to 
invest in energy infrastructure to meet the growing demand of electricity in each of the target 
countries, coupled with the difficulty of attracting private funds for investment in energy 
projects, means that the countries will continue to be vulnerable to these challenges. In the 
absence of this intervention, consumer groups will continue to face low access to electricity. 
Therefore, the proposed programme will address the needs of the beneficiary countries by 
improving access to clean and reliable energy for approximately 2.9 million people. The 
proposed programme will also create an enabling environment for increased financing of solar 
power provided to the grid and will deliver GHG emissions reduction as a result of the 
displacement of fossil-fuel-based generation, thus contributing to the achievement of the NDCs 
of the targeted countries.  
1.4.2 
Financial, economic, social and institutional needs  
25. 
Economic and social development level of the country and affected population. 
Although all six Francophone countries targeted by this programme have experienced economic 
growth in recent years, with several averaging more than five per cent gross domestic product 
growth per annum, this has not translated to national poverty reduction. In most of these 
nations, more than half of the population still live below the national poverty line and a 
significant proportion of them do not have access to modern energy, including electricity. It is 
recognized in all the target countries that the prevailing poor access to electricity is one of the 
key barriers to better economic growth and social development. Therefore, improvement of 
access to electricity in both the rural and urban areas of the country has long been recognized as 
an important development strategy. Improved access cannot be achieved by relying on the 
status quo, which depends heavily and almost entirely on imported fossil fuel with a highly 
negative trade imbalance. The targeted countries are well endowed with solar energy resources, 
offering a credible alternative pathway to improved electricity access and hence of meeting the 
social and economic development needs in the region. To achieve these results, the barriers 
identified above – financial, technology, regulatory and other − must be properly mitigated. The 
proposed programme will initiate a systemic reduction of these barriers and therefore mobilize 
climate finance at scale, contributing to a paradigm shift and introducing a low-emission 
development pathway. The programme will accelerate private sector involvement in the solar 
sector, enabling market transformation and contributing to the economic and social needs of a 
large segment of the relevant populations. The funding structure of the proposed programme 
will also contribute to strengthening the institutional capacity required to sustain the 
development and supply of solar power to the grid in the targeted countries. 
26. 
Absence of alternative sources of financing. A key barrier to a low carbon path to 
improving energy access has been the lack of funds (local equity, loans/debt – with medium to 
long maturity and lower interest rates) needed to implement clean power projects. BOAD, as an 
important regional financing institution, has a strategic objective to increase its portfolio of 
investments in the solar sector directly to private sector actors. This has not materialized as 
                                                                
2 United Nations, List of Least Developed Countries (as of March 2018), available at 
<https://www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/wp-content/uploads/sites/45/publication/ldc_list.pdf>.

=== PAGE 94 ===
GCF/B.22/10/Add.09 
Page 92 
 
 
BOAD has been unable to mobilize funds at the level needed and at terms that will increase 
participation of the private sector in this endeavour. The proposed programme, which will 
enable BOAD to blend its resources with concessional debt financing from GCF, should 
contribute significantly to reducing the financial barriers around incentivizing low carbon 
energy provision. The availability of this blended finance option will also help to crowd in 
private sector equity and debt funding for solar power projects to the grid and thus provide a 
needed alternative fund source.  
27. 
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacities in the targeted 
countries. Apart from the financial barrier discussed above, weaknesses are prevalent in 
institutional, regulatory, legal and policy frameworks, for example, tariff structures hindering 
the implementation of solar power facilities to the grid. The proposed GCF/BOAD programme 
grant funding will provide TA to relevant institutions in these countries to reduce or completely 
eliminate the negative impacts of regulatory and policy barriers. For example, as part of the 
grant funding, BOAD will carry out policy dialogue activities that will be informed by the 
activities of the proposed investments. The rationale of component 2.2 of this intervention is to 
remove the market barriers to the development of solar projects by supporting the 
implementation of regulatory and policy regimes that will provide clear and predictable rules 
for solar project development in the region. The TA under this programme is expected to 
stimulate the necessary conditions for a robust take-off and increase in private sector solar 
investment in the region. This will partly be achieved through institutional strengthening 
provided under the TA component of this intervention. 
28. 
Given the various country needs that will be satisfied by the GCF/BOAD programme in 
the six targeted West African countries, TAP has concluded that the country need of the 
recipient countries and affected consumers can be rated as “high”.  
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
29. 
Country ownership of the proposed GCF/BOAD intervention is discussed according to 
the following submetrics. 
1.5.1 
Alignment of the proposed programme with national climate strategies 
30. 
A key document articulating the national climate strategies of targeted countries is the 
intended nationally determined contribution (INDC). All six of the targeted countries prepared 
the INDC and several have submitted the document, as required by international climate change 
agreements, to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change secretariat in 
2015/2016. All the countries’ INDCs pointed to the need to implement solar power facilities to 
the grid, as well as off-grid, as a key strategy to achieve the national contribution to the global 
goal of GHG emissions reductions. In addition to the INDC documents, each target country also 
has in place national documents elaborating their climate change strategies. Measures spelt out 
in these documents, especially for the energy sector, included GHG emissions mitigation 
through the implementation of solar power systems, especially to the power grids, and as a 
means of increasing access to electricity across the various economic sectors. Therefore, it can 
be concluded that the proposed GCF/BOAD programme is aligned to country climate strategies. 
1.5.2 
Capacities of accredited and executing entities to successfully deliver this 
programme 
31. 
BOAD will serve as both the accredited and executing entity for this project. Some of the 
relevant attributes of BOAD that point to the organization’s capacity to deliver this programme 
are summarized as follows:

=== PAGE 95 ===
GCF/B.22/10/Add.09 
Page 93 
 
 
(a) 
A key priority of BOAD, pre-dating the development this programme, is the 
intensification of its activities in francophone West Africa through increased provision 
of support to private sector development. This priority is in line with the planned 
intervention, which will enable the private sector to actively participate in development 
and implementation of solar power facilities. To maximize the programme impact, some 
of the activities of the TA component have been designed to improve the capacity of 
BOAD to develop, manage and implement the programme portfolio and to integrate 
climate change dimensions into project activities.  
(b) 
Over the years, BOAD has successfully used the resources that it mobilizes to invest in 
public and private sector projects and programmes aimed at building basic and modern 
infrastructure, improving rural livelihoods, generating energy, and climate change 
adaptation and mitigation. Key examples provided in documents reviewed by TAP 
include: 
(i) 
In West Africa, the promotion and financing of private sector actors by BOAD has 
taken the form of promoting financing vehicles and funding through commercial 
banks and financial institutions as well as direct loans to projects and the 
financing of studies; 
(ii) 
BOAD has in recent times, partnered with entities, such as the Agence Française 
de Dévelopment, German Development Agency, European Investment Bank, and 
African Development Bank, to set up specific vehicles including the Global 
Adaptation and Resilience Investment Fund (providing guarantees for private 
investments in West Africa) and Cauris Investissement, a venture capital 
company, that has greatly stimulated private sector investment in francophone 
West Africa; 
(iii) 
Since 2013, BOAD has organized capacity-building activities and outreach with 
international financial institutions such as the World Bank, African Development 
Bank and United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change secretariat 
to bring more awareness to the West African National Financial Institutions 
(NFIs) and commercial bankers in the financing of energy transition projects; 
(iv) 
In June 2017 BOAD launched the creation of the West African network for 
climate finance. BOAD is also promoting the use of green bonds and green credit 
line mobilization throughout the region. Out of the 4,202.1 billion African 
Financial Community (CFA) franc (XAF) of total net commitments as at               
30 September 2016, BOAD devoted about 24.3 per cent to the private sector, 
representing XAF 1,022.4 billion for 319 projects; 
(v) 
BOAD private sector financing operations and the promotion of financial 
inclusion are carried out through the "Private Sector" window. The shareholding 
capital of BOAD for companies and financial institutions includes 82 transactions 
so far; and 
(vi) 
Other initiatives set up by BOAD include: Regional Initiative for Sustainable 
Energy, set up to better overcome recurrent energy crises in many of the West 
African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) member countries; the Energy 
Development Fund, established 25 September 2009, to contribute to improved 
access to energy in WAEMU member countries and to promote the development 
of sustainable energy under concessional conditions to finance projects eligible 
for the Regional Initiative for Sustainable Energy initiative; and the 
Infrastructure Development Fund, a profit-making fund for financing access to 
electricity in the WAEMU region.

=== PAGE 96 ===
GCF/B.22/10/Add.09 
Page 94 
 
 
(c) 
BOAD is a GCF accredited entity and the above record of activities indicates its ability to 
act as executing entity for this programme. It is also important to stress that where the 
capacity of BOAD is deemed to be inadequate, especially its functions in programme 
execution, plans are in place to strengthen its capacity through the grant-funded TA. 
1.5.3 
Engagement with national designated authorities, civil society organizations and 
other relevant stakeholders  
32. 
BOAD has engaged a wide range of stakeholders in each of the targeted countries to 
ensure country ownership. These interactions included discussions and meetings with the 
national designated authorities of the targeted countries; and the successful collection of letters 
of no objection from all six countries (included as an annex to the funding proposal). BOAD is 
also continuing engagement with country stakeholders, including national institutions and 
authorities in the energy sector, local banks and major regional public banks, including the Bank 
for Investment and Development of the Economic Community of West African States, which has 
indicated support for the BOAD Climate Finance Facility and strong interest in co-financing 
climate projects. 
33. 
Given the discussion above, TAP has concluded that country ownership is very strong as 
all targeted countries have shown interest in the programme. As such, the country ownership 
metric of this programme has been ranked as “high”.  
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
 
  Scale: Medium 
34. 
Efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed programme will be measured by the extent 
to which the intervention is able to release financing for implementation of solar power delivery 
to the grid, displacing fossil-fuel-based power generation and thereby achieving significant 
reductions of GHG emissions. The economic and financial soundness of the proposed 
programme are discussed as follows:  
1.6.1 
Cost effectiveness and efficiency 
35. 
Since public sector funding is not adequate to support delivery of solar power to the grid 
at the level needed, the effectiveness of the proposed intervention can be measured by the 
success and extent of private sector funding mobilization for solar power investment. According 
to the information included in the funding proposal, the concessional loan from GCF, which will 
be blended by BOAD with its own additional debt funding, will ensure that debt funding at 
better conditions (lower interest rate and longer tenure) will be available to solar projects in 
the countries targeted, acting as incentives for private sector actors. The concessionality 
received from GCF will enable BOAD to offer a final blended cost of capital, which will be below 
commercial rates. Furthermore, a key objective of the proposed programme is to crowd in 
private sector investment for the solar sector from commercial banks; this will be achieved 
through the provision of a tenor extension instrument from the concessional funding available 
from GCF. The efficiency of the programme will therefore be measured as follows: 
(a) 
Based on the way in which concessional funding will be made available, it has been 
estimated that the programme will leverage about EUR 128.1 million of private 
investment from project developers and local private and public banks; and 
(b) 
The programme is expected to deliver GHG emissions reductions totalling about           
3.8 million tCO2eq over the 20-year lifespan of the programme, resulting in an 
abatement cost for GCF of about EUR 15 per tCO2eq. 
1.6.2 
Co-financing, leveraging and mobilization of long-term investment

=== PAGE 97 ===
GCF/B.22/10/Add.09 
Page 95 
 
 
36. 
The programme has been designed to mobilize investment from GCF (debt and grant) as 
well as funds from BOAD (debt and grant) in such a way that public funding is not needed. The 
co-financing ratio for BOAD and GCF is therefore 1:1 as each entity will provide funding to the 
tune of EUR 61 million; 
37. 
It is expected that the concessional funding from GCF, when blended with funds from 
BOAD, will also leverage a substantial amount of financing from project developers and private 
sector banks. Project developers are expected to provide equity investment amounting to      
EUR 50 million while the debt financing from local banks is expected to be about 
EUR 78.1 million. It is important to stress that the debt financing from local banks will only 
materialize as a result of the credit enhancement facility that will be made available by GCF in 
the form of tenor extension and credit enhancement for solar projects financed under the 
programme (“Standby Loan Facility”). The tenor extension instrument is intended to crowd in 
participation from interested and credible local commercial banks for solar projects financed 
under the programme (“Standby Loan Facility”). In total, the programme will achieve a leverage 
ratio of 1:3. 
1.6.3 
Financial viability of the programme 
38. 
Without the financial support of GCF for this programme, it is doubtful that delivery of 
solar power to the grid would materialize. The internal rate of return (IRR) for the programme 
with and without GCF funding shows the increased viability of this option as follows: 
(a) 
Without GCF: IRR of 11 per cent with a net present value of EUR 5.4 million will result. 
At such return levels, the private sector would not be willing to invest in this sector; and 
(b) 
With GCF: IRR of 18 per cent with a net present value of EUR 14.3 million will be 
recorded. This level of return is expected to secure private investment at scale. 
39. 
The GCF/BOAD intervention will therefore deliver higher efficiency that will allow 
private sector investment to be released for the programme. 
1.6.4 
Application of best practices 
40. 
Equipment and technology will be selected from the best options available on the 
market. During the appraisal process of the projects to be funded under the programme, BOAD 
will support the application of best available technologies by requiring projects to demonstrate 
that they use solar technologies that are: 
(a) 
Effective in addressing climate-related goals; 
(b) 
Market-tested, technically performing and commercially viable; and  
(c) 
Contribute to market transformation in terms of demonstrating the viability and 
commercial application of new technologies. 
41. 
Key components of the TA that will ensure the programme achieves high efficiency and 
effectiveness will include: 
(a) 
Support to project developers in selecting the technology suitable for the needs 
identified, to ensure viability of the technology and soundness of the investment; 
(b) 
Assessing the quality of equipment available in the market to help project developers to 
select a robust technology and avoid underperformance of the equipment; 
(c) 
Help for project developers in designing a monitoring system, which will be used to 
assess the equipment’s performance and to identify any potential technical dysfunctions 
that may put at risk impacts (carbon savings) and efficiency (EUR/tCO2eq);

=== PAGE 98 ===
GCF/B.22/10/Add.09 
Page 96 
 
 
(d) 
Encouraging project developers to engage maintenance contracts that will guarantee 
effective repair of the equipment and are therefore a complementary tool to ensure 
overall investment effectiveness; and 
(e) 
Securing continuous reviews of the selection of technologies and equipment to avoid 
underperforming technologies. 
1.6.5 
Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
42. 
The parameters utilized for the estimation of the indicators can be summarized as 
follows: 
(a) 
Total project financing = EUR 122 million; 
(i) 
Of which GCF loan = EUR 57 million; 
(ii) 
Of which GCF grant = EUR 4 million; 
(iii) 
And BOAD loan = EUR 60 million; and 
(iv) 
With BOAD grant = EUR 1 million; and 
(b) 
Expected GHG emission reduction over 20-year lifetime = 3,867,964 tCO2eq. 
43. 
Cost efficiency/effectiveness indicators for a 20-year project are estimated as follows: 
(a) 
Estimated cost per tCO2eq (for total project financing) = EUR 32/tCO2eq; and 
(b) 
Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq removed = EUR 15/tCO2eq. 
44. 
Another set of efficiency/effectiveness indicator measures for this programme include: 
(a) 
Without GCF investment, the programme would have leveraged a 20-year IRR of             
11 per cent compared to an IRR of 18 per cent with GCF investment; 
(b) 
It has been estimated that without the GCF investment, the project has a negative net 
present value of about EUR 5.4 million compared to a positive net present value of about 
EUR 14.3 million with GCF funding; and  
(c) 
It can therefore be concluded that the programme will have a better possibility of 
achieving a much higher efficiency/effectiveness ratio with GCF funding than without. 
45. 
Based on the discussions presented above (item 17), TAP considered the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the programme can be “high”. However, the ability to achieve a high score on 
this metric is highly dependent on a successful capacity-building programme. The draft of the 
capacity-building plan, included by the accredited entity in an annex to the funding proposal, 
falls short with respect to its content; TAP feels that the programme design will not adequately 
deliver a high level of efficiency and effectiveness. TAP therefore scored this parameter as 
“medium”. TAP believes, however, that if continuous annual monitoring of the capacity-building 
element is incorporated into implementation of the programme, this parameter will eventually 
be rated as “high”.

=== PAGE 99 ===
GCF/B.22/10/Add.09 
Page 97 
 
 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
46. 
This proposed programme meets GCF performance standards at a high level for: impact; 
paradigm shift; sustainable development potential; need of the recipient; country ownership; 
and achieved a medium score for efficiency/effectiveness. 
47. 
The capacity-building plan included in the funding proposal of this submission is very 
broad and falls short with respect to its content. Since BOAD itself may lack the experience and 
capacity to produce a detailed plan immediately, TAP will recommend that the Secretariat 
request BOAD to include a report of capacity development and knowledge-sharing/transfer 
activities done, and a schedule for the next year in its annual performance report to GCF. With 
this recommendation, it will be possible to ensure that capacity development and knowledge-
sharing/transfer activities which are very critical for the achievement of a high score on 
efficiency and effectiveness of the programme are being monitored in more detail.  
48. 
With improved reporting in place, TAP feels confident to recommend this programme 
for approval by the Board.

=== PAGE 100 ===
GCF/B.22/10/Add.09 
Page 98 
 
 
Reply to the Independent Technical Advisory Panel assessment 
findings (FP 105) 
Proposal name: 
BOAD Climate Finance Facility to Scale Up Solar Energy Investments in 
Francophone West Africa LDCs  
Accredited entity: 
Banque Ouest Africaine de Développement (BOAD) 
 
Impact potential 
AE concurs with ITAP assessment  
Paradigm shift potential 
AE concurs with ITAP assessment  
Sustainable development potential 
AE concurs with ITAP assessment 
Needs of the recipient 
AE concurs with ITAP assessment  
Country ownership 
AE concurs with ITAP assessment  
In Paragraph 15.b), the AE would like to add that it has recently participated in the financing of the largest 
private PV power plant in West Africa located in Kita, Mali. In January 2018, BOAD, the Emerging Africa 
Infrastructure Fund (EAIF), National Agricultural Development Bank of Mali (BNDA), Green Africa Power 
(GAP) and GuarantCo have secured a EUR 77 million credit facility to finance the construction and 
operation of a 50MW PV power plant. The financing will be used to develop the project, which will be 
built under a Build-Own-Operate and Transfer (BOOT) contract by local company Akuo Kita Solar SA, a 
subsidiary of French IPP Akuo Energy. Funding for the project was co-arranged by both BOAD and EAIF, 
with the 50MW installation standing as the first PV plant owned and operated by an independent 
producer in Mali. 
 
In paragraph 15. c), the AE would like to add that the African Garantee Fund (AGF) and the ECOWAS Bank 
for Investment and Development (EBID) have confirmed their interest in participating in the programme. 
The Letters of Interests of AGF and EBID have been included in the annexes of the FP. Furthermore, 
Orabank has indicated its interest in co-financing solar projects through the proposed Facility.  
Efficiency and effectiveness 
AE concurs with ITAP assessment  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
AE concurs with ITAP remarks and recommendation

=== PAGE 101 ===
1
BOAD Climate Finance Facility to Scale Up Solar Energy 
Investments in Francophone West Africa LDCs 
Annex 3: Gender 
Assessment 
October 2018 
Page 99

=== PAGE 102 ===
2
Table of contents 
Table of contents ................................................................................................................................... 2 
Tables ..................................................................................................................................................... 2 
1. 
Introduction ................................................................................................................................... 3 
2. 
Strategic Context ......................................................................................................................... 6 
2.1 Regional strategic context ....................................................................................................... 6 
2.2 National strategic context ........................................................................................................ 8 
3. 
Objectives of the Programme .................................................................................................. 11 
3.1 Gender and the energy sector .............................................................................................. 11 
3.2 Gender and energy access ................................................................................................... 11 
3.3 Benefits and challenges of on-grid renewable energy development ............................. 13 
4. 
Applicability of the Gender Assessment at project-level ..................................................... 14 
4.1 Guidance on conducting stakeholder consultations, gender assessment and 
developing gender action plans .................................................................................................. 14 
4.2 Designing the Gender Action Plan at project-level ........................................................... 15 
 
Tables 
Table 1: Gender Inequality Index and Human Development Indicator by country .............................................. 3 
Table 2: Total population disaggregated by sex .................................................................................................. 4 
Table 3: Key indicators on gender inequality in target countries ......................................................................... 5 
Table 4: ECOWAS strategic objectives for Gender Mainstreaming in Energy Access ....................................... 7 
Table 5: Energy and Gender linkages in national policy frameworks in target countries .................................... 7 
Table 6: Gender and Energy linkages in the target countries ............................................................................. 8

=== PAGE 103 ===
3
1. Introduction 
 
Within the context of the six target countries, issues relating to gender equality remain an on-going challenge, 
even more so when it comes to energy access, poverty and affordability. While regional and national policy 
frameworks have existed for some time, the incorporation of women’s needs and demands into energy 
development is absent or incomplete, and the sector remains largely male-dominated at the technical and 
decision-making level. While issues with regards to energy access and affordability impact the lives of both men 
and women, women are disadvantaged compared to their male counterparts and disproportionately suffer from 
low electricity access, energy insecurity and climate change. This is exacerbated in the context of women-
headed households, where women miss out on the opportunity to contribute to their community because of their 
obligation to the household energy supply. Women in rural and isolated contexts incur even greater personal 
and social costs, spending several hours a day fetching wood for their cooking needs while having no or little 
access to electricity. Further, within the energy sector, a significant gender gap exists between men and women, 
with women not being seen as on par with men, resulting in fewer women technicians. The consequences of 
low or no electricity access, energy insecurity and unaffordability for women broadly include, but are not limited 
to: 
 
- 
Limited capacity for professional development and fewer opportunities to be competitive in the job 
market, due to fewer numbers of girls enrolled in primary, secondary and tertiary education 
- 
Inability to progress from traditional roles of women, particularly in the household where women are 
responsible for fetching wood for cooking  
- 
Negative impacts on women’s health: cooking fumes, inaccessibility of health care without electricity 
etc. 
- 
Lower income and welfare compared to men and men-headed households 
- 
Lower education levels 
- 
Marginalisation of women from political and social life  
 
The six countries targeted by the proposed programme show low to very low rankings in terms of both the 
Gender Inequality Index (GII) and the Human Development Index (HDI), as seen in Table 1 below. As of 2017, 
Mali scored the lowest of all target countries for Gender Inequality with a ranking of 157, while Togo scored the 
highest with 140, although this ranking is still among the lowest in the world. With regards to human 
development, all target countries are ranked very low, from 163 for Benin to 189 in Niger. These poor rankings 
show that social development inclusive of gender considerations will help advance human and economic 
development as a whole. Adversely, low social and gender development levels will hamper economic and 
human development. Indeed, as women represent around half of the total population in target countries (See 
Table 2), it is economic and political non-sense not to include them at every step of project development, and 
in particular in the context of energy interventions.  
 
Table 1: Gender Inequality Index and Human Development Indicator by country 
Country 
Gender Inequality 
Human Development 
 
Index (GII) 
Ranking 
Index (HDI) 
Ranking 
Benin 
0.611 
146 
0.515 
163 
Burkina Faso 
0.610 
145 
0.423 
183 
Guinea-Bissau 
N/A 
N/A 
0.455 
177 
Mali 
0.678 
157 
0.427 
182 
Niger 
0.649 
151 
0.354 
189 
Togo 
0.567 
140 
0.503 
165 
Source: UNDP data, 2017

=== PAGE 104 ===
4
Data for women-headed households in the targeted countries is scarcely available, but the data that is available 
shows quite an important share of households with a woman head in Burkina Faso (11.8% in 2014), in Mali 
(5.3%) and a significant share of women-headed households in Togo (27.5% in 2014)1. Households with a 
woman head must be taken into account in energy interventions beacuse they have different needs and 
challenges than men-headed households. For example, the woman head will be responsible for the household’s 
energy supply as well as the income, as opposed to men-headed households where the man will be in charge 
of bringing an income to the household. This means that the lack of energy access and/or energy insecurity 
impacts women-headed households disproportionately compared to men-headed households, as less time is 
available for them to generate an income, which is further hampered in the event of energy/electricity deficiency. 
Women-headed households are therefore more at risk of poverty than men-headed households, with fewer 
means to alleviate their situation. 
 
Table 2: Total population disaggregated by sex 
Country 
Total population 
Population, male (% of total) 
Population, female (% of total) 
Benin 
11,175,692 
49.9 
50.1 
Burkina Faso 
19,193,382 
49.9 
50.1 
Guinea-
Bissau 
1,861,283 
49.2 
50.8 
Mali 
18,541,980 
50.0 
50.0 
Niger 
21,477,348 
50.1 
49.9 
Togo 
7,797,694 
49.8 
50.2 
Source: World Bank, 2017 
 
In the six target countries, gender inequalities evidently affect more women than men. For example, when 
analysing key indicators on gender inequality (See Table 3), the results show that women are socially, 
economically and politically more disadvantaged than men. Maternal mortality ratios are high in all target 
countries, ranging from 368 deaths per 100,000 live births in Togo to 549 in Guinea-Bissau. Across all gender 
inequality key indicators, Togo has the most favourable scores, while scores from Mali show the greatest gender 
disparities.  
 
On average in all six target countries, one-quarter of seats in parliament are held by women, while as little as 
10% of all women have some secondary education. The share of the male population with at least secondary 
education is around 20%, which is twice that of women but still low in light of the region’s developmental 
challenges. Labour force participation rates also show important disparities, with the greatest difference 
recorded in Mali with female labour force participation showing a 21.7 point low compared to a male labour 
force participation of 82.5. These results derive from the traditional roles culturally assigned to women, who lack 
opportunities to go to school and later are responsible for providing the household with an energy supply for 
cooking. Similarly, adolescent birth rates over the period 2015-2020 represent around 120.8 births per 1,000 
women aged 15-19 on average in the target countries. These rates adversely impact women’s access to 
secondary and tertiary education, which explains the significant differences in the share of population with at 
least some secondary education. For example, in Togo, which scores the highest compared to other target 
countries, the share of men with at least some secondary education is 52.5%, double that of women with 26.3%. 
 
 
 
                                                     
1 World Bank data

=== PAGE 105 ===
5
Table 3: Key indicators on gender inequality in target countries 
 
Maternal 
mortality ratio 
(deaths per 
100,000 live 
births) 
Adolescent 
birth rate 
(births per 1,000 
women ages 15-
19) 
Share of seats 
in parliament 
(% held by 
women) 
Population with at 
least some 
secondary education 
(% ages 25 and older) 
Labour Force 
participation rate 
(% ages 15 and older) 
2015 
2015-2020 
2017 
Female 
2010-2017 
Male 
2010-2017 
Female 
2017 
Male 
2017 
Benin 
405 
86.1 
7.2 
18.2 
32.7 
69.7 
73.1 
Burkina 
Faso 
371 
104.3 
11 
6 
11.7 
58.2 
75.2 
Guinea-
Bissau 
549 
84.5 
13.7 
N/A 
N/A 
65.6 
78.1 
Mali 
587 
169.1 
8.8 
7.3 
16.4 
60.8 
82.5 
Niger 
553 
192 
17 
4.3 
8.9 
67.5 
90.7 
Togo 
368 
89.1 
17.6 
26.3 
52.5 
75.8 
79.4 
Average 
target 
countries 
472 
120.8 
25.7 
10.3 
20.3 
66.2 
79.8 
Source: UNDP data 
 
Therefore, gender equality remains an ongoing challenge in West Africa. In addition, as energy poverty affects 
men and women differently, mainstreaming gender in energy development is necessary to accommodate for 
the differences in the energy needs of men and women at the community and household level. For energy 
interventions to be effective, the programme must be tailored to the needs of the beneficiaries. Therefore, 
women need to be actively engaged in the processes of intervention to produce effective and inclusive results.

=== PAGE 106 ===
6
2. Strategic Context 
2.1 Regional strategic context 
 
Promoting gender equality and incorporating gender considerations has become a key objective of the 
ECOWAS region in recent years. The region, in cooperation with ECREEE and developmental partners, has 
drafted the ECOWAS Policy for Gender Mainstreaming in Energy Access (ECOWGEN), which was launched 
in 2013 and effectively implemented in 2015. This marks the recognition of women’s different needs and 
challenges in terms of energy access, affordability and security and the region’s commitment to reducing the 
gender gap both in general and specifically in the energy sector. The policy framework was conceived on the 
basis that the integration of a gender dimension into energy access challenges will enable the region to achieve 
both the SE4ALL and SDGs objectives by 2030. A specific gender policy framework for the WAEMU region is 
currently under development2. Fig. 1 below shows the 5 selected SDGs that are linked to gender equality and 
clean energy development in the target countries.   
 
Figure 1: Selected SDGs linked to gender equality and clean energy development 
 
 
 
BOAD also highlights the necessity to strengthen women economic empowerment as a key element of 
sustainable development (BOAD, 2012), with a word of caution. The Bank recognises that differences between 
womens’ groups must be carefully taken into account in the formulation and implementation of energy projects. 
Although women as whole face the same difficulties in terms of energy access and how society defines them, 
the extent of the impacts of such difficulties can vary across different women’s groups based on factors such 
as social status, race, or the socio-cultural group women belong to. As BOAD puts it, “activities oriented toward 
a non-differentiated “women” category can serve the cause of some women and, at the same time, harming 
others” (BOAD, 2012, p. 19) 
 
The ECOWAS Program on Gender Mainstreaming in Energy Access was accompanied by the ECOWAS 
Gender Strategy 2010-2020, developed in close cooperation with ECREEE. The strategy has the objective to 
promote favourable policy environments and to support institutional frameworks and resource mobilisation in 
order to more fully engage women in all areas of the energy access equation, including as energy suppliers, 
planners, financiers, educators and customers (ECOWAS, Situation Analysis Report on Energy and Gender 
Issues, 2015). The Strategy lays out five strategic objectives to be achieved by 2030, according to its vision of 
a world where men and women shall enjoy equal access to modern energy services that is easily available, 
affordable and contribute to high levels of standards of living and economic development (ECOWAS, 2015, p. 
7). The table below lays out these five strategic objectives.  
 
 
 
                                                     
2 According to http://www.oecd.org/swac/topics/gender.htm)

=== PAGE 107 ===
7
Table 4: ECOWAS strategic objectives for Gender Mainstreaming in Energy Access 
Strategic objectives 
Targets 
1. Achieve widespread understanding of energy 
and gender considerations at all levels of 
society 
• 
100% of energy sector government employees 
will have received some relevant training by 
2020 (and routinely thereafter) 
• 
50% of citizens will have been exposed to some 
form of relevant public service announcement by 
2020 growing to 90% by 2030 
• 
At least 50 new scientific articles about gender 
and energy in West Africa published in peer-
reviewed scientific journals by 2020, and 20 per 
year after that 
2. Ensure that all energy policies, programmes 
and initiatives, including large energy 
infrastructures and investments, are non-
discriminatory, gender-inclusive, gender-
balanced and directed towards addressing 
inequalities, particularly energy poverty, which 
affects men and women in the region differently 
• 
50% of energy policies by 2020 and 100% by 
2030 will be gender-sensitive  
• 
50% of energy projects, programmes, and 
initiatives with government participation will 
include gender dimensions in planning, 
implementation, analysis, and evaluation by 
2020, rising to 100% in 2030 
3. Increase women’s public sector participation in 
energy-related technical fields and decision-
making positions 
• 
At least 25% women in the public sector energy 
workforce by 2020 and an equal (50-50) gender 
balance by 2030 
4. Ensure that women and men have equal 
opportunities to enter and succeed in energy-
related fields in the private sector 
• 
At least 25% women participation in energy-
related fields in the private sector by 2020 and 
an equal (50-50) gender balance by 2030, as 
determined through statistically rigorous random 
sampling 
5. Establish and maintain a gender responsive 
monitoring, accountability and review 
framework for objectives 1-4 
• 
100% percent compliance by 2017 in the 
monitoring, accountability and review framework 
Source: ECOWAS (2015) Policy for Gender Mainstreaming in Energy Access 
 
The Framework constitutes a benchmark and guideline for member states to incorporate gender 
considerations and safeguards in energy Ministries and overall country policy frameworks. Although target 
countries have made progress in terms of energy access as a whole, much remains to be done to incorporate 
the gender dimension in national policy frameworks. Table 5 below provides an overview of energy and 
gender linkages in country policies in target countries.  
 
Table 5: Energy and Gender linkages in national policy frameworks in target countries 
 
National 
Energy 
Policy 
Renewable 
Energy 
Policy 
Energy 
Efficiency 
Policy 
Gender 
Dimension 
in Energy 
Policies 
National 
Gender 
Policy 
Energy 
Linkage 
in 
Gender 
Policy 
Gender 
Focal 
Point or 
Unit in 
Ministry 
of 
Energy 
Gender 
Focal 
Point or 
Unit at 
Agency 
Level 
Gender 
audit of 
Energy 
Sector 
Benin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Burkina 
Faso 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guinea
-Bissau 
N/A 
 
 
N/A 
 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Mali 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Niger 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Togo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: ECOWAS (2015) Policy for Gender Mainstreaming in Energy Access

=== PAGE 108 ===
8
Other key initiatives supporting and complementing the ECOWAS Programme on Gender and Energy Access 
include: the Mano river Union (MRU) Framework Action Plan, the West African Clean Cooking Alliance 
(WACCA), the ECOWAS Federation on Business Women and Entrepreneurs (FEBWE), the Gender and Energy 
Program of the Africa Renewable Energy Access Program (AFREA) and the UNDP Multifunctional Platform 
Program. This array of frameworks and institutions show the region’s commitment to bridging the gender gap 
in energy access, and fulfilling women’s potential as energy suppliers, purchasers and producers. Ultimately, 
an energy programme or project which does not take into consideration the differences in gender roles as 
constructed by the society cannot effectively meet the needs of both men and women and will, ultimately, not 
lead to sustainable energy for all. 
 
2.2 National strategic context 
 
Inclusive participation in target countries remains an ongoing challenge. Gender inequality persists, as women 
are under-educated and generally have a lower socio-economic status, with inadequate access to basic social 
services and reduced economic opportunities compared to men (ECREEE, 2018). Female participation in 
education, particularly higher education, remains disproportionately low, as seen in Section 1. While gender 
discrimination is widespread, these issues tend to be more pronounced in rural areas. The following table 
summarises key aspects of gender inequality and inclusive participation in relation to the energy sector in each 
target country. 
 
Table 6: Gender and Energy linkages in the target countries 
Country 
Gender and Energy linkages  
Benin 
The Government has adopted several policies and action plans to promote gender equality 
and has signed on to key international and regional framework agreements protecting 
women’s rights. In 2007, the GoB adopted the National Gender Policy promoting gender 
equality, women’s empowerment and improved social protection, including improvements 
to gender inequality in education and training. The National Policy for the Advancement of 
Women and Gender Equality (2009–2016) included specific targets for gender equality by 
2025. Like many countries in the region, Benin has two parallel and overlapping judicial 
codes – one based on Western, mainly French, systems and one based on traditional 
systems. Under the Western system, women’s rights are reasonably protected, and Benin 
is a signatory to most of the major international conventions on women’s rights. Under the 
traditional code, however, while there is variation among ethnic groups, women often do 
not share the same freedoms as men. 
 
In the energy sector, efforts have been made to implement measures under the regional 
framework, ECOWAS Policy for Gender Mainstreaming in Energy Access, as well as at 
the national level. Gender mainstreaming in the country’s energy policy requires capacity 
building of staff and the implementation of gender management systems at the institutional 
level to provide guidance on gender responsive leadership and decision making. As part 
of this process, the Government has established a gender focal point at the Ministry of 
Energy to promote inclusive participation for women in the energy sector.  
 
Under its newly developed off-grid regulatory framework (EHR), Benin has emphasised 
gender mainstreaming and social inclusion, encouraging project developers eligible to 
receive funding under the OCEF facility to take gender and social impact aspects into 
account in their project design. This includes an analysis of the project's implications for 
each target population group (men, women, youth, disadvantaged) at each stage of the 
project lifecycle along with corresponding corrective measures that will be implemented if 
the project does not benefit all groups fairly. Developers receiving assistance from OCEF 
are required to (i) commit to implementing certain gender and social measures; (ii) assess 
these issues in the project’s area; and (iii) include indicators in the system operation 
monitoring plan. 
 
Burkina Faso 
Burkina Faso has adopted several policies to promote gender equality. In 2009, the 
Government established a National Gender Policy (Politique Nationale De Genre), a 
dedicated ministry – the Ministry of Women, National Solidarity and Family – as well as a 
National Council (Conseil National pour la promotion du Genre) to promote gender equality

=== PAGE 109 ===
9
and develop several action plans and related programmes to advocate for gender 
inclusion. The existing national plan is the Strategy for Accelerated Growth and 
Sustainable Development (Stratégie de Croissance Accélérée et de Développement 
Durable, “SCADD”), which was adopted in 2010. The SCADD recognises the importance 
of gender in the country’s development and promotes gender mainstreaming and inclusive 
participation for women in the public and private sectors. As a result, FDE/ABER has 
considered gender aspects in all the projects implemented. 
 
In the energy sector, efforts have been made to implement measures under the regional 
framework, ECOWAS Policy for Gender Mainstreaming in Energy Access, as well as 
additional gender policies at the national level. The Government has included references 
and linkages to gender in its energy policies and has established a gender focal point at 
the Ministry of Energy. Despite these efforts, gender mainstreaming in the country’s energy 
policy remains insufficient and requires capacity building of staff and the implementation 
of gender management systems at the institutional level to provide guidance on gender 
responsive leadership and decision making. Across the energy sector, there are very few 
women-led businesses and women professionals in senior-level positions. In the off-grid 
space, NGOs like the Women Environmental Programme are working to promote gender 
equality. 
 
Guinea-Bissau 
Under the Guinea-Bissau Constitution, men and women are equal before the law. The 
Government has even adopted a National Gender Policy (Política Nacional para a 
Promoção da Igualdade e Equidade de Género 2012–2015) to promote gender equality 
and economic opportunities for women. The Strategic and Operational National Action 
Plan “Terra Ranka” within the Strategy for Poverty Reduction Document (DENARP II, 
2013) also includes gender equality measures. Among other initiatives, the Government 
has also established an Institute for Women and Children, IMC (Instituto da Mulher e 
Criança), the Ministry of Women, Family and Social Cohesion, and the Peace Building 
Fund’s “Gender Promotion Initiative.” Unfortunately, gender inequality persists throughout 
the nation especially in rural areas where customary and religious practices tend to 
supersede state policies and laws. 
 
In the energy sector, efforts have been made to implement measures under the regional 
framework, ECOWAS Policy for Gender Mainstreaming in Energy Access, as well as at 
the national level. Gender mainstreaming in the country’s energy policy requires capacity 
building of staff and the implementation of gender management systems at the institutional 
level to provide guidance on gender responsive leadership and decision making. As part 
of this process, the Government has established a gender focal point at the Ministry of 
Energy to promote inclusive participation for women in the energy sector.  
 
Mali 
The Government has adopted policies and action plans to promote gender equality. Mali 
has signed on to several key international frameworks and regional agreements related to 
gender equality. The GoM has established a Ministry for the Advancement of Women, 
Children and the Family as well as a National Gender Policy that endorses gender equality 
and the improvement of rights for women. The National Policy also includes gender-
mainstreaming provisions and actions to be taken by 15 government ministries, including 
those involved in the management of public employment.  
 
The Government has also made attempts to address gender equality in the energy sector. 
The National Director of Energy is a woman; moreover, AMADER has created a joint 
Gender and Energy Program in partnership with the UN and the World Bank called ‘SHER’ 
(Hybrid Rural Electrification Systems), aimed at increasing access to productive energy for 
women in rural areas. The Government has also established a gender focal point at the 
Ministry of Energy and has taken additional measures under the regional framework, 
ECOWAS Policy for Gender Mainstreaming in Energy Access, to further improve inclusive 
participation for women in the energy sector. 
 
Niger 
Niger has adopted several policies and action plans to promote gender equality and has 
signed on to key international and regional framework agreements protecting women’s 
rights. According to available data, Niger has ratified both the Convention on the

=== PAGE 110 ===
10
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and the Optional 
Protocol on violence against women (2004). They signed but have not ratified the Protocol 
to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa. 
In 2008, the Ministry of the Advancement of Women and Child Protection (le Ministère de 
la Promotion de la Femme et de la Protection de l’Enfant) developed and implemented a 
National Gender Policy that promoted rights and economic opportunities for women. 
 
In the energy sector, efforts have been made to implement measures under the regional 
framework, ECOWAS Policy for Gender Mainstreaming in Energy Access, as well as at 
the national level. Gender mainstreaming in the country’s energy policy requires capacity 
building of staff and the implementation of gender management systems at the institutional 
level to provide guidance on gender responsive leadership and decision making. As part 
of this process, the Government has established a gender focal point at the Ministry of 
Energy to promote inclusive participation for women in the energy sector. The ECOWAS 
Federation on Business Women and Entrepreneurs (ECOWAS/FEBWE) is an initiative 
open to national federations/associations of business women and entrepreneurs from 
within the Community as well. Other initiatives such as the WAPP Master Plan includes 
provisions to address gender disparities in Niger’s energy sector. The Comité Permanent 
Inter-Etats de Lutte contre la Sécheresse dans le Sahel (CILSS) includes four high level 
objectives pertaining to gender equality.  
 
Togo 
Togo has adopted several policies and action plans to promote gender equality and has 
signed on to key international and regional framework agreements protecting women’s 
rights. These include ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women and the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and 
Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa. A General Directorate for the 
Advancement of Women has existed since 1977, a Ministry for the Promotion of Women 
was established in 2010, and a National Policy on Gender Equality and its corresponding 
Action Plan were adopted in 2011. Despite these policy initiatives, the level of participation 
among women remains very low, especially in rural areas where customary and religious 
practices tend to supersede state policies and laws. 
 
In the energy sector, efforts have been made to implement measures under the regional 
framework, ECOWAS Policy for Gender Mainstreaming in Energy Access, as well as at 
the national level. Gender mainstreaming in the country’s energy policy requires capacity 
building of staff and the implementation of gender management systems at the institutional 
level to provide guidance on gender responsive leadership and decision making. As part 
of this process, the Government has undertaken a Gender Audit of its energy policy and 
established energy linkages in its gender policy. The GoT has also established a gender 
focal point at the Ministry of Energy to promote inclusive participation for women in the 
energy sector.  
 
Source: ECREEE (2018) Regional Off-Grid Electrification Project, Regional Off-Grid Solar Market Assessment 
& Private Sector Support Facility Design, Country Reports, August.

=== PAGE 111 ===
11
3. Objectives of the Programme 
 
3.1 Gender and the energy sector 
 
As access to affordable and clean energy is a prerequisite for economic empowerment and poverty reduction, 
gender inequalities limit economic opportunities for women and subsequently have significant negative impacts 
on their families and communities. Women’s and men’s needs and priorities for energy and access to energy 
resources often differ based on their roles and responsibilities in societies. This results in gender-differentiated 
impacts at the individual, household, community and project levels. Women and men enjoy different access and 
use of energy and benefits that derive from energy services. As explained above, women and girls tend to be 
disadvantaged compared to men and boys, and this can be exacerbated by poverty, intrinsic social and cultural 
norms, bias, discriminatory or blind policy frameworks, as well as political conflict and fragility. As a result, 
women and girls have little or no access to and control over how energy is accessed and/or used, their 
educational and professional opportunities and their own maternal and reproductive health. In 2018, ECREEE 
partnered with AfDB to launch a regional workshop to advance the participation of women in the renewable 
energy sector. The programme intends to address the lack of inclusion of women in the energy value chain as 
only 2% of energy sector entrepreneurs in West Africa today are women (ECREEE, 2018). The joint initiative 
ultimately seeks to develop a pipeline of investment-ready, women-owned energy businesses across the region. 
 
Regarding women’s employment in the energy sector, in the target countries and overall in West Africa, women 
suffer from gender occupational segregation, which means that women who are employed are often assigned 
to roles in the sales and service sector in roles covering retail, administration and HR, with lower salaries and 
fewer benefits than men. They are unable to integrate into more competitive and higher-paid jobs in the energy 
and construction sectors. The fact that women are disadvantaged compared to men with regards to economic 
opportunity and resource use results in them not having due access to energy and a lack of opportunities in the 
energy sector. Overall, males and females are not encouraged in equal measures to pursue studies, and 
eventually careers, in the energy sector. Specific constraints with regards to womens’ employment in the energy 
sector include but are not limited to: 
 
- 
Insufficiently resources initiatives to promote female education in STEM fields 
- 
Little targeted marketing of energy sector jobs and business opportunities for women 
- 
Too few resources dedicated to gender sensitive adaptation of vocational, management and 
entrepreneurial training and outreach 
- 
Gender equal capital flows to female entrepreneurs in the energy sector are too small and too 
concentrated in just a few sub-sectors 
- 
Few incentives for the private sector to create a gender-balanced workforce (ECOWAS, 2015, p. 20) 
 
At the consumer level, the challenges for gender equality are twofold: one is awareness about product 
availability, costs, benefits and maintenance; the other is ability to pay. The lack of female agency in households 
poses difficulties for the adoption of improved and cleaner energy in some settings. Gender equality at the 
consumer level requires that women be fully recognised as consumers, be economically empowered, and have 
equal agency. Specific constraints include: 
 
- 
Many supply side agents still lack market intelligence about demand composition and gender aware 
sales techniques 
- 
Remaining inefficiencies in the application of end-user finance and targeted subsidies, along with 
continued market impediments, affecting affordability 
- 
Incomplete progress on achieving gender equality in household budgets, including earning power and 
agency in decision making 
 
3.2 Gender and energy access  
 
Improved access to modern, sustainable energy services can significantly reduce the time and labour 
burdens women are traditionally subject to, as well as improve the health conditions and opportunities for 
enterprise and capacity building in communities3. The provision of lighting in the household, for example, 
provides an opportunity for extended and/or flexible working hours, and therefore increases the time available 
                                                     
3 UNIDO (2014) Guide on Gender Mainstreaming

=== PAGE 112 ===
12
for income-generating activities, particularly for women who are time-constrained due to their household 
obligations (UNIDO, 2014). Similarly, labour-saving technologies such as power water wells, drip irrigation 
systems for agricultural production and post-production, such as grinding and milling, can result in significant 
time saved for women and enhance productivity. With electricity access, both men and women can engage in 
other income-generating activities, while boys and girls are free of household chores and can attend school. 
Without energy access, rural women and girls have to spend long hours performing subsistence tasks, such as 
collecting wood for cooking and heating, which constrains them from accessing decent employment, 
educational opportunities and livelihood-improving options. This also limits their opportunities for social and 
political interaction and involvement outside the household sphere (UNIDO, 2014).  
 
Improving gender equality and social inclusion is therefore critical to fulfil the development impacts of energy 
projects. Tables 6 and 7 below lay out the various linkages between energy access, health and education. 
 
Table 6: Selected energy access and health linkages  
Energy services and end uses 
Health outcomes 
• 
Incubation facilities for infants 
• 
Cold chain for vaccine, medicine, and blood 
bank refrigeration 
• 
Laboratory and diagnostic equipment 
• 
Powering medical equipment 
• 
Lighting surgery and examination rooms 
• 
Electricity for prevention and cure  
• 
Indoor lighting for examination, surgery, 
reading, ambient light and outdoor, 
including security lighting 
• 
Clean water supply 
• 
Water heating 
• 
Sterilisation 
• 
Energy services for health clinics and for 
housing doctors, nurses and clinic staff 
• 
Reduced child and adult mortality and 
morbidity 
• 
Improved maternal health 
• 
Reliable access to clean/safe drinking water 
• 
Enhanced communications (especially for 
emergencies)  
• 
Technologies and education for health data 
and information 
• 
Combat HIV, malaria and other diseases 
• 
Improved life expectancy 
• 
Improved health service delivery (staff 
retention, motivation and training, lab 
services and end uses) 
• 
Evening health training for local 
communities 
• 
Reduced fertility rates 
• 
Night birthing and safety 
• 
Cleaner living conditions at home 
Source: ECREEE (2015) Situation Analysis Report on Energy and Gender Issues in ECOWAS 
 
Table 7: Selected energy and education linkages 
Energy services and end uses 
Education outcomes 
• 
Electricity for lighting 
• 
Computers 
• 
Radios/TV 
• 
Telecommunications 
• 
Thermal energy for cooking (students and 
staff) 
• 
Water pumping 
• 
Energy efficient lighting and appliances  
• 
Electricity and modern fuel services both for 
schools and for teachers’ housing 
• 
Poverty reduction 
• 
Income generation 
• 
Improved quality of education 
• 
Improved grades 
• 
Enhanced school enrolment/retention rates 
• 
Improved ability to attract and retain 
teachers and staff 
• 
Improved sanitation 
• 
Gender/balance equity 
• 
Facilities for evening classes and adult 
education 
Source: ECREEE (2015) Situation Analysis Report on Energy and Gender Issues in ECOWAS 
 
Lastly, improved electricity access, especially in rural and remote areas, can enhance security at the individual 
and community level. One example is street lighting, or lack of same, which results in increased violence 
(physical and/or sexual) against women and girls. Illuminated night markets, streets and other evening activities 
will have the potential to enhance women’s participation in social contexts outside of the household while 
improving their security. Telecommunications in the event of political and social unrest or natural disasters can 
also be used to send alerts and information.

=== PAGE 113 ===
13
 
3.3 Benefits and challenges of on-grid renewable energy development 
 
Benefits 
The proposed programme will result in increased solar capacity in the target countries and improved affordability 
of energy services, which will enable energy access to a larger number of people, including women. Additionally, 
jobs in the operating, maintenance and support areas will be created during the construction and operation of 
solar power plants. Women’s and children’s health will be improved as a result of the use of cleaner and 
sustainable energy in the household, for cooking and lighting needs. Complementing Tables 6 and 7 above, the 
benefits of improved energy/electricity access through the development of on-grid renewable energy include, 
but are not limited to: 
 
- 
Improved energy access will disproportionately benefit women as they are traditionally responsible for 
household tasks i.e. collecting wood 
- 
Reduced gap in employment opportunities for men and women 
- 
Positive impact on local economic dynamics due to the “construction boom”, with increased number of 
employment opportunities for women 
- 
Exposure to different standards of development, capacity building and skill strengthening  
- 
Long-term change at the community level and spillover benefits due to the presence of the project for 
a long period of time  
- 
Community development projects derived from increased clean energy access that alleviate poverty 
and increase choices for women 
- 
Improved learning conditions for children and adults: extended reading hours, to enable children to do 
their homework 
- 
Affordable electricity for a larger number of households, including women-headed households 
- 
Positive impact on health thanks to the electrification of local health centres, and eliminating toxic fumes 
at the household level 
- 
Overall availability of electricity that will benefit all members of the community, including women 
- 
Street and public space lighting will result in reductions of violence against women and crime rates 
- 
Possibility of training in solar energy for both men and women  
 
Challenges 
There are, however, potential negative effects that could occur during the development and construction of the 
projects, which could worsen the existing gender disparities and inequalities. This could be caused by the fact 
that access to benefits generated by the project i.e. compensation, employment, access to land and water etc, 
is subject to existing social relationships and hierarchies. For instance, as large-scale solar projects require an 
important land area, this could lead to conflict of interests over ownership and land use, governed by norms 
which typically limit women’s access.  
 
Indeed, existing gender disparities in energy poverty can be aggravated at the country, regional and local level, 
if energy access is expanded in a gender-blind manner. The benefits of on-grid expansion could apply 
disproportionately to men, thus reinforcing gender inequalities.  
 
The project must therefore pursue gender gains in its investment activities and look at opportunities for female 
entrepreneurship, improvements in the representation of women in the labour force, and energy access for the 
poorest population groups – particularly women-headed households – in the target countries. 
 
Other negative impacts could include: 
 
- 
Lack of engagement of women that would result in no genuine engagement in the project development 
process 
- 
Employment opportunities benefitting a selected few, excluding women to a large extent, thus 
increasing women’s dependency on men as household income providers 
- 
Inadequate, non-reflective representation in stakeholder consultations and contribution to local 
development plans 
- 
Increase in physical and sexual violence against women around construction sites  
- 
Risk of human trafficking 
- 
Inequitable participation between men and women in decision-making and benefits flowing from the 
newly operating renewable services.

=== PAGE 114 ===
14
For each of the projects, stakeholders will ensure that thorough gender assessments will be carried out in order 
to establish a baseline and identify challenges and opportunities specific to the concerned communities. These 
will help avoid and/or minimise the potential negative impacts and enhance the positive impacts of the project 
with regards to women and women’s groups.  
 
4. Applicability of the Gender Assessment at the project level 
 
The Gender strategy of the programme consists of this document (the Gender Assessment) and the 
accompanying Gender Action Plan. The Gender Strategy is consistent with international standards on gender 
equality and reflects the safeguards set out in BOAD’s Gender Policy4. BOAD’s Gender policy is designed with 
the dual objective of promoting the mainstreaming of gender issues in the operations of the Bank and to support 
the action undertaken by the member countries of the Bank for the achievement of equality between women 
and men. This dual objective entails: 
• 
The integration of gender analysis in all projects, projects and policies of the Bank; 
• 
The strengthening of cooperation relationships between men and women; 
• 
The strengthening of women empowerment economically: a key element of sustainable development; 
• 
The taking into account of the differences between women groups in the interventions of the Bank and  
• 
Targeted interventions in the implementation of the strategy for the integration of gender issues. 
 
The different needs and priorities of women and men in each individual project will also be assessed and taken 
into account within project-level Gender Assessment and Action Plans The present Gender Assessment acts 
as an overview of the current gender situation in targeted countries, while the Programme’s Gender Action Plan 
constitutes a safeguards benchmark laying out procedures, timings, and aspects which must be incorporated 
and mainstreamed in project design. Each project funded as part of the Programme will comply with the 
safeguards laid out in the present Gender Assessment and will follow the procedures specified in both the 
Gender Assessment and the Gender Action Plan, in addition to that of BOAD’s Gender policy and national 
safeguards. Annual Monitoring and Evaluation requirements will ensure the sound application and 
mainstreaming of both frameworks at project-level. 
 
At a project level, thorough Gender Assessments will be carried out using inputs from stakeholder consultations 
in order to incorporate and ensure the mainstreaming of needs and priorities of men, women and youth impacted 
by the project. As a result of stakeholder consultations and the assessment of gender-specific needs and 
priorities, a project-level Gender Action Plan will be developed to specify the specific interventions and/or 
activities that will be implemented in the project to address the identified vulnerabilities and enhance the 
mainstreaming of gender issues at every step of project planning and implementation.  
 
4.1 Guidance on conducting stakeholder consultations, gender assessment and 
developing gender action plans 
 
The general purpose of a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) at project-level is to ensure the involvement of 
men and women in discussions about the project’s activities, objectives and measures, in order to assess and 
analyse their respective roles and responsibilities as main actors and beneficiaries of the project. Stakeholder 
consultations must be carried out early on at the project design stage. The SEP constitutes a benchmark 
framework that sets out all relevant Grievance Response Mechanism and resettlement procedures, along with 
a project-level stakeholders matrix presenting all stakeholders and their affiliated roles, responsibilities, risk 
potential and level of impact by the project.  
 
Based on the mapping of relevant stakeholders at project-level, and using the present Gender Assessment, 
field-based data collection and documentation must be conducted to define the specific risks and gender 
mainstreaming opportunities at project-level. Below is a non-exhaustive list of questions that can be asked to 
ensure knowledge gaps are appropriately bridged: 
• 
How women, men and youth are differently affected by the project? 
• 
Are project developers taking into account the different roles and responsibilities of women, men and 
youth?  
• 
Are indicators in the Risk Mitigation Framework disaggregated by sex?  
                                                     
4 West African Development Bank (2012) Policy of the West African Development Bank in terms of Gender

=== PAGE 115 ===
15
• 
Are plans and procedures for resettlement gender sensitive?  
• 
Are women included both as organisers and beneficiaries of the awareness-raising, training and 
capacity-building activities?  
• 
Are men and women equally able to participate in decision-making processes? 
• 
Are consultations and stakeholder’s involvement gender sensitive?  
 
To efficiently bridge those gaps, the hiring of a local gender expert and reaching out to local women groups and 
organisations is highly recommended. The affiliated costs must be mainstreamed in the project-level 
implementation budget.  
 
The project-level Gender Action Plan sets out the targets, inputs, outputs and outcomes of each of the project’s 
activities by component. It is derived from the project-level logical framework and must include all relevant 
indicators, targets, timelines and costs disaggregated by gender.  
 
4.2 Designing the Gender Action Plan at project-level 
As previously mentioned, the programme-level Gender Action Plan constitutes a framework of reference for 
designing monitoring and evaluation targets and milestones in order to determine true progress in 
mainstreaming gender considerations at the project-level. The design of the project-level Gender Action Plan 
must be done jointly with the monitoring and evaluation framework. The table below outlines five indicative key 
steps to be followed for the development of project-level gender action plans: 
 
1. Provide a detailed breakdown of project 
activities to be monitored and evaluated for 
gender considerations 
To design a gender action plan, the first step is to 
identify and design the phases of the intervention 
applying a gender-sensitive lens. The project team 
will have to ensure that all project activities include 
consultations with women’s groups and other relevant 
stakeholders, that data collection is disaggregated by 
gender and that all pre-assessments incorporate 
relevant gender issues and considerations 
2. Identify relevant indicators, data sources and 
tools to be used and/or develop, decide on 
the frequency of data collection  
The focus of this step is for the project team and all 
relevant stakeholders to agree on the specific 
indicators to be included in the project-level results 
framework, the different data sources and the tools 
that would need to be developed/used to collect data 
as well as the frequency of data collection. A gender-
sensitive The GAP would be developed to include 
indicators, outputs, outcomes and impacts of the 
project, aligned with the project-level log frame 
3. Decide on evaluation methods 
Evaluations methods should be based on project’s 
priority areas and the data collected. A combination 
of quantitative and qualitative should be used, since 
some key dimensions cannot be captures using only 
quantitative data. Such qualitative data will be 
collected through stakeholder consultations.  
4. Develop effective communication channels 
for monitoring data, and identify resources, 
constraints and opportunities with regards to 
monitoring 
Monitoring and reporting requirements must be 
defined at project design phase to ensure data flows 
directly from the field to the project team. These 
requirements include the definition of responsibilities 
pertaining 
to 
data 
collection, 
documentation, 
checking and reporting. 
5. Compile and combine the data gathered  
The Monitoring and Evaluation framework and the 
Gender Action Plan outline the gender aggregated 
data to be used to determine the projects’ impacts on 
men and women. Both frameworks should be 
integrated in the workplan and revised/updated if the 
projects’ activities or objectives change. Progress 
should be reviewed regularly to make the necessary 
adjustments.

=== PAGE 116 ===
16 
Gender Action Plan 
 
Activities 
Targets 
Timeline and 
Monitoring 
Responsible 
Costs 
Impact Statement: Enhanced energy access and power generation for both women and men in target countries through the 
implementation of an enabling regulatory and financial environment for solar energy development, including in poor and female-headed 
households  
Outcome Statement: The project will contribute to a paradigm shift through the scale up of investments for solar project development 
through improved regulatory environments and financial profiles 
Component 1: To scale up commercial and sustainable financing for solar investments – Direct lending 
Outcome 1:  Commercial banks interests and capabilities for solar financing  
Output 1.1: Project design incorporates findings from gender analyses/impact assessments at the project-level 
1.1 % of solar projects 
having conducted gender 
analysis/impact 
assessment and developed 
a GAP by the end of project 
design phase 
 
% of projects reaching end of project 
design phase with a complete Gender 
Assessment and Action Plan 
Mid-term: 50% 
Final: 100% 
Monitoring: 
Yearly basis 
 
Timeline: 
baseline 
information to 
be collected 
at the start of 
project design 
phase, year 1 
to 2 
 
BOAD 
 
Project developers in 
target countries  
Mainstreamed in 
implementation 
budget at project-level 
Output 1.2: Projects have produced a dedicated gender action plan based on project-level Gender Assessments

=== PAGE 117 ===
17 
Activities 
Targets 
Timeline and 
Monitoring 
Responsible 
Costs 
 
1.2 Number of solar 
projects having produced a 
project-based gender 
action plan that includes: 
 
Share (in %) of women in 
total population benefitting 
from improved energy 
access 
 
% of women employed in 
project implementation 
% of women included in 
stakeholder consultations 
between the project and 
local communities 
 
Number of consultation 
meetings led by women 
 
 
Number of projects 
Mid-term: 3 projects 
Final: 6 projects 
 
 
50% of those benefitting from improved 
energy access in communities around 
projects are women 
 
25% of people employed for roles created 
as a result of the construction and 
operation of solar power plants are women 
 
Among which 50% of roles will be at the 
technical level, 50% at management level 
 
25% of staff employed in project 
implementation are women 
 
50% of people included in stakeholder 
consultations are women 
 
50% of consultation meetings are led by 
women 
Monitoring: 
Yearly basis 
 
Timeline: 3 
projects by 
2024 
 
6 projects by 
2031 
 
BOAD 
 
Project developers in 
target countries 
Mainstreamed in 
implementation 
budget at project-level 
Component 2: To develop technical capacity and raise awareness of private sector actors – Technical Assistance 
Outcome 2:  Project implementation and monitoring ensures gender inclusion and equality (outputs 2.1 – 2.4)   
Output 2.1: Strengthened capacity of private sector actors for investment preparation

=== PAGE 118 ===
18 
Activities 
Targets 
Timeline and 
Monitoring 
Responsible 
Costs 
2.1 Ensure inclusion of 1 to 
4 ratio of women to men in 
training and capacity 
building activities for private 
sector actors 
50% of hired training agents are women 
 
25% of capacity building activities 
participants are women 
 
Training programmes include awareness 
raising on gender dimensions and 
accommodate women’s schedules 
 
Monitoring: 
Yearly basis 
 
Timeline: 
Year 1 to 5 
BOAD 
No additional costs 
expected 
 
EUR 10,000 
(indicative)/year 
 
 
Output 2.2: Strengthened capacity of national institutions to address legal and regulatory barriers in the solar market 
2.2 Ensure inclusion of an 
equal share of women in 
capacity building and 
training activities for 
national institutions 
50% of hired training agents are women 
 
50% of capacity building activities 
participants are women 
 
Training programmes include awareness 
raising on gender dimensions and 
accommodates women’s schedules 
 
Training programmes ensure incorporation 
of gender safeguards and dimensions into 
revised regulatory frameworks for on-grid 
solar solutions, and tariffs structures 
 
Monitoring: 
Yearly basis 
 
Timeline: 
Year 1 to 5 
BOAD 
NDAs  
No additional costs 
expected 
 
EUR 10,000 
(indicative)/year  
Output 2.3: Awareness raised on the benefits of solar system technologies 
2.3 Ensure communication 
and outreach efforts 
include gender 
considerations 
50% agents in communication and 
outreach campaigns are women 
 
50% of awareness raising materials shows 
women as energy suppliers, purchasers  
 
Monitoring: 
Yearly basis 
NDAs 
BOAD 
N/A
