=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: Sunny Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.23
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.23
creationDate: D:20180608143012+09'00'
modDate: D:20180608143012+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum VII 
Funding proposal package for FP088
GCF/B.20/10/Add.07 
8 June 2018 
Meeting of the Board 
1 – 4 July 2018 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional Agenda Item 17 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three parts: 
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Biomass Energy Programme in the South
Pacific” submitted by Korea Development Bank;
b) No-objection letters issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s); and
c)
Environmental and social report disclosure;
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national 
designated authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive 
Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled “Biomass Energy 
Programme in the South Pacific” submitted by Korea Development Bank is being 
circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board Members and Alternate Board 
Members to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged or 
commercially sensitive information of the entity.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.20/10/Add.07 
Page b 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
1 
No-objection letters issued by the national designated authorities or focal points 
80 
Environmental and social report disclosure  
 
  60

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme Title: Biomass Energy Programme in the South Pacific 
Country/Region: Fiji, Papua New Guinea (PNG) 
Accredited Entity: Korea Development Bank (KDB) 
Date of Submission: December 18, 2017

=== PAGE 4 ===
Contents 
 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
 
Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 
 
Section C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
Section F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
Section G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
Section I 
ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
 
• 
Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document. 
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“[FP]-[Agency Short Name]-[Date]-[Serial Number]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
List of Abbreviations 
AMA 
Accreditation Master Agreement 
BAU 
Business as Usual 
CPI 
Consumer Price Index 
DSCR 
Debt Service Coverage Ratio 
E&S 
Environmental & Social 
EBITDA 
Earnings Before Interest, Taxes Depreciation, and Amortization 
EoI 
Expression of Interest 
EPC 
Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
ESIA 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
ESMF 
Environmental Social Management Framework 
ESMP 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
ESS 
Environmental and Social Safeguards 
FAA 
Funded Activity Agreement 
FAO 
Food and Agriculture Organization of United Nations 
FEA 
Fiji Electricity Authority  
*Renamed EFL (Energy Fiji Limited) as a result of the corporatization 
FJD 
Fijian Dollar 
FY 
Fiscal Year 
GCF 
Green Climate Fund 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GHG 
Greenhouse Gas 
GWh 
Gigawatt/hour 
ICCC 
Independent Consumer and Competition Commission 
IFC  
International Finance Corporation 
INDC 
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution 
IPCC 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  
IPP 
Independent Power Producer 
KDB 
Korea Development Bank 
LTV 
Loan to Value 
MoU 
Memorandum of Understanding 
NCV 
Net Calorific Value 
NDA 
National Designated Authority 
NDC 
Nationally Determined Contribution 
O&M 
Operations and Maintenance

=== PAGE 6 ===
PF 
Project Finance 
PNG 
Papua New Guinea 
PPA 
Power Purchase Agreement 
PPL 
Papua New Guinean Power Limited 
PPP 
Public-Private Partnership 
PS 
Performance Standards 
RC 
Regulatory Contract 
SESA 
Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
SEP 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
SIDS 
Small Island Developing States 
SPC 
Special Purpose Company 
SRWC 
Short Rotation Woody Coppices 
TA 
Technical Assistance 
TBD 
To Be Determined 
tCO2eq 
Tons of Carbon Dioxide equivalent 
UNDP 
United Nations Development Programme 
USD 
United States Dollar 
VAT 
Value-added Tax 
VEP 
VAT Exclusive Price

=== PAGE 7 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 79 
 
A 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / programme title 
Biomass Energy Programme in the South Pacific 
A.1.2. Project or programme 
programme 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region                     
Fiji, Papua New Guinea (PNG) 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies) 
Fiji    : Ministry of Economy 
PNG : Office of Climate Change and Development, Ministry of 
Environment 
A.1.5. Accredited entity 
Korea Development Bank (KDB) 
A.1.5.a. Access modality 
☐  Direct 
☒  International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary 
Executing Entity: (Component 1& 2) SPCs 
                            (Component 3) KDB 
Beneficiary: Local communities of Fiji and PNG 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, 
million USD) 
☐  Micro (≤10) 
☒ Medium (50<x≤250)  
☐ Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus 
☒  Mitigation 
☐  Adaptation ☐  Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission 
December 18, 2017 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details 
Contact person, position 
In-suk Park, Head of Climate Finance Team 
Suwon Yi, Senior Manager 
Organization 
Korea Development Bank 
Email address 
insuk@kdb.co.kr 
suwon@kdb.co.kr 
Telephone number 
+82-2-787-7209 
+82-2-787-7211 
Mailing address 
22 Eunhaeng-ro, Youngdeungpo-gu, Seoul 07242, Korea 
 
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from: 
☒ 
Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ 
Low emission transport  
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)   
☐ 
Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☒  
Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.) 
 
Increased resilience of: 
☐ 
Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.) 
☐ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.) 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.) 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
 
☐

=== PAGE 8 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 79 
 
A 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words) 
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objectives and primary measurable 
benefits (see investment criteria in section E). The detailed description can be elaborated in section C. 
 
The “Biomass Energy Programme in the South Pacific (hereinafter the “Programme”)” originates from the Fijian 
government’s endeavors to control disastrous invasive alien species – Spathodea campanulata (hereinafter ‘African 
tulip’) – that threatens native biodiversity and ecosystem functions. Also, agricultural land degradation by the 
uncontrollable invasive species has been a huge threat to livelihoods of vulnerable farming communities. Nevertheless, 
the government was reluctant to commence eradication of African tulips without finding the way to make economic use 
of the harvested invasive species which would be otherwise wasted and a disposal headache to the authorities in 
charge. The Programme finally provides the government a highly effective solution that utilizes African tulips as a 
biomass fuel source. Responding to the country needs, the Programme will supply low-carbon biomass as reliable base 
load electric power in Fiji, and expand the Fijian model to PNG, which will contribute to energy paradigm shift in South 
Pacific Small Island Developing States (SIDS) as a whole.  
 
Based on the background above, the Programme is structured by three components in total: 
1) Development of four biomass power plants; 
2) Development of one wood pellet plant; and 
3) Technical assistance  
 
The Programme satisfies two results areas of ‘energy access and power generation’ and ‘forestry and land use’, 
through which it plays a pivotal role in achieving NDC (Nationally Determined Contribution) goals. Fiji NDC 
Implementation Roadmap1, recently presented during COP23, notes the Programme’s biomass energy deployment 
including sustainable biomass plantation as the largest mitigation contributor; 210,000tCO2/year mitigation target in 
biomass sector cannot be reached without the Programme. Most importantly, the Roadmap demonstrates how well the 
Programme upholds country ownership by integrating needs of its target countries through close consultation with NDA. 
Fiji will harness the Programme as a steppingstone towards her reaching 100% renewable energy target by 2030.            
 
The Programme will also contribute to establishing sustainable land use management systems through eradication of 
African tulips and reforestation with native species in forests where invasive species control actions are taken. 
Moreover, it will do plantations over lands idled and degraded by dwindling sugarcane industry and disruptive weather 
patterns affected by climate change. These activities fundamentally aim to convert land that has been long left idle, 
neither having been natural forest nor currently used for agricultural purposes into productive land that can be once 
again vitalized for ensuring socio-economic benefits to vulnerable local communities. In addition, the Programme 
ensures to recover local food production chains disturbed by African tulip trees, which finally confirms the Programme 
as a genuine win-win solution. 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
1 GGGI (2017) Fiji NDC Implementation Roadmap 2017-2030 Setting a pathway for emissions reduction target under 
the Paris Agreement

=== PAGE 9 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 79 
 
A 
 
 
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone 
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) 
The Programme is expected to be approved via internal approval 
process of KDB within 120 days after GCF Board Approval. 
Expected financial close (if applicable) 
Each project of the Programme has a different financial closing 
schedule. The first biomass project in Fiji is expected to have 
financial closing in 4Q 2018, while the last biomass project in PNG is 
expected to have financial closing in 3Q 2022.  
Estimated implementation start and end date 
Start: 4Q 2018 
End : 3Q 2025  
Project lifespan 
25 years

=== PAGE 10 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 79 
 
B 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme 
Please provide: 
• 
an integrated financial model in Section I (Annexes) that includes a projection covering the period from financial 
closing through final maturity of the proposed GCF financing with detailed assumptions and rationale; and a 
sensitivity analysis of critical elements of the project/programme 
 
The Programme will be financed through the GCF loan, KDB loan, and private sector’s equity investment and loan. The 
anticipated financial structure of each sub-component of Component1 is as below: 
 
Elements 
Percentage 
Sub-
component1.1 
Sub-
component 
1.2~1.3 
Sub-
component 
1.4 
Total 
Debt – GCF 
32.0% 
16.3  
18.5  
18.5  
71.7  
Debt – KDB 
5.0% 
2.5  
2.9  
2.9  
11.2  
Debt – Other Investors 
33.0% 
16.8  
19.0  
19.1  
73.9  
Equity –  
Project Sponsors 
30.0% 
15.2  
17.3  
17.3  
67.2  
Total 
100.0% 
50.8 
57.7  
57.8  
224.0 
 
 
The anticipated financial structure of each sub-component of Component 2 will have a similar financial structure with 
Component1 as below: 
 
Elements 
Percentage2 
Sub-
component2.1 
Sub-
component2.2 
Sub-
component2.3 
Total 
Debt – GCF 
15.1% 
13.8  
3.5  
13.4  
30.7  
Debt – KDB 
15.5% 
14.3  
3.6  
13.7  
31.6 
Debt – Other Investors 
39.4% 
36.0  
9.1  
34.7 
79.8  
Equity –  
Project Sponsors 
30.0% 
27.5  
7.0  
26.5 
60.9  
Total 
100.0% 
91.7  
23.1  
88.2  
203.0 
 
Component 3 is TA to be financed by the GCF grant for capacity building, knowledge sharing, and creating enabling 
environments for renewables, etc. 
 
Please refer to the Integrated Financial Model attached in Section I as Annex 3 for more details.  
 
• 
a description of how the choice of financial instrument(s) will overcome barriers and achieve project objectives, 
and leverage public and/or private finance 
 
Since the South Pacific region has its context-based barriers such as low sovereign credit ratings, currency risks, and 
construction risks, few renewable energy projects have been financed so far by private investors.  
 
The GCF loan financing will be a critical catalyst in triggering private sector investments by lowering currency exchange 
                                                             
2 Percentage of each sub-component is slightly different.

=== PAGE 11 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 79 
 
B 
and sovereign credit risk, and filling financing gaps. Furthermore, equity investments from tentative project sponsors with 
sufficient capacity and technology proven by the first pilot biomass project in Fiji have played an anchor role in mobilizing 
private sector loans by reducing construction risks.  
 
Besides of filling in the financing gap, the GCF’s grant paired with loan investment will support Fiji and PNG to formulate 
an enabling environment where the uptake of renewable energy can be well realized and leveraged by private finance. In 
fact, private financial investors from Korea and Fiji are now positively considering investment in the Programme given the 
positioned senior loan paired with grant support from the GCF. 
 
For further details, refer to Section D.1.  
 
• 
a breakdown of cost estimates for total project costs and GCF financing by sub-component in local and foreign 
currency and a currency hedging mechanism: 
 
The indicative breakdown of cost estimates and the GCF funding amount and other co-financing by (sub) components is 
as below: 
 
Component 
Sub-component  
Total 
GCF 
KDB 
Co-financiers 
Currency 
of 
financing 
Currency 
of 
disburse 
-ment to 
recipient 
Equity 
Other 
lenders 
Component 1. 
Development of 
four biomass 
power plants 
Sub-component 1.1. 
Biomass power plant #1 in 
Sabeto, Fiji  
50.8 
16.3 
2.5 
15.2 
16.8 
million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) 
Sub-component 1.2.  
Biomass power plant #2 in Fiji 
57.7 
18.5 
2.9 
17.3 
19.0 
Sub-component 1.3.  
Biomass power plant #3 in Fiji 
57.7 
18.5 
2.9 
17.3 
19.0 
Sub-component 1.4.  
Biomass power plant #4 in 
PNG 
57.8 
18.5 
2.9 
17.3 
19.1 
Component 2. 
Development of 
one wood pellet 
plant    
Sub-component 2.1. 
Pellet production infrastructure 
91.7 
13.8 
14.3 
27.5 
36.0 
million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) 
Sub-component 2.2.  
Capacity increase for existing 
transportation infrastructure  
23.1 
3.5 
3.6 
7.0 
9.1 
Sub-component 2.3. 
Biomass power plant for the 
wood pellet plant 
88.2 
13.4 
13.7 
26.5 
34.7 
Component 3. 
Technical 
assistance 
Sub-component 3.1.  
Technical assistance in Fiji 
1.0 
1.0 
 
 
 
million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) 
Sub-component 3.2. 
Technical assistance in PNG 
3.0 
3.0 
 
 
 
Total project financing 
431.0 
106.4 
42.8 
128.1 
153.7

=== PAGE 12 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 79 
 
B 
B.2. Project Financing Information 
 
Financial Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing 
(a) = (b) + (c) 
431.0 
million USD ($) 
 
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient 
(i) Senior Loans 
102.4 
million USD ($) 
As defined in the 
Term Sheet  
(Annex 5) 
As defined in the 
Term Sheet 
(Annex 5) 
(ii) Grants * 
4.0 
million USD ($) 
N/A 
N/A 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1 for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E. 
Total requested (i+ii) 
106.4 
million USD ($) 
 
(c) Co-
financing to 
recipient 
 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount3 
Currency 
Name of 
Institution4 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Senior Loans 
6.2 
million USD ($) 
KDB 
TBD 
Based on  
market and 
project 
conditions 
 
TBD 
Based on  
market and 
project 
conditions 
Pari Passu 
Senior Loans 
36.65 
million USD ($) 
KDB 
 Pari Passu 
Senior Loans 
111.0 
million USD ($) 
Mirae Asset 
Daewoo 
Loan Fund 
TBD 
Senior Loans 
42.7 
million USD ($) 
Other 
investors 
TBD 
 
Equity 
128.1 
million USD ($) 
Project 
Sponsors 
N/A 
N/A 
junior 
Lead financing institution4: KDB, Mirae Asset Daewoo 
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co-financing institution 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable) 
In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deploys the GCF financing directly to the recipient, (i.e. the GCF financing 
passes directly from the GCF to the recipient through the AE) or if the AE is the recipient itself, in the proposed 
financial instrument and terms as described in part (b), this subsection can be skipped. 
As stated in the Term Sheet, the agreed Accredited Entity Fee is four per cent (4%) of the total GCF 
proceeds, subject to finalization of the AMA and FAA. It should also be noted that the Accredited Entity 
fee is not included in the project budget in section (b) above. 
 
                                                             
3 The amount of each financial instrument is indicative, and the ratio of co-financing will be slightly different in each 
project based on market conditions. The exact amount will be decided after the financial closing of the final project. 
GCF loan to go proportionately with co-investors including KDB. 
4 Co-financing institutions and lead financing institutions except for KDB are indicative.  
5 A portion of senior loan (the actual covered amount) where lenders are protected and covered against the credit risk 
of the borrower and/or political risk of the project by third party entities (i.e. MDBs/ECAs/private entities)

=== PAGE 13 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 79 
 
B 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable) 
How market price or expected commercial rate return was (non-concessional) determined? 
 
The only government bond issued in USD for the past five years in Fiji is a USD 1 billion government bond issued in 
September 22, 2015 (5-year maturity). The initial interest rate of the government bond was 6.625% and currently, the 
distribution rate is 6.518%.  
Based on the information, it is estimated that the USD market rate is formed at about 7% with 8-year maturity (Assuming 
no other credit risk except country risk). 
 
Figure 1 Market Rate Estimated through the Fijian Government Bond Rate 
 
(Source: Bloomberg) 
 
Private financial institutions such as local commercial banks and pension funds have been contacted to check their 
willingness to participate in financing the Programme, and they requested financial terms as below: 
∙ 
LTV: Less than or equal to  70%  
∙ 
DSCR: Minimum simple DSCR 1.2x 
 
 
Please provide an overview of the size of total banking assets, debt capital markets and equity capital markets which could 
be tapped to finance the proposed project/programme. 
 
Due to only a few renewable energy IPP projects in Fiji and PNG, constraints impeding adequate financing for the 
Programme exist. In the case of a pilot project implemented by potential project sponsors of the first biomass power plant 
in Sabeto, Fiji (Sub-component 1.1), foreign commercial banks including those in Korea and local commercial banks in Fiji 
were contacted for debt financing, but due to political, construction, and foreign exchange risks, financing was 
unsuccessful. As a result, the corporate financing scheme based on sponsor credits was applied for the pilot project. 
However, this is not a replicable or expandable financial structure due to credit limit set by institutional internal control 
measures. In order to encourage participation of other commercial banks, an approach of enhancing stability of the 
financial structure through the GCF participation is needed. 
 
Please provide an overview of market rates (i.e. 1-year T-Bill, 5-year government bond, 5-year corporate bond (specify 
credit rating) and 5-year syndicate loan.  
Provide examples or information on comparable transactions 
 
Please refer to the information provided for the above question.

=== PAGE 14 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 79 
 
C 
Please fill out applicable sub-sections and provide additional information if necessary, as these requirements may vary 
depending on the nature of the project / programme. 
C.1. Strategic Context 
Please describe relevant national, sub-national, regional, global, political, and/or economic factors that help to 
contextualize the proposal, including existing national and sector policies and strategies. 
 
The proposed Programme is designed to address various needs of South Pacific SIDS, namely Fiji and PNG, in an 
integrated manner. That is, the Programme will enable transformation of South Pacific SIDS into countries with not only 
sustainable economies, but also climate-resilient environment. National and regional context that could be dealt through 
the Programme include eradication of invasive plants, utilization of idled and degraded lands, and diversification of the 
countries’ energy portfolios. 
 
<Fiji> 
Country context. With a population of approximately 890,000, Fiji is a large tropical island country in the South Pacific 
Ocean with a land area of more than 18,333 square kilometers. The country consists of 330 islands, and amongst those 
islands almost 70% of total population resides in its two largest islands, Viti Levu and Vanua Levu. Although Fiji is 
relatively developed and is a relatively large country among South Pacific SIDS, it confronts various challenges that other 
neighboring South Pacific SIDS face. In particular, Fiji is highly vulnerable to climate change and extreme weather events 
which often affect health care, water resources, agricultural activities and infrastructure located near the coastal regions 
of the country, resulting in slowing down of economic growth. For instance, in 2016, Cyclone Winston6 slammed the 
entire nation, killed more than 40 people, left tens of thousands homeless, and severely damaged schools, housings and 
public infrastructure. Since the disastrous cyclone outbreak, the Fijian government has developed the cyclone response 
system, and arranged a cluster team in collaboration with Fiji Red Cross Society. At present, the cluster team acts as a 
control tower in cyclone emergency. 
Expansion of renewable energy capacity. Fiji mainly utilizes hydropower and diesel power plants for electricity 
generation; the power generation mix for 2015 was 44.90% hydro, 52% diesel and heavy fuel oil, 0.63% wind with the 
remaining 2.47% provided by few IPPs. However, both hydropower and diesel power generation are unstable sources of 
energy, as they are highly influenced by external conditions such as seasonal fluctuation in the precipitation rate and 
global energy price. Therefore, the two energy sources are growingly becoming unreliable, given the increase in 
economic activities and electricity demand. According to the Fiji Electricity Authority (FEA)’s Power Development Plan, 
the electricity demand is expected to grow by 3% annually until 2020. Accordingly, total electricity and peak load demand 
are expected to reach 1,352 Gigawatt-hour (GWh) and 256 MW, respectively in 2020.7 In order to reduce the 
environmental impact of its electricity generation portfolio and to meet the growing electricity demand, Fiji Electricity 
Authority is looking for potential IPPs and alternative options in favor of renewable energy sources. 
 
Aligned with such needs for more sustainable energy sources, the Department of Energy announced Fiji National Energy 
Policy 2013-2020 in 2013, which attempts to respond to increasing energy demand, and to decrease imported fossil fuels 
hindering the country’s economic development. The policy aims at raising the share of renewable energy sources in 
electricity generation to 81% by 2020 and 99% by 2030.  
 
The Fijian government’s commitment to the impacts of climate change by reducing CO2 emission in the energy sector 
has been demonstrated in Fiji’s NDC Implementation Roadmap. The NDC Implementation Roadmap, recently published 
by the GGGI under the guidance of the Ministry of Economy, suggests medium to long-term actions for the Government 
of Fiji. The Roadmap includes actions to increase renewable energy capacity, and highlights the role of biomass and 
waste to energy as the largest GHG mitigation contributor. In summary, these mitigation actions include the followings 
and items which include this Programme are underlined: 
 
                                                             
6 Cyclone Winston, rated a category 5 cyclone, swept through the Fiji Island in 2016. During this disaster, 43 people 
were confirmed dead, 156 people injured, and at least two people missing. Communication systems and power grids 
have been disturbed for more than a year. Due to the limited number and capacity of existing power stations, the 
cyclone impact on a single power station may cause a cascade impact on the nationwide electricity supply. 
7 Fiji Electricity Authority (FEA), Power Development Plan (2010)

=== PAGE 15 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 79 
 
C 
 
Table 1 Mitigation Actions in NDC Implementation Roadmap 
Period 
Contents 
Short-Term 
(2017~2020) 
 Grid extension and improvements 
 Increased RE power generation (12MW biomass, 32MW solar) 
 Increased sustainable biomass for fuel use (14,000 ha) 
Medium-term 
(2021~2025) 
 Grid extension and improvements 
 Increased RE power generation (28MW biomass/Waste to energy, 26MW solar, 84 
hydro) 
 Increased sustainable biomass for fuel use (5,000 ha) 
Long-term 
(2026~2030) 
 Grid extension and improvements 
 Increased RE power generation (25MW biomass/biogas, 69MW solar) 
 Increased sustainable biomass for fuel use (14,000 ha) 
 
Forestry and land use in Fiji. Fiji has been suffering from rampant diffusion of invasive trees throughout their lands, as 
the trees are increasingly threatening agricultural activities and natural ecosystems. Particularly, African tulip, which was 
purposefully introduced in the 1930s in Fiji as a street tree and household ornaments, has been invading arable lands 
and threatening biodiversity as it takes up the sunlight and moisture needed for native plants. Recognizing such adverse 
impacts of African tulip, the Fijian government has identified African tulip as a major threat to the indigenous forest estate 
as well as to plantations and agricultural land as early as 1999, when FAO implemented a project to identify the level of 
the problem posed by African tulips. Also, in 2000, the Fijian government held a national workshop on the control of 
African tulip in coordination with FAO, through which a survey of the tree distribution in Viti Levu Island was conducted. 
Moreover, recognizing such adverse impacts of African tulip, the government is currently developing a strategy to control 
and eradicate the species from Fiji. 
 
As an initiative to eradicate the invasive species, in 2015, the Ministry of Fisheries and Forests issued an Expression of 
Interest (EoI) seeking for interested parties that are willing to assist the Fijian government in controlling and eradicating 
African tulip in Fiji, as part of a programme titled “Implementing a Ridge to Reef (R2R) approach to Preserve Ecosystem 
Services, Sequester Carbon, Improve Climate Resilience and Sustain Livelihoods in Fiji” supported by UNDP. The 
programme’s components included 1) conservation of terrestrial and marine biodiversity, 2) conservation, restoration and 
enhancement of carbon stocks through sustainable forestry, and 3) integrated natural resources management. Activities 
for the second component included removal of invasive alien species, notably African tulip. Further details regarding the 
EoI released by the Ministry can be found in Section E.5.3. 
 
In addition, Fiji has been experiencing decline in the country’s major industries such as sugarcane and pine industry. This 
has led to ongoing exit of farmers and companies from such industries, and consequently, much of the artificially 
afforested lands for such traditional businesses have been left idle. Each biomass plant of the proposed Programme will 
be accompanied with a plantation business, which will utilize ex-sugar and ex- pine plantation areas that are abandoned 
or severely degraded because of 3 to 4 times pine harvesting. This will serve as a sustainable means for fuel supply of 
the plant, and will ultimately enable income generation for the local community.  
 
<PNG> 
Country context. With a population of approximately 7.5 million, PNG is a large tropical country in the South Pacific 
regions with a land area of 462,840 square kilometers. PNG is classified as a lower middle income country8 and has a 
GDP per capita of USD 2,744 in 2015. The country’s economy is largely divided into formal and informal sectors. Formal 
sector is where natural resources such as copper, gold, and oil are exported on a large scale, while informal sector 
mainly refers to agricultural sector which 85% of the population, majority living in rural areas, depend their livelihoods on. 
Such high dependence on the limited number of primary industries leaves the country vulnerable to internal and external 
factors such as total output changes and global commodities downturns. Moreover, the livelihoods of the rural population 
                                                             
8 World Bank, PNG, http://data.worldbank.org/country/papua-new-guinea

=== PAGE 16 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 79 
 
C 
that depend on self-subsistent agriculture are threatened by extreme weather and climate events such as El Nino, as 
agriculture is a climate-sensitive sector. 
 
Expansion of renewable energy in PNG. According to PNG National Energy Policy 2016-2020, it has about 580 MW of 
installed capacity, with most of it covered by hydro (230 MW, 39.7%) and diesel (217 MW, 37.4%).9 
 
The electricity demand in PNG is anticipated to rise sharply as needs for energy intensive activities such as mining, 
infrastructure development, and commercial and residential building constructions will increase. 10  Also, the PNG 
government is aiming to raise the national electrification rate to 70% by 2030, especially by expanding rural electricity 
infrastructure.11 Under such circumstances, the PNG government is turning to renewable energy sources for which the 
country has large potential, but is yet to be fully utilized. As an effort in expanding renewable energy capacity, the PNG 
government initiated the National Strategic Plan 2010-50, also known as the PNG Vision 2050. Among the seven pillars 
for development, the Environmental Sustainability and Climate Change Pillar focuses on the development of energy 
sector, and posits that the PNG economy should attain 100% electricity generation from renewable and sustainable 
sources by 2050. Specific level of mitigation targets will be determined by the availability of external funding. 
 
Aligned with the PNG Vision 2050, the PNG Government has set total electricity capacity targets by 2030 in the Medium 
Term Development Plan 2011-2015, which is a five-year rolling development plan for the country, as below: 
 
Table 2 Targets of Total Electricity Capacity (MW) in PNG 
Technology 
2020 
2030 
Hydro 
580 
1,020 
Gas 
280 
390 
Diesel and Coal 
90 
60 
Geothermal 
112 
350 
Biomass 
24 
75 
others 
24 
75 
Total 
1,110 
1,970 
(Source: Papua New Guinea, Department of National Planning & Monitoring) 
 
Moreover, PNG submitted its INDC (Intended Nationally Determined Contribution) in September 2015, and the final 
version of NDC (Nationally Determined Contribution) to the UNFCCC in March 2016, which was the first formal 
submission of an NDC to the UNFCCC parties. The NDC sets out a clear goal of raising the share of renewable energy 
for electricity generation to 100% by 2050.12 
 
Forestry and land use in PNG. Despite covering less than 0.5% of Earth’s surface, it is estimated that PNG holds 5-
10 % of global biodiversity. Since 74% of PNG is covered with forest,13 the country has been paying much attention to 
seeking ways for effectively managing forests and land use. National Forest Development Guidelines announced in 2009 
reflects PNG government’s initiatives of achieving economic recovery through the development of the nation’s natural 
resources including the forest resources, while taking into consideration environmental preservation, social and cultural 
values of the forests in PNG. 
 
 
                                                             
9 PNG Department of Public Enterprises and Department of Petroleum and Energy, National Energy Policy 2016-
2020 (2015) 
10 Department of National Planning and Monitoring, Papua New Guinea Development Strategic Plan 2010-2030 
(2010) 
11 ANZ, Powering PNG into the Asian Century (2015) 
12 PNG INDC 
13 World Bank, PNG, Forest area http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/AG.LND.FRST.ZS?locations=PG&page=2 
(2015)

=== PAGE 17 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 79 
 
C 
 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
Describe the baseline scenario (i.e. emissions baseline, climate vulnerability baseline, key barriers, challenges and/or 
policies) and the outcomes and the impact that the project/programme will aim to achieve in improving the baseline 
scenario. 
 
<Emission Baseline> 
Fiji contributes minimally to GHG emissions on global scale. Over the span of 30 years, from 1980 to 2013, Fiji has only 
experienced a subtle increase in the GHG emissions. However, according to the INDC, business as usual (BAU) 
scenario for increases in total fossil fuel consumption for energy production considering extrapolated population and

=== PAGE 18 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 79 
 
C 
economic growth would give total GHG emissions in 2030 from the energy sector of around 2500 kt with an electricity 
sector GHG emission level of around 500 kt. 14 Despite having relatively small GHG emissions compared to heavy 
emitting countries, Fiji is one of the most vulnerable countries facing the worst effects of climate change due to its 
physical location. Fijian communities are experiencing climate change impacts such as eroding shorelines and 
riverbanks, shortage of water, depletion of fisheries stock, reduction in food production, increase in large-scale flooding 
increase in outbreaks of vector borne diseases, and sea level rise.  
 
In case of PNG, the GHG emission has been drastically increased last 10 years, reaching 6,073 kt in 2013. According to 
the INDC, under BAU scenario, GHG emissions in 2030 could reach 18 Mt CO2 per year.15 Being one of South Pacific 
SIDS, just like Fiji, PNG has suffered a lot from extreme weather events related to climate change impacts. These events 
will eventually lead to inundation of coastal areas and low lying inland. It is also expected to cause loss of wetlands, 
changes to fisheries, forestry and agriculture sectors, alteration to water resources and land use practices and impacts on 
health, particularly vector borne diseases such as Malaria and other related water and air borne diseases.16 
 
Figure 2 CO2 emissions in Fiji and PNG (kt) 
 
 
<Programme Objective17> 
This Programme will mitigate 4,736,230tCO2eq (annually 189,449 tCO2eq) in Fiji and PNG from 1) transportation of 
African tulip; 2) development of the SRWC plantation on idled and degraded land, and 3) the plant operation in 
Component 1 and 2. E.1.2. presents the detailed calculation.  
 
 
C.3. Project / Programme Description 
Describe the main activities and the planned measures of the project/programme according to each of its components. 
 
<Programme overview> 
The Programme consists of three components: 1) development of four biomass power plants; 2) development of one 
wood pellet plant; and 3) technical assistance. The figure below depicts all the courses from securing biomass fuel 
sources through the biomass power plants and pellet plant to biomass outputs and more detailed description of each 
component and efforts to increase sustainability are further added on. 
 
                                                             
14 Fiji INDC 
15 PNG INDC 
16 UNDP, Climate Change Adaptation 
17 The precise capacity of each biomass power plant is subject to change depending on the needs and conditions of 
each project site. Also, the amount of CO2 emission reduction is an indicative one based on brief analysis, and more 
detailed analysis will be conducted with TA grant provided by the GCF. 
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
FIJI
Papua New Guinea

=== PAGE 19 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 79 
 
C 
Figure 3 Biomass supply chain 
 
 
<Component 1> Development of four Biomass Power Plants  
Biomass power plants will be developed along with land use for sustainable biomass production in both Fiji and PNG. 
 
Biomass power plant. Component1 plans to build four biomass power plants with each 12MW capacity: three in Fiji; 
and one in PNG. The first biomass power plant will be developed in Sabeto, Fiji. The construction is expected to start in 
4Q of 2018, and to be completed in 4Q of 2020 (the end date of EPC). The rest three biomass power plants (two 
additional 12MW biomass power plants in Fiji and one more plant in PNG) will be developed in accordance with the 
implementation schedule (see C.8).  
 
All the biomass power plants of Component 1 are expected to have similar specification. Key details of the specification 
are shown as below. 
 
- 
The site area required for each biomass power plant is estimated to be 10~20 ha. Only idle and industrial areas 
will be considered for the project site. 
- 
Approx. 84,000 tons of biomass fuel per year is needed for each power plant.  
- 
The biomass power plant shall be developed on conventional steam turbine technology including a turbine 
generator having a nominal gross capacity of approximately 12MW. 
- 
Electricity generated from the plants will be sold to the Fiji Electricity Authority (FEA) and Papua New Guinean 
Power Limited (PPL).

=== PAGE 20 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 79 
 
C 
Sustainable biomass production. Biomass fuel resources have been categorized into 3 different categories: 1) 
eradication of African tulip; 2) SRWC plantation; and 3) wood residues. Eradicated African tulip and cultivated SRWC are 
the primary fuel source while wood residues, by-products from harvesting and sawmills, are the secondary fuel source. 
Three biomass power plants in Fiji will use all the three options as biomass fuel sources, while one biomass power plant 
in PNG will use only the second and third options as fuel sources except for the first option of African tulip. All biomass 
fuel resources will be sourced from nearby areas in order to reduce inefficient transportation costs and ensuing 
emissions, and will be used as a woodchip type (raw chopping biomass). 
 
When it comes to sourcing the three types of biomass fuel, the Programme ensures sustainability of land use 
management in Fiji and PNG. 
 
(1) 
African Tulip. The first biomass fuel source is harvesting of African tulip which is widely spread in Fiji, where the 
amount of land that has been invaded is estimated to be 30,000ha18. The Fijian Ministry of Forests has identified the 
invasive African tulip tree as a major threat to the indigenous forests as well as to agricultural land as early as 2000. For 
the past 16 years, however, little has been done to take a coordinated action, with the tree continuing to spread over 
larger areas. African tulip harvesting presents a great momentum for the Ministry of Forestry to initiate invasive species 
control activities. In addition, the Programme suggests a solution making use of eradicated African tulip piled in stacks for 
energy production. 
 
All the harvesting activities will be monitored by the Ministry of Forests for its compliance to Fiji Harvesting Code as well 
as international industrial best practices. There is no need for land purchase or lease associated with the African Tulip 
fuel supply operation. Only access rights need to be obtained through an access agreement with landowners in order to 
conduct the harvesting of Africa Tulip trees. After eradication, decision on the use of the harvested land lies with local 
landowners’ desires: agricultural activities or reforestation. In case of native forestry which takes up the most part of 
African tulip areas, on the other hands, reforestation will be implemented with carefully selected native species which will 
be planted in forests where invasive species control actions are taken.  
 
(2) SWRC plantation. While other fuel sources are only for the short to medium term supply or only form a small 
portion of the entire biomass fuel supply, SRWC plantation is designed to supply a significant amount of reliable fuel 
source to the power plants in the long term. Each power plant is targeting 5,000 ha of land for SRWC plantation, which is 
focusing on idled and degraded areas that sugar cane and pine trees were once planted in, and that are outside of the 
present economic supply zone. The plantation areas will be selected among places close to biomass power plants to 
minimize the transportation distance. 
 
For plantation, Gliricidia sepium (hereinafter “Gliricidia”) which is well known for its fast growing and easy coppicing 
nature and high calorific value has been selected. Developing the SRWC (Short Rotate Wood Coppices) plantation with 
Gliricidia in ex-sugar cane lands will not only contribute to forest and land use management in a sustainable and efficient 
manner by recovering degraded lands into arable lands, but also help revitalizing local economy for community members.  
 
(3) Wood residues. For sustainable biomass supply, wood residues from harvesting and sawmill processing will be 
considered. Sawmills generate more than 100,000 tons/year of residue which is normally treated as waste and either 
burnt at the sawmill yard or dumped. The Ministry of Forests encourages sawmill operators not to dump or burn the 
residue but to find a sustainable use for it. This Programme offers the opportunity to reuse the wasted residues in an 
efficient way as well as finally gives the economic benefit to local sawmill companies. 
 
Individual fuel agreements between the project SPC and sawmills are to be made for every project. Under the 
agreement, surplus, if any, goes to corresponding projects. Nonetheless, in the same conditions such as location, 
transportation efficiency, etc, the supply priority goes to biomass power plants than the pellet plant. 
 
 
                                                             
18 The amount of land that has been invaded is estimated to be 65,000ha, however 35,000ha of this land is for steep 
areas, forests roads, waterways and buffer-zones, therefore only 30,000ha is available.

=== PAGE 21 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 79 
 
C 
※ Biomass Monitoring System 
 
The Programme contains essential arrangements for monitoring activities in compliance with the GCF standards (see 
H.2). In addition to such arrangements, the Programme intends to set up a biomass monitoring system that leads to 
spontaneous local engagement in an efficient manner, and that benefits end beneficiaries of affected communities. The 
biomass monitoring system will contribute to sustainable biomass supply chain. This monitoring system will be designed 
after considering local context, applicable technology with affordable cost, and the most appropriate providers in the 
relevant market.  
 
Technological change occurs at an exponential rate. Also, an innovative solution in a context can be an unattractive 
solution in another context. Accordingly, the Programme will do its best to devise the most feasible and attractive 
monitoring technology that corresponds the local circumstances at the timing of the project implementation. For instance, 
the following methodologies could be considered as one of technology application options.  
 
Firstly, an innovative monitoring technology could use smart-phone or satellite-based data for land-use and biomass fuel 
resources so as to protect forests from illegal and unsustainable exploitation, to verify the legality and sustainability of 
commodities entering the relevant supply chains, and simultaneously to improve the economic stability, welfare, and 
security of forest-based communities. An indicative monitoring methodology could begin with a step that trained 
community surveyors register approved harvest zones and biomass power plant locations with the use of web or smart-
phone application. The social supply chain tracking technology is based on a trusted digital mechanism around 
registered individuals and communities, where, instead of just tracking the commodities, the relationships through which 
a flow of the commodities can be tracked. 
 
< Example 1. Establishing a Smart-phone & Satellite System> 
 
 
                                                               
A second option is to adopt a drone-based monitoring system with regards to poor telecommunication infrastructure 
especially in many places where forest activities will be undertaken. Monitoring results on harvesting and plantation could 
be updated on a quarterly basis at a website. Collected data sets would be shared to the public, except for some 
confidential data sets. Local people will regularly check the data after registration as community surveyors. Actually, 
Nabou project is currently trying to go through the feasibility of the drone-based technology as a trial. The following 
pictures are a capture screen (left) and a monitoring trial activity (right) using drones. 
 
< Example 2. Establishing a Drone-based System>

=== PAGE 22 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 79 
 
C 
 
  
Above-mentioned technologies are attractive in theory but those should be applicable in local context of vulnerable target 
countries. In short, the feasibility of such indicative technologies and methodologies should be thoroughly studied, 
analyzed, and finally proven in terms of applicability and cost for two years before the very first project comes into 
commercial operation. A series of such technology financing process will be financed by the GCF grant (Component 3). 
Aside from the two examples, the Programme is open to other technological options if a more proper technology is 
identified and the technology can be applied within the reasonable boundary of spending. A finally chosen and developed 
monitoring system could be realized firstly around small areas, and be expanded into farther affected regions with 
tracking all biomass moves within the supply chain.  
 
Additionally, the supervision of the Fijian Ministry of Forests will be added on to all the procedures of the biomass supply 
chain in accordance with local regulations in order to deliver added values of the GCF involvement into vulnerable end 
beneficiaries in local communities 
 
Biodiversity and sustainability in land use management. The Programme contributes to biodiversity and 
sustainability of Fiji’s indigenous environment by eradicating African tulip trees that uncontrollably crowd out native 
species. With the invasive species control being done, all the likely environmental and social risks will be thoroughly 
analyzed and properly managed in accordance with the Plantation and Harvesting Guidelines developed by the project 
sponsor in accordance with both IFC and local standards (see Appendix 6 in ESIA for the first biomass power plant in 
Sabeto). Once invasive species control operations are done, selected native species will be planted along buffer areas to 
develop natural forests and to prevent African tulip trees from being re-established, which clearly promotes biodiversity 
and sustainability of Fiji. 
 
In addition, the Programme ensures no adverse biodiversity impact of SRWC plantation as it will develop plantation in ex-
sugarcane or ex-pine plantation areas. The ex-plantation areas are characterized by fragile biodiversity because no 
indigenous species can be properly settled down in the long idled and severely degraded ex-plantation land. The SRWC 
plantation, therefore, does not require any clearance of indigenous forests, which confirms no threat nor likely adverse 
impact on biodiversity at all, and further enhance sustainability by recovering the soil fertility. 
 
In case of PNG, the same criteria utilizing the idle and degraded lands will be applied to select approximately 5,000 
plantation areas in PNG and the site-specific guidelines for plantation based on its unique contexts will be developed.

=== PAGE 23 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 79 
 
C 
 
 
<Component 2> Development of one Wood Pellet Plant  
The wood pellet plant comprises of three sub-components; 1) pellet production infrastructure; 2) capacity increase for 
existing transportation infrastructure; and 3) biomass power plant for the wood pellet plant. The Component 2 has a 
strong rationale as a mitigation project that satisfies two result areas of (1) forestry and land use and (2) energy access 
and power generation. 
 
Firstly, the Component 2 satisfies the result area of forestry and land use. The development of a wood pellet plant 
※  Biomass vs. Food Security   
The Programme makes sure no possibility to distort the local food production chain including food markets in both 
Fiji and PNG as land required for the Programme will be chosen among idle or degraded areas with no competitive 
tension between ‘land for food’ and ‘land for energy’. In short, the change in land use will not cause adverse 
consequences on the local food security as the project sites have not been used for agricultural purposes for a 
number of years. Instead, the Programme will address threats to food security by transforming idle and degraded 
lands into productive and fertile plantation, which anticipates the improvement of livelihoods for local residents as 
well as the enhancement of food production.  
In case of Fiji, a total crop production has fallen due to a declining sugarcane export industry damaged by change of 
the European Union’s sugar subsidy policy. As the ex-sugarcane plantation has been developed for the purpose of 
export, the Programme’s use of ex-sugarcane plantation areas is unlikely to have adverse impacts on the local food 
production status.   
The total land areas acquired for biomass plantation will be 50,000 ha (5,000 ha for a biomass power plant * 3 
projects + 35,000 ha for a pellet plant) in Fiji. Since the agricultural land is 425,000 ha*, the land to be used for the 
plantation is approximately 11.8% of a total agricultural area in Fiji.  
At present, 39,000 ha out of 80,000 ha of sugarcane plantation areas and 30,000 ha of 79,000 ha pine plantation 
areas are being idled and abandoned without productive activities in Fiji. The Programme makes sure that all the 
50,000 ha of SRWC plantation areas in Fiji will be chosen only within those idle lands. The plantation area, which is 
approximately 11.8% of the total agricultural area, will be 0% of the actual agricultural productive area, as it will be 
all located in the idle abandoned portion of Fiji agricultural land, and it will have direct and multiple positive effects 
for the local rural economy. The land selection amongst idle areas will be periodically and thoroughly monitored by 
third party experts under the supervision of KDB.    
Furthermore, Fiji is supposed to witness a decline in population since a slight increase of around 25,000 by 2030, 
according to the United Nations Population Division. Asian Development Bank says 0.5% population growth rate in 
Fiji, which means little growing needs to increase food production. From a long term perspective, the conversion to 
productive land use will deliver socio-economic benefits to Fijians so that the local community could afford enough to 
maintain livelihoods including food security. 
PNG expects different dynamics in terms of land use area and population forecast. The total land areas acquired for 
the plantation of a single project is to be 5,000 ha in PNG. Comparing 1,190,000 ha* of the agricultural land, the 
portion used for the plantation is less than 0.4% of total agricultural areas in PNG. The identical monitoring activities 
will be done in PNG. Rather, considering the United Nations Population Division’s substantial population growth 
forecast in PNG for the project lifespan, the Programme will be indeed able to address socio-economic needs of the 
increasing population in the foreseeable future. A series of socio-economic benefits will contribute to enabling the 
growing population to improve quality of life as well as sustain their livelihoods.  
(*Source : http://www.fao.org/countryprofiles/en/)

=== PAGE 24 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 79 
 
C 
contributes to CO2 mitigation in forestry and land use by carrying out plantation. Plantation for pellet will be only in idle 
and degraded lands of 35,000 hectares in Vanua Levu which were abandoned with dwindling sugarcane and pine 
industries of Fiji. In brief, the pellet plant development and accompanying plantation will contribute to 329,717 tCO2 
mitigation (see E.1. Impact Potential for detail).  
 
Secondly, the Component 2 satisfies the result area of energy access and power generation. The development of a wood 
pellet plant contributes to CO2 mitigation in pellet purchasing regions. Priority target areas for pellet provision are South 
Pacific SIDS – that is the reason for the Programme to have a title ‘in the South Pacific’, not only Fiji and Papua New 
Guinea. Furthermore mitigation impacts further reaching out to Asian countries with a surging demand on biomass 
pellets.  
 
Sub-component 2.1: pellet production infrastructure. This sub-component plans to build a wood pellet production 
plant for producing pellets of 500,000 tons per year. The plant is composed of chipping, drying, pelletizing, and storing 
facilities. This sub-component requires around 60ha for such facilities.  
 
Biomass fuel sources for the wood pellet production will be secured in a similar structure with Component1- the sources 
will be secured through 1) eradicated African tulip, 2) SRWC plantation and 3) wood residues from local sawmills. For the 
SRWC plantation, Component 2 plans to develop 35,000 hectare of plantation in idle and degraded ex-plantation lands 
near the pellet plant in Vanua Levu. 
 
Sub-component 2.2: Capacity increase for existing transportation infrastructure. This sub-component plans to 
renovate the Wairiki Port19 and its surrounding facilities such as loading conveyor in Vanua Levu for efficient fuel 
sourcing and smooth transport of produced pellets. This Port and its related facilities are now being utilized by nearby 
sawmills owned and run by Tropik Wood, a statutory body of Fiji. Related to the Port usage, a concern has been 
gradually increased by the Fijian government, owing to a low frequency of usage caused by declining local industries. 
The sub-component aims at an increasing the frequency of its utilization in an efficient way. As part of the renovation 
work, an additional barge docking point is supposed to be built for the sake of moving harvested African tulip into the 
pellet plant. 
 
Sub-component 2.3: Biomass plant for the wood pellet plan. This sub-component plans to establish the captive 
biomass power plant of 24MW capacity attached to the pellet production infrastructure; this sub-component is composed 
of two sets of main facilities of 12MW biomass power plant. The maximum electricity requirement for the pellet 
infrastructure operation is 17.33MW. The power generation plant will supply electricity for wood pellet production with any 
surplus electricity to be sold to the FEA.  
 
Potential buyers. Produced wood pellets optimized for long-haul shipping are used for mostly export purpose, and not 
for the biomass plants within this Programme. The potential export target regions are SIDS and Asian markets along 
with consideration of a surging demand, transportation efficiency, sustainability of long-term contracts, and so on. 
 
When it comes to the SIDS market, produced pellets will be supplied to isolated off-grid areas in Fiji as well as to 
neighboring SIDS with a heavy reliance on imported fossil fuels, together with delivery of small scale biomass facilities as 
a package. Small-scale biomass power facilities are expected to be supplied into areas without national grid connection 
in South Pacific SIDS, along with grant resources from international aid agencies.  
 
An initial target area is vulnerable off-grid areas in Fiji20 and the facilities with 100kW capacity are planned to be built. 
Once the initial trial settles down in Fiji, the modality will be expanded into neighboring SIDS. The pellet will selectively 
target off-grid communities – representing deprivation and climate vulnerability – scattered all the way throughout South 
Pacific. Such wood pellet supply to the South Pacific is expected to bring about transformation towards renewable 
                                                             
19 The tentative location of the pellet plant is in Wairiki jetty in Vanua Levu, which is an unseen place on Google 
Maps. The site is definitely different from Wairiki in Taveuni Island. 
20 Even though produced pellet is mostly sold for export, parts of pellets can be sold to selectively off-grid 
communities – representing deprivation and climate vulnerability in Fiji. By the way, produced pellet will not be used 
for on-grid biomass power plants under the Programme.

=== PAGE 25 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 79 
 
C 
biomass energy in off-grid communities having no choice but diesel.  
 
Once the initial trial settles down in Fiji, the modality will be expanded into neighboring SIDS. Neighboring SIDS have 
been actually paying a close attention to benefits the Programme would deliver. A series of consultation with aid 
agencies are being in progress in order to provide supports for distributing small-scale facilities into the vulnerable in 
isolated areas.   
Especially, wood pellets fit for long-distance shipping will give benefits to other Pacific SIDS such as Tonga, Vanuatu, 
and Marshall Islands where their soil profiles based on coral islands are too fragile to develop renewable energy 
facilities and plantation. The produced pellets can replace fossil fuels as the very economic alternative for these coral 
island countries when it comes to electricity generation. The increasing inter-Pacific trading activities further anticipate 
the enlargement and diversification of the current small-scale biomass market within the Pacific region as a whole.  
 
The pellets will also be sold in Asian countries with limited availability of readily accessible biomass fuels under long-
term supply contracts on a commercial basis. Korea and Japan are the potential export target countries in that they 
have strengthened policy schemes for supporting biomass. 
 
<Component 3> Technical Assistance 
Technical assistance is composed of 1) capacity building and knowledge sharing, and 2) creating the enabling 
environment for renewables (only PNG), and 3) development of CO2 calculation methodology. Since the Programme 
aims at the expansion of the Fijian model to the South Pacific region as a whole, a substantial portion (75%) of grant will 
be allocated to PNG in order to create the enabling environment for scale-up and replication.  
 
Sub-component 3.1 Technical assistance in Fiji 
By the support of the GCF grant, Sub-component 3.1 includes capacity building and knowledge sharing, and 
development of CO2 Calculation Methodology in Fiji. For the sake of management of capacity enhancement, Sub-
component 3.1 carries out capacity building activities by organizing training sessions at different career levels from the 
managerial personnel to local engineers, and carries out knowledge sharing activities by transferring technology into 
various stakeholders at a national level. As part of the capacity building and knowledge sharing element, a proper and 
feasible biomass monitoring system will be studied, analyzed, and proposed. The Programme will make endeavors to 
integrate the monitoring system into local entities in change. These activities will enable transfer of state-of-the-art 
technology to local employees in Fiji, and will raise awareness of the best technologies applied and to achieve a greater 
success of the Programme. 
 
As well, financial support will be given to the in-depth methodology study on how to measure, report and verify CO2 
savings from the use of biomass fuel stock in a sophisticated way. 
 
Sub-component 3.2 Technical assistance in PNG 
In reference to capacity building and knowledge sharing, and calculation methodology for CO2 savings, Sub-component 
3.2 has a similar structure with sub-component 3.1. As planned in Sub-component 3.1, Sub-component 3.2 will deliver 
capacity building training and knowledge sharing events that include the enhancement of the existing monitoring system 
of target countries, and devise precise CO2 measuring methodology on the basis of the PNG context.  Although all the 
activities feature a similar structure and content with those in Fiji, more financial resources will be assigned into these 
activities because PNG is extremely an unexplored land in comparison with Fiji. The Programme has already pioneered 
Fiji for biomass pilot, and has obtained baseline information and knowhow by undergoing trial and error. Undoubtedly, 
more efforts and resources are required for obtaining a comprehensive understanding and making the Programme work 
in the PNG. In order to replicate the successful Fijian model in PNG, these activities are necessarily needed and the 
grant portion of the GCF will be used for this in PNG.  
 
Considering the two countries’ similar features like the Pacific community, some parts of TA activities – such as biomass 
monitoring system and CO2 calculation methodology development, etc. – may be combined and carried out 
simultaneously if reasonable and necessary.

=== PAGE 26 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 79 
 
C 
Additionally, the Sub-component 3.2 focuses further on creating an enabling environment for successfully deploying 
renewable energy including biomass. In that PNG has experienced few renewable IPPs and no successful biomass IPP 
so far, the Programme sees a necessity to formulate the nation-wide enabling environment where multi-level 
stakeholders contribute to and benefit from the Programme. 
 
First of all, the Programme considers supporting the PNG government to make a model framework for successful 
renewable energy IPPs on the basis of the PNG context. As a first step, the Sub-component 3.2 may support a review on 
relevant policy, statutory, and other regulatory instruments that are applicable to the local energy market, and may 
identify all the potential parties involved in IPPs. Based on investigation results, the model framework will be established 
and the renewable IPP manual will be produced, containing the way how to design renewable IPP projects, and to 
facilitate a series of contracts and negotiation procedures. More specifically, the model framework will be a useful guide 
that provides eligibility criteria for selecting IPP stakeholders, and standards for unit costs, procurement, relevant product 
specifications, power purchase contracts, financing, responsibilities, and so on. Along with the model framework 
production, the Programme plans to support the enhancement of the institutional governance system in terms of 
capability and accountability. Therefore, it aims for responsible institutions of PNG to have a full understanding on the 
model framework, and to utilize that in proper ways as intended.   
 
As another part of the enabling environment making work, the Sub-component 3.2 will conduct investigation for mapping 
the pattern of land use and dynamics of biodiversity nation-wide across PNG. The mapping output will be part of valuable 
baseline information when it comes to enhancing the Programme’s suitability for the PNG context, and to the PNG 
government’s forthcoming policy making activities. In short, this mapping result will greatly support to make the model 
framework materialized in the unique PNG context. 
 
The detailed plans of TA are described in the table below, and the indicative procurement plan is attached as Annex 11 
in Section I.  
 
Table 3 Detailed plans for Technical Assistance 
Item 
Activities 
Country of Operation 
Capacity building 
and knowledge 
sharing 
 Training session for technical, E&S and gender capacities, and 
sustainable land management from the managerial personnel to 
local engineers. 
 Knowledge sharing events for learning advanced technologies 
and experiences from international best practices 
 Capacity building for designing the biomass monitoring system 
and knowledge sharing for spreading the system out   
Fiji and PNG 
Creating enabling 
environments for 
renewables 
 Setting a model framework for renewable IPPs after a thorough 
review on relevant regulatory instruments: 1) eligibility criteria for 
IPP stakeholders; and 2) systematic standards for unit costs, 
procurement, relevant product specifications, supply contracts, 
responsibilities.  
 Improving responsible authorities’ institutional governance system 
so that the devised model framework could be properly realized in 
practice   
  Mapping the land use patterns and deforestation dynamics as 
well as local biodiversity features 
Only PNG 
Development of 
CO2 calculation 
methodology 
 Sophisticated measuring methodology for CO2 savings will be 
devised in accordance with varying local contexts and project 
design details. 
Fiji and PNG 
  
Provide information on how the activities are linked to objectives, outputs and outcomes that the project/programme 
intends to achieve. The objectives, outputs and outcomes should be consistent with the information reported in the logic

=== PAGE 27 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 79 
 
C 
framework in section H. 
 
The Programme has five projects in total under the overall framework of three components. Component 1 has four 
projects (development of four biomass power plants with sustainable land use management) and Component 2 has one 
project (development of a wood pellet plant with sustainable land use management) while Component 3 plans to conduct 
technical assistance. The inputs and outputs of each project are described in the figure below.   
 
Figure 4 Input/output of Each Project in the Programme 
 
  
 
 
Section H elaborates how project activities of the Programme are designed to meet the target in a way consistent with 
the GCF’s Results Management Framework and Performance Management Framework using the baseline scenario, 
assumptions, indicator, and means of verification. 
 
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity) 
Describe the quality of the management team, overall strategy and financial profile of the Sponsor (Executing Entity) and 
how it will support the project/programme in terms of equity investment, management, operations, production and 
marketing. 
 
KDB will select project sponsors in order to establish a project SPC for each (sub) component in a open and transparent 
way and the project SPC will perform as an executing entity of each project. The Investment Criteria for selecting 
sponsors (Appendix 1 of the Term Sheet attached as Annex 5 in Section I) is as follows: 
 
(i) Credit Requirement: Companies having credit ratings that are at least “BBB-” by S&P or “Baa3” by Moody’s. In case of 
Korean sponsors, companies having credit ratings of at least “BBB-” by one of NICE Information Service Co, Ltd., Korea 
Ratings Co, Ltd. or Korea Investors Services, Inc.; or;  
 
(ii) Track Records Requirement:  
(1) Experiences that utilize commercially proven technologies and employ experienced management teams which 
are related to bio energy industries; 
(2) Track records that meet the ongoing operating, monitoring and maintenance requirements for bio energy

=== PAGE 28 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 79 
 
C 
industries; and, 
(3) Experience of performing and/or to have performed at least one project in South Pacific SIDS related to bio 
energy industries 
 
- Financial investors (financial institutions or private equity funds as the case may be) can also be invited as sponsors. 
Credit Requirement or Track Records Requirements are not required for financial investors 
 
Based on the above criteria, KDB has been tentatively considering a consortium of GIMCO, GS Power and Mirae Asset 
Daewoo as the project sponsors for the first biomass power plant in Sabeto, Fiji (Sub-component 1.1). GIMCO and Mirae 
Asset Daewoo are also tentatively considered as the project sponsors for the wood pellet plant in Wairiki, Fiji 
(Component 2). The potential project sponsors were those of the pilot biomass power plant implemented in Nabou, Fiji, 
and thus are well-equipped with knowledge and experience pertaining to developing IPP projects in Fiji. Background 
information regarding each tentative partner of the consortium is as below: 
 
GIMCO. GIMCO, established in 2001, is a small and medium-sized enterprise in Korea that specializes in plant facility, 
renewable energy, biomass co-generation, community energy supply system, and smart grid. For overseas projects, it 
has numerous track records in various biomass power projects including a 30 MW biomass power plant (engineering) in 
Philippines and a 1.5 MW biomass power plant (EPC) in Cambodia. It has especially paid attention to implementing 
small-scale IPP projects and fuel supply projects in South Pacific SIDS that lack power generation infrastructure, albeit 
their abundant bio-fuel resources such as wood and agricultural residues. In 2017, GIMCO has successfully completed 
Fiji’s first biomass IPP project, and plans to replicate such achievement.  
 
GS Power. GS Power is one of Korea’s major IPPs established in 2000. It is in charge of load management during peak 
hours in the Seoul-Incheon area of South Korea, and operates a total of 950 MW plants and has abundant experience in 
developing and operating traditional and renewable power generation projects. In terms of financial soundness, the 
company has generated net cash flow of more than KRW 120 billion on average for the past five years, based on its 
stable foundation for earnings and low working capital. It has shown a strong financial structure with net borrowings of 
KRW 71.6 billion, the debt ratio of 79.5%, and the debt to total assets ratio of 11.1% at the end of 2014. GS Power is a 
subsidiary of GS Group, the 7th largest conglomerate in Korea, and this provides stable credit ratings for the company, 
thus enabling GS Power to have better access into the capital market. 
 
Mirae Asset Daewoo. Mirae Asset Daewoo, the Programme’s financial investor, will contribute to the successful 
implementation of the Programme based on its solid foundation of capital and experience of investing in various 
renewable energy projects. Mirae Asset Daewoo has participated in multiple renewable energy projects as principal 
investor or financial advisory. Moreover, it is in possession of the largest equity capital in Korea. Its revenue in FY2017 
was KRW 10,299 billion and the owner’s capital was KRW 7,385 billion in 2017. It is part of Mirae Asset Financial Group, 
which is one of Asia’s leading independent financial services companies. 
 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
Describe the market for the product(s) or services including the historical data and forecasts. 
Describe the competitive environment including the list of competitors with market shares and customer base and key 
differentiating factors (if applicable) 
 
< Biomass Market in Fiji and PNG > 
Fiji. In terms of securing fuel sources by means of forestry and land use management, there are no other competitors in 
the market since Eltech, a subsidiary of GIMCO as well as a potential fuel supplier, has been selected as the service 
provider for an Expression of Interest published by the Fijian Ministry of Fisheries and Forests. The company has 
obtained full and sole right in eradicating African tulip.  
 
For biomass market, it is difficult to say that an active market for biomass power generation exists in Fiji, considering the 
fact that the Fiji Sugar Company and Tropik Wood Industries Ltd. are the only two companies that use biomass for power 
generation, but they utilize biomass only for self-supplying purpose. Therefore, there are no existing competitors 
regarding biomass power plant. Moreover, if the biomass pilot project previously implemented by the project sponsor of 
the first biomass power plant in Sabeto, Fiji (Sub-component 1.1) is set aside, there are no ongoing renewable energy 
projects or operating renewable power plants that can be considered to form a competitive environment.

=== PAGE 29 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 79 
 
C 
 
Although the government is eager to accept private investment, it does not have the sufficient capacity to carry out IPP 
projects yet. This Programme will contribute to strengthening Fiji’s capacity not only for biomass power generation but 
also sustainable forestry and land use management, and will attract private investment for renewable energy sector.  
 
PNG. Biomass market for fuel and electricity trading in PNG is yet to be developed. Currently, a joint venture of Oil 
Search, the largest oil and gas company in PNG, and Aligned Energy, an international biomass energy consultancy, is 
establishing a 30 MW biomass power plant that supplies base-load power to the Ramu Grid through trees grown from a 
dedicated plantation. However, other than the project, the potential of biomass in PNG has not been fully utilized. This 
Programme will play a meaningful role of expanding biomass energy capacity of the country by means of sustainable 
forestry and land management. 
 
< Global Pellet Market >  
The current global pellet market overview expects global pellet demand to exceed 28 million tons per annum, and 
indicates Europe and North America as the largest consumer and supplier respectively.  
We have been keen to the pellet demand trends globally and the two East Asian countries are being recognized as 
candidate consumer countries of the produced pellets. Both Korea and Japan have an increasing need for pellets as 
biomass business grows up on the fragile geographical basis of a biomass fuel source shortage. In Korea, biomass is a 
rapidly growing sector by the support of RPS (Renewable Portfolio Standard) scheme since 2012. Many utility companies 
have henceforth included biomass as part of their business strategy. Also, the Japanese government is providing the FIT 
(Feed In Tariff) program and more assisting biomass business in pursuit of diversifying renewable energy portfolio, so as 
to address a heavily weighted reality in favor of solar power.     
 
Figure 5 Global Pellet Market (2015) 
 
(Source: FAO Forestry Statistics) 
 
Additionally, biomass needs are growing in the Pacific SIDS with a heavy reliance on diesel and lack of the 
government-led subsidy instruments. For these countries, biomass is an attractive renewable alternative in reference 
to the replacement for diesel, the potential as base load power, and more favorable costs.  Biomass differentiates itself 
from other renewable options such as solar and wind as the smartest renewable solution for the South Pacific SIDS; a 
biomass plant can afford constant electricity generation as base load power and the off-grid biomass power system 
features flexible variations in terms of size. These characteristics make biomass the most attractive renewable energy 
in the SIDS context.

=== PAGE 30 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 79 
 
C 
Provide pricing structures, price controls, subsidies available and government involvement (if any). 
 
Fiji. In 2015, Fiji Department of Energy developed a standardized Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) with support of the 
UNDP in order to attract IPPs. Prior to the pilot biomass power plant developed by tentative project sponsor of Sub-
component 1.1, there was no successful track record of IPP projects in Fiji. Therefore, the country’s PPA framework had 
not been properly utilized until the project sponsor signed a PPA with the FEA at the rate of FJD 0.3308 VEP per unit. In 
other words, the project sponsor provided an opportunity for Fiji to newly establish and practice procedures for PPAs. 
Current IPP tariff rate is also set at FJD 0.3308 VEP per unit.  
 
 
PNG. A national uniform tariff is applied to supply of electricity. The Independent Consumer & Competition Commission 
(ICCC) is responsible for regulating competition, controlling prices and protecting consumers in PNG, and is the 
regulating authority for the electricity industry. The major electricity company PPL submits a Regulatory Contract (RC) for 
a given period of time that contains tariff calculations to the ICCC and obtains approval. The calculation of power tariff 
reflects fuel price, PNG CPI, Australian CPI & Exchange Rate, and US CPI & Exchange Rate. Current RC is valid from 
January 1st, 2013 to December 31st, 2017. The Non-Fuel Weighted Average Price is approximately 0.17 USD/kWh, and 
the price is adjusted annually.21 
 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable) 
Provide details of government licenses or permits required for implementing and operating the project/programme, the 
issuing authority, and the date of issue or expected date of issue. 
 
Fiji. For eradication of invasive plants and reforestation, a fuel supplier needs to obtain approval of environmental impact 
assessment from the Ministry of Fisheries and Forests and Department of Environment separately, and shall acquire 
Harvesting License which will be in accordance with the Ministry of Fisheries and Forests’ Harvesting Code. The same 
applies to afforestation/reforestation, where a fuel supplier will manage plantation in compliance with the Harvesting 
Code. 
 
For the construction of biomass power plants, a project sponsor is required to obtain 1) legal rights for land development 
from the i’Taukei Land Trust Board, the administrator for all native lands in Fiji, 2) Special Water Rights permission from 
the Director of Lands for consent for river water extraction, 3) consent from the Department for Town and Country 
Planning and Rural Local Authority for building application, and 4) approval from the Department of Environment for an 
Environmental Impact Assessment. Also, during the construction and operation phases, the project sponsor needs to 
obtain approvals of Environmental Management Plans and waste disposal permits from the Department of Environment. 
 
For the development of a wood pellet plant, the required licenses or permits include 1) land lease agreements for 
plantation and project facilities and 2) harvesting rights. 
 
 
PNG. The Electricity Industry Act 2002 requires electric power companies to obtain licenses for electricity generation, 
transmission, distribution, and/or retail from the ICCC. Also, construction activities such as road development, logging, 
waste disposal, etc. need to comply with the PNG Logging Code of Practice. Major projects including forestry, mining and 
petroleum proposals need to acquire environmental permit from the Conservation and Environment Protection Authority 
to ensure minimal environmental and social effects.  
 
Describe applicable taxes and foreign exchange regulations. 
 
Below is the list of taxes and foreign exchange regulations relevant to the Programme. 
 
<Fiji> 
 -     IPP Tariff Rate 
∙ 
Minimum FJD 0.3308 VEP per unit 
 
                                                             
21 PNG Power Limited, Electricity Regulatory Contract (2013)

=== PAGE 31 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 79 
 
C 
-     Corporate Tax : 20% (single tax rate) 
∙ 
‘Tax holiday system’ is applied in which companies producing bio-fuel via processing of agricultural products are 
exempt from corporate tax for initial 10 years. 
∙ 
For renewable energy and cogeneration, ‘Tax holiday system’ is applied in which the corporate tax on P&L 
generated from new business is exempted for initial 5 years. 
 
-     VAT : 15% 
∙ 
VAT is applied to most goods and services including construction and development cost. 
 
-     Foreign Exchange Regulations 
∙ 
Approval from Reserve Bank of Fiji is required for overseas remittance and borrowings. 
∙ 
Regulation on debt-to-equity ratio exists for foreign-invested companies and thus the debt-to-equity ratio of less 
than 300% must be satisfied after dividends. 
 
<PNG> 
-     IPP Tariff Rate 
∙ 
Tariff applications are made annually by PPL, and fuel cost pass through is made on a quarterly basis.  
 
-     Corporate Tax : 30% (standard resident corporate), 48% (standard non-resident corporate) 
∙ 
Incentives: Depreciation incentives or concessions include following: a qualifying industrial plant not previously 
used in PNG is eligible for a flexible rate of depreciation up to 100%, but this deduction may not create a tax 
loss; eligible new plant may be subject to an additional 20% depreciation in the first year of use. 
 
-     VAT : 10% 
∙ 
VAT is applied to most goods imported into PNG and on any customs or excise duty paid on importation. 
∙ 
Land is excluded from Goods and Services Tax, but buildings and other improvements are subject to tax.   
 
-     Foreign Exchange Regulations 
∙ 
The Bank of PNG (Central Bank) administers exchange controls, including in respect of inward investment, 
registration of foreign capital, foreign currency and repatriation of capital and earnings. 
∙ 
Central Bank approval is required for non-exempt foreign exchange transactions including: 
a. where a resident company contracts with another resident company in foreign currency. 
b. where a guarantee or security contract is provided by a resident company in favor of an offshore lender, 
unless there is a benefit to PNG. 
c. where a resident company opens and maintains foreign currency accounts within and outside PNG. 
 
-     Tax Incentives 
∙ 
Infrastructure Tax Credit: Resource companies are allowed a full credit for the cost of any approved 
infrastructure developments which they undertake for the benefit of the community in which they operate. 
∙ 
Rural Development Incentive: This scheme was designed to allow income tax exemption on the net income of 
new businesses set up in specifically designated underdeveloped areas that are not dependent on the 
exploitation of natural resources. It provides exemption to businesses in a rural development industry for up to 
10 years after the first year of commencement of business. Losses arising from the newly exempt activities are 
deductible against taxable income from other activities. 
 
 
Provide details on insurance policies related to project/programme. 
 
In terms of insurance, KDB’s requirements to projects will be consistent with international best practice standards for 
project financing. Specific insurance will be required and reviewed for each project during the due diligence process. 
Such insurance will be part of security package for the project lenders, including GCF.

=== PAGE 32 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 79 
 
C 
 
 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements 
Please describe in detail the governance structure of the project/programme, including but not limited to the organization 
structure, roles and responsibilities of the project/programme management unit, steering committee, executing entities 
and so on, as well as the flow of funds structure. Also describe which of these structures are already in place and 
which are still pending. For the pending ones, please specify the requirements to establish them. 
 
KDB and the GCF will enter into an FAA or FAAs, in the form of a funded sub-participation for the financing of 
Components 1 and 2, and in the form of a grant for the financing of Component 3. KDB will be an accredited entity for the 
Funded Activity at the Programme level. The respective SPCs will be the executing entities for each project under 
Components 1 and 2. The accredited entity shall be the sole executing entity for Component 3. 
 
< Component 1 & 2 >  
 
① Subject to the terms and conditions of the FAA, KDB will conduct due diligence, and select individual projects 
that will meet the Investment Criteria set out in Appendix 1 of the Term Sheet.  
② KDB, as a lender, will enter into a loan agreement (each “Project Loan Agreement”) with a SPC for each project. 
The Project Loan Agreement will include the Concessional Tranche, the terms and conditions of which will be in 
accordance with Appendix 2 of the Term Sheet.  
③ KDB will remain the lender of record of the Concessional Tranche and the GCF will be a sub-participant for 
100% of the Concessional Tranche in accordance with the terms and conditions of the FAA.  
 
< Component 3 > 
Subject to the terms and conditions of the AMA and FAA, KDB will provide technical assistance in Fiji and PNG. As the 
Executing Entity of the Programme, KDB will procure professional service providers, and sign TA contracts with them for 
the implementation of capacity building and knowledge sharing activities, the establishment of a model framework for 
renewables (only in PNG), and the development of CO2 calculation methodology in Fiji and PNG. All the TA activities will 
be managed and supervised by KDB. Disbursement will be done as per Term Sheet (to be reflected in the FAA). 
 
Describe construction and supervision methodology with key contractual agreements.  
 
KDB, as an accredited entity, shall supervise key contractual agreements such as Project Loan Agreement and TA 
contracts, and provide to the GCF Annual Performance Reports (APRs) stating the implementation status of those 
agreements during the implementation period. Upon the completion of the implementation period, KDB shall provide a 
performance report about the Programme results and mitigation impacts on a semi-annual basis. 
 
Also, interim and final evaluation reports will include assessment of the contract performance against investment 
framework criteria. Financial information will be audited annually by independent external auditors, and provided to the 
Fund. Please refer to H.2 for more details of reporting. 
 
Describe operational arrangements with key contractual agreements following the completion of construction. If 
applicable, provide the credit analysis of key counterparties of key contractual agreements and/or structural mitigants to 
cover the counterparty risks. 
 
Each biomass power plant and wood pellet plant will function under the framework of the above implementation structure 
of the Programme. When KDB selects project sponsors for a project, the project sponsors will establish an SPC as a duly 
registered entity in target countries of the Programme for project execution. KDB will select proper project sponsors 
pursuant to the Investment Criteria (Appendix 1 of the Term Sheet attached as Annex 5 in Section I) in an open and 
transparent manner.

=== PAGE 33 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 79 
 
C 
Anticipated implementation of biomass power plants in Component 1 is as below; 
 
 
Figure 6 Indicative Implementation Arrangement for the Biomass Power Plant in Sabeto  
 (Sub-component 1.1) 
 
 
 
For the Sabeto biomass power project, the project site and tentative project sponsors have been identified by KDB and 
the PPA is under negotiation with the Fijian government. Subsequent biomass power plants in Component 1, including 
two 12 MW biomass power plants in Fiji (approximately 24 MW in total) and one 12 MW biomass power plant in PNG, 
are in the inception stage, and will be implemented under the similar structure.  
 
KDB will also play a role as a financial investor to provide senior loans in partnership with the GCF and other private 
investors. KDB will review the key contractual agreements of the SPCs, and hedge potential risks by suggesting 
mitigation measures in case a risk factor is found. 
 
In terms of the wood pellet plant, the SPC will be established and some off-takers will also participate for profit stability. 
The SPC will be provided with fuel through a fuel supply agreement with selected fuel suppliers based on KDB 
Investment Criteria. The wood pellets produced by the SPC will be supplied to owners of biomass power plants in South 
Pacific SIDS and, by extension, other countries with limited availability of readily accessible biomass fuel sources, which 
will create additional value by developing new export market for Fiji.

=== PAGE 34 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 79 
 
C 
C.8. Indicative Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation 
Please provide a project/programme implementation timetable in section I (Annexes). The table below is for illustrative purposes. If the table format 
below is used, please refer to the activities as numbered in Section H. In the case of outputs, please mark when all the required activities will be 
completed.  
 
Calendar Quarters 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2 
Q 
3
Q 
4
Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4
Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4
Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4
Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4 
Q 
Component 1. Development of 
four biomass power plants  
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ √ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Sub-component 1.1.  
Biomass power plant #1 in 
Sabeto, Fiji 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 1. 12MW biomass power 
plant #1 in Fiji 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Activity 1.1. Project Preparation 
(Permit and Basic Engineering) 
√ 
Activity 1.2. Project Execution 
(EPC) 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Sub-component 1.2.  
Biomass power plant #2 in Fiji 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Output 2. 12MW biomass power 
plant #2 in Fiji 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Activity 2.1. Project Preparation 
(Permit and Basic Engineering) 
√ 
√ 
Activity 2.2. Project Execution 
(EPC) 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Sub-component 1.3.  
Biomass power plant #3 in Fiji 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Output 3. 12MW biomass power 
plant #3 in Fiji 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Activity 3.1. Project Preparation 
(Permit and Basic Engineering) 
 
√ 
√ 
Activity 3.2. Project Execution 
(EPC) 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Sub-component 1.4.  
Biomass power plant #4 in PNG 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Output 4. 12MW biomass power 
plant #4 in PNG 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Activity 4.1. Project Preparation 
(Permit and Basic Engineering) 
 
√ 
√ 
Activity 4.2. Project Execution 
(EPC) 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√

=== PAGE 35 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 79 
 
C 
 
 
Calendar Quarters 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2 
Q 
3
Q 
4
Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4
Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4
Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4
Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4Q 
Component 2. 
Development of one wood 
pellet plant  
 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub-component 2.1. 
Wood pellet production 
infrastructure 
 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 5. Wood pellet 
production infrastructure in Fiji 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 5.1. Project Preparation 
(Permit and Basic Engineering) 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 5.2. Project Execution 
(EPC) 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub-component 2.2.  
Capacity increase of existing 
transport infrastructure 
 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 6. Capacity increase for 
existing transportation 
infrastructure in Fiji 
 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 6.1. Project Preparation 
(Permit and Basic Engineering) 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 6.2. Project Execution 
(EPC) 
 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub-component 2.3. 
Biomass power plant for the 
wood pellet plant 
 
 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 7. 24MW biomass 
power plant for the wood pellet 
plant in Fiji 
 
 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 7.1. Project Preparation 
(Permit and Basic Engineering) 
 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 7.2. Project Execution 
(EPC) 
 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√

=== PAGE 36 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 79 
 
C 
Calendar Quarters 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2Q 
3
Q 
4
Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4
Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4
Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4
Q 
1
Q 
2
Q 
3
Q 
4Q 
Component 3. 
Technical assistance 
 
 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
Sub-component 3.1. 
Technical assistance in Fiji 
 
 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 8. Capacity 
enhancement and knowledge 
sharing in Fiji 
 
 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 8.1. Project Preparation 
 
√ 
√ 
Activity 8.2. Project Execution  
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Output 9. Development of CO2 
calculation methodology in Fiji 
 
 
 
 
 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 9.1. Project Preparation 
 
√ 
Activity 9.2. Project Execution 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Sub-component 3.2. 
Technical assistance in PNG 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
Output 10. Capacity 
enhancement and knowledge 
sharing in PNG 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
Activity 10.1. Project 
Preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 10.2. Project Execution 
 
  
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Output 11. Creating enabling 
environments for renewables in 
PNG 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 11.1. Project 
Preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 11.2. Project Execution 
 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Output 12. Development of 
CO2 calculation methodology in 
PNG 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 12.1. Project 
Preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 12.2. Project Execution 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√

=== PAGE 37 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 79 
 
C 
Programme Monitoring 
 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
1. Annual monitoring report 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
2. Interim evaluation report 
 
√ 
3. Programme final report 
 
√ 
4. Final evaluation report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1Q
20
26

=== PAGE 38 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 7979 
 
 D 
 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement   
Please specify why the GCF involvement is critical for the project/program, in consideration of other alternatives. 
 
The participation of GCF is critical for mobilizing and scaling up climate finance and attaining sustainability in 
stabilizing forestry and land use management systems and distributing clean renewable energy throughout South 
Pacific SIDS. Out of the total programme cost of USD 431.0 million, private investment of USD 324.6 million will be 
financed, given the GCF financing accounting for USD 106.4 million. The scale of financing would not have been 
feasible if the GCF had not participated. 
 
Barriers for attracting commercial financing. The GCF involvement will create an environment where a large pool 
of private investors participates in the Programme, and multiply the effect of the initial financing. In fact, South Pacific 
SIDS have difficulties in attracting private financing due to the regional context-based investment hurdles such as low 
sovereign credit ratings, currency risks, and construction risks.  
 
As an illustration, when the potential project sponsor had reached out to financial institutes for a pilot(Nabou) biomass 
project, the sovereign risk of pacific SIDS and relatively new renewable technology of biomass in Fiji were found to be 
high barriers for private sector financing. All the tapped commercial banks ended up not participating in the Nabou 
project. In the end, the corporate financing scheme based on sponsor credits was applied instead of project financing 
scheme. Given the limited financial capacity of self-funded sponsors, they can no longer afford to finance further 
projects in the Programme. Nevertheless, Nabou project is significantly meaningful in that it showcased a proven 
biomass technology in the Fijian context. Furthermore, this project garnered a strong support from the Fijian 
government and the Fijian government recognized the merits of biomass projects in Fiji to incorporate them into their 
action plans to deliver its NDC.   
Against this backdrop, KDB put forth this biomass program in Fiji and PNG, aiming to scale up the proven biomass 
technology in Fiji and further expand to other parts of the South Pacific islands with the GCF, addressing the specific 
financing barrier identified in the pilot phase of the project. KDB is structuring this program with ECA or guarantee 
agencies to cover the sovereign risk for private sector investors while KDB and GCF financed the uncovered portion of 
the investment. In this way, GCF and KDB fill the gap for the financing and the private sector investors have a comfort 
by having reputable financial institutions like the GCF and KDB to take a higher risk tranche in the program. Indeed, 
the local private banks in Fiji are considering their funding the Programme in case that GCF financing in this project is 
approved and therefore confirmed.  
 
GCF concessionality needed. The GCF participation does not necessarily lead to bringing the private sector’s 
attention into the Programme because private investors still have the huddle rate of financial terms. From lenders’ 
perspective, a certain level of financial terms should be established in general – such as 70% or less of LTV and 1.2 or 
more of minimum simple DSCR (see B.3. Financial Markets Overview). Therefore, the GCF participation should satisfy 
a certain level of concessaionlity to attract commercial lenders. Taking an example of Sabeto, the Programme 
requested a minimum level of the GCF concessionality that could increase the minimum simple DSCR, the most 
important factor for investment decision, from 1.06 (non-GCF funding assumed) to 1.2 (generally accepted for the 
private). Without the GCF’s involvement, private lenders’ request for fulfilling the financial terms cannot be achieved, 
which would result in financing failure of the Programme (see E.6.3 for more detail). The Programme believes that the 
GCF engagement here is exactly in line with the GCF’s mandate of crowding in private sector investors in climate 
actions in SIDS which are otherwise barely financed from the private capital.  
 
Besides filling in the financing gap, the GCF’s grant paired with loan investment adds value to the Programme. The 
GCF grant supports Fiji and PNG to formulate an enabling environment where the uptake of renewable energy 
combined with sustainable land use management can be well realized and effectively accelerated. In particular, the TA

=== PAGE 39 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 7979 
 
 D 
activities financed by the GCF grant portion mainly aims to increase capacity of local human resources and support 
knowledge sharing in alignment with global standards. A series of TA activities will enable both target countries to 
leverage well-trained local personnel and voluntarily meet international-level E&S standards even after the project 
implementation period. Therefore, the TA activities well accords with the fundamental mandate of the GCF. 
D.2. Exit Strategy  
 
Please explain how the project/programme sustainability will be ensured in the long run, after the project/programme is 
implemented with support from the GCF and other sources, taking into consideration the long-term financial viability 
demonstrated in E.6.3. This should include a description of strategies for longer term maintenance of physical assets 
(if applicable). 
 
The Programme well recognizes that devising a viable exit strategy at the outset is critical for achieving long-term 
sustainability. 
 
First of all, provision of sufficient trainings and capacity building programmes will ensure sustainability of the 
Programme.  Training local employees, landowners, and community members who are engaged in reforestation, 
forestry plantation, and biomass energy production is important in pursuit of sustainability even after the end of the 
Programme period. Properly trained local human resources will attain capacity enough to independently manage their 
lands and biomass power plants in accordance with international best practices as well as national standards in the 
long run.  
 
In addition, the signing of long term PPA contracts for power generation is a key element for financial sustainability. 
The first biomass power plant in Sabeto, Fiji (Sub-component 1.1), is to generate stable and predictable revenue for 
the project sponsor’s sound financial management given that the PPA has been guaranteed between the project 
sponsor and the FEA for 25 years. After twenty five years, the PPA will be automatically extended for another five 
years in Fiji. Similar degree of financial soundness is expected for other subsequent projects since it will apply the 
same criteria used for the first project sponsor in selecting project sponsors. Ensuring financial sustainability and 
bankability through the PPA, every investor will be able to exit with expected return and it will accelerate access to 
more climate finance from commercial sources.

=== PAGE 40 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 79 
 
 E 
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance 
of the proposed project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity-specific sub-criteria and 
indicative assessment factors, which can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework, should be addressed where 
relevant and applicable. This section should tie into any request for concessionality made in section B.2. 
 
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas 
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential 
Specify the mitigation and/or adaptation impact, taking into account the relevant and applicable sub-criteria and 
assessment factors in the Fund’s investment framework.  
 
The Programme is estimated to mitigate 4,736,230 tCO2eq in total throughout the 25-year lifecycle of a series of 
projects (annually 189,449 tCO2eq). The mitigation potential combines all the emission reduction impacts of 
Component 1 and 2 across Fiji and PNG.   
 
The Programme ensures that the mitigation calculation has been done with most conservative estimates and detailed 
figures are elaborated in E.1.2. Sophistication will be added on in order to derive more accurate figures of CO2 
mitigation by the support of the GCF grant.  
 
When applicable, specify the degree to which the project/programme avoids lock-in of long-lived, high emission or 
climate-vulnerable infrastructure. 
 
There is an increasing need for reducing energy dependency on imported fossil fuel as well as for enhancing grid 
stability with continuous forms of renewable energy. Compared with other types of renewable energy sources, 
biomass is believed to be highly efficient in replacing diesel as a base-load power source in the regional context. 
Currently, one of the popular renewable power sources is hydropower and it is used as an alternative source of base-
load power. Due to disruptive weather patterns such as El Niño, however, hydropower is becoming more and more 
unstable in supplying electricity and the problem is getting worse, being exacerbated by climate change. Other 
renewable energy sources such as solar and wind also have an issue of unsteady electricity provision. Above all, 
unless there is an addition of high-cost facilities such as energy storage system, they cannot replace diesel power 
plants.  
 
 By building a total of 48 MW biomass power plants in Fiji and PNG, the Programme will prove that biomass is an 
attractive renewable energy source that can replace diesel and guarantee stable supply of electricity. Meanwhile, the 
wood pellet plant including 24 MW biomass power plants that would utilize affluent biomass resources will serve as a 
lubricant of paradigm shift towards clean and sustainable energy across Fiji, and beyond that, throughout the South 
Pacific region and to Asia that has limited biomass resources. Through such expansion of renewable energy supply, 
the Programme will play a significant role in GHG mitigation. 
 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below. 
GCF core 
indicators 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2 eq) to 
be reduced or avoided (Mitigation only) 22 
Annual 
189,449 tCO2eq 
Lifetime 
4,736,230 tCO2eq 
• 
Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender (reduced 
vulnerability or increased resilience);  
 
Total 
373,869 persons 
(221,205 in Fiji and 
152,664 in PNG) 
including 183,609 
women 
                                                             
22 The amount of annual CO2 emission reduction is an indicative one based on brief analysis, and more detailed 
analysis will be conducted with the TA grant provided by the GCF.

=== PAGE 41 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 79 
 
 E 
• 
Number of beneficiaries relative to total population, 
disaggregated by gender (adaptation only) 
Percentage 
(%) 
4.2% (25% in Fiji and 
2% in PNG) 
Other 
relevant 
indicators 
• 
Establishing biomass power plants with a total capacity of 48 MW23 
• 
500,000 ton/year of wood pellet produced from a pellet plant with a biomass power plant with 
24MW in total 
Increasing number of households with access to clean and low-emission energy: a total of 
approximately 77,102 households will gain access to clean and low-emission biomass energy 
in Fiji and PNG (Fiji: approximately 48,298 households through three 12 MW biomass power 
plants, PNG: approximately 28,804 households through one 12 MW biomass power plant) 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above. 
 
< Expected CO2 Reduction from Direct Aspect > 
 
Calculation for CO2 reduction of the Programme has meticulously considered 1) transportation of African tulip, 2) 
development of SRWC plantation on idle, and degraded lands, and 3) operation of plants in both Component 1 and 2. 
The calculation methodology has been carefully chosen with the support of external experts and the Life Cycle 
Assessment (LCA) was applied for estimating expected CO2 reduction impacts during the lifespan of 25 years (PPA 
period). Detailed calculation figures are elaborated in the table as below;  
 
 
Table 4 Indicative CO2 reduction from direct aspects 
Items 
Lifespan (tCO2eq) 
Sub-total 
Component 1 
Component 2 
1. Transportation of African tulip 
-581,006 
-954,703 
-1,535,709 
2. SRWC plantation 
Plantation 
2,245,834 
3,930,208 
6,176,042 
Harvesting 
-287,552 
-383,484 
-671,036 
Transportation 
-1,312,004 
-2,032,192 
-3,344,196 
Sub-total 
646,227 
1,514,532 
2,160,809 
3. Plant operation 
4,485,464 
592,575 
5,078,039 
4. Pellet export transportation 
n/a 
-966,910 
-966,910. 
Total 
4,550,735 
185,495 
4,736,230 
 
 
1. Transportation of African Tulip   
In reference to African tulip transportation, the mitigation potential calculation considered diesel consumption and 
ensuing emissions along with the distance and number of round-trips as below. Since eradication of African tulip is to 
be completed within 10 years, the period of 10 years is an applied figure. Relevant calculation logics are as follows.  
                                                             
23 The precise capacity of each biomass power plant is subject to change depending on the needs and condition of 
each project site.

=== PAGE 42 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 79 
 
 E 
As for Component 1, three biomass power plants in Fiji will use African tulip sourced via inland transportation. 40km 
is the average distance of African tulip transportation within Viti Levu (as no shipping transportation is required) and 
4,000 times/yr of the round-trip is considered for calculation. A biomass power plant in PNG is not considered for 
African tulip transportation emissions because the plant will not use African tulip as a fuel source.  
[Component 1]  CO2 emission = Transportation emissions by trucks (40 km of inland transportation from harvesting 
areas to three biomass power plants in Fiji) = Diesel emission factor * Diesel consumption of trucks 
per trip * 40,000 times of round trips/yr * 10 years = 581,006 tCO2eq 
 
As for Component 2, the wood pellet plant will source African tulip widespread nationwide across Viti Levu (main 
island) and Vanua Levu (where the pellet plant is to be located). Once the main island’s African tulip is all consumed 
as a result of successful invasive species harvesting activities of the Programme, the pellet plant will use African tulip 
spread out in Vanua Levu as well. Regardless of this plan, the mitigation potential calculation sought the most 
conservative measure by adopting the assumption that African tulip will be transported via shipping across the sea 
into the pellet plant in Vanua Levu. In short, the calculation output is the most conservative estimate in that inland 
transportation emissions are lower than outland transportation emissions. 
 
For calculation of African tulip transportation emissions in Component 2, 15km and 64km are applied respectively for 
inland transportation from harvesting areas to the port (in Viti Levu), and for outland shipping transportation. It should 
be again noted that actual transportation emissions are assumed less than the calculation output because the pellet 
plant of Component 2 plans to source African tulip from Vanua Levu as well as from Viti Levu.  
 
[Component 2] CO2 emission = Transportation emissions by trucks (15 km of inland transportation from harvesting 
areas to the port in Viti Levu before shipping transportation) + transportation emissions by ships (64 
km of outland transportation across the sea) = Diesel emission factor * Diesel consumption of trucks 
per trip * 10,000 number of round trips/yr * 10 years +  Diesel emission factor * Diesel consumption of 
ships per trip * 20 number of round trips/yr *10 years  
= 647,805 tCO2eq + 306,898 tCO2eq = 954,703 tCO2eq 
 
2. SRWC plantation  
Plantation. The plantation will be developed only in lands degraded, abandoned, or idled by adverse impacts of 
climate change, non-sustainable pine plantation practices, or dwindling sugar cane industry. At present, 39,000 ha 
out of 80,000 ha of sugarcane plantation areas and 30,000 ha of 79,000 ha pine plantation areas are being idled and 
degraded without any productive activity throughout Fiji24. The Programme makes sure that all the 50,000 ha of 
SRWC plantation areas in Fiji will be chosen only within those lands. The 5,000ha of SRWC plantation areas in PNG 
will be chosen in idled and degraded areas of PNG as will be done in Fiji.  
 
Referring to the non-active condition of planned plantation areas, the non-tree living condition is established as the 
emission baseline for calculation. Also, plantation areas will be divided into four blocks with each carrying out different 
phase activities of planting, growing, and harvesting. Approximately 25% of plantation areas will always remain filled 
with SRWC growing. These are also considered for the mitigation impact calculation as follows. 
 
CO2 reduction = Above ground net volume growth (m3/ha/yr) * wood density (ton/m3) 
* emissions conversion factor (tC/ton) * 44/12 (CO2eq/C)  
* (20,000ha for Component 1 or 35,000 ha for Component 2) areas (ha) * 25% * 25 years 
≒ 2,245,833 tCO2eq for Component 1 or 3,930,208 tCO2eq for Component 2 
 
Gliricidia is primarily considered for proper plantation species. With the support of external advisory agency, Indufor, 
the Programme takes relevant figures presented in the table below for potential CO2 reduction estimates. For the 
sake of a conservative estimate, 35 m3/ha/yr and 0.5 are applied respectively for representing the figure of the above-
                                                             
24 Source: Fiji Sugar Corp. and Fiji Pine Ltd.

=== PAGE 43 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 79 
 
 E 
ground net volume growth and wood density. Calculation sophistication will be added on after conducting more 
research and developing more detailed plantation management plans, which will be assisted by the GCF grant once 
the Programme is launched.  
 
Table 5 Figures applied for calculating CO2 reduction from SRWC plantation 
Species 
G. Sepium (Gliricidia) 
Above-ground net volume 
growth(m3/ha/yr) 
36-77 
Wood density(ton/m3) 
0.53-0.63 
Emission conversion factor(tC/ton) 
0.5 
 
 
Harvesting of SRWC plantation. Each Component regards CO2 emissions by harvesting SRWC plantation with the 
usage of diesel-fueled machinery. The amount of diesel consumption and operating hours throughout the project life 
cycle are considered for calculation as below. 16.53 MJ/hr and 28.94 MJ/hr are applied respectively for Component 1 
and 2 after estimating diesel consumption of machinery as for the amount of harvested plantation species.  
 
CO2 emission = Diesel consumption of machinery (MJ/hr )* 2 units * 2,400 hr  
* Diesel emission factor (0.08764) * 25 years 
 = 287,552 tCO2eq for Component 1 or 383,484 tCO2eq for Component 2 
 
 
Transportation. Transportation emissions from SRWC plantation are identically considered for calculation as follows; 
 
 
CO2 emission = CO2 emission by trucks (15 km inland transportation)  
= Diesel emission factor * Diesel consumption of truck per trip * number of round trips  
= 1,312,004 tCO2eq for Component 1 or 2,032,192 tCO2eq for Component 2 
 
The average distance of transportation is 15 km as SRWC plantation will be done in nearby areas of individual plants 
in pursuit of transportation efficiency. The average number of round trips per year is determined as 5,700 times for 
Component 1 and 10,000 times for Component 2.  
 
3. Plant operation  
Component 1. The tCO2eq mitigation impact from biomass power plants is calculated by applying the CDM method 
as follows: 
CO2 reductions (tCO2eq)  = Baseline Emissions (tCO2eq)  – Project Emissions (tCO2eq) 
 
Where: 
∙ Baseline Emissions(BE) : Estimated emissions where electricity is generated on the basis of the current 
national energy mix 
∙ Project Emissions(PE) : Estimated emissions where electricity is generated on the basis of the future energy 
mix structure changed as a result of the proposed renewable projects 
 
First of all, the Baseline Emissions(BE) are calculated as follows: 
 
𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝑦𝑦=𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃,𝑦𝑦 × 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔,𝑦𝑦 
 
Where:

=== PAGE 44 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 79 
 
 E 
∙ 𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝑦𝑦 = Baseline Emissions on a yearly basis (tCO2) 
∙ 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃,𝑦𝑦 = Quantity of net electricity that is produced and fed into the grid as a result of the project implementation 
on a yearly basis (MWh) 
∙ 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔,𝑦𝑦 = Combined margin CO2 emission factor for grid connected power generation on a yearly basis 
(tCO2/MWh) 
 
Secondly, for the Project Emission (PE) is calculated by CDM method which is subject to the methodological tool 
“Project and leakage emissions from biomass, Version 03.0. (IPCC)” The estimate project emissions including 
cultivation of biomass is denoted as below: 
 
𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃=𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆,𝑦𝑦+𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆,𝑦𝑦+𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸,𝑦𝑦+𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵,𝑦𝑦+𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇,𝑦𝑦 
∙ 
Where: 
∙ 
PEy = Emissions resulting from project activities in year y (tCO2e) 
∙ 
PESOC,y = Emissions resulting from loss of soil organic carbon, in year y (t CO2e) 
∙ 
PESM,y = Emissions resulting from soil management, in year y (t CO2e) 
∙ 
PEEC,y = Emissions resulting from energy consumption, in year y (t CO2e) 
∙ 
PEBB,y = Emissions resulting from clearance or burning of biomass, in year y (t CO2e) 
∙ 
PETR,y = Emissions resulting from transport of biomass, in year y (t CO2e) 
 
The Project Emissions calculated as above is near zero because site burning, soil-tilling and fertilizer will not be 
applied, and the emissions from transportation and harvesting of SRWC plantation have already been taken into 
account in the calculations above. Therefore, CO2 reductions from biomass power plants are calculated to be 
approximately equal with the Baseline Emissions (BE) in this sector.  
 
As a result of calculation, expected mitigation per annum and throughout the lifespan (25 years of PPA) are as below: 
 
Table 6 CO2 mitigation from biomass power plants 
Contents 
Lifespan (tCO2eq) 
Annually (tCO2eq/yr) 
Three biomass power plants in Fiji 
3,252,993 
130,120 
One biomass power plant in PNG 
1,232,471 
49,299 
Total 
4,485,464 
179,419 
 
 
Component 2. In Fiji, tCO2eq mitigation impact from the wood pellet plant is caused by surplus electricity from the 
captive 24MW biomass power plant to national grid in Fiji. After deducting auxiliary power consumption, emissions by 
fuel consumption of chipping machinery, and transmission loss, available electricity for sale is assumed as 39,736 
MWh. Therefore, CO2 reduction from the pellet plant is calculated as below; 
 
39,737 MWh (electricity for sale) × 0.5965 (emission factor of Fiji) = 23,703 tCO2eq 
 
Since emissions from biomass transportation have already been taken into account in the calculations above, the 
CO2 reduction from the pellet plant in Fiji is 592,575 tCO2eq for 25 years (annually 23,703 tCO2eq).  
 
4. Pellet export transportation  
The Programme also considers potential emissions by pellet export in CO2 calculation. Although the Programme 
targets both SIDS and Asian countries for export, we assume the case of exporting all pellets to Asian countries for a 
conservative measure.

=== PAGE 45 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 79 
 
 E 
 
 
 
 
Table 7 CO2 Mitigation from Transportation of the Wood Pellet Export 
Items 
CO2 Emissions 
Notes 
Project emission from shipping 
to importing countries (A) 
(Unit : kgCO2eq/MWh) 
50.08 
- Farthest Distance: 7,800 km 
- Number of round trip : 10 times 
(50,000ton/voyage) 
Power supply to grid by pellets (B) 
(Unit : MWh/yr) 
772,292 
-  (125 MW – 15MW(Auxiliary Consumption)) 
* 81%(efficiency factor) * (1-
1%(transmission loss)) * 24 hr * 365 days 
= 772,292 MWh/yr 
Emission from pellet export 
transportation 
(Unit : tCO2eq) 
966,910 
- (A)*(B)*25years/(1000kg/1t) 
  
 
< Expected increase of energy > 
The expected number of households to newly have access to low-emission energy is as below: 
 
Number of households with access to low-emission energy = Generated electricity (kWh/year) / Electricity 
consumption per capita (kWh/year/person) / Average number of persons in one household 
 
Where: 
 
Fiji 
PNG 
Electricity generated from one 12 MW power plant 
70,630,000 kWh/year 
Electricity consumption per capita25 
957.892 kWh 
462.65 kWh 
Number of persons with access to electricity 
generated from one 12 MW power plant 
73,735 persons 
152,664 persons 
Average number of persons in one household 
4.58 persons26 
5.3 persons27 
Number of households with access to electricity 
generated  
48.297 
(three power plants) 
28,805 
(one power plant) 
 
As a result of this calculation, 77,102 households including 48,297 households in Fiji and 28,805 households in PNG 
will have access to clean and low-carbon electricity from this Programme.  
 
Describe how the project/programme’s indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks (i.e. the indicator 
values for a similar project/programme in a comparable context). 
 
The proposed Programme is expected to achieve a higher level of CO2 mitigation effects than other similar renewable 
projects. Given similarities in region (Pacific) and investment area (renewable energy), the Programme compares its 
indicator value with those of the GCF-approved “Pacific Islands Renewable Energy Investment Program” and “Tina 
                                                             
25 IndexMundi, Electricity consumption per capita (kWh per person), 
https://www.indexmundi.com/g/g.aspx?v=81000&c=pp&l=en, the numbers are averages of the years between 2007 
and 2014 of the two countries. 
26 Fiji Bureau of Statistics, 2013-14 Household Income and Expenditure Survey (2015) 
27 PNG National Statistical Office, Population: Summary of Findings, 
https://www.nso.gov.pg/index.php/population-and-social/other-indicators

=== PAGE 46 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 79 
 
 E 
River Hydropower Development Project.” This Programme is estimated to reduce 4,736,230 tCO2eq for a total project 
cost (except grant) of 427 million at a rate of $90.16 per tCO2eq. The rate is far more favorable in comparison with 
$176 per tCO2eq and $290 per tCO2eq of comparable respective projects. In addition, powered by a renewable 
energy source, biomass power plants undoubtedly have significant CO2 mitigation effects compared to fossil fuel 
power plants in Fiji and PNG. 
 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale) 
Describe how the proposed project/programme’s expected contributions to global low-carbon and/or climate-resilient 
development pathways could be scaled-up and replicated including a description of the steps necessary to accomplish it. 
 
The Programme is expected to trigger paradigm shifts by scaling-up and replication of a single project into a 
programme. It seeks to enhance sustainability of forestry systems, and transform the current energy infrastructure 
settings towards more self-sufficient and climate-resilient pathways.  
 
The GCF’s financing the first biomass project in Fiji is to materialize and accelerate such intended scale-up and 
replication. The Programme success bolstered by the GCF co-financing will clearly demonstrate that renewable 
energy projects may be feasible in the South Pacific realm, and could be replicable to other areas across South 
Pacific SIDS. The built confidence will contribute to enlarging climate finance from the private sector, which will 
eventually help the South Pacific community achieve the paradigm shift goal.  
 
Above all, the wood pellet plant to be established in Fiji is expected to play an important role for potential scaling up 
and replication of the biomass energy system in isolated areas of South Pacific SIDS which cannot afford the main 
grid for power generation. The distribution of produced pellets with small-scale biomass facilities of 100kW as a 
package into geographically isolated islands within the South Pacific SIDS is a meaningful milestone towards Pan-
Pacific energy initiative, not only in that low-carbon biomass-based electricity is deployed, but also in that 
marginalized people gain access to electricity for the first time in their life.  
 
The Programme will enable the desired transformation to be extended to the regional level. Firmly anchored in Fiji 
and PNG and garnering capacities and rich resources of both countries, the Programme will attain a greater potential 
for scale-up and replication of activities in forestry and land use management and of biomass energy initiatives, which 
will accelerate paradigm shifts towards low-emission and climate-resilient pathways throughout South Pacific SIDS at 
last.  
 
Underpinned by a theory of change, each activity of the Programme has been carefully designed as illustrated in the 
figure below to create synergies between individual activities and achieve paradigm shift.

=== PAGE 47 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 79 
 
 E 
 
 
Figure 7 Theory of Change for the Programme 
 
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning 
Describe how the project/programme contributes to the creation or strengthening of knowledge, collective learning 
processes, or institutions. 
 
TA including diverse capacity building and knowledge sharing activities will act as a lubricant that keeps all the parts 
of the Programme aligned and moving smoothly without any friction. The requested GCF grant will finance the TA 
activities to be designed properly integrated into main forestry and land use and biomass projects so that they could 
contribute to enhancing the potential for scale-up and replication of this Programme. 
 
The TA of the Programme has two sub-components that target Fiji and PNG each, and each sub-component is 
expected to present substantial potential for knowledge and learning by targeting broader region-wide stakeholders 
as well as local beneficiaries in countries of operation.

=== PAGE 48 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 79 
 
 E 
Capacity building and technology transfer. Capacity building sessions will be organized engaging with the 
Programme’s managerial personnel, local engineers, or other public officials in Fiji, PNG and also from abroad. 
Various trainings will be carried out on technical, environmental, social, and gender capacities as well as project 
management skills including project monitoring, evaluation, and auditing. All the capacity building trainings will make 
sure of the participation of a certain proportion of female workforce and each training session will be monitored and 
evaluated for its effectiveness and the participants’ satisfaction. Any feedbacks received from the participants will be 
reflected in the following training sessions.  
 
For example, a ten-day technical training course can be organized targeting key managerial personnel to increase 
their capacity by learning more about the global biomass and wood pellet market and research trend, biomass 
projects development, and power generation market in the South Pacific region. The trainings can include site visits 
to biomass power plants, biomass processing facilities or research institutions. During the ten-day course, another 
session can specifically focus on technical skills required for operation, management, administration, and auditing of 
biomass plants and associated facilities and equipment.  
 
Another tentative capacity building activity is a biennial four-day-session that helps local engineers and administrative 
staffs enhance their capacity. It aims to avoid a heavy dependence on technology sources from outside, and to 
gradually increase the share of the local workforce when it comes to running biomass power plants and a wood pellet 
plant. In short, the Programme pursues to transfer state-of-the-art biomass technology to both target countries.  
 
Additionally, specifically-customized trainings will be provided to the local communities that are involved in the 
reforestation and plantation management work with a focus on the eradication of the invasive species and on the 
plantation of selected native species and the fast growing species, Gliricidia.  
 
The Spread of knowledge. Knowledge sharing events will also be organized at the local, national, and regional 
levels. These events aim to share the progress being made and benefits the Programme delivers to South Pacific 
SIDS as well as the covered countries. Demonstration of the Programme as a best practice will encourage increased 
awareness of the innovative biomass technology as an attractive alternative, and of financial synergy through the 
GCF investment.  
 
One example of the knowledge sharing events is a region-wide workshop. TA consultants will organize knowledge 
sharing workshops targeting local and regional stakeholders to present on the progress of the Programme. This may 
include the plant’s construction and O&M, implementation of the GCF E&S Safeguards, and result of stakeholder 
engagement such as resettlement or compensation if relevant. The workshop reports that will be produced and 
distributed by the TA consultants can also be useful for dissemination of the knowledge and the progress made in the 
region will contribute to a more sustainable future.  
 
Study supporting Mitigation Impacts. The support for study on local ecosystem and CO2 saving potential from 
forestry and land use management in Fiji is expected to result in significant potential for knowledge and learning. 
Estimating carbon emissions reduction potential from The SRWC plantation in Fiji has not been carried out before, 
and Gliricidia requires a sophisticated technical approach to find out its carbon saving potential. The study supported 
by the GCF grant will produce analysis and findings that are very specific to the Programme activities 
 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
Describe how proposed measures will create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained participation of 
private and public sector actors in low-carbon and/or resilient development that go beyond the program. 
 
The contribution of the Programme for creating an enabling environment can be demonstrated for how the 
Programme can turn the vicious cycle of current land use practices into the virtuous cycle as shown in the figure 
below.

=== PAGE 49 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 79 
 
 E 
The ‘As-Is’ scenario is based on the reality where local economy is hugely relying on imported fossil fuel, and the 
natural environment which has been a traditional source of livelihood has been undermined by invasive trees (African 
tulip). Fiji has actually found itself confronted by an increase in abandoned land, a decrease in biodiversity, and a 
further decline in local income creation and socioeconomic capacity. Consequently, local community members have 
lost control over the land they own, which has led to failure of the government’s efforts for effective land use 
management. 
 
The Programme will achieve transforming the ‘As-is’ reality into the ‘To-be’ scenario. Through supplying fuels by 
developing local plantations and working with community land owners, the Programme can initiate reforestation after 
eradicating invasive trees, encourage plantation on the idled and degraded land, and restore sources of income for 
local communities. All the relevant operations will be done in accordance with the Plantation and Harvesting 
Guidelines and regular inspections of compliance with the guideline will be carried out by the environmental officer in 
charge (see ESIA for more detail for the first biomass plant in Sabeto). Local community members engaged in 
reforestation and the plantation management will be direct beneficiaries of the capacity building and knowledge 
sharing support. As a result, forestry and land use will be effectively managed and under control of the government 
and land owners. All the Programme activities will support the government’s agendas of eradicating invasive trees, 
preserving local ecosystem, creating jobs for local communities and so on. Eventually, the Programme will create an 
enabling environment where sustainability and country ownership can be enhanced. 
 
Figure 8 Transformation into Virtuous Cycle  
 
 
A substantial portion (75%) of grant is to be used for creating an enabling environment in PNG. Concerned about 
PNG’s relative fragile environment for biomass deployment, the Programme plans to assign U$ 3million (out of 
U$ 4million in total) into PNG for supporting the government’s making the model framework for renewable IPPs, 
helping the development of an effective renewable energy governance structure, and assisting the mapping of the 
nationwide land use patterns and biodiversity dynamics. Such TA activities are expected to establish an enabling 
model framework and relevant institutional circumstances under which the Programme will successfully implement 
the biomass power plant project. By extension, the Programme anticipates that such an enabling environment will 
attract more investments in renewable energy including biomass in the near future. The expected enabling 
environment will pull the trigger on the whole South Pacific community when it comes to energy paradigm shift 
towards low-carbon and clean renewable energy structure. 
 
Describe how the proposal contributes to innovation, market development and transformation. Examples include:

=== PAGE 50 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 79 
 
 E 
• 
Introducing and demonstrating a new market or a new technology in a country or a region 
• 
Using innovative funding scheme such as initial public offerings and/or bond markets for 
projects/programme 
 
The Programme will introduce innovative biomass technology, create new market for biomass energy, and trigger 
further transformation for renewable energy sector in the South Pacific region. In particular, the development of a 
wood pellet plant has been a key consideration even from the design stage of this Programme because produced 
pellets are to be supplied as fuel to other biomass power plants located within the region or outside, which will not 
only formulate and invigorate the region-wide biomass market development, but also contribute to transforming 
energy mix to renewable basis within and outside the South Pacific region.  
 
The biomass market development process will be accompanied by TA activities which will play an important role for 
applying proven innovative technology on the ground and expanding new renewable initiatives across Fiji, PNG, and, 
beyond that, throughout the South Pacific region. 
 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
Describe how the project/programme strengthens the national / local regulatory or legal frameworks to systematically 
drive investment in low-emission technologies or activities, promote development of additional low-emission policies, 
and/or improve climate-responsive planning and development. 
 
South Pacific SIDS does not usually have adequate regulatory framework or institutional setup to pursue their 
renewable energy target through actual project financing. In case of Fiji, although Fiji has an ambitious target for 
renewable energy deployment, there is no legal framework for Public-Private Partnership (PPP) or IPPs which is 
probably the reason for only a single pilot project has been tried in Fiji. Especially, the roles and responsibilities of 
specific entities are rarely defined in a crystal clear manner, which leads to duplication of work and responsibilities, a 
slow decision-making process, and severe inefficiency. As for PNG, although it has a National Energy Policy 2016-
2020, which indicates the need for strengthening renewable energy sector, it lacks a regulatory framework and 
specific plan for renewable energy. 
 
When it comes to the forest and land use, the Forest Decree (1992) is the main law regulating forest use in Fiji. 
However, there is no provision for sustainable land use management or participation of local landowners in the 
management of forest resources. Part V of the Decree recognizes the rights of customary landowners and provides 
that subsistence forest use recognized by customary law is permitted and should not be restricted by the Decree. 
This law has been under review for many years and is yet to be amended. The proposed Programme will establish a 
best practice, which will catalyze further improvement in the forestry sector.  
 
This Programme, based on the experiences with the pilot project and with support from the GCF, will present a 
successful IPP project where foreign private investors have locked in, and this helps the country to trigger actions for 
establishing adequate legal framework to promote more investment in renewable energy projects. 
 
The recent NDC Implementation Roadmap clearly demonstrates how the Programme has been contributing to the 
target country’s national strategy development to address climate change challenges. In fact, the Programme has 
been seriously considered by the Fijian government when it comes to goal setting process of the Roadmap. As a 
result, the Programme’s components are comprehensively integrated through short-, mid-, and long-term mitigation 
actions of the Roadmap. According to the Roadmap, the South Pacific biomass initiative ensures to achieve 50% of 
the total mitigation target; exactly speaking, the Programme helps to reduce 212,000 tCO2/yr out of the total 427,000 
tCO2/yr mitigation target in the energy sector of Fiji.        
 
 Another example can be that South Pacific SIDS in the region does not have specific environmental and social 
assessment guidelines provided by the government, and it was the case for Fiji as well. The project sponsor for the 
Fiji’s Sabeto project had advised the Fijian government during the pilot project period that requirements such as for 
air pollutants are necessary in order to manage the biomass power plant in a sustainable way, and had voluntarily set

=== PAGE 51 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 79 
 
 E 
up the guidelines to conduct the relevant assessments. The project sponsor will apply the same approach to this 
Programme, and work in close partnership with the governments to support them to begin establishing adequate 
regulatory framework for environmental and social management guidelines. 
 
 
 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential 
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive development impact 
The Programme is anticipated to bring in wider co-benefits to the beneficiaries, local communities and relevant 
stakeholders, beyond target countries and region. 
 
<Environmental Co-benefits> 
i. 
Fuels for biomass power plants and the wood pellet plant will be co-supplied mainly from eradicated African 
tulip and SRWC. The invasive African tulip is native to dry forestry in Africa, and is famous for its 
invasiveness. According to FAO28, the wide spread of this invasive alien species has become a serious 
problem in Fiji recently. In that sense, removal of African tulip will help preservation of Fiji’s native local 
ecosystem and biodiversity. 
ii. 
The local SRWC plantations will be done in lands highly degraded by African tulip or abandoned by 
ineffective land use practices in association with declining sugarcane, pulp, and banana industries. The poor 
condition of the lands would be recovered by maintaining optimum frequency of harvesting rounds.  
Additionally, Gliricidia carefully chosen for plantation is well known for its nitrogen‐fixing properties that will 
help improve soil nourishment and avoid damage from any additional fertilizer.  
iii. 
Of invaded lands by African tulip, some belonged to natural forest and the other to agricultural areas. All the 
vacant lands with invasive species harvesting being done will appreciate the previous land use as much as 
possible not to create an unreasonable land use change. The Programme plans to implement reforestation 
with selected native species in previous natural forest lands while giving back previous agricultural areas to 
local landowners. If the landowners wish to make use of their land for plantation, and to have a fuel supplier 
contract in favor of income generation, the Programme will not disregard local landowners’ desires.   
iv. 
The Programme will contribute to reducing the use of diesel in the region. The Programme will result in 
improvement of the air quality by reducing air pollutants generated from traditional diesel power generators 
such as the emissions of nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxides, hydrocarbons and particulate matters. Phasing 
out diesel will also benefit the local community in terms of lowering exposure to the risks such as fuel spills 
and water and land contamination while diesel is being transported or stored underground. 
 
<Economic Co-benefits> 
i. 
Key economic co-benefits are job creation and income generation.  
- 
Job opportunities will be generated especially for plantation management. In general, in Fiji, more than 
90% of the land is owned by local community members so fuel suppliers will sign fuel supply 
agreements in order to develop plantation. Instead, local landowners will plant and harvest SRWC in 
their own land every 2-3 year, and provide them to the power plant, which will create benefits of 
employing landowners and local community members. 
- 
Eradicating African tulip will provide full-time and part-time employment opportunities in regions affected 
and financial supports to linked service industries such as transportation and equipment procurement. 
- 
Biomass power plants are also expected to generate job opportunities. A single biomass power plant is 
expected to create 420 jobs, and the operation of a wood pellet plant is expected to bring in 560 jobs for 
the local communities. In total, four biomass power plants and one wood pellet plant can generate jobs 
for 2,240 local people during the project implementation period. 
 
                                                             
28 http://www.fao.org/agriculture/crops/thematic-sitemap/theme/biodiversity/weeds/issues/att/en/

=== PAGE 52 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 79 
 
 E 
 
 
 
 
Table 8 Job creation of this Programme 
Project 
Phase 
People 
Unit 
Total hired people 
Power plant 
Construction 
200 
4 
800 
Operating 
50 
4 
200 
Plantation 
150 
4 
600 
Harvesting 
20 
4 
80 
Pellet plant 
Construction 
200 
1 
200 
Operating 
70 
1 
70 
Plantation 
250 
1 
250 
Harvesting 
40 
1 
40 
Total 
2,240 
 
ii. 
From a macro perspective, reduced use of diesel will help decrease the countries’ heavy reliance on the 
imported fuel and increase energy security. This also implies that the Programme will reduce the countries’ 
vulnerability to the impact of oil price fluctuations. The Pacific countries’ GDP growth fell sharply as the 2008 
financial crisis hit the world, and the fall has been hugely attributed to surging oil prices29.  
 
<Social Co-benefits> 
i. 
Income generation from the employment will enhance family welfare. The earned income can help reduce 
poverty and child labor, and promote health and education attainment of the local population.  
ii. 
KDB will steadily encourage the project sponsors to support community facilities such as schools and 
kindergartens so as to further trickle down attained financial profits of the project. In fact, the project sponsor 
has already been making financial contribution and relevant assistance, for instance, by supporting the 
kindergarten graduation ceremony and scholarships to local children with the pilot project (Nabou project).  
iii. 
Capacity building such as trainings and other educational programmes will be provided to employees 
working at biomass plants. These employees can continue working for the plants but can freely move to 
other local working places, which spur knowledge and technology transfer.  
iv. 
Overall, the programme pursues human development goals by capacity enhancement of human resources 
in Fiji and PNG. 
 
<Gender Co-benefits> 
Gender-sensitive social inclusion is at the heart of the overall Programme elements, as gender parity plays a critical 
role in moving towards a climate-resilient pathway in an inclusive way. In particular, the Programme does not only 
target women but also take the needs of both women and men into account to achieve genuine gender equality. 
 
Gender inclusive approach is particularly important for the countries such as Fiji and where the male-female ratio of 
the labor force and the population is nearly equal. The Programme fully recognizes that without gender 
mainstreaming strategies, the Programme will not be able to reach out to groups discriminated by gender, and thus 
will fail to achieve its full sustainability potential. 
 
i. 
Certain proportion of women will be engaged in all types of consultations conducted during the Programme 
period, in order for their voices to be heard. 
                                                             
29 ADB, AusAID (2012) Revitalising the Fiji Economy

=== PAGE 53 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 79 
 
 E 
ii. 
The Programme will adopt well-devised gender mainstreaming practices in terms of employing adequate 
number of female workforce, applying the equal terms to both men and women employees (i.e. 
remuneration), and providing desirable working environment for women (i.e. sexual harassment policy).  
iii. 
Various trainings will be provided particularly targeted at female (or male in case of PNG if the project site 
possesses female-dominated gender dynamics) engineers to help the female labor force to increase the 
technical capacity and move into senior managerial levels with higher incomes, thus moving up the poverty 
ladder and achieving social mobility. Women’s economic empowerment is expected to accelerate by 
building a low-emission future in Fiji, PNG and the Pacific as a whole. Plus, their empowerment will help end 
violence against women and girls – which is one of serious gender-based human rights violations in the 
region.  
iv. 
Such practices will showcase the gender mainstreaming approach (best practices in mainstreaming 
gender throughout the whole business cycle) to other businesses in Fiji and PNG. Such practices can 
also serve as a momentum for advancement of the National Gender Policy of Fiji and the National 
Policy on Women Equality and Women Empowerment of PNG, and ignite other gender related 
initiatives in Fiji and PNG. 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient  
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only) 
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups, and elaborate how the 
project/programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and groups, 
overall income level, etc). 
 
Not Applicable 
 
 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
• 
Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
• 
Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payment gap that prevents from 
addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market) 
• 
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity. 
 
Phasing out diesel dependency in energy production. The economy in Fiji and PNG is characterized by its 
vulnerability to both internal and external shocks. Truly, the country’s economic growth rate has been severely 
influenced by global financial crises and natural disasters such as cyclones and flooding. Above all, its heavy 
dependence on imported fuel is a huge burden. The development of biomass power plants is expected to contribute 
to the countries’ financial stability, as the power plants will lessen Fiji and PNG’s dependence on imported fossil fuels, 
in particular, diesel for energy production.  
 
Land use sustainability and livelihood improvement. Fiji’s pulp and sugar cane industries have been 
experiencing economic downturn, and a large number of related businesses have been shutting down their farms. 
Even worse, recent climate disasters (i.e. Cyclone Winston) have badly damaged the sugarcane plantation farms, 
and the prices of sugar cane have sharply decreased. The businesses have been forced to close down their farms, 
and it has resulted in not only large areas of land being abandoned but also thousands of people losing jobs. It has 
directly affected the local economies leaving the community members economically vulnerable without access to their 
livelihoods. By planting Gliricidia in abandoned lands and providing jobs, the Programme will achieve enhancing local 
livelihoods as well as improving forestry and land use systems.  
 
Absence of alternative sources of financing. Though the governments of Fiji and PNG are ambitious to expand 
their renewable energy capacities, they have limited budget to carry out such projects and their financial markets are

=== PAGE 54 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 79 
 
 E 
not mature enough to attract private investments. During the pilot project implementation in Fiji, the project sponsor 
had difficulties in attracting private investment due to the country’s financial and political risks. In that sense, 
therefore, international institutions such as the GCF can play a significant role in countering such hardships, paving a 
way for further renewable investments, and enabling the Fijian and PNG governments to move forward in achieving 
their renewable energy targets.  
 
In particular, PNG mentioned in its INDC that the amount of GHG mitigation of the country highly depended on the 
availability of external funding. That is, in achieving its ambitious goal of achieving 100% electricity generation 
through renewable energy, it will need to attract sources of finance from outside the country. 
 
Need for strengthening institutional capacity. According to a report prepared by the Fiji Department of Energy and 
UNDP, efforts in developing IPP market did exist in the past, but such attempts were not successful. Main issues 
behind such poor performance include30: 
∙ 
Power purchase tariffs are significantly below avoided cost of FEA’s thermal generation, and thus cannot 
render IPP projects financially viable; 
∙ 
Unclear situation with regard to Fiji Commerce Commission ruling on minimum tariffs; 
∙ 
Complex and costly approval procedures; 
∙ 
Self-regulating of FEA with regards to grid access; 
∙ 
Difficulties in accessing financing; 
∙ 
Difficulties with or lack of access to relevant information.  
 
Moreover, in case of PNG, an issue regarding its renewable energy policy is that it is yet to formulate a specific action 
plan that will realize the goals. By setting a model framework for renewables and enhancing the governmental system 
by Grant, the local community and government officials will be able to gain insight and knowledge related to 
renewable energy.  
 
The Programme will be operated and managed by entities that have extensive experience in terms of renewable 
technology and finance. Once these entities enter Fiji and PNG and transfer their know-hows to local stakeholders 
through technical assistance, the local governments could build capacity needed for developing IPP markets and 
improving renewable energy capacity. As outlined in Section E.2.2, various capacity building and training sessions 
will be provided to government officials regarding development of regulatory framework. 
 
Moreover, KDB, as the accredited entity, will effectively manage the Programme in compliance with the GCF 
standards by assisting relevant government agencies in strengthening their capacity of implementing PPP projects 
and biomass IPP projects. 
 
E.5.  Country Ownership  
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs 
Please describe how the project/programme contributes to country’s identified priorities for low-emission and climate-
resilient development, and the degree to which the activity is supported by a country’s enabling policy and 
institutional framework, or includes policy or institutional changes. 
 
The Programme upholds the principle of country ownership by aligning the Programme components with identified 
policy priorities of target countries for low-emission and climate-resilient development. Both Fiji and PNG 
governments have emphasized the significance of raising the share of renewable energy on their policies and 
                                                             
30 In case of Fiji, import of fuel accounted for 22.9% of total merchandise imports in 2015 (Department of 
Energy & UNDP)

=== PAGE 55 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 79 
 
 E 
national strategies in order to address disastrous climate change impacts. The Programme fits well with the two 
governments’ interests and priorities by introducing low-carbon biomass energy to the South Pacific realm with rich 
endowments of biomass fuel sources. In addition, the Programme responds to the country needs of promoting 
sustainable forestry and land use and reducing CO2 emission by suggesting ways to effectively handle forestry and 
land use systems.  
 
<Fiji> 
Playing a pivotal role in achieving the NDC goals. Expansion of biomass energy has been strongly supported by 
the Fiji NDC Implementation Roadmap 2017-2030 published by the GGGI. The Roadmap 2017 - 2030 describes that 
biomass-based power generation including sustainable biomass plantations can make the largest contribution to 
achieve the Fiji’s CO2 mitigation target through 2030. Increasing renewable power generation capacity through a 12 
MW biomass power plant, and developing sustainable biomass to use as fuel have been proposed as a short-term 
mitigation action (2017 – 2020) for the Fijian Government. Biomass power plants accompanied by sustainable 
biomass plantation and increasing their capacity are repeatedly highlighted as medium-term and long-term mitigation 
actions in this Roadmap as a primary consideration for Fiji to achieve the NDC target.  
 
Accordingly, the Roadmap clearly demonstrates that the Programme can make a significant contribution and play a 
pivotal role in supporting these countries to achieve the CO2 emissions reduction targets they have ambitiously 
announced in the NDCs. 
 
Land use management. The Programme contributes to the Fijian government’s priority activities for effectively 
managing forests and land use, which is aligned with climate-resilient development. Fiji National Biodiversity Strategy 
and Action Plan stipulates that there are a variety of ecosystems present in Fiji with various habitats containing 
variety of species of fauna and flora that has helped maintain sustainability in terms of biodiversity and ecosystem 
stability. The focal areas outlined in the Action Plan include: 1) community support – awareness, involvement and 
ownership; 2) improving knowledge; 3) developing protected areas; 4) species conservation; 5) control of invasive 
species; and 6) capacity building and strengthening. The 5th focal area details on how to control invasive species that 
crowds out native species present in Fiji. 
 
Most notably, the Ministry of Fisheries and Forests of Fiji has been making endeavors for the effective use of 
abandoned land, focusing on the eradication of African tulip which has caused deterioration of forests and 
consequently abandonment by landowners. As an initiative to eradicate African tulip, the Ministry issued an 
Expression of Interest (EoI) in 2015 to find interested parties that can assist the Fijian government in eradicating 
African tulip. The EoI was supporting the UNDP programme titled “Implementing a Ridge to Reef approach to 
Preserve Ecosystem Services, Sequester Carbon, Improve Climate Resilience and Sustain Livelihoods in Fiji”. 
 
Further details of the Fijian government-led initiatives and efforts can be found in Section C.1 and E.5.3. The 
Programme is designed in line with the Fijian government’s significant efforts to create a sustainable and efficient 
cycle of land use and forest management. 
 
<PNG> 
Increasing renewable energy generation. PNG submitted its INDC in September 2015, where it states that “the 
main mitigation contribution for PNG would be in terms of an indicative replacement of fossil fuelled electricity 
generation with renewable energy sources.”31 While the INDC does not specify the amount of contribution of 
electricity to emissions, it commits to the goal of raising the share of renewable energy for electricity generation to 
100% by 2050. 
                                                             
31 Fiji NDC Implementation Roadmap 2017-2030(2017)

=== PAGE 56 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 79 
 
 E 
 
PNG’s National Energy Policy 2016-2020 sets out detailed strategies for ensuring “affordable, reliable, and 
accessible provision of energy in a manner that is competitive, sustainable and environmentally friendly,”32 and 
achieving the target of reaching 100% renewable energy sources for electricity generation. In doing so, the Policy 
spells out the need for maximizing the use of renewable energy and expresses its willingness to draft and formulate a 
National Renewable Policy, in which biomass is included as a renewable energy source. 
 
Land use management. Despite covering less than 0.5% of the Earth’s surface, it is estimated that PNG holds 5-
10 % of global biodiversity. The PNG government announced the National Forest Development Guidelines in 2009, 
which reflects the government’s needs for achieving economic recovery and nation-building through the development 
of the country’s natural resources including forest resources, while taking into consideration environmental 
preservation and social and cultural values of the forests in PNG. 
 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
Please describe experience and track record of the accredited entity and executing entities with respect to the 
activities that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme. 
 
<Accredited Entity– KDB> 
Since 2007, KDB has financed approximately USD 3.3 billion for about 45 renewable energy projects including solar, 
wind power, and biomass projects across the globe. In terms of biomass projects, KDB has played a role as the lead 
arranger for three projects including a biomass project in China (2011).  
 
Table 9 Track Records of KDB 
(Unit: USD million) 
Year 
Project Title 
Total Project Cost 
Financial Arrangement by KDB 
2011 
Biomass Power Plant in China 
54 
36 
2014 
Jeonju Power Corporation Biomass Power Plant 
88 
70 
2016 
Tees Renewable Energy Plant, Teesside, United Kingdom 
1,091 
87 
 
Based on its employees’ expertise on electricity industry and finance, KDB has a separate Project Finance Unit in 
power sector, which is divided into three teams by region, and is increasing financing for renewable energy projects 
in developing countries such as Indonesia and Georgia through coordination with international organizations 
 
<Executing Entity– Project SPC(s)> 
KDB will select project sponsors for each biomass power plant based on criteria outlined in its Investment Criteria, as 
done in the first Sabeto project (Sub-component 1.1), in order to establish project SPC(s) which will act as an 
executing entity. The criteria is as follows: 
 
- Credit Requirement: Companies having credit ratings that are at least “BBB-” by S&P or “Baa3” by Moody’s. In 
case of Korean sponsors, companies having credit ratings of at least “BBB-” by one of NICE Information Service 
Co, Ltd., Korea Ratings Co, Ltd. or Korea Investors Services, Inc.; or; 
 
- Track Records:  
(1) Experiences that utilize commercially proven technology and employ experienced management teams which is 
related to bio energy industries and, 
(2) Tack records that meet the ongoing operating, monitoring and maintenance requirements for bio energy 
industries; and, 
(3) Experience of performing and/or to have performed at least one project in South Pacific SIDS related to bio 
                                                             
32 PNG National Energy Policy 2016-2020 (2015)

=== PAGE 57 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 79 
 
 E 
energy industries 
 
- Financial investors (financial institutions or private equity funds as the case may be) can also be invited as 
sponsors. The above credit requirements or track records are not required for financial investors.  
 
Project sponsors tentatively selected by KDB were the project sponsors of the pilot biomass power plant 
implemented in Nabou, Fiji, and thus are well-equipped with knowledge and experience pertaining to developing IPP 
projects in Fiji. Please refer to Section C.4 for further information on KDB’s capacity in terms of selection of project 
sponsors, etc. 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
Please provide a full description of the steps taken to ensure country ownership, including the engagement with 
NDAs on the funding proposal and the no-objection letter. 
 
<Engagement with NDAs and Governmental Agencies> 
The project sponsors of the first biomass power plant in Sabeto, Fiji (Sub-component 1.1) have been cooperating 
with the Fijian government for sustainable forestry and land use and economic use of biomass resources. In fact, the 
Ministry of Fisheries and Forests had realized the need for eradication of African tulip for its invasiveness, and agreed 
with the proposal that the project sponsor has made to the Ministry for removing African tulip to use for biomass fuels, 
and planting native species to replace African tulip.  
 
The EoI that the Ministry released in early September 2015 demonstrates the commitment the Fijian government has 
made to eradicate African tulip. The EoI states that African tulip is an invasive plant in Fiji and has been posing a 
great threat to Fiji’s national biodiversity, and the Ministry intends to identify interested parties who are willing to 
assist the Ministry to address the issue of African tulip by entering into a long term agreement.  
 
Figure 9 The EoI and the Letter of acceptance for the African tulip eradication project 
 
 
(Source: Ministry of Fisheries and Forests of Fiji) 
 
Since Eltech, a subsidiary of the project sponsor, GIMCO, was selected as a service provider for this EoI, it has been 
carrying on cooperation with the Ministry to eradicate African tulip. The Ministry has been supportive of  
Eltech’s reforestation and plantation activities.

=== PAGE 58 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 79 
 
 E 
 
Following that, the first task force committee has been organized by the Ministry of Fisheries and Forests on the 
matter of utilization of African tulip. The task force committee includes all the related government departments such 
as the Department of Agriculture and Department of Rural Development under the Ministry of Agriculture, Rural 
Development, and National Disaster Management, and Department of iTaukei Affairs under the Ministry of iTaukei 
Affairs & Sugar Industry. The first task force committee meeting was held in February 2016. In April 2016, the 
Cabinet of the Fijian government expressed support for developing biomass businesses. In addition, the project 
sponsor has signed a MoU with the FEA which agrees upon overall cooperation in developing biomass energy 
generation projects in Feb 2017. The MoU had been drafted based upon a series of consultations with the NDAs and 
other governmental agencies that have taken place over the last few years. It is evident that the Programme is in line 
with what the beneficiary governments wish to achieve. In short, country ownership has been well realized as the key 
principle throughout steps taken. 
 
As a result of is in-depth communications between KDB and the NDAs, Fiji and PNG already issued the No-Objection 
Letter on August 2017 and January 2018 respectively.   
  
Please also specify the multi-stakeholder engagement plan and the consultations that were conducted when this 
proposal was developed.  
 
<Multi-Stakeholder Engagement Plan and Consultation> 
Several hearings and meetings have been and will be carried out to ensure that the proposed Programme is 
implemented without conflicts with stakeholders. Specifically, the project sponsor are willing to organize several 
government stakeholder meetings and to invite relevant government officials for them to be assured that the 
Programme is aligned with vision and strategies of the governments with regards to land use, renewable energy, and 
benefits the local community will obtain. 
 
In fact, the project sponsor had conducted several consultation meetings with various stakeholders for environmental 
and social issues of the biomass power plant in Sabeto, Fiji (Sub-component 1.1), particularly focusing on utilizing 
land and road access, providing employment opportunities, and complying with regulated procedures. Social studies 
were conducted targeting different focus groups: 1) related departments under the Ministry of Environment, local 
authorities such as Town Council, Rural Local Authority, and FEA; and 2) community members including women and 
youth. Interviewing the focus groups has provided opportunities to listen to concerns and issues of the local groups, 
and to come up with appropriate measures to mitigate the negative impacts. According to landowners who were key 
stakeholders of the project, the raised concerns and related impacts are expected to be appropriately managed, and 
to benefit the livelihood of the local people by transforming the abandoned land to the productive land by plantation.  
 
In case of PNG, KDB will make endeavors to establish a constructive partnership with government bodies in relation 
to the GCF-funded activities such as PPL at an appropriate timing of a certain level of PNG project details being 
confirmed. Particular project activities including selecting plantation areas will be carefully implemented after 
conducting thorough feasibility studies and considering feedback from multi-dimensional stakeholders in PNG. In the 
decision-making process, ideas, opinions, and advices from PNG counterparts will be treasured in order to make a 
consensus that satisfies all relevant parties. 
 
<Women’s Active Engagement> 
The Programme recognizes the importance of gender mainstreaming. Prior to the proposal submission, the 
stakeholder engagement strategy for women is currently being discussed with the Ministry of Women, Social Welfare, 
and Poverty Alleviation. The discussion entails capacity building activities targeting local women so called ‘Biomass 
Project’ – i.e. training local women to be a biomass engineer and garnering their support for distributing small scale 
biomass power facilities as packages into isolated areas without grid connection.

=== PAGE 59 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 79 
 
 E 
The Programme is seeking specific ways for effectively implementing the ‘Biomass Project’ as part of the Programme 
component 3 by encouraging local entities’ active engagement. The Ministry can play a significant role in facilitating 
the consultation process with local women (both native and indo) and other relevant stakeholders and enabling the 
Programme gender sensitive. 
 
<Miscellaneous Remarks> 
A communication strategy for complaints raised by local communities, stakeholders, and the government will be 
established. That is, throughout the construction and operation phases of the biomass power plant, a form of 
“Complaint Register” will be kept on a project site to register complaints regarding the noise, dust and surrounding 
environmental degradation.  
 
KDB also has an information disclosure system for its projects on its website where stakeholders can have access to 
information related to the projects. The system was established to enhance communications with borrowers and 
promptly respond to the complaints. 
 
KDB, as the accredited entity, has attended the GCF Structured Dialogue with the Pacific held in Tonga in July 2017 
where it had the opportunity to communicate the progress being made with this Programme, and has collected more 
information on the demand for biomass across South Pacific SIDS. This consultation played a significant role in 
designing the Programme to be more demand-driven so that it can reach those that are vulnerable and in need.

=== PAGE 60 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 79 
 
 E 
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, 
including addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers; providing the least concessionality; and without crowding 
out private and other public investment. 
 
The financing structure of this Programme is designed to leverage the GCF finance to fill the financing gap, and to 
induce more private capital to enable the project. At the same time, considering the characteristics of private sector 
projects, financial terms and conditions for the GCF are suggested with the minimum-level of concessionality. 
 
The market rate presented in Section B.3 indicates that the debt to equity and the minimum simple DSCR are not 
attractive enough to invite private sector investments in the Programme. The pricing and funding size of the GCF 
loan plays a decisive role in achieve the minimum level of financial requirements under which commercial banks 
may consider loan provision. 
 
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness, taking into account the total project financing and the mitigation/ 
adaptation impact that the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate 
benchmark. For mitigation, please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the cost per tCO2eq). 
 
< Biomass projects >  
Compared to other similar projects, the proposed biomass power plant project is assumed more cost-effective. 
Information on the comparable projects is as in the table below. The cost per MW of the first Sabeto project is more 
favorable in comparison with other two biomass energy projects in Sri Lanka and Malaysia. 
 
Table 10 Information on Comparable Transactions 
Items33 
Proposed Project 
Comparable Project 1 
Comparable Project 2 
Project Title 
Fiji Biomass Plant 
Renewgen Kaduwela Biomass 
Plant 
Felda Global Jenka Biomass Plant 
Country 
Fiji 
Sri Lanka 
Malaysia 
Source 
Wood Chip 
Municipal Solid Waste 
Palm Oil Residues 
Status 
Under Contemplation 
Completed (2012) 
Completed (2012) 
Installed Capacity
(MW) 
12.0 
10.0 
12.5 
EPC Cost  
(million USD) 
36.4 
32.6 
40.5 
Cost per MW 
(USD/kW) 
3,033 
3,265 
3,242 
 
 
< Wood pellet plant > 
The total investment cost of the pellet production infrastructure (Sub-component 2.1) and capacity increase for 
existing transportation infrastructure (Sub-component 2.2) is USD 114.8mil (USD 230/pellet-ton) in this Programme. 
By the way, the investment cost of Highland Pellet s-Pine Bruff in U.S. which started construction in 2017 is USD 
300 pellet-ton, while that of SY Energy in Korea which started construction in 2015 is USD 333/pellet-ton. These 
references show that the cost of the pellet plant under this Programme is more cost-effective in comparison with 
other two projects.  
                                                             
33 The feedstock price and operating cost of each comparable project varies in a wide range. For example, 
Comparable project 1 uses solid wastes with little cost but some tipping fees if applicable.  LCOE (Levelized cost of 
Energy) is hard to compare between individual cases but LCOE is generally lower in biomass than in Waste to 
energy. (Source : Bloomberg New Energy Finance, 2014).

=== PAGE 61 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 79 
 
 E 
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only) 
Please provide the co-financing ratio (total amount of co-financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the 
project/programme) and/or the potential to catalyze indirect/long-term low emission investment. 
 
The total Programme size is USD 431.0 million of which the financing from the GCF is USD 106.4 million. The GCF 
financing accounts for nearly 25% of the entire Programme financing and thus the co-financing ratio is 3.05 (co-
financing ratio is 3.17 except the grant for TA). 
 
The investments from KDB (the accredited entity of the Programme), project sponsors (such as GIMCO, GS Power, 
and Mirae Asset Daewoo, etc.), and financial investors (such as Mirae Asset Daewoo, etc.) present a reasonable 
balance of private capital for project financing. USD 42.8 million from other investors is not confirmed at this stage, 
and local financial institutions are currently reviewing their participation. 
 
Meanwhile, all the planned projects under the proposed Programme will contribute to building a successful track 
record, and these will pave ways for private sector’s participation in more renewable energy projects in South Pacific 
SIDS in the future. Although risks still exist in terms of investing in South Pacific SIDS, private sector will be able to 
consider investing more comfortably if there is an evident precedent of success.  
 
E.6.3. Financial viability  
Please specify the expected economic and financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support, based on the 
analysis conducted in F.1. 
 
 The equity ratio to achieve the minimum requirement of simple DSCR (1.2 x) can increase up to approx. 40% of the 
total Programme size without the GCF involvement. As the volume of equity increases, project sponsors having 
limited financial capacity are reluctant to participate in the projects, which is likely to result in the failure of financing. 
On the other hand, without adjusting the equity ratio, the minimum simple DSCF decreases to 1.1, which makes it 
difficult to attract private lenders.  
. 
Table 11 Minimum Simple DSCR before and after the GCF involvement 
Project 
With the GCF 
involvement minimum 
simple DSCR (A) 
Without the GCF involvement 
minimum simple 
DSCR (B) 
Equity ratio to 
adjust (B) to 
achieve (A) 
Equity ratio for 
 (B) to achieve 1.2 
Biomass Power Plant in 
Sabeto 
(Sub-component 1.1) 
1.19 
1.06 
38% 
38% 
Wood Pellet Plant in Wairiki 
(Component 2) 
1.2 
1.07 
37% 
37% 
 
The figures in the table above do not take into account the currency fluctuation. Risks to the investors may increase 
once the currency volatility is fully considered in the analysis. Fiji Dollar had depreciated by 20% during the Asian 
financial crisis in 1998 and the global financial crisis in 2009, respectively. It had appreciated since 2009 to peak at 
2011, depreciated again till 2015, and recently, FJ Dollar against US Dollar is 0.48. In PNG, the trade weighted 
exchange rate fell 10.8% from October 2015 to Oct 2016, with the kina slipping 11.4% against the US dollar over 
that period (USD 0.3485 end of Sept 2015, USD 0.3155 28 Sept 2016). 
 
Thus, the GCF involvement is critical to reduce the risks upon the private sector, and to attain financial viability of 
projects with terms and conditions at least equal to or more favorable than private sectors. The GCF, as the anchor 
investor, will play the role of attracting private sector investments.  
 
 
Please describe financial viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention. 
Please describe the GCF’s financial exit strategy in case of private sector operations (e.g. IPOs, trade sales, etc.). 
 
The Programme will generate profit through the PPA signed for 25 year with the FEA and the PPL, and all loans 
including that from the GCF will be repaid within the operation period. Please refer to Section D.2 for more details.

=== PAGE 62 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 79 
 
 E 
                                                             
34 Eltech is the only entity with access rights to African tulip harvesting, approved by the Fiji government. Based on 
the country ownership principle, the Programme gives priority to the government choice. In that African tulip is 
primary fuel, Eltech has been an integral part of the Programme since the early development phase.  
E.6.4. Application of best practices 
Please explain how best available technologies and practices are considered and applied. If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices. 
 
<Reforestation after Eradication of African Tulip> 
To promote biodiversity after eradication of African tulip. African tulip spread throughout 30,000ha will be 
eradicated and the area after eradication will be rehabilitated. The tentative species selected for reforestation 
include native species. The Programme will appreciate two principles when it comes to rehabilitating the harvested 
land: 1) consideration of the previous land use; and 2) local landowners’ desire. (more specified in Environmental 
Co-benefits of E.3.)  
 
The potential fuel supplier (Eltech 34) has acquired Harvesting License for African tulip from the Fijian government, 
will obtain approval of environmental impact assessment from both the Ministry of Fisheries and Forest and the 
Department of Environment, and will eradicate the invasive plant in accordance with the Ministry of Fisheries and 
Forest’s Harvesting Code. After eradicating African tulip, reforestation will be managed according to the guidelines 
set out by IPCC and UNDP-led programme, “Implementing a Ridge to Reef (R2R) approach to Preserve Ecosystem 
Services, Sequester Carbon, Improve Climate Resilience and Sustain Livelihoods in Fiji”, as well as Fijian 
regulations. Reforestation in line with strict global standards and best practices will enhance biodiversity and local 
ecosystem.  
 
<SRWC Plantation in Idled and Degraded Lands> 
To select an adequate species for plantation in idle and degraded lands. Local Gliricidia has been selected for 
the SRWC plantation in abandoned ex-sugarcane lands, given its various advantages. Firstly, Gliricidia is a species 
native to tropical or subtropical climate and at the same time tolerant to a wide range of soil conditions. Secondly, it 
is also easy to control the propagation since it does not spread seeds and the main means of reproduction is 
cutting. Moreover, as a nitrogen-fixing tree, Gliricidia has the capacity of recovering soil fertility, and can play a role 
as a fallow crop. According to risk assessment of the Pacific Island Ecosystems at Risk (PIER), the local Gliricidia is 
“highly domesticated” in the Pacific context with an extremely low probability of invasiveness, in spite of its fast-
growing properties.  
 
To ensure appropriate intervention in plantation management. All the processes of the plantation management 
will be in line with the IFC Performance Standards, particularly PS6. Under the final supervision and responsibilities 
of KDB in accordance with AMA and the practical control of sponsors, the Programme’s potential supplier is to 
precisely figure out vulnerabilities and critical characteristics of the primary supply chains, and to stick to global 
standards for monitoring and managing the plantation work.  
 
To select the right site for plantation. Selected SPCs will have to search for lands that were once utilized for 
cropping or planting purposes but now left idle due to declining major industries. For instance, in case of the pilot 
biomass power plant in Nabou, Fiji, a 5,000ha land, which was previously used for pine tree plantation but now 
abandoned, has been rehabilitated as the plantation site. After signing direct contracts with landowners who own 
such lands, the landowners will get a job for land management under the lease contract. Such a win-win model has 
received positive feedbacks from landowners in relation to the pilot biomass power plant in Nabou, Fiji. The same 
criteria of converting idle land into productive land to raise the quality of life for residents will be applied for the 
plantation in Fiji as well as PNG.

=== PAGE 63 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 79 
 
 E 
                                                             
35 The sponsors of the first power plant are now operating the pilot project (Nabou biomass power plant) at the initial 
stage. During the ramp-up period, the sponsors are trying to find the optimum operating conditions. The know-how 
and experience of the sponsors are greatly helpful for subsequent projects in this Programme to maintain high 
combustion efficiency. 
<Enhancing Renewable Energy Access> 
To maintain high combustion efficiency to reduce greenhouse gases emission from the power plant. 35 A 
single 12MW biomass power plant can be seen relatively small in size equipped with the combustion system of solid 
fuels, and the combustion efficiency varies depending on the fuel condition. The combustion efficiency is one of the 
most sensitive parameters that affect the efficiency of the overall plant operation. To reduce GHG emissions from 
solid fuel-fired power plants, therefore, a high level of the combustion efficiency is particularly important. 
 
To keep the combustion efficiency high, fuels should be uniform in size, moisture level and type. This project, 
however, does not coincide with the ideal condition. Biomass fuel sources supplied to the plant are less likely to be 
uniform due to varying conditions during gathering, delivering, and drying processes.  
 
The moving grate system will be installed to resolve the issue of such non-identical types of fuel condition. If 
collected fuel is too wet, then the fuel may be moved slowly at the drying area so that the fuel can reach down to the 
appropriate moisture level for combustion. This is possible because the moving grate system is usually divided into 
several zones – i.e. drying, burning, mixing, and ash zones – and can control the speed of each zone separately. 
This mechanism allows constant efficiency to be maintained regardless of the type of fuels. 
 
< Mitigating Vulnerability to Cyclone Events>  
Tropical cyclone has destructive impacts on plant facilities and forestation. To reduce such vulnerability to cyclone 
events, mitigation measure will be developed and employed for each project during preparation, construction, and 
operation in accordance with national regulations as well as with international best practices as follows.  
 
Preparation period. The mitigation plan will be developed to outline strategic approaches for how to compile and 
monitor cyclone risk, and how responses are coordinated and implemented before, during and after cyclone events. 
It may have three components: 1) early warning system; 2) incident response; and 3) communication strategy. 
Every project company for the Programme will nominate the coordinator, who has a role of monitoring, forecasting, 
and reporting the extreme weather pattern in relation to cyclones.  
Constructional period. EPC contractor should have capability to consider a wind force factor for building designing 
in line with international best practices. Fiji has experienced cyclone occasions with the maximum speed of 70-
75m/s which exceeds 57m/s. Therefore, a wind force factor will be applied in a stricter manner. 
Operational period. The mitigation plan for cyclone events during operation phases will be prepared by O&M 
supplier. The specific responsibilities of staff in charge with cyclone contingency plans include operation and 
supervision of the warning and response systems, and coordination with governmental agencies and relevant 
stakeholders.

=== PAGE 64 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 79 
 
 E 
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
 
GCF core 
indicators 
Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only) 
 
(a) Total project financing(except grant) 
US$427,000,000  
(b) Requested GCF amount(except grant) 
US$102,400,000  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  
4,736,230tCO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO2eq (d = a / c) 
US$90.16 / tCO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq removed (e = b / c) 
US$21.62 / tCO2eq  
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators (d) and (e) above. 
 
Please refer to Section E.1.2. 
 
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in a 
comparable context.  
 
Please refer to Section E.1.2. 
 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only) 
 
Participation of the GCF will mobilize private investment at a total of USD 324.6 million. The indicative 
breakdown of the USD 324.6 million is as follows: 
 
- 
KDB: USD 42.8 million (loan) 
- 
Other commercial investors: USD 153.7 million (loan) 
- 
Sponsors : USD 128.1 million (Equity) 
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above. Please describe how the 
indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in a comparable context.   
 
- 
Equity to debt ratio: based on 3:7 which is a typical ratio applied for private sector projects in 
developing countries 
- 
Other commercial banks: subject to investment appetites of prospective lenders which are 
based on market and project conditions investigated by KDB    
 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme) 
 
The key economic co-benefit is job creation for 
2,240 local persons in biomass power plants and a 
pellet plant. Considering reforestation and 
plantation, a greater income generation benefit is 
expected through additional part-time and full-time 
job opportunities.

=== PAGE 65 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 79 
 
 F 
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis 
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the detailed economic and financial analysis (including the financial 
model, taking into consideration the information provided in section E.6.3). 
 
GIMCO, one of the project sponsors of the first biomass power plant in Sabeto, Fiji (Sub-component 1.1), has 
conducted feasibility studies for the Programme. Following that, Korea Ratings, an external firm specializing in 
feasibility studies, has prepared a draft of the feasibility studies as of June 2017. The feasibility studies conducted 
financial analysis such as profitability analysis, cash flow analysis of loan repayment, and DSCR Analysis of each 
activity, and pro forma financial statements have been developed for the 12MW Sabeto Project.  
 
The feasibility study claims that the project sponsors have enough capacity of construction, fuel supply, technology 
application, and operation and maintenance, in terms of risk management and project implementation. A further due 
diligence is to be carried out at an in-depth level once legal arrangements such as inter-stakeholder agreements and 
EPC contract are materialized. As an accredited entity, KDB will monitor a series of procedures that properly 
employed external agencies with reasonable specialty conduct due diligence in accordance with best practices of 
project finance.     
 
More details can be found from the feasibility study reports (Annex 2) and financial model (Annex 3) attached in 
Section I.  
 
Based on the above analysis, please provide economic and financial justification (both qualitative and quantitative) for 
the concessionality that GCF provides, with a reference to the financial structure proposed in section B.2. 
 
The financing structure of this Programme is designed to leverage finance from the GCF to fill the financing gap and 
induce more private capital to enable the project. As the anchor investor, the GCF will play the role of stabilizing the 
investment structure to solicit as much private sector participation as possible. Also, considering the nature of private 
sector projects, financial terms and conditions for the GCF are suggested with the minimum-level concessionality. 
 
Please refer to Section E.6.3 for more information. Additionally, the financial analysis with the GCF participation can 
be found from the attached financial model (Annex 3). 
 
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
Please provide an assessment from the technical perspective. If a particular technological solution has been chosen, 
describe why it is the most appropriate for this project/programme. 
The best technical solutions for the Programme were selected in both areas of forestry and land use management 
and renewable energy generation.  
 
Forestry and land use Management. To select adequate species for plantation in idled and degraded lands, 
invasiveness of selected species, Gliricidia as reviewed by the reference of the ‘Pacific Island Ecosystem at Risk’ 
(PIER) program’. According to the weed risk assessment undertaken by the PIER, Gliricidia in the Pacific is identified 
as being a low risk of invasiveness36.  
 
For more information related to technical evaluation in forestry and land use management, please refer to Section 
E.6.4. 
 
Renewable Energy Generation. The technologies and measures employed for the biomass power plants have been 
chosen for the sake of operational safety of the plant. With the boiler efficiency running at 87.9~88.7% Net Calorific 
Value (NCV) and the turbine efficiency at 28.95~29.78%, the plant will have the gross efficiency of 25.45~26.35% 
NCV overall. As the parasitic load is expected to be about 10-12%, the net efficiency will be 22.13%-23.37% NCV. 
                                                             
36 http://www.hear.org/pier/wra/pacific/gliricidia_sepium_htmlwra.htm

=== PAGE 66 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 79 
 
 F 
Hence, the net maximum continuous rating output will be 10.44-10.85MW in case of a 12MW biomass power plant.  
 
 
Steam Boiler & Grate: the steam boiler uses LAWI EtaComb® Combustion Systems, supplied by LAWI 
Engineering and designed to withstand a 30-year lifetime. The boiler uses a stoker type with moving grate, which 
will enable firing multiple biomass fuels, with the boiler efficiency of 87.9-88.6 % NCV. The grate is fabricated 
from a high chromium alloy (>26% Cr) which should provide suitable resistance to high temperature. 
 
Turbine Generator: the turbine type will be an SST300 of Siemens has about 20 years assumed lifetime at 
50MW. The projected turbine efficiency is 28.95-29.78%, with the rated output at the generator terminals 
12,000kW, running at the speed of 7500/1500 rpm (turbine/generator). 
 
Condensing & Feed-heating Plant: the heat balance diagram proposes a water-cooled two pass surface (shell 
and tube) condenser with stainless steel and carbon steel tube plates, and a rolled steel shell. Two condensate 
extraction pumps are to be provided and there is a steam jet ejector condenser and a gland steam condenser in 
the main condensate flow path en-route to the de-aerator. 
 
Once in full operation, the expected overall capacity factor is analyzed to be 81% given 90% availability factor and 
90% load factor. The technical due diligence has agreed to this figure. 
 
Please refer to Section E.6.4 for efficiency of the technologies that will be applied in renewable energy generation. 
 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations 
Describe the main outcome of the environment and social impact assessment. Specify the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan, and how the project/programme will avoid or mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g. 
preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with the Fund’s Environmental and Social Safeguard 
(ESS) standard. Also describe how the gender aspect is considered in accordance with the Fund’s Gender Policy and 
Action Plan.  
 
<Environmental and Social Management Framework> 
As an accredited entity, KDB has the guidelines for environmental and social management that are consistent with 
the GCF Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS). The ESMF has been developed for the Programme in 
accordance with KDB guidelines as well as GCF ESS. Basically, the ESMF presents guidance to the project sponsor 
on the process of how to screen scope and assess each project within the Programme, and manage environmental 
and social issues that may arise during construction and operation. It also identifies the roles and responsibilities of 
the environmental and social management organization of the projects and associated agencies including any 
capacity building requirements. 
 
Key actions and guidance shown in the ESMF for sound environmental and social management of the Programme 
are summarized below. 
 
Programme overview. The main components of the Programme are feedstock production, biomass power plants, 
and a pellet plant. Especially, feedstock areas are considered to be associated facilities in accordance with PS1 of 
IFC PS on ESS.  
 
Screening and scoping. The ESMF involves screening of anticipated environmental and social impacts of the 
Programme and defines the risk category accordingly as Category A, B, or C. Currently KDB is accredited to submit a 
Funding Proposal for a programme that is no higher than Category B. Thus, KDB will identify the potential 
environmental and social impacts of the projects through screening and will continue to carry out the activities as long 
as the Risk Category is identified to be lower than B. Before finalizing the Risk Category, KDB will seek for advice 
from a consultancy with global reputation to review whether the categorization is determined appropriately. 
 
ESIA and ESMP. Depending on the risk category and results of the screening, scope of the Environmental and 
Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) is determined. It is highlighted that the assessment should present proposed 
measures to minimize, mitigate, and offset adverse impacts in an appropriate manner in relation to the nature and

=== PAGE 67 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 79 
 
 F 
scale of the proposed project. Mitigation and monitoring measures proposed within the ESIA will be detailed within 
the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for each project. 
 
Land Tenor System.  In case of Fiji, lands required will be acquired through the iTaukei Land Trust Board (TLTB), 
which acts as a trustee for the landowners to protect their interests in relation to land lease arrangements. Fiji laws 
prevent the sale of traditional land but provides for lease agreements of up to 99 years (particularly in relation to idle 
land) without termination unless the purpose of lease is violated. As for PNG, Customary land which consists of 97% 
of total areas is held by tribes, clans and land groups with its ownership dictated by local customs and traditionally 
held values and beliefs. The government is able to acquire or lease customarily owned land, and leases are typically 
granted for a period of 99 years. 
 
Land requirements will vary on a project by project basis and the impacts of land acquisition will be determined in 
detail through the ESIA processes for each. Since the land required will be idled and degraded areas without using 
for agricultural purpose, any tension with the allocation of ‘land for energy’ and ‘land for food’ is not expected in this 
Programme. If the consultation process for the ESIA raises any conflicts or concerns, then appropriate mitigation will 
be recommended to alleviate them. 
 
Stakeholder engagement. Community and stakeholder engagement is a key component of the environmental and 
social assessment process throughout the Programme. An outline of a stakeholder engagement process for the 
specific project is provided as below. 
 
 
Figure 10 Overview of stakeholder engagement process (SEP = Stakeholder Engagement Plan) 
 
(Source: ESMF) 
 
The programme level stakeholder engagement was conducted at the design stage of the Programme. 
Representatives from the government – the Ministry Fisheries and Forests, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of iTaukei 
Affairs & Sugar Industry, etc. - attended the consultation meetings, expressing support for the Programme activities 
including eradication of African tulip, the SRWC plantation, and the biomass and wood pellet plant in Fiji. The details 
of consultation are summarized in Appendix H of the ESMF attached as Annex 3 in Section I. 
 
Grievance mechanism. The ESMF includes the approach for grievance mechanism. Grievance mechanism is 
designed to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and grievances about the project’s environmental and social

=== PAGE 68 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 79 
 
 F 
performance in compliance with the relevant IFC PS 1, 2, 4 and 5. The sponsors will inform the affected communities 
about the mechanism in the course of the stakeholder engagement process.  
 
More details of the ESMF are elaborated in Section 1~10 of the ESMF attached as Annex 3 in Section I.  
 
<Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment> 
The strategic environmental and social assessment (SESA) has been developed as a separate section of the ESMF. 
The SESA provides relevant institutions and gap analysis, a high level overview of the environmental and social 
context of the region, and likely impacts in relation to the Programme. Likely impacts at pre-construction, construction 
and operation phases are described, and key mitigation measures are provided. Since the project screening criteria is 
designed to avoid diverse, irreversible or unprecedented impacts, the activities of the Programme are likely site-
specific and readily addressed with key mitigation measures suggested in the SESA.   
 
More details of the SESA are elaborated in Section 11 of the ESMF attached as Annex 3 in Section I. 
 
<Environmental and Social Impact Assessment of the Sabeto biomass power plant> 
The ESIA has been developed for the first 12MW biomass power plant in Sabeto, Fiji. As per the guidance provided 
in the ESMF, the ESIA presents the areas of influence considering fuel sources, description of the project, the 
baseline data, environmental and social impacts, management plans, and the result of the consultations.  
 
Land use management. Environmental and social impacts related to fuel sources are likely to be limited and readily 
addressed through management and mitigation measures. Since plantation areas will be idle and degraded land that 
is not used for agricultural purposes, there will be no clearance of indigenous habitats, and land use will barely 
change. In addition, it is assessed that eradication of invasive African tulip will generate beneficial impacts to the 
biodiversity of areas. The management plan is put in place to avoid likely adverse impacts and ensure compliance 
with the GCF and IFC safeguards for Forestry and land use management.  
 
Biomass power plant. The physical, ecological, and social and economic impacts were assessed near the site. The 
anticipated environmental and social impacts related to power plant are generally site-specific, readily addressed with 
mitigation measures. The mitigation measures are necessarily required during construction and operation in relation 
to traffic, noise, air quality, etc., and the ESMP is developed into detailed matrix showing responsible institutions, 
verification measures, cost, etc. All the measures and activities are designed to comply with IFC PS, WB EHS 
Guidance and Fijian requirements. 
 
Land Acquisition. The site for the power plant is acquired through the TLTB in full agreements with all that have 
been interested in the land. The plantation areas will be secured by long-term lease agreements or supply contracts. 
Since these areas have been left idle, landowners are very supportive for making a long-term leasing agreement, 
anticipating additional economic earnings. In case of supply contracts, the sponsors/suppliers support the land 
owners to plant the fuel wood trees in their own lands and buy the wooden fuel from them, so that land owners have 
new income sources without leasing the lands. Therefore, it’s unlikely to have conflicts related to land rights. 
 
Consultation. The ESIA contains the results of the consultations that have taken place with various stakeholders at 
village, local, civil society, local authority, and the central government levels. At the consultation with the community 
members, questions were raised about potential benefits such as job opportunities during construction and operation, 
and had discussion over potential impacts related to air quality, health and safety.  
 
A separate consultation meeting was organized for women regarding gender inclusiveness. During the consultation, it 
was highlighted to the female community members that this project understands the importance of women’s 
participation and the significance of potential roles and benefits for women in the biomass power plant. The project 
sponsor made a presentation specifying the expected number of jobs for women and briefing how environmental and 
social impacts will be managed for women, children and other vulnerable groups.

=== PAGE 69 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 79 
 
 F 
More details are elaborated in the ESIA attached as Annex 3 in Section I.  
<Gender mainstreaming> 
The Programme values gender mainstreaming, and takes gender sensitive approach. This is particularly important for 
the countries such as Fiji and PNG which present nearly equal male-female population ratio. However, both countries 
are still ranked low in Human Development Index, and women’s participation in economic and social activities is 
severely constrained. In case of Fiji, poverty was categorized as one of the critical gender inequality issues by the 
government37, and for PNG, lacking access to job opportunities and income-generating activities due to limited 
access to trainings and education restricts women from having equal treatment when compared with men.38 
 
The Programme will encourage gender equality and mainstreaming gender considerations by implementing capacity 
building activities. Various trainings will be provided particularly targeting female employees to increase technical 
capacity, and thus as a result, can have diversified income opportunities apart from subsistence farming or any low-
paid daily jobs. The trainings will be focused on engineering, O&M of the plants, or administrative works. The 
Programme aims for a sustainable gender mainstreaming processes that will help female employees to successfully 
stand as an independent decision maker for their own livelihoods. 
 
Moreover, the Programme will promote hiring female workforce, and make sure female employees are treated in an 
equal way as male employees in terms of remuneration and working hours. The Programme will also ensure that 
adequate working environment is provided for women. 
 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement 
Describe the project/programme’s financial management and procurement, including financial accounting, 
disbursement methods and auditing. 
<Financial Management> 
Financial resources from the GCF will be managed according to the general provisions of the AMA and FAA. In 
particular, the GCF proceeds will be provided to individual SPCs of the biomass power plants and the wood pellet 
plant through KDB.  
 
As always named among the top seven PF arrangers in Asia Pacific, KDB Bank has its internal capacity of 
investment decision with the disciplined risk appetite, and of the systematic credit approval system after a thorough 
credit due diligence. Equipped with decades of accumulated international capacity, KDB is fully capable to sort out 
qualified projects with great potential.  
In addition, KDB, as an accredited entity, will assure the debt financing repayment by pledging any present or future 
properties, assets, and revenues of the borrower to the lenders and managing cash flows via an escrow account. The 
controlling authority may be given to KDB or another qualified independent agent that can represent all lenders in a 
reasonable manner. Each project SPC would repay debts to KDB which would then repay the debts to the GCF. The 
expected flow of GCF loans is elaborated in detail in Section C.7. 
In compliance with its internal regulation titled ‘Project Finance and Syndication Guideline’, KDB, will execute financial 
management of the projects under the Programme. KDB will regularly check whether the Programme is being 
executed in compliance with requirements such as withdrawals and payments of funds, etc. as outlined in the loan 
agreements. 
 
KDB will visit the project sites more than once a year to oversee the status of construction or operation, but if the 
projects are implemented in areas where a regular visit is difficult, KDB will hire a consultant to execute management. 
Moreover, KDB will make its full efforts to secure project stability by overseeing compliance with affirmative covenants 
                                                             
37 http://egov4women.unescapsdd.org/country-overviews/fiji/gender-equality-and-women%E2%80%99s-
empowerment-priorities-in-fiji 
38 https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/linked-documents/cps-png-2011-2015-ga.pdf

=== PAGE 70 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 79 
 
 F 
such as maintenance of corporate entity status, submission of financial statements, signing of insurance contracts, 
implementation of terms related to E&S, etc., and negative covenants such as prohibition of restricted payment, 
termination and change of contracts, etc. on a regular basis, as outlined in the agreements. 
 
Since the Programme is large-scale and expects a long implementation period, signing of contracts and supervision 
for several projects are needed over time. Therefore, the SPC may appoint and sign the agreement with an inter-
creditor agent bank and/or a security agent bank that will carry out tasks related to the funds and project 
management. For each sub-component, the agent banks will be in charge of project cash flow management, security 
management, and withdrawals of loans. 
 
KDB, as the accredited entity of the Programme, will thoroughly supervise all activities related to financial 
management. 
 
<Procurement> 
KDB has a procurement policy that abides by the GCF procurement guidance. The SPCs of each biomass power 
plant and a wood pellet plant are required to procure and purchase goods and services in accordance with KDB’s 
procurement policy. The method of international open bidding will be strictly applied for selecting the EPC contractor 
in pursuit of transparency. Such condition will be reflected in legal documents between KDB and the SPCs in order to 
ensure that each SPC complies with the procurement rules. All the procurement arrangements will be governed by 
KDB.  
 
More specifically, KDB will ensure the procurement procedures of all projects comply with “the Guidance for GCF-
Funded Projects (hereinafter the “Guidance”)” established on September 5, 2016. Chapter 2 of the Guidance states 
the regulations pertaining to borrowers’ purchase and procurement procedures. Items relevant to the Programme are 
as below: 
 
- 
Article 5. Prevention of Fraud and Corruption 
- 
Article 6. Procurement Method  
- 
Article 7. Pre-qualification of Bidders 
- 
Article 8. Time Interval  
- 
Article 9. Bid Evaluation 
- 
Article 10. Publication of Contract Award 
 
In accordance with Article 5 of the Guidance, in case that the SPC or any entity relevant to the Programme (a 
company and/or individual) is discovered to have participated in fraudulent or corrupt activities related to 
procurement, KDB can ban one from participating in the Programme, or can annul the funding. KDB also ensures that 
any entity relevant to the Programme complies with international regulation on AML/CFT. For prevention of fraud and 
corruption, the SPC of each (sub) component is obligated to be investigated by KDB for its account books and other 
documentations regarding contracts, and to submit materials that the GCF requests based on the AMA and FAA.  
 
For matters not mentioned in the Guidance, KDB’s internal regulations titled “Contract Regulations” will be applied for 
observance. KDB’s strict procurement oversight will be arranged before, after, and in between bidding procedures 
according to the Guidance.  
 
Also, the Programme ensures the fair and appropriate procurement process in selecting proper agencies for 
implementing Component 3 (TA). For a good use of the GCF grant, agencies specialized in capacity building, 
knowledge sharing, and other TA activities will be selected according to Regulation on Contracts (hereinafter 
‘Regulation’) which provides guidance for procurement activities of KDB, not a borrower. The Regulation was also 
completely screened by the Fund as part of accreditation due diligence. A specified procurement plan for using grant 
is attached as Annex 11 of the proposal.

=== PAGE 71 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 79 
 G 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures 
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Unreliability of fuel sources 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium (5.1-20% 
of project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
A stable supply of fuel sources is prerequisite to a stable operation of four biomass power plants and a pellet plant. 
In order to ensure sustainable fuel supply, biomass fuels will be obtained from various sources: 1) harvested 
invasive plants; 2) the SRWC plantation; 3) sawmill residues; and 4) other harvesting and forestry residues.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Delay in construction  
Technical and 
operational 
Medium (5.1-20% 
of project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
It is unlConstruction delay caused by complaints during the construction period and/or authorization/licensing 
process is unlikely occur in that 1) the plant is a renewable power plant with environmentally friendly properties, 
and in that 2) the positive impacts are shared upon the establishment of the plant when it comes to reducing 
reliance on imported energy sources and improving balance between supply and demand in the power market. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Development of an E&S Category A project 
Social and 
environmental 
Medium (5.1-20% 
of project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary 
Please provide a summary of main risk factors. Detailed description of risk factors and mitigation measures can be 
elaborated in G.2. 
 
Several assessments carried out for this Programme have identified some risk factors. Financial, technical, and 
environmental and social aspects have been thoroughly appraised and this has resulted in classification of seven 
main risk factors. The technical risks include construction delay, unreliability of the fuel supply, and risks associated 
with potential off-takers. The analysis indicates that the main financial risk is the case that the construction cost 
exceeds the estimated investment (cost overrun). 
 
The key risk factors are elaborated with the level of impact and probability of risk occurring below. Mitigation 
measures for each risk factor are also described in G.2.

=== PAGE 72 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 79 
 G 
Based on the ESMF, possible E&S impacts will be thoroughly assessed in the initial stage of project assessment. 
Risk categorization will be determined for each project in order to confirm Category B projects and at the same time, 
key mitigation measures developed for each project will be evaluated. The assessment will be conducted by a third 
party professional organization to obtain objectivity, so the risk probability pertaining to likely E&S impacts is 
expected to be low. 
  
Selected Risk Factor 4 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Cost overrun during the construction phase 
Financial 
Medium (5.1-20% 
of project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
In order to control the risk of cost overruns and cash deficiency during the construction period, the EPC contract will 
be signed as a Fixed Price Lump-Sum Turnkey model. Accordingly, the risk related to cost overrun is mostly 
transferred to the EPC contractor. The EPC cost of the project is similar to those of other biomass power plants, 
and the tentative project sponsors are well-prepared for the risk factor because they already have experienced the 
pilot project in Nabou, Fiji. 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Price fluctuation 
Financial 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
The sales of electricity will be determined by the PPA tariff rate which will be quarterly adjusted to inflation rates of 
Fiji’s Consumer Price Index (CPI) in order to avoid financial risks induced by price fluctuation.     
 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Market and policy risks  
Other 
Medium (5.1-20% 
of project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
The project is designed to sell electricity at a fixed price to FEA through a long-term PPA. The agreement of fixing 
the price will accordingly mitigate possible risks pertaining to changes in the supply and demand structure of the 
Fijian electricity market and relevant policy change. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 7 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Off-taker risk 
Other 
Medium (5.1-20% 
of project value) 
Low

=== PAGE 73 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 79 
 G 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
FEA, the sole revenue source of the project, stands in authority of regulating power generation, transmission and 
distribution, and controlling the electricity market in Fiji. The FEA owns approximately 70% of power plants 
nationwide, and generates about 740 GWh/year (approximately 86.5% of power generation nationwide). Given that 
the revenue stream of the FEA has been stable and the EBITDA margin has been over 30%, it is assessed that the 
FEA’s profitability is at an excellent level.  
 
In case of PNG, quasi-governmental authorities or the government itself such as PPL will be selected as an off-
taker in accordance with the investment criteria. 
 
.

=== PAGE 74 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 79 
 
 H 
H.1. Logic Framework.  
 
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework under 
the Results Management Framework. 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level39 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Shift to low-emission 
sustainable 
development pathways 
The Programme aims to support a paradigm shift to low-emission sustainable development 
pathways of South Pacific SIDS by developing biomass power plants and a wood pellet plant, 
which will make significant contribution for the target countries to achieve the NDCs. 
Simultaneously, the Programme is accompanied by technical assistance that will provide 
capacity building and knowledge sharing for local stakeholders. 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baselin
e 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term  
(if applicable) 
Final 
Fund-level impacts 
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low-
emission energy 
access and power 
generation 
Volume of 
finance leveraged by 
Fund funding 
Annual 
performance 
reports  
0 
- 
324.6 
million 
USD 
 
1.1 *Tons of 
carbon dioxide 
equivalent (t CO2eq) 
reduced or avoided 
as 
a result of Fund-
funded 
Projects/programmes 
–gender-sensitive 
energy access power 
generation 
(sub-indicator) 
Annual 
performance 
reports 
including 
CO2  
monitoring 
and 
validation by 
independent 
specialists 
0 
2,055,56
5 
tCO2eq 
4,111,1
30 
tCO2eq
40 
Life span: 25 years 
Average annual energy 
production of a single 
12MW biomass power 
plant: 72,712 MWh 
Emission factor of Fiji: 
0.5965 tCO2eq/MWh 
Emission factor of PNG: 
0.6780 tCO2eq/MWh 
Emission from pellet 
export transportation 
considered (966,910 
tCO2eq) 
M4.0 Reduced 
emissions from land 
use, reforestation, 
reduced 
deforestation, and 
through sustainable 
forest management 
and conservation 
and enhancement of 
forest carbon stocks 
4.1 * Tonnes of 
carbon dioxide 
equivalent (t CO2eq) 
reduced or avoided 
(including increased 
removals) as a result 
of Fund-funded 
projects/programmes 
– forest and land-use 
sub-indicator 
Annual 
performance 
reports 
including 
CO2 
monitoring 
and 
validation by 
independent 
specialists 
0 
312,550 
tCO2eq  
625,100 
tCO2eq 
 
 
 
Life span: 25 years 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
39 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement): 
http://www.greenclimate.fund/documents/20182/239759/5.3_-
_Performance_Measurement_Frameworks__PMF_.pdf/60941cef-7c87-475f-809e-4ebf1acbb3f4  
40 Please note that the mid-term and final amount of emission reduction is an indicative one based on brief analysis, and 
more detailed analysis will be conducted with TA grant provided by the GCF.

=== PAGE 75 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 79 
 
 H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Base 
-line 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term  
(if applicable) 
Final 
Project/programme 
outcomes 
Outcomes that contribute to Fund-level impacts 
M6.0 Increased 
number of small, 
medium and large 
low-emission power 
suppliers 
6.2 Number of 
households and 
individuals 
(males and 
females) with 
improved access 
to low-emission 
energy sources 
Annual 
performance 
reports, 
Reports 
from 
recipients 
0 
n/a 
Approximately 
77,102 
households 
(48,298 in Fiji 
and  28,804 in 
PNG) 
373,869 
persons 
(221,205 in Fiji 
and 152,664 in 
PNG) including 
183,609 
females41 
6.3 MWs of low 
emission energy 
capacity 
installed, 
generated 
and/or 
rehabilitated as 
a result of GCF 
support 
Annual 
performance 
reports, 
Reports 
from 
recipients 
0 
12 MW 
72 MW 
24MW of the 
72MW will be 
used for the 
wood pellet 
plant’s 
consumption 
M9.0 Improved 
management of land 
or forest areas 
contributing to 
emissions reductions 
9.1 Hectares of 
land or forest 
under improved 
and effective 
management 
that contributes 
to CO2 emission 
reductions 
Annual 
performance 
reports, 
Reports 
from 
recipients 
0 
Reforestation of 
5,000ha of land 
after eradication 
of African tulip 
and development 
of 5,000ha of 
plantation 
Reforestation 
of 30,000ha of 
land after 
eradication of 
African tulip 
and 
development 
of 55,000ha of 
plantation 
 
Project/programme 
outputs 
Outputs that contribute to outcomes 
Component 1. Development of four biomass power plants 
1. 12MW biomass 
power plant #1 in Fiji 
 
MW of power 
plant 
Annual 
performance 
reports, 
Reports from 
recipients 
0 
12MW 
12MW 
 
Hectares of 
Reforestation 
Annual 
performance 
reports, 
Reports from 
recipients 
0 
5,000ha42 
5,000ha 
 
Hectares of 
plantation 
Annual 
performance 
0 
5,000ha 
5,000ha 
 
                                                             
41 More details are elaborated in Section E.1.2.  
42 The target of reforestation (areas of African tulip eradication) is subject to change in accordance with surrounding 
circumstances. The targets of Hectares of Reforestation under Project/programme outputs 1-3 and 5 in mid-term and 
final are indicative and to be fixed with in-depth assessments.

=== PAGE 76 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 79 
 
 H 
reports, 
Reports from 
recipients 
2. 12MW biomass 
power plant #2 in Fiji 
MW of power 
plant 
Annual 
performance 
reports, 
Reports from 
recipients 
0 
- 
12MW 
 
Hectares of 
Reforestation 
Annual 
performance 
reports, 
Reports from 
recipients 
0 
- 
5,000ha 
 
Hectares of 
plantation 
Annual 
performance 
reports, 
Reports from 
recipients 
0 
- 
5,000ha 
 
3. 12MW biomass 
power plant #3 in Fiji 
 
MW of power 
plant 
Annual 
performance 
reports, 
Reports from 
recipients 
0 
- 
12MW 
 
Hectares of 
Reforestation 
Annual 
performance 
reports , 
Reports from 
recipients 
0 
- 
5,000ha 
 
Hectares of 
plantation 
Annual 
performance 
reports , 
Reports from 
recipients 
0 
- 
5,000ha 
 
4. 12MW biomass 
power plant #4 in PNG 
 
MW of power 
plant 
Annual 
performance 
reports , 
Reports from 
recipients 
0 
- 
12MW 
 
Hectares of 
plantation 
Annual 
performance 
reports , 
Reports from 
recipients 
0 
- 
5,000ha 
 
Component 2. Development of one wood pellet plant  
5. Wood pellet 
production 
infrastructure in Fiji 
Number of wood 
pellet production 
infrastructure 
supplying 500,000 
ton per annum of 
wood pellets 
Annual 
performance 
reports , 
Reports from 
recipients 
0 
- 
1 
 
Hectares of 
Reforestation 
Annual 
performance 
reports, 
Reports from 
recipients 
0 
- 
15,000ha 
 
Hectares of 
Annual 
0 
- 
35,000ha

=== PAGE 77 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 79 
 
 H 
plantation 
performance 
reports, 
Reports from 
recipients 
6. Capacity increase for 
existing transportation 
infrastructure in Fiji 
Number of wood 
pellet transport 
infrastructure 
Annual 
performance 
reports, 
Reports from 
recipients 
0 
- 
1 
 
7. 24MW biomass 
power plant for the 
wood pellet plant in Fiji 
MW of power 
plant 
Annual 
performance 
reports, 
Reports from 
recipients 
0 
- 
24MW 
 
Component 3. Technical Assistance 
8. Capacity 
enhancement and 
knowledge sharing in 
Fiji 
Number of 
stakeholders 
participating in 
capacity building 
and knowledge 
sharing events 
Annual 
performance 
reports, 
Reports from 
consultants 
0 
75 
150 
Main stakeholders 
are local staffs 
and contractors, 
government 
officials,, local 
community, , CSO 
including women.  
9. Development of CO2 
calculation 
methodology in Fiji 
Number of CO2 
savings 
assessment 
reports 
CO2 savings 
assessment 
reports  
0 
0 
1 
 
10.  Capacity 
enhancement and 
knowledge sharing in 
PNG 
Number of 
stakeholders 
participating in the 
capacity building 
and knowledge 
sharing events 
Annual 
performance 
reports, 
Reports from 
consultants 
0 
100 
200 
Main stakeholders 
are local staffs 
and contractors, 
government 
officials,, local 
community, , CSO 
including women 
and indigenous 
people 
11. Creating enabling 
environments for 
renewables in PNG 
Number of reports 
for setting the 
model framework 
Reports for 
setting the 
model 
framework  
0 
0 
1 
 
Number of 
training for 
enhancing 
institutional 
governance 
system 
Annual 
performance 
reports 
0 
0 
3 
Public officials 
and other 
stakeholders 
Number of reports 
for mapping the 
land use patterns 
Reports for 
mapping the 
land use 
patterns 
0 
0 
1 
 
12. Development of 
CO2 calculation 
methodology in PNG 
Number of CO2 
savings 
assessment 
reports 
CO2 savings 
assessment 
reports 
0 
0 
1 
 
Activities 
Description 
Inputs 
Component 1. Development of four biomass power plants 
Sub-Component 1.1. Biomass power plant #1 in Sabeto, Fiji 
1.1. 
Project Preparation (Permit and Basic Engineering) for the 
Project 
USD

=== PAGE 78 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 79 
 
 H 
development of 12MW biomass power plant #1 in Fiji 
development by 
project sponsors 
and participation of 
technical experts 
50.8 mil 
1.2. 
Project Execution (EPC) for the development of 12MW biomass 
power plant #1 in Fiji 
Participation of 
global EPC 
companies 
Sub-Component 1.2. Biomass power plant #2 in Fiji 
2.1. 
Project Preparation (Permit and Basic Engineering) for the 
development of 12MW biomass power plant #2 in Fiji 
Project 
development by 
project sponsors 
and participation of 
technical experts 
USD 
57.7 mil 
2.2. 
Project Execution (EPC) for the development of 12MW biomass 
power plant #2 in Fiji 
Participation of 
global EPC 
companies 
Sub-Component 1.3. Biomass power plant #3 in Fiji 
3.1. 
Project Preparation (Permit and Basic Engineering) for the 
development of 12MW biomass power plant #3 in Fiji 
Project 
development by 
project sponsors 
and participation of 
technical experts 
USD 
57.7 mil 
3.2. 
Project Execution (EPC) for the development of 12MW biomass 
power plant #3 in Fiji 
Participation of 
global EPC 
companies 
Sub-Component 1.4. Biomass power plant #4 in Fiji 
4.1. 
Project Preparation (Permit and Basic Engineering) for the 
development of 12MW biomass power plant #4 in PNG 
Project 
development by 
project sponsors 
and participation of 
technical experts 
USD 
57.8 mil 
4.2. 
Project Execution (EPC) for the development of 12MW biomass 
power plant #4 in PNG 
Participation of 
global EPC 
companies 
Component 2. Development of one wood pellet plant 
Sub-Component 2.1. Pellet production infrastructure 
5.1. 
Project Preparation (Permit and Basic Engineering) for the 
development of wood pellet production infrastructure in Fiji 
Project 
development by 
project sponsors 
and participation of 
technical experts 
USD 
91.7 mil 
5.2. 
Project Execution (EPC) for the development of wood pellet 
production infrastructure in Fiji 
Participation of 
global EPC 
companies 
Sub-Component 2.2. Capacity increase for existing transportation infrastructure 
6.1. 
Project Preparation (Permit and Basic Engineering) for capacity 
increase for existing transportation infrastructure in Fiji 
Project 
development by 
project sponsors 
and participation of 
technical experts 
USD 
23.1 mil 
6.2. 
Project Execution (EPC) for capacity increase for existing 
transportation infrastructure in Fiji 
Participation of 
global EPC 
companies

=== PAGE 79 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 79 
 
 H 
Sub-Component 2.3. Biomass power plants for the wood pellet plant 
7.1. 
Project Preparation (Permit and Basic Engineering) for the 
development of biomass power plant for the wood pellet plant in Fiji 
Project 
development by 
project sponsors 
and participation of 
technical experts 
 
USD 
88.2 mil 
7.2. 
Project Execution (EPC) for the development of biomass power 
plant for the wood pellet plant in Fiji 
Participation of 
global EPC 
companies 
Component 3. Technical Assistance 
Sub-Component 3.1. Technical Assistance in Fiji 
8.1. 
Project Preparation (Consultant procurement) for capacity 
enhancement and knowledge sharing in Fiji 
Consultant 
procurement 
process managed 
by the AE 
USD 
1 mil 
8.2. 
Project Execution for capacity enhancement and knowledge 
sharing in Fiji 
Participation of 
capacity building 
and knowledge 
sharing experts  
9.1. 
Project Preparation (Consultant procurement) for development of 
CO2 calculation methodology in Fiji 
Consultant 
procurement 
process managed 
by the AE 
9.2. 
Project Execution for development of CO2 calculation methodology 
in Fiji 
Participation of 
experts in CO2 
calculation 
Sub-Component 3.2. Technical Assistance in PNG 
10.1. 
Project Preparation (Consultant procurement) for capacity 
enhancement and knowledge sharing in PNG 
Consultant 
procurement 
process managed 
by the AE 
USD 
3 mil 
10.2. 
Project Execution for capacity enhancement and knowledge 
sharing in PNG 
Participation of 
capacity building 
and knowledge 
sharing experts 
11.1. 
Project Preparation (Consultant procurement) for setting enabling 
environments for renewables in PNG 
Consultant 
procurement 
process managed 
by the AE 
11.2 
Project Execution for setting enabling environments for renewables 
in PNG  
Participation of 
experts in policy, 
financial and 
technical 
consultancy 
12.1. 
Project Preparation (Consultant procurement) for development of 
CO2 calculation methodology in PNG 
Consultant 
procurement 
process managed 
by the AE 
12.2. 
Project Execution for development of CO2 calculation methodology 
in PNG 
Participation of 
experts in CO2 
calculation

=== PAGE 80 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 79 
 
 H 
                                                             
43KDB will conduct reporting the audited Fund-level impact indicator of M 4.0 (H.1) on an annual basis. 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
Besides the arrangements (e.g. semi-annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please provide project/programme 
specific institutional setting and implementation arrangements for monitoring and reporting and evaluation. Please 
indicate how the interim/mid-term and final evaluations will be organized, including the timing. 
Please provide methodologies for monitoring and reporting of the key outcomes of the project/programme. 
 
<Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation> 
Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangement will comply with requirements established between the GCF and 
KDB in the AMA. KDB shall provide to the Fund the following reports prepared in a form and manner compliant with 
the practices and procedures of the Fund :  
(a) Annual performance reports on the status of each project throughout the implementation period, including a 
narrative report on implementation progress based on the logical framework submitted in H.1 (above) and 
considerations on the ongoing performance of the project against the Fund’s investment framework criteria, and 
a report on ESS as well as gender. Upon the completion of the implementation period, KDB shall provide a 
performance report about the Programme results and mitigation impacts on a semi-annual basis43. 
(b) Interim and final evaluation reports, setting out any necessary corrective measures (in the case of interim 
reports), an assessment of the performance of this Programme against the Fund’s investment framework 
criteria, including financial/economic performances as part of the Funded Activity efficiency and effectiveness 
criterion, as well as the sustainability and scalability of results and impacts and lessons learned.  
 
Also, KDB shall provide the financial information on an annual basis, which will be audited and reported on by external 
auditors in accordance with ISA. The financial information including but not limited to the following content will be 
included;  
 
-   the dates and amounts of disbursements for the period reported and cumulative amounts up to the period, and 
compliance with financial covenants; 
-   the actual expenditures for the period reported and cumulative amounts up to the period;  
-   a statement of investment income earned on GCF proceeds, as well as the amount of such investment income 
paid to the Fund 
 
In preparing the reports, KDB may hire an external expert in order to secure expertise and objectivity. The team which 
is in charge of matters regarding the GCF is a separate team from the Programme implementing team within KDB, and 
will review the report and evaluate its appropriateness prior to submission to the GCF. 
 
<Calculation of CO2 Emission Reduction> 
Upon implementation of each project, KDB will assess the reduced amount of CO2 emission independently through an 
external organization specialized in the calculation, and estimate and monitor the real amount of reduction on a yearly 
basis over the lifetime of the Programme. KDB’s environmental specialist will review the propriety of the overall 
process of assessment, estimation, and monitoring of CO2 emission.

=== PAGE 81 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 79 
 
 I 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents. 
 
 
I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal 
 ☒   
NDA No-objection Letter (Annex 1) 
 ☒  
Feasibility Study (Annex 2) 
 ☒  
Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if applicable) 
(Annex 3)  
 ☐   
Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co-financing commitment (If applicable) (Annex 4) 
 ☒  
Project/Programme Confirmation/Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, 
 
etc.) (Annex 5) 
 ☒  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Plan  
 
(If applicable) (Annex 6) 
 ☐  
Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (If applicable) (Annex 7) 
 ☐  
Evaluation Report of the baseline project (If applicable) (Annex 8) 
 ☐  
Map indicating the location of the project/programme (Annex 9) 
 ☐  
Timetable of project/programme implementation (Annex 10) 
 ☒  
Indicative procurement plan for grant (Annex 11) 
 ☒  
CO2 calculation logics (Annex 12) 
 ☒  
Gender & Social Inclusion Analysis and Action Plan (Annex 13)

=== PAGE 82 ===
Page 80

=== PAGE 83 ===
Page 81

=== PAGE 84 ===
Page 82 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Basic project/programme information 
Project/programme title 
Biomass Energy Programme in the South Pacific 
Accredited entity 
Korea Development Bank 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
2018-01-18 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English 
Link to disclosure 
https://www.kdb.co.kr/ih/simpleJsp.do?actionId=ADIHGIGI30002&
menuId=IHIHEN0021&localeCode=en&orgC=001&notiNo=5 
Project: A ESIA provides information related to the construction and 
operation of the Sabeto biomass power plant in Fiji and associated 
fuel supply chain.  
Programme: A Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) provides description of the programme-level environmental 
and social assessments of risks and impacts.  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
2018-01-18 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English 
Link to disclosure 
https://www.kdb.co.kr/ih/simpleJsp.do?actionId=ADIHGIGI30002&
menuId=IHIHEN0021&localeCode=en&orgC=001&notiNo=5 
Project: A ESMP for the Sabeto biomass power plant in Fiji, consistent 
with the requirements for a category B project is contained in the 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA).  
Programme: The Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) consistent with the requirements for the programme.    
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
2018-01-18 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English 
Link to disclosure 
https://www.kdb.co.kr/ih/simpleJsp.do?actionId=ADIHGIGI30002&
menuId=IHIHEN0021&localeCode=en&orgC=001&notiNo=5 
The RPF is integrated in the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF). 
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure 
Not applicable 
________
