=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.5
title: 
author: Rudo Matsheza
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Microsoft® Word 2016
producer: Microsoft® Word 2016
creationDate: D:20180206105045+09'00'
modDate: D:20180206105045+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
27 February – 1 March 2018  
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea  
Provisional agenda item 15 
GCF/B.19/22/Add.17 
6 February 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum 
XVII 
Funding proposal package for FP075 
 
 
 
 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following three parts: 
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Institutional Development of the State 
Agency for Hydrometeorology of Tajikistan”; 
b) No-objection letters issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s); and 
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;

=== PAGE 2 ===
Project/Programme Title: Institutional Development of the State Agency for 
Hydrometeorology of Tajikistan 
Country/Region: Tajikistan 
Accredited Entity: Asian Development Bank 
Date of Submission: 16 October 2017

=== PAGE 3 ===
Contents 
 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
Section F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
Section G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
Section I 
ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document. 
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“[FP]-[Agency Short Name]-[Date]-[Serial Number]”

=== PAGE 4 ===
A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 53 
 
 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / programme title 
Institutional Development of the State Agency for 
Hydrometeorology of Tajikistan 
A.1.2. Project or programme 
Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region 
Tajikistan 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies) 
Mr. K. Ibodzoda, Chairman, Committee on Environmental 
Protection 
A.1.5. Accredited entity 
Asian Development Bank 
A.1.5.a. Access modality 
☐ Direct 
☒ International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary 
Executing Entity: Ministry of Finance1 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD) 
☒ Micro (≤10) 
☐ Medium (50<x≤250) 
☐ Small (10<x≤50) 
☐ Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus 
☐ Mitigation 
☒ Adaptation ☐ Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission 
16 October 2017 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details 
Contact person, position 
Nathan Rive, Climate Change Specialist 
Organization 
Asian Development Bank (ADB) 
Email address 
nrive@adb.org 
Telephone number 
+63-2-632-4444 
Mailing address 
6 ADB Ave., Mandaluyong City 1550, Philippines 
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply) 
Reduced emissions from: 
☐ 
Energy access and power generation 
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.) 
☐ 
Low emission transport 
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.) 
☐ 
Buildings, cities and industries and appliances 
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.) 
☐ 
Forestry and land use 
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.) 
Increased resilience of: 
☒ 
Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.) 
 
 
 
 
 
1 ADB will conclude a financing agreement with the Republic of Tajikistan represented by the Ministry of Finance on 
the management and use of proceeds. The Ministry of Finance will cause the project to be implemented through the 
State Agency for Hydrometeorology (Hydromet).

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 2 OF 53 
 
 
☐ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.) 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.) 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
☐ 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words) 
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objectives and primary measurable 
benefits (see investment criteria in section E). The detailed description can be elaborated in section C. 
Tajikistan already faces recurring climate-related extreme weather events, particularly flood and landslides. Climate 
change is expected to exacerbate these impacts2,3. Districts in the Pyanj River Basin, in particular, are among poorest 
and most vulnerable to climate change4. 
However, low capacity in the country the forecasting of weather, hydrometeorological, and climatic conditions remain a 
critical weakness in the country. Disaster risk mitigation and response in vulnerable communities, as well as broader 
climate change adaptation efforts, are thus hampered. The responsible forecasting entity, the State Agency for 
Hydrometeorology (Hydromet) is crippled by many of the common problems faced by post-Soviet institutions including 
limited budget, decaying infrastructure, and poor staff retention. Its technical capacity is relatively low, and government 
and civil society stakeholders are generally unsatisfied with the forecasting services offered by Hydromet. Without 
interventions addressing its underlying weaknesses, Hydromet capacity and outputs will likely continue to languish. 
The subject proposed project will support Hydromet’s development to a sustainable and well-resourced institution that 
produces timely and accurate forecasting of extreme weather events particularly in the PRB. In doing so, the project will 
address key institutional weaknesses. The project will (i) modernize Hydromet’s campus and associated facilities 
[Component A], (ii) support legal and organizational transformation and capacity building of Hydromet into a 
government entity with flexibility to set staff salaries and retain additional entrepreneurial revenue [Component B], (iii) 
undertake capacity building for improve forecasting and warning of extreme weather events [Component C], and (iv) 
support development and implementation of a viable business model through marketing of fee-based services 
[Component D]. The project’s primary measurable benefit (indicators) are (i) Hydromet develops and disseminates 
timely and accurate forecasts of flood events in the PRB and (ii) Hydromet develops a weather service product 
marketed to customers in the PRB. 
Impact: The project will have direct benefits to individuals, community organizations, and government agencies in the 
Pyanj River Basin, and broader indirect benefits to the wider country from a strengthened Hydromet agency. 
Paradigm shift potential: The project will facilitate a significant shift in the funding and provision of information and 
forecasting services in Tajikistan. The model is replicable in other hydrometeorology agencies around Central Asia. The 
project will help enable the scaling up of Hydromet’s products and services into for example agrometeorology. 
Sustainable development potential: The project will provide direct and indirect economic and social benefits to the 
PRB, wider country, and Hydromet. This includes (i) more attractive and well-paid jobs in Hydromet, (ii) improved 
disaster preparedness and response, and (iii) increased productivity in key economic sectors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Murnane, et al., 2016. Future scenarios for earthquake and flood risk in Eastern Europe and Central Asia. Earth’s 
Future. 5(7): 693-714. 
3 Westphal, 2008. Summary of Climate Science in the Europe and Central Asia Region: Historical Trends 
and Future Projections. World Bank. Washington DC. 
4 ADB, 2011. Climate Resiliency for Natural Resources Investments. TA Consulant Final Report. Manila.

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 53 
 
 
Needs of receipient: Tajikistan is highly vulnerable to climate change, and communities in the PRB are among the 
most exposed, vulnerable, and poor in the country. 
Country ownership: The Tajikistan Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the UNFCCC Paris Agreement 
prioritizes improvement and modernization of hydrometeorological services as a key climate change adaptation. The 
Government of Tajikistan has requested ADB’s support to transform and modernize Hydromet. 
Efficiency and effectiveness: GCF co-financing ratio is 50%. Economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the project is 
estimated at 29% and robust to key cost and benefit sensitivities. 
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone 
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) 
31/03/2018 
Expected financial close (if applicable) 
Q4 2023 
Estimated implementation start and end date 
Start: Q3 2018 
End:  Q2 2023 
Project/programme lifespan 
Implementation period: 5 years 
Project benefit stream: 30 years

=== PAGE 7 ===
B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 53 
 
 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme 
The project’s financing plan by financier is provided in Table 1 below. 
Table 1: Project financing by financier (USD million) 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
ADB will contribute $5.0 million grant financing from the Asian Development Fund under the disaster risk reduction 
funding mechanism6 and an equal grant is requested from GCF. Detailed budget by expenditure and activities are 
provided in Table 2 and Table 3. 
Table 2 : Project budget by expenditure item (USD) 
a Plus government in-kind contribution of taxes and duties forgone and social costs estimated at $1.141 million.  
ADB (ADF DRR) = Asian Development Bank Asian Development Fund Disaster Risk Reduction mechanism; GCF = 
Green Climate Fund 
Source: Asian Development Bank 
 
 
 
 
 
5 Estimated taxes and duties foregone and social costs. 
6 ADB, 2016. Concessional Assistance Policy 2016. Manila. 
Source 
Instrument 
Overall Project 
(USD million) 
Share 
(%) 
ADB 
Grant 
5.0 
45% 
GCF 
Grant 
5.0 
45% 
Government 
Exemptions5 
1.1 
10% 
Total 
11.1 
100% 
ADB 
(ADF DRR) 
GCF 
Totala 
% Total 
Base Cost 
A. Investment Cost 
1 
Civil Works 
a. Main office and ancillary 
1,495,750 
1,495,750 
17% 
b. Mixed-use buildings 
3,734,831 
3,734,831 
41% 
2 
Equipment 
162,500 
949,300 
1,111,800 
12% 
3 
Survey, Study & Design 
112,500 
53,500 
166,000 
2% 
4 
Training & Workshops 
26,875 
123,125 
150,000 
2% 
5 
Consulting Services 
324,078 
1,198,519 
1,522,597 
17% 
Subtotal 
4,360,784 
3,820,193 
8,180,978 
91% 
B. Recurrent Cost 
1 
PMO Salaries 
107,214 
390,786 
498,000 
6% 
2 
O&M Equipment 
3,125 
171,856 
174,981 
2% 
3 
Office / Vehicle O&M 
33,381 
121,669 
155,050 
2% 
Subtotal 
143,720 
684,311 
828,031 
9% 
Total Base Cost 
4,504,505 
4,504,505 
9,009,009 
100% 
C. Contingencies 
1 
Physical 
225,225 
225,225 
450,450 
5% 
2 
Price 
270,270 
270,270 
540,541 
6% 
Subtotal 
495,495 
495,495 
990,991 
11% 
Total 
5,000,000 
5,000,000 
10,000,000 
111%

=== PAGE 8 ===
B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 53 
 
Table 3 : Project budget by component including contingencies 
(USD million) 
ADB 
GCF 
Totala 
(ADF DRR 
GCF 
Share (%) 
Component A - Campus modernization 
4,446,541 
2,348,512 
6,795,053 
35% 
1.1 
Design and supervision services engaged 
300,878 
365,730 
666,608 
55% 
1.2 
Core operational systems modernized 
0 
1,982,782 
1,982,782 
100% 
1.3 
Mixed-use buildings constructed 
4,145,663 
0 
4,145,663 
0% 
Component B - Legal and organizational transformation 
179,541 
511,764 
691,305 
74% 
1.3 
Legal reforms implemented 
39,682 
110,989 
150,672 
74% 
1.4 
Institutional framework and quality management system enhanced 
75,812 
216,692 
292,503 
74% 
1.5 
Capacity building and knowledge-sharing program implemented 
64,047 
184,083 
248,130 
74% 
Component C - Forecasting and warning of extreme weather 
373,918 
1,094,894 
1,468,812 
75% 
1.6 
Community awareness and preparedness enhanced 
68,892 
198,619 
267,511 
74% 
1.7 
Flood forecasting system developed and capacity building undertaken 
305,026 
896,275 
1,201,301 
75% 
Component D - Marketing of fee-based services 
0 
1,044,830 
1,044,830 
100% 
3.1 
Community awareness and weather product accessibility enhanced 
0 
289,448 
289,448 
100% 
3.2 
Subscription platform and new weather products developed 
0 
755,382 
755,382 
100% 
Total 
5,000,000 
5,000,000 
10,000,000 
50% 
a Plus government in-kind contribution of taxes and duties forgone and social costs estimated at $1.141 million. 
ADB (ADF DRR) = Asian Development Bank Asian Development Fund Disaster Risk Reduction mechanism; GCF = Green 
Climate Fund 
Source: Asian Development Bank 
 
Grant finance is requested as Hydromet is not a profit-making enterprise and is expected to continue to rely on core 
government funding for the foreseeable future. In addition, Tajikistan is a country with high level of debt distress7. 
 
B.2. Project Financing Information 
Financial Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing 
 
(a) = (b) + (c) 
10 
million USD ($) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient 
(i) Senior Loans 
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans 
(iii) Equity 
(iv) Guarantees 
(v) Reimbursable 
grants * 
(vi) Grants * 
 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
5.0 
 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
million USD ($) 
 
( ) years 
( ) years 
 
(   ) % 
(   ) % 
( ) % IRR 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1 for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of c.2.2oncessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 https://www.imf.org/external/Pubs/ft/dsa/DSAlist.pdf

=== PAGE 9 ===
B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 53 
 
 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi) 
Financial 
Instrument 
 
5.0 
million USD ($) 
 
Amount 
Currency 
 Name of 
Institution 
 
 
 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Seniority 
 
 
 
(c) Co- 
financing to 
recipient 
Grant 
Options 
Options 
Options 
 
5.0 
…………… 
…………… 
million USD ($) 
Options 
Options 
Options 
 
ADB 
……………… 
……………… 
( ) 
years 
( ) 
years 
(   ) % 
(   ) % 
( ) % IRR 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
 
Lead financing institution: ADB 
Plus government in-kind contribution of taxes and duties forgone and social costs estimated at $1.141 million. 
 
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co-financing institution. 
 
In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deploys the GCF financing directly to the recipient, (i.e. the GCF financing 
passes directly from the GCF to the recipient through the AE) or if the AE is the recipient itself, in the proposed 
financial instrument and terms as described in part (b), this subsection can be skipped. 
 
 
 
 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable) 
If there is a financial arrangement between the GCF and the AE, which entails a financial instrument and/or financial 
terms separate from the ones described in part (b), please fill out the table below to specify the proposed instrument 
and terms between the GCF and the AE. 
 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
…………………. 
Options 
( ) years 
( ) % 
 
 
Please provide a justification for the difference in the financial instrument and/or terms between what is provided by 
the AE to the recipient and what is requested from the GCF to the AE. 
 
 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable) 
Not applicable.

=== PAGE 10 ===
C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 53 
 
 
Please fill out applicable sub-sections and provide additional information if necessary, as these requirements may vary 
depending on the nature of the project / programme. 
C.1. Strategic Context 
Please describe relevant national, sub-national, regional, global, political, and/or economic factors that help to 
contextualize the proposal, including existing national and sector policies and strategies. 
Tajikistan is one of the wellsprings of Central Asia; the Syr and Amu Rivers, originating in Tajikistan and Kyrgyz 
Republic and flowing into Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Kazakhstan, comprise 90% of the water resources in the 
region. Roughly 70% of the population lives in rural areas and rely on agriculture as a primary source of income. Their 
livelihoods are thus directly dependent on the country’s water resources and exposed to the prevailing climatic 
conditions and weather events. It is also Central Asia’s poorest country and among the region’s most vulnerable 
countries to climate change, as ranked by the ND-GAIN vulnerability index.8 
Tajikistan is a country highly prone to climate-related extreme weather events, notably flooding, which has caused 
roughly 80% of disaster mortalities in the country in the period 1990-2016.9 Climate change is expected to exacerbate 
these adverse events and their impacts. Higher temperatures and changes in precipitation patterns are expected to 
cause earlier and faster snowmelt and recession of glaciers and a decline in overall water availability. Water stress 
conditions are likely to become more common, and flooding and landslides are likely to become more frequent and 
damaging10. 
Climate vulnerability is particularly acute in the districts along the Pyanj River Basin (PRB), the primary tributary to the 
Amu River in the south of the country, which are among the country’s poorest and comprise a wide range of 
geographical and climatic conditions. The PRB is the largest river basin in the country (114,500 km2) spans 18 
administrative districts across two administrative regions (Khatlon and Gorno Badakhshan provinces), with a population 
of approximately 1.3 million.11 The mountain massifs that define the PRB feature glaciers and permanent snow fields at 
elevations above 3,500 m, and have high density drainage networks of steep alpine streams delivering runoff and 
sediment rapidly to the alluvial fan. Water resources management in the PRB is critical to the country’s economy and 
development. Khatlon is the province with the largest population (2.7 million) and agriculture production (e.g. 774,000 
tons cereal production) in the country, it includes the most food insecure zone among country’s irrigated area.12 PRB is 
the country’s poorest river basin (55% poverty rate).13 It is estimated that 14% of the PRB is at high to extremely high 
risk of floods, and this is expected to increase to 20% by 2070.14 In Khatlon region alone between 1998-2016, there 
occurred annually roughly 30 natural disaster events with 4 lives lost and damage exceeding over $3 million per year.15 
Annual river flows are likely to increase in the glacial sub-basins between 2015 and 2065 or 2075, due to increased 
melt caused by higher air temperatures. The expected change in monthly flow rates due to increased rainfall and 
decreased snowfall may entail an increase in the magnitude and frequency of extreme flood events. A gradual shift in 
the river flow seasonal distribution and increase of irrigation water requirements are predicted.16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 Tajikistan is 79th out of 182 countries (in ascending vulnerability). See: http://index.gain.org/ranking/vulnerability 
9 The OFDA/CRED - International Disaster Database, http://emdat.be/emdat_db/ 
10 Punkari et al. 2014. Climate Change and Sustainable Water Management in Central Asia. ADB Central and West 
Asia Working Paper Series No. 5. Asian Development Bank. Manila. 
11 ADB, 2013. Building Climate Resilience in the Pyanj River Basin. Technical Assistance Final Report (TA7970-TAJ). 
Manila. 
12 World Food Programme. 2013. Food Security Classification Overview–June 2013. Dushanbe. 
13 World Bank. 2013. Tajikistan-Reinvigorating Growth in the Khatlon Oblast. Washington, DC. 
14 ADB, 2011. Climate Resiliency for Natural Resources Investments. TA Consulant Final Report. Manila. 
15 World Bank, 2017. Strengthening Critical Infrastructure Against Natural Hazards Project. Social Assessment 
Report. Washington DC. 
16 See Footnote 10

=== PAGE 11 ===
C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 53 
 
 
Addressing the current and future climate-related extreme weather risks is a concern and priority at high levels of the 
government. This is reflected in the Tajikistan Nationally Determined Contribution submitted for the UNFCCC Paris 
Agreement, which prioritizes reducing the vulnerability to climate change in key sectors such as agriculture and water 
resources through among others improvement and modernization of hydrometeorological services, disaster risk 
reduction, and improved knowledge sharing.17 These adaptation priorities were likewise reflected in investments 
proposed during consultation among government and civil society stakeholders for improvements in water resources 
management including flood risk reduction in the PRB and improved knowledge sharing18 as well as the Tajikistan 
National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy due for approval in Q1 2018.19 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
Describe the baseline scenario (i.e. emissions baseline, climate vulnerability baseline, key barriers, challenges and/or 
policies) and the outcomes and the impact that the project/programme will aim to achieve in improving the baseline 
scenario. 
The State Agency for Hydrometeorology is Tajikistan’s climate and weather agency, with a mandate to among others (i) 
ensure protection of vital interests of the individual, society and state from natural hazards; (ii) provide 
hydrometeorological information to government and civil society stakeholders; and (iii) ensure functioning of the state 
monitoring network and the system for collection, processing and dissemination of hydrometeorological information. 
This mandate includes providing warnings for extreme climate change-related weather events such as floods. However, 
Hydromet’s capacity against the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) Strategy for Service Delivery (SSD)20 and 
Global Framework for Climate Services (GFCS) pillars21 remains low. As such, Hydromet is hindered in its ability to 
achieve its public service mandate to inform, warn and protect the public on weather and hydrometeorological issues. 
User engagement. Only 20% of surveyed stakeholders of Hydromet services expressed they were satisfied with 
Hydromet’s forecasting services. There is a lack of two-way communication with customers to support product 
development and service enhancement. Hydromet lacks a framework and platform to solicit and seek feedback from 
users. Hydromet lacks a framework and capacity for the development and sale of fee-based services. There is an 
apparent lack of close relationship between Hydromet and Ministry of Emergency Situations. Advisory services are 
focused on general weather warnings rather than key decision-making issues. 
Relevant SSD pillars: Evaluate user needs and decisions; Link service development and delivery to user needs; Share 
best practices and knowledge 
Relevant GFCS pillars: User interface platform; Climate Service Information System 
Quality of outputs and capacity development. Hydromet has a limited and patchy meteorological and hydrological 
monitoring network that is labor-intensive to operate. Hydromet provides local weather forecasts, for which it depends 
on third-party numerical weather prediction modelling and satellite imagery, and which lacks probabilistic analysis. Its 
weather forecasting is not integrated with analysis of hydrological response such as of flood forecasting. Its platforms 
and networks for rapid and broad dissemination of weather-related news and alerts to key government and civil society 
 
 
 
 
 
17 Government of Tajikistan, 2015. Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) towards the 
achievement of the global goal of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) by the 
Republic of Tajikistan. Dushanbe. 
18 ADB, 2016. Economics of Climate Change in Central and West Asia. Adaptation Component. TA Consultant’s 
Report. Manila. 
19 ADB, 2017. Draft National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (under preparation). TA Consultant’s Report. 
Manila. 
20 WMO. 2014. The WMO Strategy for Service Delivery and its Implementation Plan. 
https://library.wmo.int/pmb_ged/wmo_1129_en.pdf 
 
21 WMO. 2014. Implementation Plan of the Global Framework for Climate Services. 
http://www.wmo.int/gfcs/sites/default/files/implementation-plan//GFCS-IMPLEMENTATION-PLAN-FINAL- 
14211_en.pdf

=== PAGE 12 ===
C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 53 
 
 
stakeholders are limited. There is a lack of motivation and integration between teams to develop new advisory and 
customer service skills, and apparent lack of evaluation and verification that would feed back into improved services. 
Relevant SSD pillars: Sustain improved service delivery; Develop skills needed to sustain service delivery; Evaluate 
and monitor service performance and outcomes 
Relevant GFCS pillars: Research, Modeling and Prediction; Observations and Monitoring; Capacity Development 
Underlying institutional weakness. As detailed in Attachment 1, Hydromet suffers many of the common problems facing 
institutions in post-Soviet countries, which cause this poor performance. It is fully financed from the state budget, but 
due to the country’s broader budgetary constraints it receives a very limited budget in proportion to its size. Hydromet’s 
infrastructure and buildings are poor and decaying, staff retention is low due to uncompetitive salaries, and there is 
limited budget for operation and maintenance (O&M). 
As of March 2017, there are 708 staff in total working at Hydromet with 262 professional staff on active duty. There are 
45 unfilled professional positions, roughly 15% of the total approved professional staff. Most the unfilled positions are 
based in Dushanbe and are currently vacant due to difficulties in the recruitment and retention of professional staff. 
The current organizational structure of Hydromet is complex, as illustrated in Figure 1 below. The overall leadership is 
at Director level, which specifically oversees several departments or units such as Human Resources, International 
Relations, the Department of Environmental Monitoring and the Convention on Climate Change. In addition, there are 
two Deputy Directors. One oversees the Hydrometeorological Centre, the Centre for Glacial Study and programs or 
projects such as the ‘program on the study of glaciers’ and ‘program to restore meteorological and hydrological 
stations’. The second oversees the economic and financial management, automated communications, the Center for 
Measuring Instruments and the Centre for Climate Change and Ozone (although no work on ozone is currently 
performed).

=== PAGE 13 ===
C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 53 
 
 
Figure 1: Organogram of the Existing Hydromet Structure 
 
Source: Hydromet 
As suggested by the organogram, functional connectedness in Hydromet is lacking. A modern, effective and efficient 
hydromet service would have a focus on service delivery and user engagement with other programs clearly supporting 
the delivery of these services such as observations, communications, or cross-cutting corporate functions. Hydromet’s 
structure, on the other hand, has had projects and programs ‘bolted-on’, rather than integrated into the broader 
organizational (and staff) structure with shared responsibilities. As such, small units or teams function independently, 
creating a broad structure and silos of activities. User engagement is lacking. Thus, the organization will tend to 
operate in silos and lacks a common vision, purpose, and close links with their (potential) customers. 
Hydromet faces difficulties in recruiting and maintaining staff. For example, many of the staff in the Department of 
Meteorology lack professional training; instead, they learned on the job and assisted when it was operationally busy. 
However, many of these staff are unskilled to do the valuable and necessary improvements and assessments at times 
of benign conditions. Although there are a few experts within Hydromet; overall, the basic training of staff working in 
meteorology, hydrology, climate change impact assessments and other specialized areas is limited. Many staff at 
Hydromet have limited technical specialist backgrounds given the relative lack of formal training when they join

=== PAGE 14 ===
C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 53 
 
 
Hydromet. Individuals who do have stronger backgrounds will tend to find work in other counties or sectors where 
salaries are higher. 
In May 2015, Hydromet’s legal status was upgraded to that of a State Agency with professional staff salaries increased 
by roughly 40% to better align with civil service payscales. However, salaries for civil servants at Hydromet (average 
approximately $150 per month) still lag behind equivalent levels in government line ministries (average $80-$300 per 
month) and are significantly lower than in the private sector (average $100-$3000 per month). However, in its current 
legal status as State Agency, Hydromet is not able to set its own staff salaries and due to limited budget availability 
further government-approved salary increases are unlikely to be forthcoming. 
Hydromet’s headquarter campus in Dushanbe comprises of a series of detached bungalows within an enclosed 
compound near the city center of Dushanbe. The current physical structure reflects the organogram, with activities 
operating out of numerous, dispersed, small offices. The buildings are in a state of disrepair with poor facilities (see 
Figure 2 below). The toilet facilities, particularly for women, are in very poor condition and unheated during winter 
months. Indeed, it is the open spaces between buildings where staff tend to congregate. Such an environment acts as a 
barrier to integration, innovation and efficiency. It has long been proposed that Hydromet headquarters be moved to a 
new site in Dushanbe. Land as already been allocated for a new Hydromet campus and construction of a 6-storey office 
tower at the site was initiated in the 1980s but never finished. Construction was halted and restarted at various stages, 
most recently in 2011 with limited annual budgetary allocations. It remains unfinished (at roughly 60% physical 
completion, see photo in Figure 3 below) and unable to accomodate Hydromet staff, and is likely to remain so in the 
coming years due to the budgetary situation of the Government of Tajikistan arising from external economic shocks.22 
Figure 2: Photos of current Hydromet headquarters buildings in Dushanbe 
 
Source: Hydromet and Asian Development Bank 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 See: https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2017/05/30/pr17196-imf-staff-completes-2017-article-iv- 
mission-to-tajikistan

=== PAGE 15 ===
C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 53 
 
 
Figure 3: Photo of proposed new (unfinished) Hydromet building 
 
Source: Asian Development Bank 
Ongoing projects and sustainability. Several recent and ongoing donor technical assistance and investment projects 
have improved Hydromet’s capacity in data collection, analysis, and forecasting through technical training and 
modernization of equipment. The World Bank Central Asia Hydromet Modernization Project (CAHMP) has invested in 
equipment and training for to improve the meteorological and hydrological monitoring network, data storage, and short- 
term weather forecasting23. The original scope of CAHMP had included the piloting of fee-based weather information 
products, but this was removed due to budget limitations24. It is understood that additional financing is being sought for 
CAHMP to develop standard operating procedures and information service regulations, build capacity on additional 
services including glaciology and agrometeorology, further strengthen the monitoring network. The ADB Building 
Capacity for Climate Resilience25 technical assistance project will invest in equipment and training for climate change 
scenario and impact modelling, and a climate information database. The World Bank in association with the Global 
Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction (GFDRR) and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) are working with 
Hydromet as well as other related agencies in Central Asia to develop and implement a Central Asia Regional Flash 
Flood Guidance System (CAFFGS) that provides flood guidance and potentially early warnings.26 The Finnish 
Tajikistan Meteorology Project (2014-2017) supported improvements in Hydromet’s (i) capacity to provide climate 
services, (ii) air quality observation system, (iii) strategic and technical planning capacity, and (iv) capacity on modern 
observation technology and weather service process.27 It is understood that a second phase will commence in 2018. 
However, no donor investments have to-date sought to address the abovementioned underlying institutional barriers 
and weaknesses, and thus sustainability and effectiveness of these interventions is at risk. The sustainability of the 
benefits of training is likely to be poor with low staff retention. Purchases of equipment puts additional burden on 
Hydromet’s already stretched O&M budget, and thus future maintenance may be inadequate. Equipment storage and 
operation is not sufficiently secure in Hydromet’s current dilapidated campus. Indeed, ADB has postponed its climate 
modelling activities and procurement of high-performance computers due to the poor state of Hydromet’s current 
campus. These will be restarted once they may be safely and securely installed in the new Hydromet campus. 
As such, in the baseline, Hydromet capacity and quality of forecasting services remains low due to underlying 
institutional barriers and weaknesses. Hydromet is unlikely to see improvement over the current situation in the 
medium-term due to likely poor sustainability of ongoing donor-supported activities, and circumstances may in fact 
worsen as projects complete and direct support ceases. 
C.3. Project / Programme Description 
Describe the main activities and the planned measures of the project/programme according to each of its components. 
Provide information on how the activities are linked to objectives, outputs and outcomes that the project/programme 
intends to achieve. The objectives, outputs and outcomes should be consistent with the information reported in the logic 
framework in section H.

=== PAGE 16 ===
C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 53 
 
 
The project will address the key barriers and weaknesses identified in Section C.2. and support the development of 
Hydromet to a sustainable and well-resourced institution that provides timely and accurate forecasting services. They 
project focuses on addressing (i) underlying institutional barriers and weaknesses of Hydromet that hamper its 
institutional capacity and development; and (ii) support improved capacity in the production and dissemination of 
forecasting services particularly for the PRB area. Unless the institutional barriers and weaknesses are addressed, it is 
not likely that support for Hydromet’s technical capacity (by this or any other project) can be sustainable. 
The project will (i) modernize Hydromet’s campus and associated facilities [Component A], (ii) support legal and 
organizational transformation of Hydromet into a government entity with flexibility to set staff salaries and retain 
additional entrepreneurial revenue [Component B], (iii) undertake capacity building for improve forecasting and warning 
of extreme weather events [Component C], and (iv) support development and implementation of a viable business 
model through marketing of fee-based services [Component D]. In doing so, the project is directly and indirectly 
supporting Hydromet’s performance against the key WMO SSD and GCFS pillars. 
Component A: Hydromet campus modernization. 
The project will support the modernization of the new Hydromet headquarters campus including main office building, 
ancillary buildings, and two mixed-use buildings. The modernization of the Hydromet campus underpins the project’s 
contribution to the WMO SSD and GFCS pillars and achievement of the project objective of a sustainable and well- 
resourced Hydromet, which under this project and through a legal transformation will become a semi-autonomous entity 
under the Government. 
Activity 1.1 Design and supervision services engaged for detailed design and system integration, preparation of bidding 
documents for the campus modernization. 1.2 Core operational systems modernized. The project will modernize and fit 
out the currently unfinished office tower described in Section C.2. and Hydromet headquarters will be relocated to this 
secure and modernized building (see Figure 4 for drawing). The project will install a core office IT network with high 
speed internet connection to be designed during implementation for integration with the World Bank CAHMP monitoring 
and forecasting systems and ADB-supported climate modelling facility and climate data management system and 
alignment with WMO guidelines28. Ancillary buildings will be constructed comprising a laboratory, conference hall, and 
visitor’s information center (see schematic of campus in Figure 5). The laboratory will be used for Hydromet’s 
environmental testing activities. The conference hall will be used for internal activities and provide a source of revenue 
through rental of facilities for external engagements. The visitor’s information center will be used for Hydromet’s public 
outreach on weather and climate change education and information. Containerized offices will be installed on the 
campus to accommodate staff overflow. 
1.3 Mixed-use buildings constructed. Two mixed-use buildings will be constructed to provide low-cost housing for 
Hydromet staff. GCF finance will not contribute to this activity. The housing facilities will be provided as an in-kind 
benefit to compensate for low staff salaries and ensure that Hydromet staff can remain near the office during critical 
extreme weather events. The lower floor of the mixed-use buildings will be rented out on a commercial basis for 
additional revenue for Hydromet. A modern campus will (i) allow equipment to be safely and securely operated; (ii) 
provide additional entrepreneurial income through rental of facilities; (iii) improved staff retention with more attractive 
 
 
 
 
 
23 World Bank, 2011. Central Asia Hydromet Modernization Project. Project Appraisal Document. 
Washington D.C. 
24 As reported by Hydromet Deputy Director and World Bank team leader in personal communication. 
25 ADB, 2012. Building Capacity for Climate Resilience. Technical Assistance Report. Manila. 
26 WMO. 2017. Central Asia Region Flash Flood Guidance (CARFFG) System. 
http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/hwrp/flood/ffgs/carffg/carffg.php 
27 http://en.ilmatieteenlaitos.fi/documents/30106/42393/tajikistan.pdf 
28 WMO, 2015. Manual on the WMO Information System. WMO-No. 1060. Geneva.

=== PAGE 17 ===
C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 53 
 
 
salary packages through higher salaries and in-kind benefit of low-cost housing. Higher staff retention and improved 
facilities, combined with the project’s capacity building on management, marketing, and forecasting services, will help 
Hydromet improve the quality and relevance of forecasting outputs. This, in turn, will support the sale of fee-based 
information services and consulting services. See further analysis of options considered for Hydromet campus 
modernization during project preparation in Section E.6.3. 
Figure 4: Architect’s drawing of proposed new Hydromet building 
 
Source: Hydromet 
Figure 5: Schematic of proposed new Hydromet campus 
 
Note: (1) Office Building, (2) Laboratory, (3) Conference Center, (4) Visitor’s Information Center, (5-6) Mixed- 
use buildings. 
Source: Hydromet

=== PAGE 18 ===
C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 53 
 
 
Component B: Legal and organizational transformation. 
The project will address key legal and institutional barriers and weaknesses faced by Hydromet, and provide a solid 
operational foundation upon which it may develop and produce high quality services. 
1.4 Legal reforms implemented. Hydromet’s legal status will be amended to allow for more flexible and autonomous 
operation including internal reorganization, setting of staff salaries, and seeking and retaining additional entrepreneurial 
income. As described further in Section F.2., it is proposed that through a staged approach Hydromet is be converted to 
full State Institution status. Hydromet will be overseen initially by a Project Steering Committee to be established under 
the project. Following a government amendment to Hydromet’s legal status and update to the Hydromet charter, the 
Project Steering Committee will be formalized as a Board of Directors. 
1.5 Institutional framework and quality management system enhanced. The project will enhance Hydromet’s 
frameworks and systems for strategic planning, management, administration, and control towards ensuring output and 
development of quality climate services. Detailed program design will be prepared based on a gap analysis and 
technical needs assessment in line with WMO guidelines.29 Hydromet’s organizational business model and strategic 
planning will be updated. A viable business and marketing strategy including sustainable O&M plan will be developed to 
provide a framework for Hydromet to seek and retain additional entrepreneurial revenue as will be allowed under 
Hydromet’s new legal status. Hydromet will remain primarily supported through core government funding, and thus the 
staging of the legal transition will be linked to the establishment of additional source of entrepreneurial income. New 
sources of revenue for Hydromet are expected to include (i) rental of facilities from the new Hydromet campus 
described in the succeeding paragraphs; (ii) sale of weather information products described under Output 3 below; and 
(iii) in future, consultancy and other expert services. Additional entrepreneurial income is expected to contribution more 
than 10% of Hydromet’s annual budget by 2025 compared to 0% in 2017 (see analysis in Attachment 8). Staff structure 
and responsibilities will be streamlined and consolidated with formal terms of reference including quality management 
responsibilities and career pathways. Management, administration, and control manuals will be updated or established 
including sustainable O&M plan. A user feedback and service quality M&E system will be established to support 
reporting and stakeholder engagement on among others service experience and content, forecast timeliness and 
accuracy, and mediums of dissemination. Annual stakeholder opinion surveys will be undertaken on Hydromet 
services. A time-bound action plan will be developed and implemented for ISO 9001 certification of Hydromet’s quality 
management system. 
1.6 Capacity building and knowledge-sharing program implemented. A training program for senior and mid-level 
Hydromet professional staff will be designed and implemented on management and administration including strategic 
planning, human resource management, financial management, and career development including for women staff. 
Training will be conducted through a combination of workshops and seminars, and “on the job” training under 
Activity 1.4. Regional and international knowledge partnerships will be established, to support continued development 
of Hydromet capacity. The project will support a regional knowledge sharing event such as workshop, conference, or 
study tour. An annual stakeholder workshop will be held in-country to present project progress and plans. 
Component C: Forecasting and warning of extreme weather 
The project will develop Hydromet capacity riverine flood forecasting and local flood alerts in the PRB area. 
1.7 Community awareness and preparedness enhanced. Gender-sensitive consultation with national and local 
government and civil society stakeholders will be conducted to inform (i) the selection of pilot areas and (ii) the design 
of flood forecasting dissemination and alerts systems including method of delivery. During and following the 
establishment of the flood forecasting system, the project will conduct training for stakeholders in pilot areas on flood 
risks and the use of flood forecasts and disaster preparedness. 
1.8 Flood forecasting system developed and capacity building undertaken. Hydromet’s hydrological monitoring and 
forecasting capacity will be developed for three (3) pilot areas in the PRB to be identified during project implementation 
from an indicative short-list30 based on flood risk mapping and prioritization based on key risk and socio-economic

=== PAGE 19 ===
C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 53 
 
 
indicators and appropriate terrain. The project will install river gauges at pilot areas, and install a (likely cloud-based) 
flood early warning system platform in Hydromet incorporating rainfall-runoff, routing, and hydrodynamic models. 
Component D: Marketing of fee-based services 
It is intended that the sale of weather forecast information products will become a key source of additional 
entrepreneurial revenue for Hydromet in future. A system and platform for the sale of weather information and 
forecasting products will be developed by Hydromet and least one new weather information product will be marketed 
among key stakeholders in the PRB to support agricultural production and water resource management. A detailed 
market research analysis has been performed during project preparation to identify key issues and potential clients of 
Hydromet’s information products (see Section F.2.). 
1.9 Community awareness and weather product accessibility enhanced. Gender-sensitive consultations with farmers 
and stakeholder organizations in the PRB will be undertaken to inform the design of the marketing and subscription 
platform and prospective new weather information products. During and following the establishment of the system and 
new products, further gender-sensitive training and awareness campaigns will be conducted on the receipt and use of 
weather services. 
1.10 Subscription platform and new weather products developed 
A platform will be developed for managing the subscription and dissemination of weather information products, which 
are expected to be accessed and transmitted through web, email, and SMS. Hydromet’s main website will be 
accordingly updated and modernized. Capacity building of Hydromet staff will be conducted on marketing and product 
development to support the sustainability and quality of weather product development. 
The project has the following output indicators: 
• 
Hydromet headquarters offices relocated to modernized campus. (2017 baseline: not applicable). 
• 
Hydromet Board of Directors established. (2017 baseline: not applicable). 
• 
Local flood forecasts issued for pilot PRB districts on Hydromet website at least 36 hours in advance with >40% 
probability of detection (POD) and <25% false alarm rate (FAR) (2017 baseline: not applicable) 
• 
At least 500 individuals (of which 30% are female) are trained on flood warnings and preparedness in the PRB. 
(2017 baseline: 0). 
• 
IT platform for sale of information and forecasting products established (2017 baseline: not applicable). 
• 
At least one new weather alert product marketed to customers in the PRB by Hydromet (2017 baseline: not 
applicable). 
• 
At least 500 individuals (of which 30% are female) are trained on the receipt and use of weather forecasting 
products in the PRB. (2017 baseline: 0). 
The project has the following outcome indicators: 
• 
Share of surveyed government and civil society stakeholders reported ‘satisfied’ with Hydromet’s forecasting 
services increased to 30% (2017 baseline: 20%). 
• 
Share of annual Hydromet budget contributed by income from sale of fee-based services increased to 1.5% 
(2017 baseline: 0%) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 WMO, 2013. Guide to the Implementation of a Quality Management System for National Meteorological 
and Hydrological Services. WMO-No. 1100. Geneva. 
30 Bichkharv (Vanj District); Ishkashim (Ishkashim District); Khirmandjo (Shuroobod District); Khorog 
(Shughnon District); Rushon and Shidz (Rushon District)

=== PAGE 20 ===
C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 53 
 
 
Equipment to be purchased 
Equipment comprises approximately 10% of the base project cost (see Table 3). Identification of equipment needs has 
sought to (and subsequent detailed design during project implementation will) address the objectives of (i) enhancing 
services of Hydromet and meet the needs of stakeholders and (ii) ensuring sustainable O&M and equipment 
performance and lifetime. Project budget has been allocated for running costs including software licenses and 
subscriptions, developer services, and maintenance. Where feasible, autonomous, wireless, and cloud-based systems 
will be employed. It is expected that equipment purchases and estimated costs will include: 
• 
Furniture and office equipment for campus fit-out 
• 
IT systems including CPU, storage, backup, and wifi 
• 
Satellite receiver system 
• 
Automated river gauges and weather stations including telemetry 
• 
Flood forecasting and early warning system 
• 
Containerized offices 
• 
Portable telemetry and monitoring equipment for field work 
Contribution to WMO SSD and GFCS 
The project will directly contribute particularly to the following key elements: 
• 
SSD: Evaluate user needs and decisions; Evaluate and monitor service performance and outcomes; Link 
service development and delivery to user needs; Sustain improved service delivery; Develop skills needed to 
sustain service delivery 
• 
GFCS: User interface platform; Climate Service Information System; Research, Modeling and Prediction; 
Capacity Development 
By supporting and facilitating the sustainability of other donor interventions, notably the World Bank CAHMP project, the 
project will also indirectly contribute to the abovementioned elements as well as: 
• 
GFCS: Observations and Monitoring 
Linkages to ongoing ADB projects in Pyanj River Basin 
The project’s benefits and activities have strong links to two ongoing ADB water resources sector projects in the Pyanj 
River Basin. The Building Climate Resilience in the Pyanj River Basin (BCRPRB) project31, which runs from 2013-2020, 
invests in climate-proofed flood protection, irrigation, and water supply infrastructure. The project also establishes local 
disaster risk management committees (DRMCs) and water user associations (WUAs) to support improved disaster 
preparedness and response and water resources management. The Water Resources Management in the Pyanj River 
Basin (WRMPRB) project32, which runs from 2017-2022, will improve the government’s WRM capacity in PRB 
nationally and regionally through the establishment of (i) Tajikistan-Afghanistan Joint PRB Commission (JPRBC) to 
support improved hydrological monitoring and (ii) river basin organizations (RBOs) in Kulob and Khorog cities for 
resource planning, monitoring, and development. The project will invest in a selected irrigation system, the Chubek 
Irrigation System in Hamadoni district (see further information in Attachment 14). 
The subject proposed Hydromet project will enhance and sustain the BCRPRB and WRMPRB project’s agricultural 
productivity and climate resilience benefits through the provision of higher-quality forecasting services for PRB 
beneficiaries and stakeholder institutions. Consultation and training under Components B, C and D will seek to involve 
the entities established under these respective projects, including the DRMCs, RBOs, WUAs, and JPRBC, to leverage 
the institutional structures and capacity engaged in WRM and disaster management in the region. To enhance these 
linkages, the subject project will be presented to the ADB Board for approval as an additional financing extension 
project to the WRMPRB project. 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity)

=== PAGE 21 ===
C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 53 
 
 
Describe the quality of the management team, overall strategy and financial profile of the Sponsor (Executing Entity) 
and how it will support the project/programme in terms of equity investment, management, operations, production and 
marketing. 
ADB will conclude a financing agreement with the Republic of Tajikistan represented by the Ministry of Finance as 
Executing Entity. The Ministry of Finance will cause the project to be implemented through the State Agency for 
Hydrometeorology (Hydromet). A project management office (PMO) will be established within Hydromet to be 
responsible for project implementation. The Project will also recruit consultants to support project implementation 
including capacity building, procurement, construction supervision, and safeguards. 
Tajikistan became a member country of ADB in 1998, and since then cumulative lending, grant, and technical 
assistance to the country for Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Rural Development has totalled approximately 
$170 million and for Public Sector Management has totalled approximately $200 million. These represent roughly 11% 
and 14% of ADB’s approvals in the country to date. ADB has longstanding experience in Tajikistan in supporting 
climate change and disaster resilience, notably in the Pyanj River basin. In addition to the abovementioned WRMPRB 
and BCRPRB projects, under the Tajikistan Pilot Program for Climate Resilience funded by the Climate Investment 
Funds, ADB is currently administering one technical assistance (“Building Capacity for Climate Resilience”). Hydromet 
is an executing agency (in ADB terminology) for this existing ADB technical assistance, which is developing Hydromet’s 
capacity for modelling climate change and impacts in the country. 
Hydromet is a State Agency with approximately 800 staff including approximately 300 professional staff. In addition to 
the abovementioned ADB technical assistance, Hydromet is implementing the World Bank Central Asian Hydromet 
Modernization Project to improve Hydromet’s monitoring and weather forecasting capacity. A Project Management Unit 
(PMU) has been established within Hydromet, with responsibility for implementing the World Bank project, however, it is 
currently a limited team for the final stages of the project. Therefore, a new PMO will be established for the proposed 
project (see Section C.7 below). ADB’s financial management and internal control policies and procedures will be 
followed, including but not limited to those described in ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from 
time to time). 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
Describe the market for the product(s) or services including the historical data and forecasts. 
Describe the competitive environment including the list of competitors with market shares and customer base and key 
differentiating factors (if applicable). 
Provide pricing structures, price controls, subsidies available and government involvement (if any). 
Hydromet is the government agency providing climate and weather information and forecasting to the general public in 
Tajikistan. There are no direct competing agencies, although private company State Unitary Enterprise 
‘Tajikairnavigation’ proves weather services for aviation transport only in Tajikistan. A summary of Hydromet’s mandate 
and current outputs is provided in Sections C.2. and F.2. A market research survey has been undertaken during project 
preparation, to assess the use and opinion in Hydromet’s outputs from key government and civil society stakeholders. 
There is broad support for improvements in Hydromet’s services, with currently only 20% respondents indicating they 
are ‘satisfied’ with current provision. Approximately 50% of respondents indicated their organizations may be willing to 
pay for Hydromet information and forecasts in future, particularly short- and medium-term forecasts and hydrological 
information. Further description of the market research is found in Section F.2. 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable) 
 
 
 
 
 
31 ADB, 2013. Building Climate Resilience in the Pyanj River Basin. Report and Recommendation of the 
President. Manila. 
32 ADB, 2016. Water Resources Management in the Pyanj River Basin Project (L3434-TAJ). Report and 
Recommendations of the President. Manila.

=== PAGE 22 ===
C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 53 
 
 
Provide details of government licenses or permits required for implementing and operating the project/programme, the 
issuing authority, and the date of issue or expected date of issue. 
Describe applicable taxes and foreign exchange regulations. 
Provide details on insurance policies related to project/programme. 
ADB projects in Tajikistan are exempt from duties and taxes. There are no regulations affecting the import or use of 
foreign currency under this project. 
Land use and building permits are required. Structural integrity audit has been undertaken to confirm applicable permits 
and conformation with local laws and structural integrity of existing buildings in the new Hydromet campus including 
seismic strength (see Attachment 3). 
Consulting firms and contractors to be contracted by Hydromet under the project will be obliged to take the necessary 
insurance policies as required by the relevant government laws and/or policies. For civil works, the Contractor shall 
provide insurance cover from the start date to the end of the Defects Liability Period, in the amounts and deductibles 
stated in the particular conditions of contract for the following events, which are due to the Contractor’s risks: (a) Loss of 
or damage to the Works, Plant, and Materials; (b) Loss of or damage to Equipment; (c) Loss of or damage to property 
(except the Works, Plant, Materials, and Equipment) in connection with the Contract; and (d) personal injury or death. 
The project will comply with all national laws and regulations. All ADB’s fiduciary, environmental and social standards, 
as well as ADB’s procurement guidelines and policies including the ADB Procurement Guidelines (2016). 
C.7. Institutional / Implementation Arrangements 
Please describe in detail the governance structure of the project/programme, including but not limited to the 
organization structure, roles and responsibilities of the project/programme management unit, steering committee, 
executing entities and so on, as well as the flow of funds structure. Also describe which of these structures are 
already in place and which are still pending. For the pending ones, please specify the requirements to establish them. 
Describe construction and supervision methodology with key contractual agreements. 
Describe operational arrangements with key contractual agreements following the completion of construction. If 
applicable, provide the credit analysis of key counterparties of key contractual agreements and/or structural mitigants to 
cover the counterparty risks. 
The project organizational structure is presented below in Figure 6. A project steering committee (PSC) will be 
established comprising key stakholders to provide oversight and advise on project implementation. Upon legal 
transformation of Hydromet, the PSC will serve as the Hydromet Board of Directors. A new PMO will be established 
within Hydromet to manage the project including finance, procurement, construction supervision, and monitoring and 
evaluation. A PIC will be recruited to support the Hydromet PMO in all implementation matters. 
For implementation of the abovementioned activities, GCF will transfer USD 5.0 million to the GCF Account at ADB, in 
its capacity as Accredited Entity. As trustee of the GCF Account, ADB will make the GCF Proceeds, in the form of a 
grant, available to the Executing Entity in accordance with terms and conditions consistent with the Funded Activity 
Agreement. ADB will conclude a financing agreement with the Republic of Tajikistan, represented by the Ministry of 
Finance, on the management and use of the proceeds. All disbursements under the loan will be carried out in 
accordance with ADB’s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time). The Hydromet PMO will 
receive and verify claims for payments from contractors, suppliers and service providers, and consolidate and approve 
the requests for payment and will forward request for disbursement to ADB. ADB will pay the key suppliers, service 
providers and contractors via direct payment. An imprest account will be established in a local commercial bank 
acceptable to ADB for smaller items of expenditure of the PMO and the payment of PMO staff salaries and office 
operating costs. ADB, in its role as the AE, has overall responsibility and oversight for the project in line with its AMA. 
See further details in Attachments 1, 2, and 4.

=== PAGE 23 ===
C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 53 
 
 
Figure 6: Project organizational structure 
 
Source: Asian Development Bank 
Modernization of new Hydromet campus will be carried out by a construction company selected through national 
competitive bidding following ADB’s Procurement Guidelines (2015, as amended from time to time). When the Project 
is completed, the infrastructure will be handed over to the Government of Tajikistan, per standard contract procedures.

=== PAGE 24 ===
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation 
Indicative timetable attached in Section I. 
 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 53 C

=== PAGE 25 ===
D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 53 
 
 
 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement 
Please specify why the GCF involvement is critical for the project/programme, in consideration of other alternatives. 
In supporting the institutional transformation of Hydromet, GCF financing will provide significant value-added above 
the baseline case described in Section C.2 above. As indicated in B.1, GCF financing is requested to match ADB grant 
financing 1:1 for each expenditure category and project component, including civil works. Without the GCF financing, 
and thus without this proposed project, the capacity of Hydromet and the quality of its outputs will languish for the 
forseeable future. The project will help overcome the key underlying institutional weaknesses and barriers of 
Hydromet, and ensure the sustainability and viability of Hydromet. The project will support development of weather 
information products and flood forecasting for residents of the Pyanj River Basin, and facilitate the achievement and 
sustainability of other donor interventions with Hydromet including the World Bank CAHMP project. 
D.2. Exit Strategy 
Please explain how the project/programme sustainability will be ensured in the long run, after the project/programme is 
implemented with support from the GCF and other sources, taking into consideration the long-term financial viability 
demonstrated in E.6.3. This should include a description of strategies for longer term maintenance of physical assets 
(if applicable). 
The project’s exit strategy is to ensure that Hydromet’s underlying organizational weaknesses are addressed, and the 
agency is on a growth trajectory towards increased self-reliance, higher technical capacity, staff retention, and high- 
quality outputs. 
Governance 
The institutional structure of Hydromet will be reformed to establish legal standing in order to flexibly set salaries, and 
seek and retain additional income under the Government of Tajikistan. A Board of Directors will be established to 
oversee management of Hydromet (see Attachment 2) 
Financial and operational stability 
The project will support the development and implementation of a viable business plan including marketing strategy. 
The institutional reform will include a reorganization of Hydromet for more efficient, effective, and capable 
management and output. Hydromet, as a public institution, is expected to rely on core government funding. Continued 
sufficient core government funding for Hydromet will be agreed between the Government of Tajikistan and ADB 
through the project period in line with the sustainable O&M plan, and continued monitoring by ADB after the project 
period will be agreed. 
Maintenance 
The project will develop a viable business and marketing strategy including sustainable O&M. The costs for this 
are included in the financial assessment (see Attachment 8). 
Capacity building 
A full training needs assessment and capacity building of Hydromet staff will be implemented during the project for 
management and organization, marketing and business strategies, and flood forecasting.

=== PAGE 26 ===
F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 53 
 
 
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance of the 
proposed project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity-specific sub-criteria and 
indicative assessment factors, which can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework, should be addressed where 
relevant and applicable. This section should tie into any request for concessionality made in section B.2. 
 
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas 
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential 
The project will support adaptation to climate change in Tajikistan (i) directly through improvements in flood 
forecasting and weather products for approximately 300,000 residents (of which 150,000 are women) of the PRB and 
(ii) indirectly through a strengthened Hydromet agency providing improved and widely disseminated forecasting 
services to approximately 8.7 million33 residents across the entire country. The benefits of the project are expected to 
comprise (i) avoidance adverse effects to infrastructure and livelihoods; (ii) improved climate-related data and 
analysis to support broader adaptation efforts including operation and maintenance, planning and investments; and 
(iii) leveraging and enhancing the sustainability of other donor investments in Hydromet including ongoing projects by 
the World Bank (to support weather monitoring and forecasting) and ADB (long-term climate forecasting), which are 
currently at risk due to institutional barriers and weaknesses. 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below. 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only) 
Annual 
N/A 
Lifetime 
N/A 
• 
Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by 
gender (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience); 
• 
Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only) 
Total 
8,735,000 (of which 4,346,000 women) 
Percentage 
(%) 
100% 
Other 
relevant 
indicators 
Entrepreneurial income contribution of Hydromet budget. The baseline (2017) is 0% of Hydromet’s 
annual budget is provided by income from additional entrepreneurial activities. By 2025, this is targeted 
to be 10%, with the remainder arising from core government funding. 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above. 
 
 
 
 
33 2016 estimate. Source: World Bank.

=== PAGE 27 ===
F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 53 
 
 
Describe how the project/programme’s indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks (i.e. the indicator 
values for a similar project/programme in a comparable context). 
Methodology 
Hydromet is a public service agency with a remit to providing national and local weather and climate information. It 
has a mandate to (i) ensure protection of vital interests of the individual, society and state from hazardous effects, (ii) 
satisfy the needs of public authorities, sectors of the economy and population for hydrometeorological information as 
well as information about the state of the environment and its pollution, and (iii) ensure functioning of the state 
monitoring network and the system for collection, processing and dissemination of hydrometeorological information. 
This includes providing warnings for extreme climate change-related weather events, as well as providing input to 
planning and development. In improving the agency, all residents of Tajikistan will be directly or indirectly benefiting. 
It is estimated that roughly one quarter of the 1.3 million population of the PRB will benefit directly from the project, 
comprising those who may subscribe to or otherwise make use of improved weather information products and those 
in flood-prone areas covered by flood forecasting (to be determined during implementation). The national-level male 
to female population ratio is used to estimate the number of female beneficiaries. 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale) 
Describe how the proposed project/programme’s expected contributions to global low-carbon and/or 
climate-resilient development pathways could be scaled-up and replicated including a description of the 
steps necessary to accomplish it. 
Hydromet has a broad and important mandate to provide important monitoring and forecasting services. As a public 
service entity, its outputs are valuable – but un-priced and undervalued. Like other government agencies in 
Tajikistan, suffers from limited budget, degraded infrastructure, poor staff retention and institutional capacity. Without 
addressing these underlying weaknesses, there are limited prospects for significant improvement in the medium 
term, even with ongoing donor-supported interventions of training and equipment purchase. 
The project will among others support (i) the modernization of the new Hydromet campus to ensure safe and secure 
facilities, and (ii) the legal transformation of Hydromet to an entity able to seek and retain additional entrepreneurial 
income to supplement core government funding and flexibly set staff salaries. It is expected that the key sources of 
income will be (i) sale of fee-based information and forecasting products; (ii) rental of facilities such as conference 
rooms and office space; and (iii) consulting services. The project will support the development and implementation of 
a viable business and marketing strategy for Hydromet and the development of at least one new weather product 
targeted at customers in the PRB. 
This institutional transformation of Hydromet will represent a significant paradigm shift in the funding and provision of 
hydrometeorological services in Tajikistan and Central Asia. It is novel for a country with a substantial legacy of 
Soviet-era institutions and weak investment climate for entrepreneurs. The model is replicable in other 
hydrometeorological agencies in other countries in Central Asia. The project will help enable the scaling up of 
Hydromet’s products and services into for example agrometeorology. 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning

=== PAGE 28 ===
F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 53 
 
 
Describe how the project/programme contributes to the creation or strengthening of knowledge, collective learning 
processes, or institutions. 
As described in Section C.3., the project will support the strengthening of institutional capacity of Hydromet and legal 
transition. The project will support improved monitoring and forecasting outputs and dissemination to the general 
public and its use in disaster preparedness. The institutional transformation model may by applicable to similar 
agencies within Tajikistan and the region. A monitoring and evaluation systems will be established in Hydromet for 
service development and improvement, and develop regional partnerships for knowledge development and 
cooperation. Hydromet will host a regional knowledge sharing event to share developments, experiences, and 
lessons-learned. 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
Describe how proposed measures will create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained participation of 
private and public sector actors in low-carbon and/or resilient development that go beyond the program. 
Describe how the proposal contributes to innovation, market development and transformation. Examples include: 
• 
Introducing and demonstrating a new market or a new technology in a country or a region 
• 
Using innovative funding scheme such as initial public offerings and/or bond markets for projects/programme 
As described in Section C.2., insufficiently timely and accurate forecasting services for climate-related extreme 
weather events remain a limiting factor for efforts to reduce the vulnerability of communities in the PRB. The project 
will support improved forecasting services from Hydromet, to improve the disaster preparedness and response of the 
most vulnerable communities in Tajikistan. By supporting the provision of more timely and accurate information to the 
project beneficiaries, the project will empower communities to make decisions to reduce their own vulnerabilities and 
exposure to climate-related risks. The currently low satisfaction among key stakeholders of Hydromet’s forecasting 
services will be increased. 
As described in Section C.3., the project will support the development and implementation of a viable business 
model and marketing strategy for Hydromet to seek additional entrepreneurial revenue. At least one new weather 
product will be made available under the project, and the project will support capacity building for Hydromet to 
develop further information and forecasting products for income generation. This may include expansion beyond the 
project into areas not yet covered by Hydromet such as agrometeorology. 
Private sector entities are expected to be key clients for Hydromet’s fee-based services, and during marketing and 
product development Hydromet will engage in consultation with selected potential clients to cater services towards 
their priorities and needs. Further opportunities for partnerships with private entities will be explored during 
implementation. 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies

=== PAGE 29 ===
F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 53 
 
 
Describe how the project/programme strengthens the national / local regulatory or legal frameworks to systematically 
drive investment in low-emission technologies or activities, promote development of additional low-emission policies, 
and/or improve climate-responsive planning and development. 
A described in Section C.3, the project will support the legal transition of Hydromet towards increased flexibility to 
seek additional income, improve forecasting services, and offer new products to the most vulnerable through 
outreach, consultation, and marketing. A strengthened Hydromet is a key priority for Tajikistan’s NDC, and underpins 
the achievement of adaptation and resilience goals for national planning and development. As highlighted in Section 
C.2, low Hydromet capacity is a limiting factor in improved water resources management particularly in the Pyanj 
River Basin. Without improved forecasting and information services from Hydromet, it is unlikely that climate change 
and disaster risk considerations are included in planning, design, and operation of key infrastructure, as prioritized in 
the NDC and upcoming National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy34. 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential 
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive development impact 
Economic co-benefits 
The economic benefit of a strengthened Hydromet is expected to total approximately $55 million in present value 
terms (at 9% discount rate) comprising avoided losses from disaster impacts (see Attachment 9). 
The project will also have second- or third-order indirect effects on the wider economy, as a strengthened and more 
sustainable Hydromet will more effectively achieve its mandate for the country and support more climate resilient 
planning and development. This is in part from facilitating Hydromet’s broader activities including forecasting services 
supported by other donor projects. 
Social co-benefits 
The project will support improved comfort, convenience, health, and safety among vulnerable communities in the 
Pyanj River Basin through improved flood forecasting and weather services. Estimated avoided affected households, 
deaths, and homeless due to disaster events are tabulated in Attachment 9. 
Environmental co-benefits 
The project does not have recorded direct environmental co-benefits, but it is noted that Hydromet undertakes 
environmental monitoring and testing as part of its mandate, which will indirectly benefit from institutional 
strengthening. 
 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient 
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 ADB, 2017. Draft National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (under preparation). TA Consultant’s Report. Manila.

=== PAGE 30 ===
F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 53 
 
 
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups, and elaborate how the 
project/programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and 
groups, overall income level, etc). 
As described in Section C.1. and C.2., Tajikistan is Central Asia’s poorest country and among the most vulnerable 
countries in the region. Tajikistan is a country highly prone to climate-related extreme weather events, notably 
flooding, which has caused roughly 80% of disaster mortalities in the country in the period 1990-2016.35 Climate 
change is expected to exacerbate these adverse events and their impacts. Higher temperatures and changes in 
precipitation patterns are expected to cause earlier and faster snowmelt and recession of glaciers and a decline in 
overall water availability. Water stress conditions are likely to become more common, and flooding and landslides are 
likely to become more frequent and damaging36. 
Climate vulnerability is particularly acute in the districts along the Pyanj River Basin (PRB), the primary tributary to 
the Amu River in the south of the country, which are among the country’s poorest and comprise a wide range of 
geographical and climatic conditions. PRB covers the majority of Khatlon region, the province with the largest 
population (2.7 million) and agriculture production (e.g. 774,000 tons cereal production) in the country, it includes the 
most food insecure zone among country’s irrigated area,37 and it is the country’s poorest river basin (55% poverty 
rate).38 In Khatlon region alone between 1998-2016, there occurred annually roughly 30 natural disaster events with 
4 lives lost and damage exceeding over $3 million per year.39 Women dominate lower paying jobs in the agriculture 
sector – thereby bearing a disproportionate burden and vulnerability to climate-related extreme weather events. 
However, women have less access to resources (land, credit) and fewer are in leadership roles in WUAs and other 
community organizations. Annual river flows are likely to increase in the glacial sub-basins between 2015 and 2065 
or 2075, due to increased melt caused by higher air temperatures. The expected change in monthly flow rates due to 
increased rainfall and decreased snowfall may entail an increase in the magnitude and frequency of extreme flood 
events. A gradual shift in the river flow seasonal distribution and increase of irrigation water requirements are 
predicted.40 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs: 
• 
Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
• 
Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payment gap that prevents from 
addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market) 
• 
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity. 
Tajikistan is a high-debt country and the government’s budgetary support for Hydromet is heavily constrained. 
Overall institutional capacity of Hydromet is low, and most fundamentally has underlying institutional barriers and 
weaknesses that prevent it from achieving its mandate and hinder sustainable improvments in institutional capacity. 
Without the project, Hydromet is unlikely to develop and grow its capacity beyond its current situation, and recent and 
ongoing donor interventions are unlikely to be sustainable. 
 
 
 
 
 
35 The OFDA/CRED - International Disaster Database, http://emdat.be/emdat_db/ 
36 Punkari et al. 2014. Climate Change and Sustainable Water Management in Central Asia. ADB Central and West 
Asia Working Paper Series No. 5. Asian Development Bank. Manila. 
37 World Food Programme. 2013. Food Security Classification Overview–June 2013. Dushanbe. 
38 World Bank. 2013. Tajikistan-Reinvigorating Growth in the Khatlon Oblast. Washington, DC. 
39 World Bank, 2017. Strengthening Critical Infrastructure Against Natural Hazards Project. Social Assessment Report. 
Washington DC. 
40 See Footnote 10

=== PAGE 31 ===
F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 53 
 
 
E.5. Country Ownership 
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs 
Please describe how the project/programme contributes to country’s identified priorities for low-emission and climate- 
resilient development, and the degree to which the activity is supported by a country’s enabling policy and 
institutional framework, or includes policy or institutional changes. 
Addressing the current and future climate-related extreme weather risks is a concern and priority at high levels of the 
government. This is reflected in the Tajikistan Nationally Determined Contribution submitted for the UNFCCC Paris 
Agreement, which prioritizes reducing the vulnerability to climate change in key sectors such as agriculture and water 
resources through among others improvement and modernization of hydrometeorological services, disaster risk 
reduction, and improved knowledge sharing. These adaptation priorities were likewise reflected in investments 
proposed during consultation among government and civil society stakeholders for improvements in water resources 
management including flood risk reduction in the PRB and improved knowledge sharing41 as well as the Tajikistan 
National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy due for approval in October 2017.42 
The project will contribute to international strategy and policy frameworks for development and disaster risk 
reduction. The project will contribute to the outcome and targets of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk 
Reduction43, particularly through improving understanding of disaster risk (Priority 1) and enhancing disaster 
preparedness (Priority 4). The project will contribute to the Sustainable Development Goals44 particularly Goal 13: 
“Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts” through among others improving awareness and 
capacity on adaptation and early warning. The project will contribute to the implementation of the Global Framework 
for Climate Services45 through improving provision of climate information (Goals 1 and 2) and strengthening 
engagement of providers and users of climate services (Goal 4) 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
Please describe experience and track record of the accredited entity and executing entities with respect to the 
activities that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme. 
The accredited entity is the ADB. ADB is a multilateral development finance institution that provides loans, grants and 
technical assistance to its developing member countries. ADB is composed of 67 members, 48 of which are from the 
 
 
 
 
 
41 ADB, 2016. Economics of Climate Change in Central and West Asia. Adaptation Component. TA Consultant’s 
Report. Manila. 
42 ADB, 2017. Draft National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (under preparation). TA Consultant’s Report. Manila. 
43 United Nations, 2015. Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030. Third UN World Conference. 
Sendai. 
44 United Nations, 2015. Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Resolution adopted 
by the General Assembly on 25 September 2015. New York. 
45 WMO, 2014. Implementation Plan of the Global Framework for Climate Services. Geneva.

=== PAGE 32 ===
F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 53 
 
 
Asia and Pacific region. ADB’s clients are its member governments, who are also its shareholders. In addition, ADB 
provides direct assistance to private enterprises of developing member countries through equity investments and 
loans. In 2016, loan, grant and technical assistance approvals to ADB's developing member countries amounted to 
$17.8 billion, and total cofinancing mobilized, with donor support, amounted to $13.9 billion, bringing total sovereign 
operations to $31.7 billion in 2016. Nonsovereign operations for the same year amounted to $2.5 billion. 
Tajikistan became a member country of ADB in 1998, and since then cumulative lending, grant, and technical 
assistance to the country for Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Rural Development has totalled approximately 
$170 million and for Public Sector Management has totalled approximately $200 million. These represent roughly 
11% and 14% of ADB’s approvals in the country to date. ADB has longstanding experience in Tajikistan in supporting 
climate change and disaster resilience, notably in the Pyanj River basin. Under the Tajikistan Pilot Program for 
Climate Resilience funded by the Climate Investment Funds, ADB is currently administering one technical assistance 
(“Building Capacity for Climate Resilience”) and one investment project (“Building Climate Resilience in the Pyanj 
River Basin”). Hydromet is an executing entity (“executing agency” in ADB terminology) for the existing and ongoing 
ADB technical assistance, which is developing Hydromet’s capacity for modelling climate change and impacts in the 
country, including development of a climate information and data system. 
The subject project’s executing entity is the Ministry of Finance and will be implemented by Hydromet. See Section 
C.4. for information on its capacity to implement the project. 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
The project was initiated by the Center of Environmental Protection (COEP) and Hydromet, who requested ADB’s 
support in modernizing the Hydromet campus. Following an ADB Consultation Mission in March 2016, including high- 
level consultation with the First Deputy Prime Ministers and representatives of COEP and Hydromet, the Government 
requested ADB to develop the institutional transformation project for Hydromet including campus modernization. The 
GCF NDA for Tajikistan is the Chairman of COEP. 
The ADB project team and project preparation consultants have worked closely with Hydromet management and 
staff to develop the project. A detailed market research survey was conducted of government and civil society 
stakeholders (including ALRI and MEWR) on their use, opinion, and interest in Hydromet products and services (see 
Attachment 1). 
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the project/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, 
including addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers; providing the least concessionality; and without crowding 
out private and other public investment. 
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness, taking into account the total project financing and the mitigation/ 
adaptation impact that the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate 
benchmark. For mitigation, please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the cost per tCO2eq). 
In light of the broad and public-service nature of Hydromet, the beneficiaries of improved services will be both direct 
and indirect. If it is taken that all 8.7 million inhabitants can benefit from improved Hydromet services, the cost per 
beneficiary of the project is $1.2. 
The project economic analysis is presented in Attachment 9. As summarized in Table 5, the economic net present 
value (ENPV) at 9% discount rate of the project is $47 million over 30 years against a project cost of $11.0 million,

=== PAGE 33 ===
F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 53 
 
 
with an EIRR of 29%. This result is in line with the findings of the literature indicating high benefit-cost ration for 
investments in weather and climate services46. The finding is robust to alternative cost and benefit cases. 
Table 4: Results of economic evaluation and sensitivity analysis 
Results of Evaluation 
Change 
ENPV@9% 
EIRR 
Switching 
($ million) 
(%) 
Value 
Project Case 
47.1 
29.0% 
Sensitivity Scenarios 
Case 1 - Increase in Capital Costs 
+40% 
43.5 
23.9% 
525% 
Case 2 - Decrease in benefit 
-50% 
19.0 
19.3% 
-84% 
Case 3 - Benefit delay by 2 years 
-2 
36.1 
22.8% 
-15 
Case 4 - Combination of cases 1, 2 and 3 
as above 
9.9 
13.2% 
n/a 
Source: Asian Development Bank 
Note: ENPV@9% = economic net present value at 9% discount rate; EIRR = economic internal rate of return; Switching 
Value = level of sensitivity scenario at which ENPV = 0. 
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only) 
As presented in Section B.1., GCF’s co-financing ratio for the project is 50%. 
E.6.3. Financial viability 
Please specify the expected economic and financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support, based on the 
analysis conducted in F.1. 
The project financial analysis is presented in Attachment 8. After legal transformation, it is envisaged that Hydromet 
will remain primarily funded by core government budget in light of its public service mandate rather than stand alone 
as a profit-making entity. This is consistent with other similar meteorological agencies elsewhere with budget 
flexibility/autonomy arrangements, such the UK Met Office47. As such, the project financial analysis focuses on the 
key financial issues related to the project’s contribution to a sustainable and well-resourced Hydromet agency, notably 
projected (i) entrepreneurial revenues; (ii) O&M costs; (iii) staff salary package; and (iv) required core government 
budget support for Hydromet. 
Salaries for key professional civil servant staff at Hydromet (average approximately $150 per month) lag well behind 
equivalent levels in government line ministries ($80-$300 per month) and are significantly lower than in the private 
sector ($100-$3000 per month). This constrains staff retention, recruitment, and development. However, in its current 
legal status as State Agency, Hydromet is not able to set its own staff salaries and due to limited budget availability 
further government-approved salary increases are unlikely to be forthcoming. 
The modernization of the Hydromet campus underpins the achievement of the project objectives of a sustainable and 
 
 
 
 
 
46 World Meteorological Organization, 2015. Valuing Weather and Climate: Economic Assessment of Meteorological 
and Hydrological Services. WMO Report No. 1153. Geneva. 
47 UK Met Office, 2017. Annual Report and Accounts 2016/2017. Exeter.

=== PAGE 34 ===
F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 53 
 
 
well-resourced Hydromet that produced timely and accurate forecasts. A modern campus will (i) ensure equipment to be 
safely and securely operated; (ii) provide additional entrepreneurial income through rental of facilities; (iii) improve staff 
retention with more attractive salary packages through higher salaries and in-kind benefit of low-cost housing. Higher staff 
retention and improved facilities, combined with the legal transformation of Hydromet and capacity building on 
management, marketing, and forecasting services, will help Hydromet improve the quality and relevance of forecasting 
outputs. This, in turn, will support additional entrepreneurial income from the sale of fee-based forecasting services and 
consulting services. 
Four project options for campus modernization were considered: (i) Option A – Office tower (Building 1), ancillary buildings 
(Buildings 2,3,4), and two mixed-use buildings (Buildings 5 and 6); (ii) Option B – Office tower (Building 1), ancillary 
buildings (Buildings 2,3,4), and one mixed-use building (Building 5); Option C – Office tower (Building 1) and ancillary 
buildings (Buildings 2,3,4) only; and (iv) Capacity Building Only scenario –project includes only capacity building for 
Hydromet forecasting services, the new office building (Building 1) is completed in 2023 using State funds, and no legal 
transformation of Hydromet is sought, as there would be limited opportunity for rental income in the absence of a 
modernized campus during the project implementation period. These alternative scenarios are compared against the 
‘Without Project’ baseline scenario, wherein no Hydromet project is undertaken and new office building is completed in 
2023 using State funds. 
Option A was selected for the project. 
The key financial indicators for 2020 and 2030 for the alternative options and baseline are presented in Table 6 below. 
The project’s contribution to the objective of a sustainable and well-resourced Hydromet will depend on the extent to 
which it can address key underlying institutional weaknesses and barriers. In particular dilapidated facilities and poor staff 
retention and development hamper Hydromet’s achievement of its key public service mandates. 
The share of entrepreneurial income in Hydromet’s total budget reaches roughly 10% in 2025 and 15% in 2045 under 
Options A, B, and C. By comparison, the UK Met Office receives approximately 15% from non-governmental sources. 48 
Thus, required annual government contributions to the Hydromet budget are lower under Options A, B, and C compared 
to the Without Project baseline by up to 4%. However, required contributions are higher under Capacity Building Only 
scenario, as no additional entrepreneurial revenue is gained and capital investments increase O&M costs. 
Options C and Capacity Building Only provide only limited increase in staff salary packages, and the latter also does not 
modernize the Hydromet campus. It is unlikely that donor investments under these scenarios are will be sustainable in 
the medium-term and thus will unlikely help deviate Hydromet’s development and level of forecasting services beyond 
the current limited level. Option B provides a modernized office campus, but only a limited number of civil servants will 
receive a significant increase in salary package. This will constrain and potentially hamper the sustainability of the benefits 
of the overall investment in campus modernization and capacity building. As such, Options B, C, and Capacity Building 
Only were deemed insufficient and appropriate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48 UK Met Office, 2017. Annual Report and Accounts 2016/2017. Exeter.

=== PAGE 35 ===
F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 53 
 
 
Table 5: Summary projected financial indicators of alternative scenarios 
Indicator 
Without 
Option A 
Option B 
Option C 
 
Capacity 
Project 
 
 
 
Building Only 
Capital Investment ($) 
1,192,602 
6,024,155 
3,949,248 
1,874,342 
1,522,602 
Post-tax entrepreneurial income ($ p.a) 
2020 
0 
74,283 
55,083 
35,883 
0 
2030 
0 
274,631 
248,827 
223,024 
0 
2040 
0 
520,905 
486,228 
451,551 
0 
Government contribution ($ p.a.) 
2020 
1,125,410 
1,110,553 
1,114,393 
1,118,233 
1,125,410 
2030 
1,784,757 
1,736,648 
1,741,808 
1,746,969 
1,788,057 
2040 
2,835,357 
2,737,993 
2,744,928 
2,751,864 
2,838,657 
Civil servant salary packagea ($ p.m.) 
2020 
173 
439 
436b 
179 
173 
2030 
282 
631 
626 
319 
282 
2040 
459 
867 
862 
534 
459 
a Includes in-kind housing benefit under Option A and B 
b Only applicable for 40 of approximately 64 civil servant positions. The remainder will have salary packages comparable to those under 
Option C. 
Source: Asian Development Bank 
E.6.4. Application of best practices 
Please explain how best available technologies and practices are considered and applied. If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices. 
During project preparation, the institutional assessment of Hydromet included a comparison against the WMO SSD 
and GFCS49 for a comparison against best practices for climate and weather service entities. A market research 
survey was undertaken to undertand and incorporate the needs and expectations of key stakeholders and potential 
clients of fee-based services. The project will support organizational and legal transformation and Hydromet to allow 
increased flexibility to set staff salaries and seek and retain additional revenues. 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49 WMO. 2014. The WMO Strategy for Service Delivery and its Implementation Plan. Geneva. See: 
https://library.wmo.int/pmb_ged/wmo_1129_en.pdf

=== PAGE 36 ===
F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 53 
 
 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
N/A 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only) 
N/A 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme) 
 
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme appraisal document. 
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis 
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the detailed economic and financial analysis (including the financial 
model, taking into consideration the information provided in section E.6.3). 
Based on the above analysis, please provide economic and financial justification (both qualitative and quantitative) for 
the concessionality that GCF provides, with a reference to the financial structure proposed in section B.2. 
The economic and financial analysis considers the circumstances and uncertainties of investments in climate and 
weather services. Improvements in weather and climate services provide benefits only through the way the services 
are received and used by the end user. The benefits may include avoided losses to infrastructure, livelihoods, or life; 
improved day-to-day convenience, safety and comfort; improved water resources quality and management; and 
increased productivity in transport, agriculture, energy sectors. However, identifying and quantifying all such benefits 
may be difficult or impossible; the unknowns and uncertainties in the “value-adding” process add complications to 
economic analysis of such investments. 50 Furthermore, weather and climate service agencies are typically public 
service institutions. They may in some cases seek and retain additional entrepreneurial income, but annual operating 
costs are typically fully or largely funded from the government budget. 
As such, the economic and financial analysis of this project focuses on the following respective issues: 
1. The sufficiency of economic returns to the investment project, capturing the incremental capital and O&M 
costs and benefits arising from improved climate services under the project. The analysis takes a 
conservative approach to the benefits, capturing only the expected the avoided damages from improved 
forecasting of disasters arising from broader long-term Hydromet strengthening from the project. Additional, 
uncertain and possibly unquantifiable economic, social, and environmental benefits are not included. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 World Meteorological Organization, 2015. Valuing Weather and Climate: Economic Assessment of Meteorological 
and Hydrological Services. WMO Report No. 1153. Geneva.

=== PAGE 37 ===
F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 53 
 
 
2.  The long-term financial viability of the strengthened Hydromet considering O&M costs, prospective 
additional entrepreneurial income, staff retention through increased salaries, and necessary continued 
government core budgetary support. The project’s contribution to the objective of a sustainable and well- 
resourced Hydromet will depend on the extent to which it can address key underlying institutional weaknesses 
and barriers. Dilapidated facilities and poor staff retention and development hamper Hydromet’s achievement of 
its key public service mandates. 
The results are summarized in Section E.6.1 and E.6.3, with further detail in Attachment 8 and 9. 
Grant finance is requested as Hydromet is not a profit-making enterprise and is expected to continue to rely on core 
government funding for the foreseeable future. Tajikistan is a country with high debt levels and high vulnerability to 
climate change. 
F.2. Technical Evaluation 
Please provide an assessment from the technical perspective. If a particular technological solution has been chosen, 
describe why it is the most appropriate for this project/programme. 
The project’s rationale and interventions are described in Section C.2. and C.3, which were underpinned by 
institutional, market, legal, and infrastructure assessments. Summaries are provided below, with full reports in 
Attachments 1, 2, and 3 respectively. 
Institutional development and forecasting services 
A detailed institutional assessment has been undertaken of Hydromet assessing (i) current organizational structure 
and capacity of Hydromet to fulfill its mandate, (ii) key needs of the country, and (iii) recommended directions for 
development. 
Hydromet’s meteorological monitoring station is limited (although recently improved by World Bank’s CAHMP project) 
and labor intensive with delays in data transmission. Hydromet do not operate their own numerical weather prediction 
(NWP) model for short-term weather forecasting. Instead they access NWP output using the Internet from a selection 
of modeling centres, such as ECMWF and Deutscher Wetterdienst where the COSMO model was developed. 
Hydromet are therefore reliant on the Internet to access NWP data, as well as other important information such as 
satellite imagery. At Hydromet the NWP data used is at a reasonably coarse resolution, and largely deterministic. 
There is no integration of the meteorological forecast with the predicted hydrological response. Hydrological, 
meteorological, agro-meteorological observations cannot be implemented due to poor functioning equipment, weak 
coverage due to low numbers of equipment, and lack of training. Indeed, the World Bank noted that ‘hydrological 
data, which is critically important for the economy, is completely inadequate51’. Significant improvements are required 
in Hydromet’s capacity for forecasting of extreme weather and floods. 
Organizationally, there is a lack of functional programs that oversee and integrate activities. Instead, the current 
structure of Hydromet has projects compartmentalized and ‘bolted-on’ to the existing structure. Second, there is an 
apparent absence of a clear operational focus of forecasting delivery. Third, there is very little evidence of 
engagement, understanding the evolving needs of the ‘user’ or ‘customer’, and product development. As of March 
2017, there were 708 staff in total working at Hydromet with 262 professional staff on active duty. There are 45 
unfilled professional positions, roughly 15% of the total approved professional staff. Most the unfilled positions are 
 
 
 
 
 
51World Bank. 2011. Central Asia Hydrometeorology Modernization Project. Project Appraisal Document. Washington 
DC.

=== PAGE 38 ===
F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 53 
 
 
based in Dushanbe and are currently vacant due to difficulties in the recruitment and retention of professional staff. 
The majority of the unfilled positions are based in Dushanbe and are currently vacant due to difficulties in the 
recruitment and retention of professional staff. Hydromet faces difficulties in recruiting and maintaining staff. Many of 
the staff in the Department of Meteorology lack professional training; instead, they learned on the job and assisted 
when it was operationally busy. However, many of these staff are unskilled to do the valuable and necessary 
improvements and assessments at times of benign conditions. 
Consultation with the stakeholders (i.e. users of Hydromet data) identified consistent views and needs for Tajikistan. 
They broadly signaled a lack of reliability and therefore trust in the forecasts produced by Hydromet – although 
stakeholders were often sympathetic to their lack of resourcing and monitoring available to Hydromet. Results from a 
market survey (see below) indicated that although users required a better service, roughly 70% of respondents did 
consider that there had been an increase in reliability of forecasts over the last 5 years. The desire for more 
information and awareness leading up to severe weather or flood related disasters; and better coordination of 
weather and flood information during an event. A lack of understanding of what historical data may be available, and 
what longer range weekly to seasonal information may be available. For example, whilst historical data would assist 
in strategic planning of hydroelectric power stations, the longer range could be used to optimize their operations. 
Tajikistan currently produces ‘traditional weather and hydrological information’, but there is a potentially an 
undeveloped weather and climate services ’market’. Access and communication of weather and climate informations 
should be improved using electronic methods such as the internet and a wider range of media sources. 
The intended pilots under Component C of the project may inform potential further expansion of monitoring across 
Tajikistan and development of hydrometeorological and flood forecasting services. Based on gaps in the current 
network, it is recommended that additional new automated river gauge are procured with ratings conducted and 
telemetry installed. It is noted that the testing of automatic gauges is ongoing at present under the World Bank CAHMP 
project. Additional operating and maintenance costs should be incorporated into project for initial startup. 
Automated and telemetered river gauges in the PRB should be configured into a Flood Early Warning system that 
integrates observed and forecast meteorological and hydrological data. Hydrological models can be developed using 
software that is freely available (such as Flood Modeller52), and where hydrological models are already established 
these can be ported across to run on a flexible cloud-based platform. Recent advances in software design and 
computing have led to significant improvements that Hydromet could take advantage of. Instead of large capital 
investment in computing hardware a cloud-based system should be adopted. For example, the national hydrological 
service in Wales, National Resources Wales, have recently adopted a cloud based system to run hydrological, coastal 
and hydraulic routing models. 53 
Market research 
A market research study of 63 government and local stakeholders to assess their interest, opinion, and willingness to 
pay for Hydromet’s information and forecasting services. There was broad interest and support for Hydromet’s 
services, but only 20% of respondents express satisfaction with Hydromet’s forecasting services (see Figure 7). 
However, approximately 70% of respondents indicated that forecasts had improved in the last 5 years. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52 Flood Modeller https://www.floodmodeller.com/en-gb/about/ 
53 Deltares – Delft-FEWS https://www.deltares.nl/en/software/flood-forecasting-system-delft-fews-2/

=== PAGE 39 ===
F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 53 
 
 
Figure 7: Respondents’ assessment of satisfaction of Hydromet forecasting 
 
Approximately 50% of respondents expressed a broad willingness for their insitutions to in principle to pay for 
Hydromet services, while some agencies indicated that Hydromet should provide its services for free as a public 
entity. Among those expressing willingness to pay for Hydromet services, the prospective services of most interest 
were historical data on weather or river flow, (ii) short-term forecasts [up to 2 days], and (iii) mid-term forecasts [up to 
7 days]. Stated willingness to pay was generally up to 100 TJS (roughly 10 USD) for each forecast. The most desired 
way of receiving this information is e-mail (75% of respondents), physical delivery to organization (38%), internet site 
(25%) and SMS notification (19%). 
Legal analysis 
Hydromet is a Government Agency transformed by a Government Resolution (decree) dated May 30, 2015 into a civil 
service organization, whose civil service rules apply to 64 staff while the majority fall outside the civil service. After May 
2015 the State agency (civil service) budget from Government is separated from the rest of Hydromet staff who fall 
under a State institution type of structure. Hydromet is a hybrid entity applying two different sets of rules to its staff 
(remuneration, promotions, incentives etc.) but also enjoying certain flexible management arrangements under the law 
that regulates a State institution. According to law and regulations applicable to State agencies, any revenue generated 
by Hydromet, whether through services rendered, products and services sold or rentals from assets accrued, must 
under an Agency status, be “surrendered” first to MOF. Discretion to put revenues that accrue from sources outside the 
State budget at the disposal of Hydromet lies entirely with MOF except for funds provided to Hydromet for project 
implementation through sovereign loans and grants governed by project agreements. 
For Hydromet to retain and manage its revenues flexibly and provide performance-based incentives to staff (civil 
servants and non-civil servant), current restrictions resulting from it being a Government Agency need to be addressed. 
The Government has assured in a letter issued by the Office of the First Deputy Prime Minister of the Government of 
Tajikistan of its principled support for the transformation of Hydromet into a semi-autonomous agency with flexibility 
towards salaries and retaining revenues. There may be a need to consider a legal status of Hydromet that is different 
than that of an Agency (civil service) allowing it to carry out the institutional transformation under a grant project. In this 
regard, the example of the National Center for Accreditation, which has gone through a process of legal transformation 
and is awaiting its approval as a State Institution for similar justifications may be worth considering. 
Table 7 below provides an overview of the type of legal structure and under which Ministry or governing entity the 
Hydromet entity falls / reports to. There is no consistent or uniform pattern that can be gleaned from examining the 
Central Asian countries including the Russian Federation.

=== PAGE 40 ===
F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 53 
 
 
No. 
Table
Country 
6: Comparison of Region 
Type 
al Hydromet institutions
Governing Body 
Equivalent legal 
structure in 
Tajikistan 
1 Kazakhstan54 
State Unitary Enterprise 
Ministry of Energy 
State unitary 
enterprise 
2 Kyrgyzstan55 
Agency for 
Hydrometeorology 
Ministry of 
Emergency Situations 
Agency 
3 Uzbekistan56 
Center of 
Hydrometeorology 
Service 
Ministry of 
Emergency Situations 
State Institution 
4 Turkmenistan57 
National Committee for 
Hydrometeorology 
Cabinet of Ministers 
National Committee. 
However,  in 
Tajikistan national 
committees are 
advisory bodies while 
in Turkmenistan it is 
close to an Agency. 
5 Russian federation58 
Federal Service for 
Hydrometeorology and 
Environmental Monitoring 
Ministry of Natural 
Resources and 
Ecology 
State Service having 
more inspection 
function 
Source. Asian Development Bank 
 
The following broad steps are considered for the proposed legal transformation of Hydromet, to take place in a staged 
approach taking into account the project progress and Hydromet capacity: 
 
(i) 
Establishment of a Project Steering Committee (PSC) to oversee project progress. The PSC will 
become the Supervisory Council (Board) of Hydromet upon conversion to State Institution status. 
(ii) 
Confirm that Hydromet continues to receive adequate State budget support and ensure that the core 
government support is not reduced to offset expected future increased revenue from additional 
entrepreneurial sources. 
(iii) 
Confirm that new Hydromet campus assets currently registered with COEP are transferred to Hydromet 
on completion of physical structures and any new structures are registered in the name of Hydromet. 
This will ensure that the use and benefits of the assets purchased under the project accrue to Hydromet 
alone. 
(iv) 
Change Hydromet legal status from a Government Agency to that of a State Institution governed by a 
Supervisory Council (Board) under the Government of Tajikistan to ensure retention of revenue accrued 
from rentals and service provisions and flexibilities to set staff salaries. 
 
Infrastructure audit assessment 
 
A structural audit of the unfinished office building was undertaken for project preparation. The recommendations will be 
incorporated into the design of the Hydromet modernization. The review concluded that: 
 
[T]aking into account the elimination of the identified shortcomings, the cross-section and reinforcement of 
reinforced concrete structures provides the necessary load-bearing capacity of these building elements. The 
loaded capability and stability of the main structural elements of the building are sufficient for the perception 
of design loads, taking into account the 9-point earthquake action. 
 
The review recommended minor remedial measures for the completion of the building, including: 
 
(i) The Client of the Сonstruction of object must agree on a change in the design decision on the upper part 
of the erected block-2 with the KVD PILT Institute "Dushanbeshahrsoz" and with the Main Department of 
Architecture and Urban Planning in Dushanbe;

=== PAGE 41 ===
F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 53 
 
 
(ii) The Client of the Сonstruction of object must conduct additional state expertise of the modified part of the 
project in accordance with the Urban Development Code of the Republic of Tajikistan (Chapter 9, Article 
64, paragraph 3); 
(iii) Clean all bare reinforcing bars and fittings from rust; 
(iv) To strengthen the columns of the sixth floor and the technical room on the roof of the building in the axes 
11-Г, 11-B, 14-Г, 14-B, 16-B, 16-Г by metal clips from corners L75x75mm, connected with each other by 
plates 50x5mm every 500mm; 
(v) To restore the separated sections of reinforced concrete structures with concrete of the appropriate grade 
to concrete structures; and 
(vi) In all the partitions in newly pierced doorways to arrange reinforced concrete or reinforced brick lintel 
blocks. 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations 
Describe the main outcome of the environment and social impact assessment. Specify the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan, and how the project/programme will avoid or mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g. 
preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with the Fund’s Environmental and Social Safeguard 
(ESS) standard. Also describe how the gender aspect is considered in accordance with the Fund’s Gender Policy and 
Action Plan. 
Environmental Considerations 
The project is category B as per ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (SPS) 2009, and in line with ADB guidelines an 
initial environmental evaluation (IEE) was undertaken including consultation with local and national government and 
civil society stakeholders. The IEE assessed the potential impacts associated with the proposed civil works 
(modernization of Hydromet campus): pollution from wastes, noise, dust, and air pollution, health hazards and labor 
safety issues. It was determined that they are all expected to be typical for small scale construction/rehabilitation 
works, temporary by nature and site specific and can be easily mitigated by applying best construction practices and 
relevant mitigation measures. An environmental management plan (EMP) has been prepared setting out 
environmental mitigation measures to be incorporated in the design and implementation of the project, to be 
implemented by the construction contractor and overseen by Hydromet. It was concluded that no further 
environmental assessment was necessary. An audit of the existing structure in the new Hydromet campus has been 
undertaken to assess structural integrity, appropriate permitting and standards (including seismic risks), and 
environmental issues (see Attachment 3). The draft IEE and EMP are included in the Attachment 10. 
Social Considerations 
This project is category C for involuntary resettlement and indigenous peoples as per the SPS. All physical civil works 
activities will be conducted within the land which Hydromet has already owned therefore no land acquisition and 
resettlement is expected in this project. The projects will not impact any indigenous peoples, as per definition of SPS 
and will be confirmed during implementation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54 Kazakhstan at: http://www.kazhydromet.kz/ru/history 
55 Kyrgyzstan at: http://meteo.kg/index.php?page=2 ; http://mes.kg/ru/about/subordinate/kyrgyzgidromet/ 
56 Uzbekistan at: http://www.meteo.uz/ 
57 Turkmenistan at: http://www.meteo.gov.tm/ru/ 
58 Russian Federation at: http://www.meteorf.ru/

=== PAGE 42 ===
F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 53 
 
 
During project preparation, extensive consultation has been undertaken with government and civil society 
stakeholders on their awareness, use, and satisfaction of Hydromet services. Reported support for improved 
Hydromet services is high with potentially large benefits to direct and indirect beneficiaries. During project 
implementation, the development of flood forecasting and weather products will be informed by gender-sensitive 
consultation of national and local stakeholders, including RBOs and WUAs. 
Gender considerations 
A poverty, social, and gender assessment was undertaken (see Attachment 13) and a gender action plan (GAP) and 
Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy prepared (see Attachments 5 and 6). 
The gender assessment identified that key gender issues are in leadership and access to resources. Within Hydromet 
organization, only 3 out of 19 senior level positions are held by women. Among the project’s broader beneficiaries, 
women dominate lower paying jobs in the agriculture sector – thereby bearing a disproportionate burden and 
vulnerability to climate-related extreme weather events. However, women have less access to resources (land, credit) 
and fewer are in leadership roles in WUAs and other community organizations. 
The GAP includes the following key performance targets and activities: 
 An average of 25% of staff positions at Chief and Deputy Chief of Department, Chief of Groups, Heads of 
Units, Laboratory, and Stations are held by women. (Baseline 2017: average 20%)
 Modernized campus is designed and constructed with adequate gender-appropriate facilities (e.g. sanitary, 
changing rooms, breast feeding rooms, refreshment areas). (Baseline 2017: not applicable)
 At least 25 qualified female staff from Hydromet are trained in administration and management including 
leadership, financial management, and commercial management. (Baseline 2017: 0)
 Clear career path opportunities and career track profiles are provided to every staff member. (Baseline 2017: 
not applicable)
 Participants in community consultation and participation activities will comprise 30% women.
An gender specialist will be recruited under the PIC to assess, consultant, train, and support management of the 
implementation of the GAP. A gender specialist will be recruited under the PMO for GAP implementation. 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement 
Describe the project/programme’s financial management and procurement, including financial accounting, 
disbursement methods and auditing. 
Financial management and procurement capacity assessment 
A full assessment has been undertaken of the financial management and procurement capacity of the executing and 
implementing entities (see Attachments 4 and 7). 
The FMA for Hydromet as the implementing entity of the subject proposed project concluded that it represents a 
substantial risk (defined as high impact but low probability risks) due to less effective internal controls, accounting and 
financial reporting, and funds flow. There is currently no PMU within Hydromet that can manage the project, and as 
described above in Section C.4. a new PMO will need to be established for the project. The FMA recommended 
mitigation measures to address these risks, including: (i) recruitment of experienced and qualified staff for the PMO, 
(ii) provision of financial management support and training under the PIC, (iii) providing training in ADB procedures 
related to audit, disbursement, and project management. These measures have been incorporated into project design 
and terms of reference of PIC. Project audit reports will be prepared annually to international accounting standards. 
The proposed project fund flow diagram is presented in Figure 8 below. For implementation of the abovementioned 
activities, GCF will transfer USD 5.0 million to the GCF Account at ADB, in its capacity as Accredited Entity. As

=== PAGE 43 ===
F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 53 
 
 
trustee of the GCF Account, ADB will make the GCF Proceeds, in the form of a grant, available to the Executing 
Entity in accordance with terms and conditions consistent with the Funded Activity Agreement. ADB will conclude a 
financing agreement with the Republic of Tajikistan, represented by the Ministry of Finance, on the management and 
use of the proceeds. All disbursements under the loan will be carried out in accordance with ADB’s Loan 
Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time). The Hydromet PMO will receive and verify claims for 
payments from contractors, suppliers and service providers, and consolidate and approve the requests for payment 
and will forward request for disbursement to ADB. ADB will pay the key suppliers, service providers and contractors 
via direct payment. An imprest account will be established in a local commercial bank acceptable to ADB for smaller 
items of expenditure of the PMO and the payment of PMO staff salaries and office operating costs. 
Figure 8: Project fund flow 
 
ADB = Asian Development Bank; GCF = Green Climate Fund; PMO = Project Management Office 
Source: Asian Development Bank. 
A procurement capacity assessment concluded that Hydromet represents a substantial risk. Key sources of risk 
identified include (i) lack of qualified procurement staff, (ii) lack of experience and unfamiliarity with competitive 
procurement processes consistent with ADB Procurement Guidelines, (iii) insufficiently centralized record keeping, 
and (iv) inadequate integrity and anticorruption measures in place. The procurement capacity assessment 
recommended mitigation measures to address these risks including: (i) recruitment of experienced and qualified staff 
for the PMO, (ii) provision of procurement support and training under the PIC, (iii) providing training in ADB 
procedures related to procurement including use of ADB standard bidding documents, and (iv) use of prior review 
procedures. These measures have been incorporated into project design and terms of reference of PIC. 
Procurement methods and thresholds

=== PAGE 44 ===
F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 53 
 
 
Procurement is not expected to include highly specialized, complex, or customized civil works or goods. There is a 
robust local construction industry, with firms likely to be interested in bidding on the construction works for 
modernizing the Hydromet campus. Monitoring and IT equipment may be procured by shopping or competitive 
bidding. Detailed design will be conducted during implementation. 
The following indicative methods and process thresholds shall apply to procurement of goods and works, and 
consulting services (see Table 8) below. Bidding documents prepared and procurement initiated by PMO, based on 
ADB standard bidding documents. Prior review of the bidding documents will be undertaken by ADB. Bid evaluation 
and bid evaluation reports will be prepared by the PMO with support of the PIC. Bid evaluation will be reviewed by 
ADB before approval by the government tender board. 
  
Table 7: Procurement methods and thresholds 
 
Source: Asian Development Bank 
Procurement will follow among others the ADB Procurement Guidelines (2015, as amended from time to time) and 
the Guidelines on Use of Consultants (2013, as amended from time to time). 
Method 
Threshold 
International Competitive Bidding (ICB) for 
Works 
Over $3,000,000 
International Competitive Bidding for Goods 
Over $2,000,000 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) for Works 
$100,000 through $3,000,000 
National Competitive Bidding for Goods 
$100,000 through $2,000,000 
Shopping for Works 
Below $100,000 
Shopping for Goods 
Below $100,000

=== PAGE 45 ===
G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 53 
 
 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary 
Please provide a summary of main risk factors. Detailed description of risk factors and mitigation measures can be 
The following key risks have been identified: 
• 
Political support for project 
• 
Major extreme weather or seismic event 
• 
Staff turnover 
• 
Government financing of operation and maintenance 
 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures 
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. 
Selected Risk Factor 1: Political support for project 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Change of government leadership, organization, or 
priorities at a national and/or local level may result in 
project refocus, delays, part/whole project cancellation. 
Legal transformation for Hydromet to more flexibly set 
salaries to seek and retain additional entrepreneurial 
income may be hampered. Key Hydromet assets 
(including modernized campus buildings) may be 
transferred to other agencies for other use. 
Other 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Political risks are inherent in all projects in Central Asia, including Tajikistan. However, climate change adaptation, 
including improvement of Hydromet services, remain a priority at the highest level of government. ADB has 
consulted extensively with a broad range of stakeholders on the project, including at the Deputy Prime Minister level, 
and has received request and support for the project (see Attachment 11). Project covenants will cover legal 
transformation and Hydromet’s exclusive use of modernized assets. 
Selected Risk Factor 2: Major extreme weather or seismic event 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
A major extreme weather or seismic event affect 
structures or livelihoods in the project areas in 
Dushanbe and PRB, thereby delaying progress on civil 
works, capacity building, or stakeholder consultation 
components, or damaging installed infrastructure or 
equipment. 
Other 
Medium (5.1- 
20% of project 
value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)

=== PAGE 46 ===
G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 53 
 
 
A structural integrity assessment has been undertaken of the new Hydromet campus building, confirming adherence 
to national standards including seismic risk. The campus upgrading will be designed to high standard. The new 
Hydromet campus is located in the suburbs of Dushanbe, and at insignificant risk of flooding or landslide. ADB will 
work closely with the relevant government agencies to monitor extreme weather events, particularly annual spring 
flooding. 
Selected Risk Factor 3: Staff turnover 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
High staff turnover and a limited local human resource 
base could compromise the PIU 
and delay implementation. 
Technical 
and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Competitive salaries for PIU staff will be offered. The high priority of the project among stakeholders should make 
the positions attractive. 
Selected Risk Factor 4: Government financing of operation and maintenance 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Hydromet, as a public service entity, will require 
continued core government funding during and after 
the project. Insufficient continued government funding 
to cover operation and maintenance of current and 
new assets will risk Hydromet’s future sustainability 
and production of high quality outputs. 
Financial 
Medium (5.1- 
20% of project 
value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Hydromet services remain a priority for government, although budget provision is constrained. The World Bank have 
reported in August 2017 that an increase of budget has been allocated to Hydromet to ensure continued services. 
Selected Risk Factor 5: Financial management and procurement capacity of EE 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
The FMA for Hydromet as the implementing entity of 
the subject proposed project concluded that it 
represents a substantial risk (defined as high impact 
but low probability risks) due to less effective internal 
controls, accounting and financial reporting, and funds 
flow. A procurement capacity assessment concluded 
that Hydromet represents a substantial risk. Key 
sources of risk identified include (i) lack of qualified 
procurement staff, (ii) lack of experience and 
unfamiliarity with competitive procurement processes 
consistent with ADB Procurement Guidelines, (iii) 
insufficiently centralized record keeping, and (iv) 
Financial 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Low

=== PAGE 47 ===
G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 53 
 
 
inadequate integrity and anticorruption measures in 
place. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will undertake the following measures for financial management: (i) recruitment of experienced and 
qualified staff for the PMO, (ii) provision of financial management support and training under the PIC, (iii) providing 
training in ADB procedures related to audit, disbursement, and project management. For procurement risk the 
following measures will be taken: (i) recruitment of experienced and qualified staff for the PMO, (ii) provision of 
procurement support and training under the PIC, (iii) providing training in ADB procedures related to procurement 
including use of ADB standard bidding documents, and (iv) use of prior review procedures. 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon 
Alignment with other donor interventions including World Bank 
It is anticipated that Hydromet will continue to work with other donors, notably the World Bank, during and after the 
project. It is understood that the World Bank is considering extensions and follow-on projects for CAHMP. Without 
appropriate coordination, the respective interventions may not be effective or consistent. ADB is working and will 
continue to work with Hydromet and other donors to ensure appropriate alignment and synergy with respective 
future investments and activities. However, implementation of the subject project is unlikely to be affected by other 
projects, due to the establishment of own project management office. 
.

=== PAGE 48 ===
H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 53 
 
 
H.1. Logic Framework. 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Increased climate-resilient 
sustainable development 
This project will support directly PRB area and indirectly the entire country of Tajikistan with 
improved disaster forecasting and warning, new weather products, and a strengthened 
Hydromet agency. 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid- 
term 
(if  
applica 
ble) 
Final 
Fund-level impacts 
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and enhanced 
livelihoods of the most 
vulnerable people, 
communities and 
regions 
1.1 Change in 
expected losses of 
lives and economic 
assets (US$) due to 
the impact of 
extreme climate- 
related disasters in 
the geographic area 
of the GCF 
intervention 
It is proposed that 
annual number of 
households in the 
selected pilot areas 
(to be determined 
during 
implementation) 
affected by floods is 
used as a proxy. 
National 
and district- 
level 
reports 
To be 
determined 
To be 
determined 
Major extreme 
weather or 
seismic events 
do not occur. 
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and enhanced 
livelihoods of the most 
vulnerable people, 
communities and 
regions 
1.2 Number of males 
and females 
benefiting from the 
adoption of 
diversified, climate- 
resilient livelihood 
options (including 
fisheries, agriculture, 
tourism, etc.) 
It is proposed that 
the number of 
households in the 
PRB subscribing to 
or otherwise using 
Hydromet weather 
services as inputs to 
Project 
reporting 
and public 
surveys 
To be 
determined 
To be 
determined

=== PAGE 49 ===
H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 53 
 
 
their livelihood 
decision-making.

=== PAGE 50 ===
H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 53 
 
 
 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verificatio 
n (MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
(if applicable) 
Final 
Project/programme 
outcomes 
Outcomes that contribute to Fund-level impacts 
A6.0 Increased generation and 
use of climate information in 
decision-making 
6.2 Use of 
climate 
information 
products/servi 
ces in 
decision- 
making in 
climate- 
sensitive 
sectors 
Proposed 
proxy indicator 
is number of 
surveyed 
government 
and civil 
society 
stakeholders 
‘satisfied’ with 
Hydromet 
forecasting 
services 
Annual 
survey 
20% 
(2017 
Baseline) 
20% 
30% 
Hydromet 
development 
has continued 
national and 
local political 
support. 
A6.0 Increased generation and 
use of climate information in 
decision-making 
6.2 Use of 
climate 
information 
products/servi 
ces in 
decision- 
making in 
climate- 
sensitive 
sectors 
Proposed 
proxy indicator 
is share of 
Hydromet’s 
annual budget 
provided by 
income from 
fee-based 
services. 
Annual 
project 
reports 
and 
Hydromet 
annual 
financial 
reporting. 
0% (2017 
Baseline) 
0% 
1.5% 
Hydromet 
legal 
transformation 
and 
development 
has continued 
national and 
local political 
support. 
Project/programme outputs 
Outputs that contribute to outcomes

=== PAGE 51 ===
H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 53 
 
 
Component A 
Hydromet 
headquarters 
offices 
relocated to 
modernized 
campus 
Quarterly 
Hydromet 
project 
reports 
Not 
applicable 
(2017 
baseline) 
Hydrome 
t 
relocated 
Hydromet 
relocated 
Component B 
Hydromet 
Board of 
Directors 
established 
Quarterly 
Hydromet 
project 
reports 
Not 
applicable 
(2017 
baseline) 
Board of 
Directors 
establish 
ed 
Board of 
Directors 
established 
Local flood 
Quarterly 
Not 
25% 
40% POD 
forecasts 
Hydromet 
applicable 
POD and 
and 25% 
issued for pilot 
project 
(2017 
40% 
FAR 
PRB districts 
reports 
baseline) 
FAR 
on Hydromet 
website at 
least 36 hours 
in advance 
with >40% 
probability of 
detection 
Component C 
(POD) and 
<25% false 
alarm rate 
(FAR) 
At least 500 
individuals (of 
Quarterly 
Hydromet 
0 (2017 
baseline) 
300 
individual 
s (of 
which 
30% are 
women 
500 
individuals 
which 30% are 
project 
(of which 
female) are 
trained on 
flood warnings 
reports 
30% are 
women 
and 
preparedness 
in the PRB 
Component D 
At least one 
new weather 
alert product 
marketed to 
customers in 
the PRB by 
Hydromet 
(2017 
baseline: 0) 
Quarterly 
Hydromet 
project 
reports 
0 (2017 
baseline) 
1 
1

=== PAGE 52 ===
H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 53 
 
 
At least 500 
individuals (of 
which 30% are 
female) are 
trained on the 
receipt and 
use of weather 
forecasting 
products in the 
PRB 
Quarterly 
Hydromet 
project 
reports 
0 (2017 
baseline) 
300 
individual 
s (of 
which 
30% are 
female) 
500 
individuals 
(of which 
30% are 
female) 
IT platform for 
sale of 
information 
and 
forecasting 
products 
established 
Quarterly 
Hydromet 
project 
reports 
Not 
applicable 
(2017 
baseline) 
Platform 
establish 
ed 
Platform 
established 
Activities 
Description 
Inputs 
Description 
Component A: Hydromet campus modernization 
1.1 
Design and supervision 
services engaged 
The project will support the 
modernization of the new 
Hydromet headquarters 
campus including main 
office building, ancillary 
buildings, and two mixed- 
use buildings. 
1.1.1 Detailed design 
undertaken for system 
integration 
1.1.2 Bidding 
documents prepared 
and tendered 
1.1.3 Construction 
supervision 
undertaken 
1.2 
Core operational 
systems modernized 
1.2.1 Contract 
awarded for civil works 
See Section C.3. 
1.2.2 Contract 
awarded for office 
furniture 
1.2.3 Contract 
awarded for core IT 
systems 
1.3 Mixed-use buildings 
constructed 
1.3.1 Contract 
awarded for civil works 
Component B: Legal and organizational transformation 
1.4 
Legal reforms 
implemented 
Hydromet’s legal status will 
be amended to allow for 
more flexible and 
autonomous operation 
including internal 
reorganization, setting of 
staff salaries, and seeking 
1.4.1 Business 
development and 
transition team 
established 
See Section C.3. 
1.4.2 Project Steering 
Committee 
established

=== PAGE 53 ===
H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 53 
 
 
and retaining additional 
entrepreneurial income. 
1.4.3 Draft 
government resolution 
for new legal structure 
and charter drafted 
and submitted 
1.5 Institutional framework and 
quality management system 
enhanced 
The project will enhance 
Hydromet’s frameworks 
and systems for strategic 
planning, management, 
administration, and control 
towards ensuring output 
and development of quality 
climate services. 
1.5.1 Gap analysis 
and detailed program 
prepared 
See Section C.3. 
1.5.2 Organizational 
business model and 
strategic planning 
updated 
1.5.3 Management, 
administration, and 
control manuals 
updated or established 
1.5.4 User feedback 
and service quality 
M&E system 
established 
1.5.5 Annual 
stakeholder survey on 
Hydromet services 
undertaken 
1.5.6 Time-bound 
action plan for ISO 
9001 certification 
developed 
1.6 Capacity building and 
knowledge-sharing program 
implemented 
Training program for staff 
and development of 
regional partnerships. 
1.6.1 Training for 
senior and mid-level 
Hydromet staff 
undertaken 
See Section C.3. 
1.6.2 Regional and 
international 
knowledge 
partnerships 
established 
1.6.3 Regional 
knowledge sharing 
event held 
1.6.4 Annual 
stakeholder workshop 
held 
Component C: Forecasting and warning of extreme weather 
1.7 Community awareness 
and preparedness enhanced 
Gender-sensitive 
consultation with the newly- 
formed JPRBC and RBOs 
and other national and local 
1.7.1 Gender-sensitive 
consultation on flood 
forecasting and 
warning systems 
undertaken 
See Section C.3.

=== PAGE 54 ===
H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 53 
 
 
government and civil 
society stakeholders. 
1.7.2 Gender-sensitive 
stakeholder training 
and awareness 
campaign on use of 
flood forecasts and 
disaster preparedness 
undertaken 
1.8 Flood forecasting system 
developed and capacity 
building undertaken 
Hydromet capacity riverine 
flood forecasting and local 
flood alerts to support 
improvements in the water 
resources management in 
the PRB area. 
1.8.1 Pilot districts 
selected and detailed 
design including IT 
system integration 
prepared 
See Section C.3. 
1.8.2 Flood risk 
mapping of target 
areas in PRB 
prepared 
1.8.3 Contract 
awarded for flood 
forecasting and 
monitoring equipment 
1.8.4 Capacity building 
for Hydromet staff on 
flood forecasting 
undertaken 
Component D: Marketing of fee-based services 
1.9 Community awareness 
and weather product 
accessibility enhanced 
Gender-sensitive 
consultations and training 
with farmers and 
stakeholder organizations 
including RBOs and WUAs, 
including awareness 
campaign. 
1.9.1 Gender-sensitive 
consultation 
undertaken with 
farmers and 
stakeholder 
organizations in PRB 
districts on 
development of 
weather services 
See Section C.3. 
1.9.2 Gender-sensitive 
stakeholder training 
and awareness 
campaign on use and 
receipt of weather 
services undertaken 
1.10 Subscription platform and 
new weather products 
developed 
Platform will be developed 
for managing the 
subscription and 
dissemination of weather 
information products. 
1.10.1 Detailed design 
undertaken for system 
integration 
See Section C.3. 
1.10.1 Contract 
awarded for IT 
systems 
1.10.2 Website 
updated and 
information 
subscription and

=== PAGE 55 ===
H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 53 
 
 
delivery system 
established 
1.10.3 Capacity 
building for Hydromet 
staff on marketing and 
product development 
undertaken 
 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
Besides the arrangements (e.g. semi-annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please provide project/programme 
specific institutional setting and implementation arrangements for monitoring and reporting and evaluation. Please 
indicate how the interim/mid-term and final evaluations will be organized, including the timing. Please provide 
methodologies for monitoring and reporting of the key outcomes of the project/programme. 
Monitoring, evaluation, and reporting will follow ADB’s Evaluation Policy and the Accreditation Master Agreement 
concluded between ADB and GCF. The Hydromet PMO established for the project will be responsible for day-to-day 
project management, monitoring, and reporting. The PMO will prepare quarterly reports on progress, on the current 
level for all indicators, on the implementation progress and challenges, updated procurement and implementation plan 
for next 12 months, and the financial status. The PIU will appoint one staff member as focal point for monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E), and who be supported by M&E specialist under the PIC. 
The PMO Director will inform Hydromet and the ADB on an as-needed basis of any delays or difficulties during 
implementation, so that the appropriate support and corrective measures can be adopted. The Project Director will also 
ensure that all project staff maintain a high level of transparency, responsibility and accountability in monitoring and 
reporting project results. The PMO will organize one independent evaluation at the financial close of the program. 
In addition: 
• A detailed project administration manual will be prepared at the project outset setting out the reporting, monitoring 
and evaluation activities, responsibilities, and budget. 
• ADB will undertake at least two project review missions per year to assess progress of project implementation 
activities, compliance with covenants and project agreements, and to monitor progress in achieving project outputs 
and agree on any required modifications. 
• ADB will undertake a mid-term review mission through project implementation at a time that ADB and the 
Government deem it appropriate. The midterm review mission will (i) review institutional, administrative, organizational, 
technical, environmental, social, economic, procurement, and financial aspects of the project based on the 
assumptions and risks included in the design and monitoring framework; (ii) review compliance to project covenants; 
(iii) assess the need to restructure or reformulate the project; and (iv) update the project’s design and monitoring 
framework if restructuring or reformulation is necessary. 
• Project implementation will be monitored on an ongoing basis by ADB staff in Manila and Dushanbe. 
• Following physical completion of the project, Hydromet will submit a project completion report to ADB.

=== PAGE 56 ===
ANNEXES 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal 
☒ 
Feasibility Study 
☒ 
Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations 
☒ 
Map indicating the location of the project/programme (in IEE) 
☒ 
Government concurrence letter 
☒ 
NDA No-objection Letter 
☒ 
Integrated Economic and Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements 
Attached Documents: 
1. 
Institutional Transformation 
2. 
Legal Structure 
3. 
Campus Modernization 
4. 
Financial Management Assessment 
5. 
Summary Poverty Reduction and Social Strategy 
6. 
Gender Action Plan 
7. 
Project Procurement Risk Assessment 
8. 
Financial Assessment 
9. 
Economic Assessment 
10. 
Supplementary Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) 
11. 
Government Concurrence 
12. 
NDA No Objection Letter 
13. 
Poverty, Social, and Gender Analysis 
14. 
Water Resources Management in Pyanj River Basin project summary 
☒ 
Timetable of project/programme implementation 
☒ 
Appraisal document (Report and Recommendations of the President) of the WRMPRB project 
☒ 
ADB Tajikistan Country Operating Business Plan (2018-2020) 
I

=== PAGE 57 ===
GCF/B.19/22/Add.17 
   Page 54 
 No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority

=== PAGE 59 ===
GCF/B.19/22/Add.17 
   Page 56 
 
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
 
Basic project/programme information 
Project/programme title 
Institutional Development of the State Agency of Hydrometeorology 
of Tajikistan 
Accredited entity 
Asian Development Bank 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
 
 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
2018-01-25 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English, Russian 
Link to disclosure 
https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/taj-47181-003-iee 
A simplified ESIA consistent with the requirements for a category B project is 
contained in the Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) 
Other link(s) 
https://www.adb.org/ru/projects/documents/taj-47181-003-iee 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
2018-01-25 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English, Russian 
Link to disclosure 
https://www.adb.org/projects/documents/taj-47181-003-iee 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a category B project is 
contained in the Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) 
Other link(s) 
https://www.adb.org/ru/projects/documents/taj-47181-003-iee 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Not applicable 
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure 
Not applicable
