=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.5
title: 
author: Chananyou Muadmanee
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Microsoft® Word 2016
producer: Microsoft® Word 2016
creationDate: D:20170911151012+09'00'
modDate: D:20170911151012+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
30 September – 2 October 2017 
Cairo, Arab Republic of Egypt 
Provisional agenda item 14(g) 
GCF/B.18/04/Add.13 
11 September 2017 
 
 
 
 
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum XIII 
Funding proposal package for FP058 
 
 
 
 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following three parts: 
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Responding to the increasing risk of 
drought: building gender-responsive resilience of the most vulnerable 
communities”; 
b) No-objection letters issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s); and 
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;

=== PAGE 2 ===
Project/Programme Title:   Responding to the increasing risk  of drought: building gender- 
responsive resilience of the most vulnerable communities 
 
Country/Region:   Ethiopia 
 
Accredited Entity:   Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation (MOFEC) 
 
Date of Submission:

=== PAGE 3 ===
Contents 
 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
Section F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
Section G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
Section I 
ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Sections A, B, D, Eand H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document. 
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name:

=== PAGE 4 ===
A 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 64 
 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
 
 
 
 
A.1. Brief Project/Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / programme title 
Responding to the increasing risk of drought: building 
gender-responsive resilience of the most vulnerable 
communities 
A.1.2. Project or programme 
Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region 
Ethiopia 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies) 
Ministry  of  Environment,  Forest  and  Climate  Change 
(MEFCC) 
A.1.5. Accredited entity 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation (MoFEC) 
A.1.5.a. Access modality 
☒ Direct 
☐ International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary 
Executing Entity: MoANR, MoWIE 
Beneficiary: Drought-affected &vulnerable communities; 
public institutions at the national, Woreda (District) and 
Kebele (Sub-District) levels 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD) 
□ Micro (≤10) 
□ Medium (50<x≤250) 
☒ Small (10<x≤50) 
□ Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus 
□ Mitigation 
☒ Adaptation 
☐ Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission 
Date of re-submission 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details 
Contact person, position 
Zerihun Getu, CRGE Facility Coordinator 
Organization 
MoFEC 
Email address 
zedget@yahoo.com 
Telephone number 
+251921566324 
Mailing address 
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. 
 
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply) 
Reduced emissions from: 
□ 
Energy access and power generation 
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.) 
□ 
Low emission transport 
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.) 
□ 
Buildings, cities and industries and appliances 
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.) 
□ 
Forestry and land use 
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.) 
Increased resilience of: 
Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.) 
Health and well-being, and food and water security 
16) 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.) 
□
Infrastructure and built environment

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 2 OF 64 
 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
 
 
 
 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.) 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
 
 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words) 
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objectives and primary measurable 
benefits (see investment criteria in section E). The detailed description can be elaborated in section C. 
1. Ethiopia ranks as one of the countries at most “extreme risk” of climate change. 60% of the country is dryland, 
where annual rainfall is becoming increasingly unpredictable and is contributing to the rising frequency and severity 
of drought. Climate change therefore has significant implications, given the reliance of many of the communities in 
these areas on rain-fed agriculture. In 2015/16, a severe drought threatened one-tenth of the country’s population 
(c.10.3 million people1) with catastrophic food shortages. Ethiopia’s exposure to drought and floods is heavily 
influenced by the El Niño/La Niña phenomenon. In 2015/16, Ethiopia experienced one of the worst droughts in 
decades. 
2. Climate projections show high uncertainty with rainfall projections ranging from -25% to +30% by 2050. It has been 
estimated that droughts alone can reduce total GDP by 1% to 4% while soil erosion reduces agricultural GDP by 
2% to 3%. If no adaptation measures are taken currently, climate change-induced impacts are projected to result in 
a 2-10% loss of GDP by 2045 relative to baseline growth. 2 Given Ethiopia’s general low level of economic 
development, it is particularly vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change. All assessments – including the 
Second National Communication to the UNFCCC (2014) and the National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA, 
2007) have articulated this. Climate change is further increasing this uncertainty in three main ways: 
• 
Continued temperature increases of 0.8 to 2.7°C. 
• 
Continued rainfall variability with more frequent extremes 
• 
Parts of the country could see changes in key seasonal rainfall. 
3. Within Ethiopia, causes of vulnerability to climate variability and change include, but are not limited to: high 
dependence on rain-fed agriculture; inefficient water resources management at the local level; low economic 
development level and low adaptive capacity. 
4. Cognizant of the current and future impacts of climate change, the Government of Ethipia (GoE) has developed the 
Climate Resilient Green Economy (CRGE) strategy, launched at the Durban COP in 2011. Ethiopia’s Climate 
Resilient water strategy sits at the heart of this CRGE Strategy, now mainstreamed into Ethiopia’s second Growth & 
Transformation Plan (GTP-II; 2015-2020). Building on the CRGE Strategy, Ethiopia was also the first LDC country 
to submit it INDC to the UNFCCC in June 2015. Ethiopia has since ratified the Paris Agreement in April 2016. 
5. This project is designed in line with Ethiopia’s NDC implementation process and will catalyse the implementation of 
the CRGE strategy. It will transform the way that water is being utilized and managed in Ethiopia. The main 
objective of the project is to increase the resilience of the targeted rural communities to the adverse impacts of 
climate change by introducing new approaches to water supply and management systems capable of increasing 
the productive capacity of the community and the carrying capacity of the water ecosystems. The project is 
expected to benefit 330,000 people (or 73,333 households with the current average family size of 4.5) directly (30% 
Female Headed Households) with year –round access to reliable and safe water supply improve their food security 
and 990,000 people indirectly. 7,850 ha of degraded land will be rehabilitated, of which 5,000 ha shall be covered  
by trees. Improvement in female participation in decision making and in productive activities and an overall increase 
in agricultural productivity are also expected. 
6. The design of this project combines improved water access and resource management in line with the Ethiopian 
Water Resources Management Policy 2.33 to enable the most vulnerable communities to adapt to shocks of climate 
variability in the future. The project will introduce proven technologies (Solar powered ground water Pumps and 
Ground water monitoring Systems) and resilient infrastructure (Boreholes and Small Scale Irrigation Schemes), 
while utilizing natural resource management based adaptation methods (Physical and Biological Conservation). 
7. The project will simultaneously establish institutional systems that enable gender and climate-responsive planning 
and development, ensuring optimization of social, economic and environmental benefits. By investing in particular 
 
1Ethiopia Humanitarian Requirement Document (2016). 
2World Bank (2010). 
3 MoWIE, 1999

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 64 
 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
 
 
 
 
gender responsive water and irrigation infrastructure and other climate smart initiatives, the project will improve 
health, food and water security as well as strengthen institutional and regulatory systems for gender and climate- 
responsive planning and development As a result, the project will directly support 330,000 people (over 50%  
women and 30% female headed households) to cope with the intensifying challenges of climate Change. The 
project will focus on women and in particular female heads of households to increase their resilience and unleash 
their untapped potential as key stakeholders and community leaders in their own right. 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone 
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) 
N/A 
Expected financial close (if applicable) 
TBD [date of agreement on the FAA between MoFEC and GCF] 
Estimated implementation start and end date 
Start: 01/08/2017 
End: 01/09/2022 
Project/programme lifespan 
5 years, 0 months

=== PAGE 7 ===
B 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 64 
 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
 
 
 
 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme 
8. A detailed multi-year budget has been prepared for the project in order to generate reliable forecasts of funding 
requirements and allocations (Annex XIV(c)). Breakdowns of cost estimates are presented in this sub-section, and 
financial instruments are described in Section B.2. 
9. The project will be financed by GCF grant resources and will include contributions from the Government of Ethiopia 
(GoE). It is proposed that a significant proportion of the total cost be covered by the GCF in the form of grant 
finance. This is essential because Ethiopia is a Least Developed Country (LDC) with very limited financial capacity 
to adapt to climate change, high degree of vulnerability of the beneficiaries (poor farmers and pastoralists) to 
climate change and high level of indebtedness of the country. Thus, the financial instruments chosen, which rely 
heavily on GCF grants to overcome structural barriers to change, are considered appropriate to the achievement of 
project objectives. 
10. A breakdown of cost estimates by Outputs and Activities in local and foreign currency (USD) is provided in Table 1 
below. As a form of currency hedging mechanism, we propose to base any agreement with the GCF in US dollars, 
with amounts indicated in the project proposal. Data from the National Bank of Ethiopia show that the Ethiopian Birr 
(ETB) has been depreciating against the USD over time. This would mean the value of USD-denominated grants 
will increase in ETB when the prevailing exchange rate is applied, which should help address (at least partially) 
anticipated inflationary cost increases over time. 
Table 1: Breakdown of Project Costs by Output 
Component 
Ouptput 
Amount 
for entire 
project 
(in 
USD 
million) 
Amount 
for entire 
project (in 
ETB 
million) 
GCF 
funding 
amount 
(in USD 
million) 
GoE 
co- 
financi 
ng (in 
USD 
million) 
Component 1. Improved Access 
to Water to Build Resilient 
Livelihoods 
Total 
29.309 
615.497 
26.738 
2.572 
1.1 Develop water schemes 
17.060 
358.258 
16.417 
0.643 
1.2 Establish small scale 
irrigation and water retention 
structures 
12.249 
257.239 
10.321 
1.929 
Component 2: Management of 
natural resources for improved 
water availability 
2.1 Degraded lands around the 
water sources managed 
15.427 
323.959 
13.569 
1.857 
Component 3.Enabling 
environment 
Total 
1.893 
39.770 
1.364 
0.529 
3.1 Improved capacity of both 
men and women beneficiaries 
on use, management and 
administration of irrigation and 
potable water schemes and 
enhanced communication and 
learning 
1.346 
28.276 
0.912 
0.434 
3.2 Institutional framework and 
local management instruments 
strengthened 
0.547 
11.494 
0.452 
0.095

=== PAGE 8 ===
B 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 64 
 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
 
 
 
 
Project management 
3.331 
69.952 
3.331 
0.000 
Grand total 
49.961 
1049.178 
45.003 
4.958 
1 USD=21 ETB 
B.2. Project Financing Information 
Financial Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing 
(a) = (b) + (c) 
50 
million USD ($) 
(i) Senior Loans 
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans 
………………… 
………………… 
million USD ($) 
million USD ($) 
( ) years 
(  ) years 
(   ) % 
(   ) % 
(iii) Equity 
………………… 
million USD ($) 
( ) % IRR 
(iv) Guarantees 
………………… 
million USD ($) 
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient 
(v) Reimbursable 
grants * 
(vi) Grants * 
………………… 
45 
million USD ($) 
million USD ($) 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1 for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E. 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi) 
45 
million USD ($) 
(c) Co- 
financing to 
recipient 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Name of 
Institution 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Grant 
Grant 
5 
…………… 
million 
USD ($) 
Options 
GoE 
……………… 
( )  years 
(  ) years 
(   ) % 
(   ) % 
(   ) % IRR 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Lead financing institution: Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation (MoFEC) 
* A letter of commitment issued by the co-financing institution has been provided in Annex IV. 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable) 
N.A 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable) 
11. The Government of Ethiopia is requesting 100% grant resources for the proposed project, the financial market 
overview is therefore not applicable.

=== PAGE 9 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
 
 
C.1. Strategic Context 
12. Ethiopia is a federal state subdivided into nine regional states, two administrative cities, 68 Zones; and 670 rural 
Woredas, 100 urban Woreda (districts) and 15,000 Kebeles. Kebele is the smallest administrative unit in the 
country, being part of a Woreda that is usually part of a zone, which in turn is part of a region. Ethiopia covers 
1,119,683 sq. km with the population of 96.6 million (2013 est.), of which more than 84 percent live in rural areas. 
Analysis undertaken in Ethiopia’s climate resilient strategy for agriculture (see Figure 16, Page 29 Livelihood 
Exposure Maps, Agriculture Sector CR Strategy) demonstrates that all political regions are vulnerable to one or 
more of climate hazards. 
Climate change context 
13. The IPCC’s AR44 revealed that globally induced climate change has a major effect on annual runoff compared to 
land-use changes in central Ethiopia. There has been increasingly high variability in rainfall  between  years, 
seasons and regions, trends that are of huge significance to Ethiopia given its dependence on rain-fed agriculture. 
The yearly variation of mean rainfall levels is 25%, although this can be as high as 50% in some regions5. These 
fluctuations have included changes in the intensity and frequency of extreme events, with the incidence of droughts 
and floods having increased in the last 10 years relative to the decade before, leading to severe impacts on 
people’s livelihoods. 
14. Climate change is already impacting Ethiopia. Current climate variability is imposing a significant challenge on 
Ethiopian local communities by affecting water and food security. Changing weather patterns, in addition to other 
environmental stresses including land overexploitation and deforestation, have increased soil degradation and led 
to water stress, drought, and crop failure. Recent climate trend analysis indicates that the mean annual temperature 
increased by 1.3°C between 1960 and 2006, with an increase in the number of hot days and nights of 20% and 
38%, respectively. 6 This trend is expected to worsen. Climate change projections indicate that Ethiopia will 
experience increasing temperatures in the coming decades; mean annual temperature will increase in the range of 
0.9-1.1°C by 2030, 1.7-2.1°C by 2050 and 2.7-3.4°C by 2080 for the IPCC mid-range emission scenario compared 
to the baseline 1961-1990 level.7 Precipitation is expected to decrease in the northern regions of Ethiopia, while 
southern areas could see an increase of as much as 20%. 
15. In Ethiopia, food security greatly depends on rain. Agriculture is the foundation of the economy, employing 85% of 
the country’s over 96 million people. Some 85% of the Ethiopian population live in the rural areas and depend on 
rain-fed subsistence agriculture for their survival whilst 10% of the population depends on their pastoral livestock’s 
for their survival. 55% of farmers cultivate a hectare or less of a land and grow 97% of the national crop outputs8. 
Ethiopia’s food security depends on small-scale farmers who largely rely on rain-fed and traditional agricultural 
practices. Currently less than 30% of the arable land is cultivated and only about 250,000 hectares out of a  
potential 5 million hectares is irrigated. In this context, it should be noted that the agriculture sector contributes 46% 
of the national GDP9 and accounts for 90% of the national export. 
Policy context 
16. Ethiopia’s long-term goal is to build a climate resilient green economy by reducing vulnerability and  extreme 
weather events which are exacerbated by climate change. Ethiopia has already prepared several national level 
strategic and programmatic adaptation actions; including: Climate Resilient Green Economy (CRGE) strategy, the 
National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA), Ethiopian Program of Adaptation to Climate Change (EPACC). 
Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation plus (REDD+), and water, sanitation and hygiene 
(WASH) programs. This project supports and aligns with the priority areas of the above national flagship strategies 
and programmes. Specific links are summarized below. 
Overview of the climate related policy context in Ethiopia 
Policy framework 
Priority areas 
Examples of links 
 
4Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability 
5Ibid. 
6 McSweeney, C., New, M., & Lizcano, G. (2010), UNDP Climate Change Country Profiles: Ethiopia. 
7 National Meteorological Agency (2007), Climate Change National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) of Ethiopia, Addis Ababa, 
Ethiopia. 
8 Ethiopian Central Statistics Agency & World Food Programme, March 2014 
9 CR Strategy – Agricultural Sector

=== PAGE 10 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
 
 
Climate Resilient Green 
Economy (CRGE) Strategy 
(2011) 
The strategy aims to address both climate change 
adaptation and mitigation objectives. The strategy 
identifies priority sectors including agriculture (livestock 
and soil), forestry, transport, electric power, industry 
(including mining) and buildings (including urban waste 
and green cities). By implementing adaptation and 
mitigation interventions in the priority sectors, the 
strategy targets reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 
64 percent by 2030. The CRGE Strategy has laid 
ground for Ethiopia’s INDC. 
All components of the project contribute to 
achieving the CRGE strategy. In  particular, 
the 
project 
directly 
contributes 
to 
the 
adaptation aspects of the CRGE strategy and 
the INDC with some mitigation co-benefits 
through introduction of water supply and 
management regimes in moisture stressed 
rural landscapes and increase the productive 
capacity of the community and the carrying 
capacity of the water ecosystems 
National Adaptation 
Programme of Action (NAPA) 
NAPA identifies agriculture and livestock as priority 
areas to address climate change. In particular, NAPA 
provides list of priority activities including promoting 
drought/crop insurance and early drought and flood 
warning systems, development of small-scale irrigation 
and water harvesting schemes, community based 
sustainable use of wetland and capacity building and 
improved rangeland resources management practice. 
The project intends to develop and promote 
small scale irrigation, water development, 
natural resources management, and capacity 
building which are linked to NPA. 
Nationally Appropriate 
Mitigation Actions (NAMA) 
Ethiopia has also prepared Nationally Appropriate 
Mitigation Actions (NAMA) and submitted to the 
UNFCCC in January 2010. The NAMA consists of 
selected sectors including agriculture, building, energy, 
forestry, industry, urban waste management and 
transport. 
The project focuses on building resilience of 
smallholder agriculture and natural resources 
management around the water  catchment 
area to ensure sustainable agriculture. 
Ethiopian Programme of 
Adaptation to Climate 
Change (EPACC) (2011) 
EPACC aims to build a climate resilient economy 
through adaptation initiatives implemented at sectoral, 
regional and local community levels. The EPACC 
programme links climate change adaptation with the 
economic and physical aspects of the country and 
identifies key climate change adaptation measures, 
strategic priorities. EPACC identifies various climate 
change risks in the areas of human, animal and crop 
diseases, land degradation, loss of biodiversity, decline 
in agricultural production, dwindling water supply, social 
inequality, 
urban 
waste 
accumulation, 
and  
displacement 
due 
to 
environmental 
stress 
and 
insecurity. 
All components of the project contribute to the 
EPACC programme. 
Reducing Emissions from 
Deforestation and Forest 
Degradation plus (REDD+) 
Strategy 
The REDD+ strategy aims to reduce emissions from 
deforestation and forest degradation, and enhances the 
role of conservation and sustainable management of 
forests. By attaching monetary values for carbon  
stocks, the strategy aims to show the value of forests. 
Specifically, interventions related to the 
management of natural resources for 
sustained water availability (Component 2 of 
the project)  are linked to the REDD+ strategy 
Ethiopia’s Second National 
Communication (SNC) 
Ethiopia’s INDC components cover both mitigation and 
adaptation activities as reflected in the CRGE strategy. 
The priority sectors covered under Ethiopia’s INDC are 
similar to those in the CRGE strategy which help  
reduce vulnerabilities due to climate change. 
All components of the project contribute to 
achieving the Ethiopia’s SNC). 
Climate resilient (CR) strategy 
for water 
The 
strategy 
identifies 
key 
priorities 
including 
accelerate universal access to water and sanitation, 
strengthen 
the 
management, 
co-ordination 
and 
streamlining of water resource planning, manage 
growing water demands, and ensure water allocation, 
improve local water storage facilities or participatory 
water resource management, increasing the resilience 
of rain fed agriculture, and strengthen data systems 
In particular, interventions related to improved 
access to water to build resilient llivelihoods 
(Component 1) and those under component 
3 directly contribute to achieving the 
objectives of the CR for water strategy. 
Climate resilient (CR) strategy 
for agriculture and forest 
This strategy identifies 15 priority resilience options for 
immediate investment which are related to the 
sustainable  agriculture  and  land  management  pillar. 
Activities under the management of natural 
resources for sustained water availability 
(Component 2) help achieve the goals of the

=== PAGE 11 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
 
 
The main intervention area in the sustainable 
agriculture and land management pillar is soil and  
water conservation (SWC) structures  (e.g.  bunds, 
trees, grass strips, contour leveling, terraces, shade 
trees, and waterways). 
CR strategy for agriculture 
One WASH Programme 
The programme intends to achieve increased coverage 
of water supply and sanitation in rural and urban areas 
in Ethiopia and integrates water, health and education; 
specific interventions include watershed and water 
resources management, productive uses of water, 
environmental protection, climate resilience, capacity 
building, and other related activities. 
Specifically, activities under components 2 
and 3 are aligned with the One WASH 
Programme. 
The government of Ethiopia designed the Water Sector Policy and Water Sector Development Universal Access 
Plan (UAP I) and revised UAP II, and has achieved significant progress in the provision of safe water supply 
through its Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) programs both in the urban and the rural settings. This 
initiative has enabled Ethiopia to achieve significant progress to increase access to improved water and  
sanitation from 1990 to 2015. However, to date only 58% of the total population and 59% in rural areas, has 
access to improved water sources as per the GTP-II standards10 and only 24% use an improved sanitation  
facility. Ethiopia ranks 5th on the list of countries with the highest number of people practicing open defecation11. It 
is estimated that 2.4 million deaths (4.2% of all deaths) could be prevented through improved hygiene and access 
to safe water and sanitation. 53% of the water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) disease burden is dominated by 
diarrheal illness. These disproportionately affect children under the age of five, killing more young children each 
year than HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria combined12. 
17. Furthermore, Ethiopia has adopted the principles of Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) and has 
already put in place an appropriate water policy, legislation, strategy, and development program (including master 
plans) that embraces IWRM principles and approaches and is at a stage of implementation. However, capacity 
constraints have been a challenge to fully embed IWRM procedures at all levels. 
18. WASH programs have a significant impact on health and education, and are of particular concern, as described in 
the recent IPCC Special Report on Extreme Events, to the risks of more frequent and intense extreme weather 
events such as floods, cyclones and droughts, alongside increasing temperatures. Such extremes pose particular 
challenges to the capacity of WASH programs to protect health, and there is accumulating evidence that climate 
change is worsening these risks.13 
19. In terms of institutional arrangement, the CRGE Facility, which is housed within the MoFEC and managed by both 
the MoFEC (Accredited entity to the GCF) and the MEFCC (NDA for the GCF), was established in 2012 to access 
and channel Climate Funds from various sources and coordinate the implementation of climate focused projects in 
line with the CRGE Strategy of Ethiopia. This funding proposal was developed by the CRGE Facility jointly with the 
MoWIE and MoANR, the designated EE’s for this project. The project design features address water supply issues 
at the centre of the CRGE to alleviate chronic problems linked with the lack of water supply with the core objective 
of improving climate resilience, health, food security, child mortality and increasing school enrolment in the targeted 
Woredas. This project will contribute to Ethiopia’s NDC and NAPA implementation and is aligned to the Climate 
Resilient Water Strategy. 
Selection of project sites: 
20. An iterative process was followed to select Woredas and specific Kebeles for this project intervention. The Woreda 
Disaster Risk Profiling (WDRP) census that was implemented throughout Ethiopia was the basis to select Woredas. 
This was first used to understand Woreda level livelihood risk profile; identify the major disasters; difficulty to 
 
10 Rural;  25  l/c/d   within  1km  radius. GTP-II (2015). Pp 39. 
11 “Country profile of Environmental Burden of Disease: Ethiopia.” WHO, Geneva 2009 
12 Boschi-Pinto, C.,Velebit, L., Shibuya, K. (2008) Estimating child mortality due to diarrhoea in developing countries. Bull 
World Health Organ, 86, pp. 710–717 
13 IPCC. Managing the risks of extreme events and disasters to advance climate change adaptation. Special report of Working 
Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK and New York, USA: Cambridge 
University Press; 2012

=== PAGE 12 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
 
 
access the project site ; livelihood vulnerability information, level of awareness; institutional development at the  
local level, and the communities’ capacity to cope with climate change shocks. Based on this profile, 22 Woredas 
were selected for subsequent baseline studies to shortlist Kebeles (within those Woredas) that are the most 
vulnerable. 
21. The Baseline Studies applied four main selection criteria to select the Kebeles for this project intervention I) 
potential for water availability; II) the Kebeles not being included in other national programs; III) Agro Ecology of the 
Kebele and IV) Stakeholder consultation with the Woreda, Kebele Elders and Community to identify the most 
vulnerable Kebele. 
22. A relatively large number of Woredas (22) has been included in the proposal to capture the different adaptation 
planning zones in Ethiopia, i.e. to reflect the large differences in vulnerability, and thus to be able to test integrated 
solutions and climate smart planning in varied areas representative of the country. This will provide critical 
information for learning and subsequent scale-up, i.e. on what works well in different agro-ecological zones, see 
Annex VIII - Map indicating the location of the project/programme. . 
23. Following the baseline studies, detailed Hydrogeological and Irrigation Infrastructure feasibility studies were 
conducted in a total of 176 Kebeles within the 22 Woredas, - see Annex II. To this end, 22 Woredas with a targeted 
three Kebeles per Woreda and a total of 66 Kebeles have been selected for this project intervention and the 
Kebeles identified are considered to have high transformation potential upon the implementation of this project 
(Figure 1, Location Map of the Project Area) 
 
Figure 1 Location Map of Project Areas 
C.2 Objectives Against Baseline 
Objetives 
24.  The main objective of the project is to increase resilience of the targeted rural community to the adverse impacts  
of climate change by introducing new approaches to water supply and management that are capable of increasing 
the productive capacity of the community and the carrying capacity of the natural water ecosystems. A key focus 
will be on increasing the the supply of water through solar powered pump systems for effective adaptation benefits

=== PAGE 13 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
 
 
to the intermittent rainfall. 
Results 
25. The project will benefit 330,000 people directly (30% Female Headed Households) and 990,000 people indirectly. 
Direct beneficiaries include 330,000 people with year –round access to reliable and safe water supply, despite 
climate shocks and stresses and make them food secured. . Moreover, 7,850 ha degraded land will be 
rehabilitated and managed, of which 5,000 ha shall be covered by trees. Improvement in women participation in 
decision making and in productive activities and increased agricultural productivity are also expected. 
26. The current baseline scenarios described below will be improved by means of the proposed project outcomes. 
Baseline 1: Improved access to water to build a resilient livelihood 
27. Only 27% of the communities within the targeted Woredas have access to improved water sources, with 43% of 
rural households relying on unsafe surface water sources for drinking and 30% of the communities requiring travel 
of prolonged hours to get access to a water source (protected and or unprotected). Rainfall variability and the 
potential increased variability from climate change further exacerbates these impacts by drying up local water 
sources, often forcing families to rely on sources further away or to access contaminated water sources. 
28. Collection of water is usually assigned to children, especially girls, and this reduces school attendance, as this task 
usually requires three to four hours a day. Thus, gender inequality is high in the target Woredas, as the majority of 
young girls discontinue their education even before completing first grade. The average school attendance is 35%, 
with 82% of people not being able to read and write. About 58% of females, in comparison to 38% of males, have 
no formal education, limiting future individual opportunities, economic and social status. In most of the rural areas 
women are the primary water carriers and users. Women spend many hours each day fetching water. Often the 
sources of their water are unprotected springs, or polluted streams or ponds. By virtue of their household functions 
they are more exposed to polluted water than the rest of the household, but they also use this source of water for 
their needs and that of the rest of household members which make the latter vulnerable to water-borne diseases. 
29. Due to poor water resources management and to a lack of technical knowhow on how to build resilient 
infrastructure, only 5.3% of the targeted communities practice irrigation agriculture either in the form of traditional 
irrigation schemes or through the use of diversion channels, whilst close to 94% of the targeted community rely on 
subsistence rain fed agriculture. Ethiopia’s economy, particularly the rural economy is heavily dependent on 
climate-related factors, making it difficult to split between rural development and climate related interventions. 
Temperatures have increased by an average of around 1°C since the 1960s. Rainfall is very variable, with a 20% 
decrease in the south-central region of the country. The economic impact of climate depends on the extent of 
annual weather variability and extremes, but recent major droughts have reduced GDP by 1%-4%. Rain induced 
soil erosion has been estimated to reduce GDP by around 1%. Ethiopia experiences a consistent trend  of 
increasing temperature across the country over the last 50 years; the increase in temperature ranges from 0.1 0C  
to 0.4 0C per decade, resulting in an approximate average temperature increase of around 10C since the 1960s. 
Historic data shows national rainfall variability of approximately 25% around the mean across the time period since 
1960, with significant regional and local rainfall variability. Studies show that a decrease in rainfall and an increase 
in temperature both affect agriculture as the sector is highly dependent on rainfall. The trends in the contribution of 
agriculture to the country’s total GDP clearly explain the relationship between the performance of agriculture, 
climate and the total economy. Years of drought and famine (1984/1985, 1994/1995, 2000/2001) are associated 
with very low contributions, whereas years of good climate (1982/83, 1990/91) are associated with better 
contributions. Recent studies also indicate that land productivity and crop yield are expected to decline as a result 
of climate change, especially in the drought prone areas14.In the drought-prone areas, there is little investment to 
mitigate the adverse effects of climate change and hence negligible TFP growth. However, with climate-related 
investments to increase TFP growth (can be considered as project scenario), the adverse effects of climate change 
can be reduced (i.e. high TFP growth with climate change). Without the proposed project interventions, the drought 
incidence caused by rainfall shortage will increase in the project target woredas, which can lead to migration, loss 
of lives, etc. Thus, investments in climate related activities including investment in irrigation have the potential to 
increase total factor productivity, thereby reducing the adverse effects of climate change. Note that substantial 
investment is required to reverse the devastating long-run effects of climate change, especially after 2050. 
 
14 Gebre egziabher, Z., Stage, J., Mekonnen, A., and Alemu, A. (2011), Climate change and the Ethiopian 
economy: A computable general equilibrium model analysis, EfD Discussion Paper Series, EfD DP 11-09

=== PAGE 14 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
 
 
Expected project outcomes that will improve the baseline scenario 
30. The project will promote the use of appropriate technology and infrastructure solutions for a resilient livelihood, and, 
consequently, i) will increase access to water supply, improving current health, gender and social conditions and ii) 
will reduce the climate risks from rain-fed subsistence agriculture, reducing negative environmental and economic 
impact. The introduction of green technologies, consistent with Ethiopia’s national CRGE strategy and INDC will 
build resilience and, at the same time, reduce GHG emissions. 
31. The project will also introduce ground water monitoring systems; along with the required technical trainings to 
enable stakeholders collect data for further analyses and use. Key information on the effect of climate change on 
the country’s water resources and interventions required to address possible risks are expected to be gained 
through this monitoring process. 
Baseline 2 : Management of Natural Resources for Sustained Water Availability 
32. In the targeted Woredas the availability of water, in both quantity and quality, is being severely affected by climate 
variability and climate change. Constraints identified from the full-fledged implementation of IWRM at the local level 
include capacity limitations, lack of proper coordination/collaboration among various stakeholders, and lack of 
integrated and participatory approaches in planning and implementation of water resources. 
33. All of the Woredas in the proposed project have reported high agriculture losses in recent years, as a result of 
climate variability and shocks. Addressing the risks of current and future climate change to water supply and 
agricultural productivity is therefore critical in enhancing resilience. Frequent drought or erratic rainfall results in  
crop damage, loss of livestock and pastures, water shortage (for humans and livestock), malnutrition (due to lack of 
food), and migration of households and wild animals. 
34. Deforestation, poor environmental conservation practices, conflict over grazing land and water points, and 
overgrazing, and in general poor integration of IWRM procedures at the local level among others, are the major 
factors aggravating the impacts of climate change in the targeted areas. Crop pests and diseases such as  
partinum, striga, white grub and stock borer are common, caused by poor farm management and lack of pest- 
resistant seeds. 
Expected outcomes that will improve the baseline scenario 
35. This project will implement the IWRM procedures in Ethiopia in the targeted Kebeles and will improve the 
management of water resources at the local level. This shall be done through the sustainable development of 
watersheds through physical and biological interventions such as bunds, trenches, terraces and planting trees, 
grass Streep’s, etc. to support the sustainability of agricultural practices (soil and water), control runoff, reduce 
environmental degradation, and create conducive conditions for improved soil fertility, nutrient recycling, increased 
organic matter, increased ground water recharge and water retention in the target Kebeles. 
36. The project outcome is the coordinated development (Component 1) and management (Component 2) of water and 
land resources and is aligned with the IWRM policy of Ethiopia. Project results will feed into other on-going national 
initiatives such as the IWRM projects being implemented in the various watersheds, SLMP, AGP and REDD+ 
programs being implemented in the adjacent Kebeles. This project will be implemented in different Agro-Ecological 
zones and so will provide fertile ground for learning and to understand what works well in each targeted Woreda’s 
context and to subsequently scale up the interventions. The existing strong linkages of the project to on-going 
programs will allow project replication and increased impact. This project could be considered as one of the few 
initiatives in Ethiopia that has put climate change in to building the resilience of the communities. Whilst there are 
various ongoing national development programs and projects, climate change has not been captured at the core of 
it. This program has been strategically designed to address current and future water supply issues to the  
community as well as integrate initiatives and structural adjustments to efficiently manage this resource. 
Furthermore, this project has identified that water supply is the critical factor that is hindering the community from 
building its resilience. Having the fundamental issue at hand identified, this project has given strong emphasis to 
enhance access of communities to water for household use and irrigation. Unlike other projects being implemented 
in the adjacent SLMP, AGP, and REDD+ Kebeles, the project is water centric which is the key enabler to build long- 
term resilience.  This makes this project unique in the sense that it will build the resilience of the community whilst  
at the same time seamlessly weave into and builds into the project results of other ongoing national initiatives. As 
this project is based on the CRGE Strategy, the enabling environment component of this project will build the 
required capacity at all levels which are critical for sustainability and also to influence other ongoing initiatives to be

=== PAGE 15 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
 
 
aligned to the strategy. This project leverages the links with other efforts going on in the country through experience 
sharing, capacity building, and knowledge generation via identification of best practices. 
Baseline 3: Enabling Environment 
37. Several factors have been identified as critical and the root causes for the communities increased vulnerability in all 
Woredas that were covered under the baseline survey. To name a few; 
• 
Lack of capacity and awareness to mainstream IWRM procedures at the local level in line with the national 
IWRM policy; 
• 
Ineffective institutional architecture and management instruments at the local level; 
• 
Lack of capacity at the Woreda level to prepare climate and gender responsive plans and budgets; 
• 
Lack of clear and transparent operational manual and/or user guidelines that help assure the application of 
common rules and principles in a gender responsive manner; 
• 
Untrained Water Users Association members and weak representation of women in the associations who are 
unable to manage the operation and maintenance of existing schemes; 
• 
Inadequate attention to creating awareness among the farmers on the importance of gender responsive 
resilient infrastructures for sustainable livelihoods; and 
• 
Lack of gender inclusive consultation process for planning, implementation and management of water 
infrastructures at the local level. 
Expected outcomes that will improve the baseline scenario 
38. This project will promote the implementation of IWRM procedures through improved institutional structures and 
management instruments and strengthen participatory approach in the planning and implementation of the IWRM   
to create a more conducive enabling environment. In particular, support to the government’s on going reforms of  
the regulatory framework at the Woreda level to be streamlined to the CRGE strategy at the national level. The 
project will contribute to establishing/strengthening climate and gender responsive integrated planning, 
strengthening institutional capacity, and establishing an efficient project management, monitoring and evaluation 
system. 
C.3. Project / Programme Description 
39. Aiming at improving the baseline scenarios shown in section C.2, the project is divided into three interrelated 
components: Improved Access to Water to Build Resilient Livelihoods (Component 1); Management of Natural 
Resources for Sustained Water Availability (Component 2); and Enabling Environment (Component 3). A brief 
description of these components is presented below. 
Component 1: Improved access to water to build a resilient livelihood 
40. This component is designed to be aligned with four strategic priorities outlined in the CRGE Strategy with respect to 
the water sector. In line with Strategic Priority 4.1 Accelerate universal access to WASH; it will enhance potable 
water supply for vulnerable households from groundwater sources that are resilient to current climate shocks and 
future climate change trends. Step and continuous pumping test followed by recovery shall be followed to delineate 
safe abstraction rate (Yield) of the water well. In addition to understanding yield, pumping test will also be used to; 
• 
Determine yield drawdown behavior of the well at various pumping output rates. This would mean recharge 
and abstraction rate can be clearly deduced after conducting a pumping test; 
• 
Assess the impact of the Pumping Well on nearby water wells and springs; and 
• 
Facilitate retrieval of water samples for chemical and bacteria analysis. 
For further details, please refer to the Feasibility Studies, section E 3.2 Borehole development and testing section 
on the procedures to measure optimum abstraction and recharge rate 
41. In line with the CRGE Strategy, Strategic Priority 3.1 - Accelerate irrigation plans; this component will also provide 
water to the small-scale irrigation infrastructure that shall be built under this project. A combination of interventions 
is envisaged to develop small-scale irrigation through upgrading traditional irrigation schemes, and construction of 
diversion weirs to irrigate more than 1990 ha of land. Easily replicable irrigation designs will be discussed with 
stakeholders directly involved and concerned with water collection, included men and women farmers, and with

=== PAGE 16 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
 
 
those responsible with irrigation systems maintenance. Overall, this component will aim to implement irrigation 
technologies that meet the needs of local communities through an equitable process involving end-users in the 
design and implementation activities. This means to collectively discuss with community members what would be 
the best farming technologies that can simultaneously reduce farmer’s workload; be gender-friendly (e.g. be safe 
and secure to use by women farmers and socially acceptable); be economically viable and environmentally friendly 
(e.g. to phase out of diesel powered generators). 
42. Aligned with the CRGE Strategy Priority, Strategic Priority 2.2 Accelerate non-grid energy access, water will be 
provided for potable and irrigation use in the targeted Kebeles through solar powered pumps. Furthermore, pumps 
that are currently powered by diesel generators shall be connected with either grid or solar power to completely de- 
commission the use of diesel generators in the targeted Kebeles. This innovative approach, will totally replace 
planned and existing diesel powered generators within the targeted Kebeles and will also influence how rural water 
supply schemes should be designed in the future. 
43. In addition, and in line with the CRGE Strategy Priority, Strategic Priority 5.1 Data systems for decision support 
oriented to strengthening data systems to provide timely, reliable and usable data for decision makers at all levels, 
groundwater-monitoring systems shall be installed in 44 wells drilled. Groundwater will be measured both 
quantitatively and qualitatively in real time, contributing to the GoE efforts in addressing most pressing water policy 
adjustments through a stronger integration of groundwater development and land use planning. 
Main Expected Outputs of Component 1 
44. The following outputs are expected to be delivered from Component 1: (i) construction of 112 drilled wells and 80 
hand dug wells, 30 springs, 31 community ponds, 150 water reservoirs, 140 water points in the 66 Kebeles 
targeted; (ii) implementation of groundwater monitoring systems in 44 wells;(iv) the use of solar powered pumps in 
the 112 drilled wells, (iii) implementation of small-scale irrigation systems covering an area of 5,421 ha. Main  
project activities under project output are presented below. 
Output 1.1 - Water Schemes Developed 
Specific Activities under this output include; 
Activity 1.1.1 Tender document preparation and bidding process (consultant and contractor) 
Activity 1.1.2 Procurement of work (equipment and machineries) including mobilization Kebele’s 
Activity 1.1.3 Hiring supervision consultants 
Activity 1.1.4 conducting Geophysical studies 
Activity 1.1.5 Shallow wells drilling (100m depth, 6" pvc casing) 
Activity 1.1.6 Deep water wells drilling (150m depth, 8" pvc casing) 
Activity 1.1.7 Construction of hand-dug wells 
Activity 1.1.8 Procurement and installation of complete set of solar PV arrays with all required control box 
Activity 1.1.9 Supervision of drilling and construction of wells, etc. 
Activity 1.1.10 Construction of water reservoir 
Activity 1.1.11 Supply and installation of all pipes with fittings for drinking water supply 
Activity 1.1.12 Installation of transformer, including power lines and all miscellaneous costs, for existing 
boreholes power source upgrading 
Activity 1.1.13 Construction of water points 
Activity 1.1.14 Installation, testing, and commissioning of all electro-mechanical equipment 
Activity 1.1.15 Construction of guard house at solar pump system and motor house 
Activity 1.1.16 Development of springs for potable water supply 
Activity 1.1.17 procurement non-vented water well monitoring device- in situ mini-troll divers, two per Woreda 
Activity 1.1.18 Purchase and supply GPS (22/ 1 per woreda) Garmin, model MAP 64 
Activity 1.1.19 Configure and install non-vented water well monitoring devices 
Output 1.2 - SSI and water retentions structures established 
Output 1.2 - SSI and water retentions structures established 
Activity 1.2.1 Service procurement for SSI study and design preparation 
Activity 1.2.2 Procurement and installation of complete set of Solar PV arrays with all required control box to

=== PAGE 17 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
 
 
power surface (40) and submersible pumps (112) 
Activity 1.2.3 Up-grading of traditional irrigation schemes 
Activity 1.2.4 Irrigation through construction of diversion weirs 
Activity 1.2.5 Irrigation through water harvesting structures 
Activity 1.2.6 Irrigation through community pond construction 
Activity 1.2.7 Confirmation of design and Irrigation through construction of hand dug wells 
Activity 1.2.8 Confirmation of design and Irrigation through development of springs 
Activity 1.2.9 Confirmation of design and Develop small scale irrigation canals 
Activity 1.2.10. Irrigation through construction of dams 
Activity 1.2.11 Supply and installation of hand pumps for household irrigation 
Activity 1.2.12 Re-vegetate disturbed areas due to construction of wells and irrigation fields (ha) 
Activity 1.2.13 Sediment retention fences to minimize release of clays and fine silts into aquatic environment 
Activity 1.2.14 Silencers and mufflers to reduce noise 
Activity 1.2.15 Dust gauge procurement and installation 
Activity 1.2.16 Operation and maintenance for irrigation infrastructure (including spare parts) 
Component 2: Management of Natural Resources for Sustained Water Availability 
45. The CRGE Strategy identifies water resources as a key driver of economic and social development whilst also 
having a basic function in maintaining the integrity of the natural environment. It was therefore imperative that this 
funding proposal considered the rationale for the IWRM approach to be followed as a way forward for efficient, 
equitable and sustainable development and management of the limited water resources. 
46. This component is linked to the on-going nationwide IWRM policy that is being implemented in Ethiopia. In line with 
this policy, water resources and land use should be managed through a community level participatory approach to 
ensure that the limited water resources are properly managed and to instil ownership of the project results for 
sustainability. This component will essentially focus on rehabilitation of degraded landscape and restoration of  
forest resource surrounding the water resources. The intended activities under this component will improve water 
retention capacity of the soil, reducing run-offs, etc. and contribute to the sustainable utilization of both ground and 
surface water.The results of this component are the reduction of risks from rainfall variability and soil erosion, the 
increase of soil organic matter and soil fertility, the increase of agricultural productivity, the increased groundwater 
recharge and the reduced greenhouse gas emissions. The following specific activities will be conducted under this 
component: 
Output 2.1 Degraded lands around the water sources managed 
Activity 2.2.1 Threat communal and private degraded land with physical and biological soil and water 
conservation 
(SWC) measures 
Activity 2.2.2 management of range land management in pastoral watersheds 
Activity 2.2.3 Nursery establishment or upgrading 
Activity 2.2.4 Purchase improved and selected seeds 
Activity 2.2.5 Seedling production, afforestation and grass seedling planting 
Activity 2.2.6 Construction of water harvesting structures for rehabilitation of land 
Activity 2.2.7 Soil fertility management 
Main Expected Outputs of Component 2 
47. The outputs of this component are directly linked to the rehabilitation of degraded forest, farm and communal lands. 
The support includes, among others, establishing seedling nursery centres; procurement of seeds; seedling 
production and planting trees on 5,000 ha as part of rehabilitation of 7,850 ha degraded land through physical and 
biological landscape restoration conservation and management measures. The type of plant species to be planted 
and restoration measures to be applied will differ from area to area and depends on the agro-ecology. The 
selection of species will be given due attention during the actual implementation drawing on local knowledge and 
practice with attention to gender differences. Species which have proved record for land scape restoration, soil

=== PAGE 18 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
 
 
fertility management, water retention, erosion reduction and water absorption will be prioritized. Local knowledge 
and practice will be also considered. 
Component 3: Enabling Environment 
48. The CRGE Water Sector Strategy has been unsatisfactorily implemented at the local level. Local development  
plans (Woreda level plans) are developed annually in Ethiopia but do not properly mainstream the CRGE strategy. 
A focus only on a national sector and regional planning would omit some of the most vulnerable groups at the local 
level, and also not fully capture the preferences or responses of affected communities. To overcome these 
constraints, Component 3 focuses on: (i) strengthening the Institutional framework and local management 
instruments (ii) building human capacity and strengthening communication and learning at the local level. 
49. A key innovation of this project that will be developed in this Component is to translate national CRGE plans into 
local development planning, making existing Woreda plans climate smart and aligning them with the national GTP II 
targets. In Ethiopia, there is a need to build climate resilience into local development planning, and this  is 
particularly important given the localised nature of climate risks and vulnerability. A focus only on a national, sector 
and regional planning would omit some of the most vulnerable groups, and also not fully capture the preferences or 
responses of affected communities. Related to this, a key issue of the recent focus on climate mainstreaming is to 
look to embed the CRGE climate smart (or resilience) activities within existing plans and policies. At the national 
level, the Government of Ethiopia has mainstreamed the CRGE strategy in its second five year Growth and 
Transformation Plan (GTP-II). However, mainstreaming of CRGE strategy at Woreda level has not yet been 
advanced due to limited capacity. Activities under this component will focus on supporting the woredas for 
integrated climate smart planning with strong emphasis on gender responsive integrated climate-smart water 
interventions. Furthermore, activities under this component will seek to address gender inequalities that may 
prevent women from benefitting from these interventions. It will also be linked to awareness raising, monitoring and 
learning initiatives to ensure this approach is developed and implemented with the local community, and that 
sufficient learning elements are put in place to ensure the results of activities can help inform future planning. This 
component will also develop climate resilient and gender responsive planning for integrated agricultural 
development, with a focus on climate smart agriculture and integrated land-water-ecosystem management. 
50. In addition, this component is also central to bringing about a paradigm shift to build the resilience of the vulnerable 
communities and address capacity constraints especially for women at all levels. Community ownership of the 
project results particularly the IWRM (Component 1 & 2), on the ground shall involve women in the planning, 
implementation and management of the schemes to ensure the success of the project and continued sustainability. 
Woreda-based climate and gender responsive integrated planning and budgeting systems shall be established and/ 
or strengthened through institutional guidelines, manuals and reform of the institutional architecture. This shall be 
achieved by building capacity and transferring knowledge to the communities, bridging the gender gaps through 
tailor-made training, linking communities with higher learning institutions/research centres as well as strengthening 
gender responsive institutional capacity at all levels. 
51. The project involves a greater degree of collaboration than typical projects, thus it is important to start the project 
with an orientation session to advance the project objectives. It is also important for the project to have a common 
set of information that is shared across the project areas, to enhance consistency and efficiency. The project will 
therefore start with a series of orientation activities to ensure all actors have a common understanding of the  
project. At the local level, the orientation will be designed to enhance local level participation in the planning and 
implementation of this project as well as other initiatives that are being implemented in the select Woredas. 
Furthermore, it is about enhancing awareness of climate change and building ownership of the project results by 
the community. Woreda officials will also be sensitized on climate change issues and relevant CRGE strategies and 
objectives to mainstream the overarching CRGE strategy to local development plans  and  implementation 
regiments. This component is critically important, as it is the basis for sustainability and replicability of the project. 
The following key activities will be implemented under each output under this component. 
Output 3.1 Improved capacity of both men and women beneficiaries on use, management and 
administration of irrigation and potable water schemes and enhanced communication and learning 
Activity 3.1.1 Organize trainings for communities on management, operations and maintenance of water 
schemes and irrigation agronomy 
Activity 3.1.2 organize in-country experience exchange and learning events 
Activity 3.1.3 organize training on communication and knowledge management 
Activity 3.1.4 Training and awareness raising for ESMF

=== PAGE 19 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 3.2 Institutional framework and local management instruments strengthened 
Activity 3.2.1 establish link with higher learning institutions/ research centers 
Activity 3.2.2 establish and operationalize data base 
Activity 3.2.3 prepare locally appropriate climate planning framework 
. 
52. The expected outcome will be that human and institutional capacity is built and sustainability ensured across all 
Components of the project, as a result of strengthened institutions, processes and systems, and increased capacity 
of human, institutional and regulatory system for climate-responsive planning and implementation. 
Main Expected Outputs of Component 3 
53. The main outputs of Component 3 comprise: (i) strengthening experts/community members with knowledge and 
skills on operations and maintenance of potable water and irrigation schemes (1500 beneficiaries), 10 experience 
exchange and learning events organized, 9 linkages with higher learning institutions/ research centers established 
(ii) strengthening institutional framework and local management instruments across 44 Woreda offices in planning, 
operation. 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity) 
The Accredited Entity – MoFEC 
54. Formally established in 1907, MOFEC has undergone several structural reforms since its establishment, with its 
mandates revised and broadened. MOFEC is a Ministry within the Cabinet of the Federal Democratic Republic of 
Ethiopia that is responsible to drive the economic policy of Ethiopia and to provide oversight on national financial 
management, national development planning, and development programs implementation. MOFEC executes these 
responsibilities in all government sectors. For effective delivery of its mandates, MOFEC follows the  federal 
structure outlined in the Ethiopian constitution and has its office in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, with Bureaus of Finance 
and Economic Development (BOFED)15 situated in the regional (provincial) capitals of Ethiopia. 
55. In accordance with the law, MOFEC is also mandated to enter into contracts and sign international agreements on 
behalf of the Government of Ethiopia16. In line with this mandate, MOFEC established in 2012 a Climate Resilient 
Green Economy (CRGE) Facility, a national fund to mobilize international climate finance resources for the 
implementation and realization of Ethiopia’s climate resilience building and low carbon development agenda. 
56. To ensure that capacities are more targeted for the implementation of climate-related finance, MOFEC has 
established a CRGE Facility Secretariat. The Secretariat falls under MOFEC and includes capacities in project 
management, appraisal, review and monitoring. The Secretariat operates under the rules of government and is 
under the proclamation establishing MOFEC. 
The Executing Entities – MoANR & MoWIE 
57. Two line ministries, the Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources (MoANR), and the Ministry of Water,  
Irrigation and Electricity (MoWIE) will execute the project directly under the overall guidance and oversight of the 
CRGE Facility Management Committee, co-chaired by State Ministers of MOFEC (the accredited entity) and 
MEFCC (the NDA) (see Section C.7):). 
58. The MoANR formally known as Ministry of Agriculture was established in 1907 mandated to oversee the 
implementation of agricultural development strategies and ensuring the food security of the country on a Federal 
level. The powers and duties of the MoANR include: conservation and use of forest and wildlife resources, food 
security, water use and small-scale irrigation, monitoring events affecting agricultural development aiming at 
promoting agricultural development, and establishing and providing agriculture and rural technology training. 
59. The Ministry has subsidiaries at the regions: the Regional Bureaus of Agriculture and Woredas; the Woreda 
Agricultural Offices; the Kebele Development Agents and the communities of the intervention Woredas. The 
Ministry has an operational structure that extends to the sub-village level and reaches the majority of farmers. It has 
a wealth of experience in managing and implementing large-scale donor or Government funded projects and 
programs (See Section C.7 for details). 
 
15 Given the Federal System of Government, BOFED are autonomous regional counterparts of MOFECMOFEC, which are accountable to the Councils 
of their respective Regions, but working closely and with the support of MOFECMOFEC. 
16 The Proclamation no. 691/2010 confers upon MOFECMOFEC, powers to mobilize, negotiate and sign foreign development aid and loans, and follow- 
up the implementation of same, and to manage and coordinate bilateral economic cooperation as well as relationships with international and regional 
organizations set-up to create economic cooperation.

=== PAGE 20 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
 
 
60. Similarly, the MoWIE formally known as Ministry of Water & Irrigation & Electricity is a federal organization 
established to undertake the management of water resources, water supply and sanitation, large and medium scale 
irrigation and electricity. The Ministry is a regulatory body that is involved in the planning, development and 
management of resources, preparation and implementation of guidelines, strategies, polices, programs, and 
sectoral laws and regulations. It also, conducts study and research activities, dam safety and hydropower 
generation; river basin studies; groundwater studies and development; and water use permit and licensing. 
61. The two ministries have already institutionalized the CRGE unit in line with the guidance provided by the CRGE 
Inter-Ministerial steering committee, which is chaired by the Prime Minister’s Office. The unit are functioning under 
the Environmental Impact Assessment and Social Development Office, within the Ministry of MoWIE and under the 
Natural Resources Management Directorate in MoANR, which are responsible for the overall coordination and 
facilitation of the programmes and projects related to the CRGE initiative. These units are coordinating various 
climate change related projects such as Energy+ program, One WASH and the Fast Track Investment projects in 
their respective ministries. The Units have an established line of communication with the CRGE facility and 
Development Partners. In addition to designing projects, they also compiles action plans, follow up on the financial 
issues of the programs/ projects, compile all reports of the programs/ projects which are submitted to CRGE facility 
and Development Partners, facilitate the audit process, organize monitoring and evaluation as well as annual 
consultation workshops. Note that although there are various interventions in the target Woredas, one of the criteria 
to select project sites was that Kebeles should not be covered by any of the on-going interventions. Various 
investments in agriculture, forest, and water have been undertaken over years in Ethiopia. Such investments 
include Ethiopia’s afforestation and reforestation regular programs; Sustainable Land Management programs, 
Agricultural Growth Programs, Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP); WASH Sector-Wide Approach and UNDP 
GEF projects, including Climate Information and EWS, Promoting Autonomous Community and Adaptation Project 
and Coping with Climate Change and Drought Projects, implemented in Ethiopia. Please refer annex  6  for 
summary of some of the flagship programs. The list of water related projects and programs in the target woredas 
including NRM is annexed. Thus the target Kebeles are not covered by any of the ongoing interventions, making it 
difficult to explore co-finance options with other programmes. 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
62. The project promotes sustainable agriculture in drought vulnerable areas of the country through reducing barriers 
which include information asymmetry (on risks, causes or practices and technologies of reducing risks), risk 
averseness (i.e. smallholder farmers are constrained from investing in climate smart practices due to their risk 
averseness), limited ability of smallholder farmers to pay, as well as inadequate supply of technologies and inputs. 
In addition, as a Least Developed Country (LDC), Ethiopia has very limited financial capacity to overcome barriers 
and adapt to evolving climate change which require high initial capital expenditures. Although the project depends 
on a small contributions from the Ethiopian government, a large part of the project is expected to be financed by 
GCF funding in the form of grants which focuses on supporting higher-cost capital expenditures as a springboard to 
initiate transformation process (e.g. water resource management and irrigation infrastructure). Neither the Ethiopian 
government nor vulnerable farmers are able to afford in investing in activities that require high upfront capital 
outlays, at least in establishing the necessary infrastructure. 
63. The initial catalytic effect of the GCF grant will help train vulnerable famers through introducing climate smart 
practices and help them adapt climate change during the project period. By the end of the project duration, the 
selected communities will be able to continually adapt to changes in climate on a self-sustaining basis, with limited 
government assistance. The project is not intended to generate public revenue from beneficiaries, rather support 
vulnerable farmers to adapt and cope with climate change. Given the size of the capital investment required, as  
well as limited capacity of target farmers, the GCF fund will be used to establish the basic infrastructure, which 
farmers use to sustain their livelihoods. In addition, the water market for irrigation is not well developed in the 
country and the scope for cost recovery opportunities is limited. It is only after the project period that beneficiary 
farmers are expected to contribute to cover costs associated with operations and maintenance of water 
infrastructures, including solar PVs. 
64. The price of modern energy is relatively low compared with kerosene, due to government subsidies. Tariffs for 
modern energy (largely hydro-power) are heavily regulated by the Government and vary by energy end-users;  
tariffs are relatively low for residential uses and high for industrial and commercial uses. The Government also 
provides incentives (subsidies) for private companies engaged in the supply of renewable energy; such incentives 
are in the form of duty-free importation of renewable energy equipment and accessories. Currently, the increasing 
Block Tariff (IBT) is being used in Ethiopia for pricing electricity, which is an extremely popular tariff structure in low- 
income countries because it is perceived to provide lower-cost access to poor households, while middle- and

=== PAGE 21 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
 
 
upper-income households and other customers pay more for electricity. Low prices in renewable energy sources 
have made the products more affordable to low-income populations and many companies are now seeing these 
populations as viable markets for commercial sales of solar products. It is expected that the government provides 
support to scale-up solar solutions through improved regulatory and tariff policies.17 As any other green technology, 
the solar pumping technology is eligible for capital subsidy, i.e. investors are entitled to receive subsidies from the 
government which involve in the form of tax incentives. 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable) 
Provide details of government licences or permits required for implementing and operating the project/programme, the 
issuing authority, and the date of issue or expected date of issue. 
65. Where Executing Entities implement activities of the project, there will be no need to issue investment licenses. 
However, the private sector is required to provide renewed business licenses including due diligence on 
competency grade for construction companies and quality assurance certificates in line with the Ethiopian 
Standardization Authority for equipment’s and materials imported. These are mandatory requirements and are 
articulated in the Procurement Directive issued by MoFEC (See Section F4 for specifics) The Ethiopian Investment 
Commission (EIC) is the autonomous regulatory agency responsible for issuing investment permits, work permits, 
trade registration certificates and business licenses as part of its one-stop-shop services for investors. The 
Investment Proclamation of 2002, as amended in 2003, and the 2003 Regulation on Investment Incentives, 
constitutes the main legal framework for both foreign and domestic investment in Ethiopia. This framework 
describes, among other things, the forms of investment and capital requirements, investment permits, concessions, 
incentives and facilities. An industrial development strategy was also issued in 2002 aimed at: (i) placing private 
investment as the engine of industrial development; (ii) promoting export-led and labor-intensive industrial 
development; and (iii) promoting joint ventures in industrial development. With regard to the forest sector, the 
current draft Federal Forest Proclamation has provisions for “certificates of possession” to be provided to forest  
user groups, and requires Government institutions to make best efforts to strengthen tenure security for 
participatory forest development associations and community groups. 
66. Government institutions responsible for managing the project are not subject to any profit or business taxes. 
Procurement of goods and services for the project will incur taxes as any other project. Where the project requires 
import of goods from abroad, this necessitates payment of import duties and taxes. 
67. The National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE) is mandated to issue foreign exchange directives to control the transactions 
and allocation of foreign exchange resource. The local currency, the Ethiopian Birr, is not freely convertible. The 
NBE therefore prioritizes the provision of foreign exchange for selected goods and services. Payments for imports 
can be made by letter of credit, cash against documents and advance payment. MoFEC has significant experience 
with international procurement and strong relationships with the Federal Public Procurement and Property 
Administration Agency, which is responsible for management of international procurement to international 
standards. 
Provide details on insurance policies related to project/programme. 
This is not applicable to the proposed project. 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements 
Federal Level 
68. MoFEC, the accredited entity (AE), will assume full financial and programmatic management accountability for the 
funds disbursed from the GCF. MoFEC, in its role as the Accredited Entity has overall responsibility and oversight 
for the project including project preparation, project implementation and supervision, financial management, and 
reporting. The CRGE Facility, a climate finance delivery entity within the MoFEC, will be responsible for the day-to- 
day management of funds released to the Executing Entities (MoWIE and MoANR) through its extended bureaus 
and offices at the regional level – Bureau of Finance and Economic Development (BOFED) and Woreda level - 
Woreda Office of Finance and Economic Development (WOFED). Periodic monitoring and evaluation (M&E) shall 
also be conducted by the AE to ensure that project activities are being implemented in the planned time schedule, 
quality and to also identify potential risks early on the project. 
69. The CRGE Facility will assign dedicated technical and financial project staff at the various tiers of governance (See 
Figure 3 Project Reporting Path) that will facilitate fund disbursement, compile periodic reports; conduct monitoring 
 
17 The current tariff for modern electricity is below USD 3 cents per KW.

=== PAGE 22 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
 
 
and evaluation and ensure compliance to the environmental, gender and social safeguard standards of the GCF. 
70. The CRGE Facility, in addition to its existing Operational Manual, will develop a Project Implementation Manual 
(PIM) (under component 3) that elaborates fund management at the various levels of governance. It will also 
ensure that the two executing ministries are aligned to the PIM in implementing the project. . 
71. At the federal level, within the CRGE Facility and in each Executing Entity, three Project Coordinators will be hired 
by this project, who will be assisted by the existing staff employed by the GoE within these Ministries. The Project 
Coordinator will provide guidance and technical support to the regional level Project officer. He/she will consolidate 
technical reports from the regions and submit to the CRGE Facility. 
Regional Level 
72. At regional level, a total of 10 Project Officers (one per region– at least 50% of which will be women) will be hired to 
conduct regular monitoring, supervision and oversight of project execution at Woreda level. The existing team in the 
regional sector bureau who are employed by the GoE will be assisting the Project Officers who will be employed 
under this project. 
Woreda Level 
73. At the Woreda level, an expert within each targeted 22 Woredas will be hired (at least 50% of which will be women) 
to provide technical input to beneficiary households and also to conduct regular monitoring and follow up of the 
project implementation process at the designated Kebeles within the Woredas. In addition, finance officer will also 
be hired within each targeted Woreda to ensure that funds are effectively disbursed, utilized, monitored and 
reported back to the CRGE Facility. Headed by the Woreda level expert, a Woreda Coordination Body (WCB) will 
be established in each of the 22 Woredas and housed under the office of the Woreda Administrator. Wherever 
possible, depending on the actual constitution of the woreda level experts, the project will ensure at least 50% of  
the WCB members are women. The main objective of the WCB is to ensure that all the plans and mitigation actions 
are plugged into the ground as well as to inform other on-going development projects to be aligned to the regulatory 
and institutional frameworks that shall be developed under this project. The WCB will be the fundamental body in 
ensuring the CR Woreda plans that shall be developed under this project are implemented at all Kebeles. The WCB 
will be comprised of Woreda Office Administrators and experts, Women and Youth Affairs and Finance Office. 
Under the over-sight of the Woreda Administrator and direct supervision of the Office Heads of the two sectors, the 
Woreda Level experts will run the day-to-day project activities and processes, engage stakeholders, and mobilize 
communities at target Kebele level. 
Kebele /Village Level 
74. Community representation and engagement is coordinated by Kebele (village) Committees. In each of the 66 
project target Kebeles, a Community Facilitator will be hired by the project (at least 50% of which will be women). 
Local stakeholders and community members have a key role to play in the implementation and monitoring of the 
project. Consultations with all stakeholders, including women’s groups and community leaders will be organized to 
ensure there is clear understanding of the roles, functions and responsibilities within the project's decision-making 
structures, including reporting and communication lines, and conflict resolution mechanisms. At the Kebele 
(community) level, the project-hired community facilitators in collaboration with the Development Agents (DAs) will 
be responsible for advisory support and extension services to local beneficiaries (mainly farmers with special 
attention to women. They will be responsible for capacity building and backstopping in the implementation of 
programme activities. Utmost focus will be given to work based on gender balance team and promote equal 
representation and active participation of women headed households, youth and girls that will get high priority. To 
ensure gender-balanced team at project level, in addition to having 50% women experts’ representation across the 
10 regions, 22 woredas and 66 kebeles, the project will also aim to ensure 50% women facilitators are hired at  
each woreda-kebele block. That is, of the total four experts to be hired (1 at woreda level and total of 3 at the three 
kebeles under each woreda) 50% will be women. The project M&E officers at the woreda and MoFEC level will be 
responsible to overlook gender responsiveness is ensured throughout the project implementation 
75. To ensure implementation of project activities are fully owned by the communities, Kebele Implementing Committee 
(KIC), of which 50% are women, will be set up. The KIC will comprise community members that will represent the 
various socio-economic groups and will advise on the design, construction and maintenance of facilities and ensure 
all activities meet the needs of local communities and end-users. During the course of the project implementation, 
‘pairing’ between the existing staff who are on the government payroll and project paid staff will be ensured at all 
levels for knowledge and skill transfer and project sustainability. The following chart depicts the projects 
implementation arrangement.

=== PAGE 23 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Project Implementation Arrangement 
Fund Disbursement and Financial Reporting: 
76. The Project’s financial management and procurement will be guided by the GoE’s public finance management and 
public procurement regulations, which is identical to MOFEC’s financial management and procedure policies. On 
top of this, MoFEC is the responsible organ for public financial management in the structure of the Ethiopia 
government. As such it is the lead in the implementation of the public financial management policies of the country. 
The directives in-force are prepared by MOFEC on the basis of the public procurement and property administration 
proclamation (PPPA). The Public Procurement and Property Administration Agency (PPPAA), which an agency for 
the oversight of public procurement and property administration is accountable to MOFEC. The Executing entities 
are public institutions, which manage budgetary, programmatic and project resources channeled from the MOFEC. 
Their financial management and procurement systems and practices are similar to MOFEC and are under constant 
supervision and regulation by MoFEC. Furthermore, the OFAG and its replica at regional levels perform regular 
audits of the accounts of the federal and regional public bodies and report to the federal and regional parliament 
respectively. The PPPA also conducts procurement audits of these public institutions. Hence the EEs are under 
continuous due diligence process by MOFEC, OFAG and PPPAA. The project funds will be deposited in  
designated CRGE accounts of the Federal institutions as well as CRGE accounts of the Bureau of Finance and 
Economic Development (BOFED) at the regions and CRGE Woreda Office of Finance and Economic Development 
(WoFED) accounts at the Woreda’s on a regular basis. The executing line Ministries at federal level will receive 
funds for activities they directly execute. Other than this, the entire project fund will be disbursed to the Bureau of 
Finance and Economic Development (BOFED) in each region. The BoFED will make direct transfer to the Regional 
Sector Bureaus for regional level activities and to WoFEDs for activities at the local level. 
77. The financial reporting follows the same channel in a reverse direction. The utilisation of funds will be monitored 
through an internal control framework, which depicts the funds transfer and reporting channels; it shows that funds 
received by a project account at the CRGE Facility are then channelled through the government structure - federal, 
regional and Woreda- and reported back through the same channels. The Channel One Fund Disbursement and 
Financial Reporting arrangement highlighted in the following diagram.

=== PAGE 24 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION

=== PAGE 25 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
C.8. Timetable of  Project/Programme Implementation 
 
78. The implementations of the project will start in all the 22 woredas simultaneously. Nonetheless, it will follow 
step wise approach during the course of implementation. The first step will lay out the project implementation 
systems and frameworks and recruiting project staff. This will last from Q 1 to Q 6. In the second step, the 
project will focus on building the infrastructures identified under the project initiatives. This is planned to run 
from Q6 to Q16 of the project period. It is important to note that the project monitoring, supervision and follow 
up activities will continue during the entire project period. The third step of the project will focus on fitting 
electro-mechanical equipment, testing and handing over of the project results to the relevant owners as well  
as documenting and finalizing evaluation results. This will take place between Q16 and Q20. The main project 
activities, which will be executed at different stages of the project timeline, are outlined below. 
 
Step I (Q 1 to Q 6): 
• 
Conducting kick-off workshop and stakeholder consultation; 
• 
Recruitment of local project implementing team; 
• 
Inception preparation; 
• 
Procurement of consulting companies, contractors and GPS equipment’s; 
• 
Development of tendering document 
• 
Initiation of studies and familiarization workshops; 
• 
Institutional set up and development of local PIM; 
• 
Integration of CR strategy into local level plans; and 
• 
Establishment of IWRM procedures at the Woreda level 
 
Step II (Q 6 to Q 16): 
 
This step of the project shall focus on building the infrastructures at the kebele (Village) level in line with the PIM 
that have been developed through a consultative process involving all relevant stakeholder 
The works will include: 
• 
Construction of water wells and points (boreholes, springs, ponds); 
• 
Construction of irrigation infrastructures; 
• 
Procurement of Electro-Mechanical equipment’s including monitoring devices and installation; 
• 
Community mobilization to rehabilitate land; 
• 
Establishment of nurseries; 
• 
Plant seedlings; 
• 
Construct reservoirs, water points and stands for the Solar PV; and 
• 
Install and configure Solar PVs and monitoring devices 
 
Step III (Q 16 to Q 20) 
 
The works here under will include systems that are established under this project will be checked to be 
mainstreamed with national level plans, strategies and procedures and are being used; gender inclusiveness is 
ensured; infrastructures built are tested; ensure linkages are created with surrounding projects and project results 
are handed over to the community and Woreda. This phase of the project shall be finalized within 12 months and 
shall commence 48 months after this project is commenced. 
79. 
Please refer to Annex X for detailed timetable of project/programme implementation

=== PAGE 26 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
 
 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement 
80. The government of Ethiopia has integrated the issues of climate change into country’s mid-term development 
plan (GTP-II) for 2016-2020 by making climate resilience a key pillar of this plan. As indicated in the CRGE 
strategy and communicated in the INDC, Ethiopia requires over US$ 150 billion to realize its vision of building 
a low-carbon and climate resilient middle income country status by 2025. In other words, Ethiopia should 
spend over US$7.5 billion per year by 2025. This resource should be mobilized from domestic and external 
sources including from private sector in the form of Foreign Direct Investment, and from bilateral and 
multilateral sources. 
81. There are several climate change mitigation and adaptation focused domestic initiatives in Ethiopia. In terms  
of renewable energy, the government is investing billions of dollars, which will soon increase the country’s 
power generation capacity from 2000 MW to 10,000 MW. Ethiopia is also modernizing its transport system to 
reduce its carbon footprint, for example, by prioritizing electric railway infrastructure. Furthermore, the GoE  
and local communities are investing significantly on restoration of degraded landscapes, crop and livestock 
production. Since 2011, about 16 million hectares of land have received soil and water conservation 
interventions. On water management alone, on average 26 million people have participated annually in 
watershed rehabilitation activities summarized, as in-kind community contribution is equivalent to USD 1.3 
billion. 
82. Most of the existing ongoing initiatives are aimed at GoE priority development activities and climate mitigation 
actions, which provide cost recovery. However, to meet the country’s adaptation needs and realize the CRGE 
vision, Ethiopia requires additional fund to cover costs related to enhancing climate resilience. This funding 
should be mobilized from bilateral and multilateral sources such as the Green Climate Fund. Without 
contributions from such sources, it will be very difficult for Ethiopia to realize its vision and INDC commitment. 
The proposed project actions represent a major element of the CRGE strategy in the water and agriculture 
sector and the GCF contribution will help improving reliable access to water and management of degraded 
landscapes that will enable adaptation to climate change, and reduce vulnerability. As the project has a strong 
adaptation to climate change focus, it is fully aligned with the GCF result areas on increasing resilience of 
most vulnerable people and communities; health and well-being, and food and water security and ecosystems 
and ecosystem services. It also fulfills all the GCF investment framework requirements (as described in detail 
in section E) and supports the target to prioritize LDC and African countries. Support from the GCF will enable 
Ethiopia to introduce solar PV pumps for irrigation and potable water supply while building the resilience of 
vulnerable communities and shift to climate compatible pathway. 
83. Consideration has also been given to the options of borrowing from international development banks and 
tapping into capital market and foreign direct investment (FDI). LDCs are, in general, not favorably appraised 
in the international capital markets. FDI in Ethiopia has been limited although increasing over the years, 
registering $953 million in 2013. However, the high cost of borrowing continues to be a problem. The country 
raised $1 billion at a cost of 6.625% in a debut international bond issue in 2014. 
84. Finally, the country’s debt burden limits its access even to concessional loans provided by international and 
regional development banks. Over recent years, the GoE has improved its effectiveness in mobilizing revenue 
through tax reforms and other innovative measures. This revenue is covering development priority 
investments and is not enough to cover climate change adaptation measures. While private sector (local and 
foreign) investment undoubtedly has a role to play, some of the activities and outputs of this project have 
“public good” characteristics, in particular high costs of exclusion and non-rivalry, as a result of which 
smallholder farmers have little or no incentive in investing. This is true, for example, with respect to the small- 
and medium-scale irrigation schemes and knowledge and learning essential to this project. Smallholder 
farmers are generally risk-averse. It is only when they perceive the risk-reducing benefits of investments that 
they will be willing to increase expenditure as part of their strategy to cope with, and adapt to, drought and 
climate shocks. 
85. The constraints in global initiatives that is available to fund projects that build resilience puts the GCF in a 
unique position as its establishment pertains in responding to climate change by investing in low-emissions 
and climate resilient development. The GoE recognizes the GCF as a partner to provide thrust in the 
momentum built in implementing its CRGE strategy and meet its global commitment. This project proposal 
thus picks on the common aspirations of both the GoE and the GCF in combating climate change not only at   
a national level but also at a global level. 
.

=== PAGE 27 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
D.2. Exit Strategy 
86. The project has been designed to bring about sustainable transformation in the resilience of vulnerable 
communities to drought and increasing unpredictability of rainfall, through increasing access to water for domestic 
and agricultural uses, strengthening institutions and climate resilience planning and practices, conservation and 
management landscapes for sustainable water supply. 
87. Institutional Sustainability: The proposed project actions are based on the GTP II, the overarching mid-term 
development plan of Ethiopia. This will ensure direct institutional linkage and coordination with relevant national 
and regional programmes (such as PSNP, Household Asset Building and others). This clear alignment with the 
country’s strategies and plans, coupled with capacity building, will ensure that by project completion the targeted 
Woredas will sustain efforts in the participating Kebeles. 
88. This project will be implemented through an inter-institutional coordination mechanism using existing systems and 
structures encompassing local, regional and federal government. The project services will also be delivered 
through existing government structure, which will stretch up to Kebele level and community structures. To sustain 
project impact beyond its implementation phase, technical support will continue to be provided by the government 
(federal, regional and local) as indicated in the co-financing letter submitted in Annex IV Woreda-level 
administration will be strengthened by the project to carry out integrated development planning and delivery using  
a gender responsive approach, and to be able to continuously provide relevant technical assistance and services  
to women and men within the target communities. In line with the O&M plan, some services (or project 
activities/interventions) will continue to be provided by community-based organizations post-project 
implementation, rather than by federal, regional or local governments. 
89. Financial Sustainability: As the project is in line  with the CRGE strategy and the GTP-II and embedded  within 
the existing system, the line ministries and the regional government will continue to cover staff salary and other 
operational expenses after project implementation. In addition, the community in line with the by-laws developed,  
to access water will make an equitable monthly contribution. The payment made is a diversion of resources from 
what otherwise would have been allocated for the purchase of fuel, lubricants and spare parts to power diesel 
generators. The funds collected by the community will be used to cover costs associated with operations and 
maintenance of water infrastructures including solar PVs. After the completion of the project, some systems and 
infrastructure will be handed over to local administration or community-based organizations as appropriate. When 
these are handed over to local administration or community, it is this responsible organization, which largely  
covers the maintenance costs. A comprehensive operations and maintenance manual shall be prepared  by the 
NIE after the signing of the agreement. 
90. Technical Sustainability: To ensure sustainability, some of the activities will continue after the completion of the 
project. One factor that affects the sustainability of the installed schemes is the lack of trained and capable 
personnel, and involvement of women particularly in water supply infrastructures. As stated above in relation to 
systemic changes, the project will result in enhanced capacity of government (federal, regional and local) to 
provide technical support through capacity building. In addition, the project will enable integrated development 
planning and delivery capacity at the local level. Thus, gender responsive technical support will continue to be 
provided by the government (federal, regional and local) after the project period. During the life of the project, 
targeted beneficiaries will be trained on O&M of the project infrastructures. Pertinent infrastructure use “by-laws” 
will also be prepared by the project to govern the equitable use of the schemes by the community and ensure an 
equal representation of women in the WUA. The by-laws are also important to ensure collecting and allocating of 
funds for security and maintenance amongst others for the water reservoirs, solar panels, drilled wells or irrigation 
infrastructure. 
91. In addition, the following specific strategies will be used to ensure sustainability of the project results:Gender 
equality dimension: The project mainly builds local capacities to ensure that gender standards are followed in 
programming and operation of the project by project implementing entities. The project seeks to create greater 
capacity among staff and stakeholders of local actors. To this effect, consultation will be conducted with the 
gender affairs units in each of the micro watershed for their gender responsive interventions and the sustainability 
of their actions. The capacity building component of the project will ensure that implementing entities have proper 
policies and implementation guides, and a gender integration checklist to be used during the project’s life span. To 
ensure its success and sustainability, the project will provide a series of capacity development and skills training  
on gender within the various project components and budget lines. These interventions will be delivered by locally 
established training institutions and will have a transformative and long lasting impact on gender equality and 
women’s empowerment. The training will be delivered at Farmers’ Training Centres and it will include: gender 
analysis of climate change and its differential gender impact (for women leaders, project staff and development 
agents); focus groups of women for agenda setting and strategic priorities for women; leadership and 
assertiveness skills for women community leaders; delivery of gender responsive services for extension workers 
and  credit  service  providers;  These  deliberate  and  targeted  gender  interventions  will  increase  women’s

=== PAGE 28 ===
C 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 64 
 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
 
participation in various value chains, access to extension services and agricultural inputs, supply and market 
linkages. The project will promote 50/50 gender balance as a guiding principle at all levels of decision making, 
particularly in Kebele water management, technology selection committees and budgetary  committees.  The 
project activities will be guided by focus group discussions with women beneficiaries at Kebele and Woreda levels, 
at the beginning of the project and at different benchmarks. The process will help identify the differential roles and 
needs of men and women and the actions to be taken in the different Kebeles to support women and narrow 
gender gaps in all project interventions. Throughout the implementation of the project, gender-sensitive M&E tools 
will be used to collect information to show what worked and what did not work during the project intervention. This 
will build the evidence base for informed decisions related to gender equality during and beyond the project  
lifetime while at the same time holding implementers accountable to their commitments. 
• 
Reducing Barriers: As market and community-based organizations (including women’s grassroots 
associations, cooperatives and other groups) are strengthened they are expected to play roles in the 
sustainability of project results. The project will therefore ensure that barriers which have prevented these 
services to be provided by the market or community-based collaboration are effectively eliminated or reduced 
through capacity building and creation of awareness (Component 3). These barriers include information 
asymmetry (the fact that smallholder farmers are not well informed of risks, causes or practices and 
technologies of reducing risks), risk averseness (the fact that smallholder farmers will be constrained from 
investing because of their risk averseness), limited ability of smallholder farmers to pay, and limited supply of 
technologies and inputs. The project is designed with the view of effectively eliminating or reducing these 
barriers so that smallholder farmers will reach a stage where they are willing and able to pay for improved 
technologies, inputs and operations and maintenance as a result of improved purchasing power associated 
with increased productivity, income from the irrigation schemes and that community-based organizations and 
market actors are willing and able to supply. The project will help improve resilience of smallholder farmers 
(both men and women, including female heads of households) by improving their productivity and resource 
management. It will raise their resilience by also working to ensure that smallholder farmers are informed of 
risks, causes, adaptation strategies and alternative inputs and practices. 
• 
Knowledge Management and Communication: The project will also put in place a robust and effective 
knowledge management and communication structure that will be integrated to the regional structure as a 
ground for knowledge sharing as well as the through the linkages built with the institutions  and training  
centers . This will allow for continuous analysis and wide communication of project goals, actions and results. 
This is based on widely recognized experience that when beneficiaries understand the goals and results of the 
project, they are more willing to develop ownership and participate in on-going activities beyond the project 
lifecycle. The project will ensure that the beneficiaries and other stakeholders are engaged in the analyses of 
the activities and results of the project. Focus groups of women across Woredas will value and share women’s 
own knowledge of their environment and their coping skills and strategies. The communities built capacity to 
resilience; efficacy of systems rolled out through out the Woreda, data captured and used by experts in 
government and research institutions and project spill overs in adjacent Woredas shall be captured, lessons 
learned and shared widely. The knowledge management system will ensure that lessons learned are 
effectively disseminated. As part of the exit strategy, and particularly to understand women’s empowerment in 
the project, lessons learned will be documented based on focus groups that will evaluate the intended and 
unintended outcomes, the positive and negative impact on gender equality and women’s empowerment. 
Women will communicate their experience via media and model the project for possible replication in other 
areas. 
• 
Technology Identification and Quality Control: Improved technologies, inputs and practices promoted by 
the project are fit for purpose (see technical evaluation in section F.2 and feasibility study in Annex II) and  
have been selected after proper consultation and participation of beneficiaries including women’s groups. This 
is one of the strategies of this project for sustainability. The quality of equipment’s and infrastructures that will 
continue to be operational post the project’s lifecycle is an important factor that determines project 
sustainability. Hence, the project will follow a strategy of ensuring the quality of these in accordance with 
government regulations regarding procurement and quality control.

=== PAGE 29 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance of 
the proposed project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity-specific sub- 
criteria and indicative assessment factors, which can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework, should  
be addressed where relevant and applicable. This section should tie into any request for concessionality  
made in section B.2. 
 
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas 
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential 
Adaptation Impact 
 
92. The project will benefit 330,000 people directly (30 % of Female Headed Households) and 990,000 people 
indirectly of the most vulnerable populations of Ethiopia by improving their access to water and food, empowering 
women, improving health and wellbeing, improving resilience of ecosystems and the availability of ecosystem 
services, and introducing improved and climate-smart technologies, frameworks and instruments. In other words, 
the project will directly benefit 99,000 female (most of which will be heads of households) and 231,000 male. We 
have added the proportion of direct beneficiaries relative to the total population of the target woredas 
disaggregated by sex. The total population of the 22 Woredas is 2,500,297 persons (1,265,437 male and 
1,234,860 female). The direct project beneficiaries represent 13.2% of the total population residing in the project 
target woredas. Put differently, the project will respectively benefit 4% and 9.2% of female and male out of the 
total population of the 22 woredas. When we compare the proportion of direct beneficiaries in the same sex 
group, the project will benefit 8% of all the female residents in the 22 woredas and 18% of all the male residents  
in the project target woredas. On average, Ethiopian Kebele’s are comprised of 5,000 communities or 1,000 HH 
and this defines target beneficiaries per Kebele. Three adjacent Kebeles surrounding the project target kebeles 
with a total average population of 15,000 heads comprise the indirect beneficiaries of the project. As this funding 
proposal has identified 66 Kebeles, the number of direct beneficiaries will be 330,000 persons. The number of 
indirect beneficiaries is 990,000 people’s living in 198 Kebeles. This makes the total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries 1,320,000 persons. Collectively, these results will make the communities more resilient to climate 
change risks. Specific adaptation impacts include the following: 
 
93. Increased resilience of the most vulnerable people, communities as a result of: 
• 
Directly and indirectly, the project will help approximately 1,320,000 million people become more resilient to 
drought and increasing variability in rainfall, which is around 10-12% of the number of people severely 
impacted by the drought crisis, which was experienced in 2015/16, 
• 
The project will bridge gender gaps and build women’s capacities to play a critical role as beneficiaries and as 
leaders that have a voice in the project design, orientation and implementation 
 
94. Increased resilience of health and well-being, and food and water security, as a result of: 
• 
Increases in the amount of irrigated land, 
• 
Increased and more reliable access to water for personal and irrigation purposes, 
• 
Increased food security (decreased reliance on food aid and increase in women’s food intake), 
• 
Reduction in malnutrition, 
• 
Reduced school drop-out rates 
• 
Increase girls’ school enrollment and retention 
• 
Reduced domestic chores and burden on women 
95. Increased resilience of ecosystems and ecosystem services: 
• 
Rehabilitation of degraded lands through building physical and biological moisture and soil conservation 
structures, and 
96. Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate-responsive planning and development, including 
through: 
• 
Increased participation in community planning (including women), 
• 
Adoption of tailored products for improved decision-making, and women’s equal share in decision making 
• 
Increased capacity and responsiveness of government agencies; 
• 
Increased involvement of women in community based and local government institutions targeting 50/50 
representation

=== PAGE 30 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
97. The project will generate a discernible climate change adaptation impact both directly and locally through the 
provision of improved infrastructure, and indirectly and structurally through mainstreaming gender equality and of 
climate change adaptation into development plans and operations. 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below. 
 
 
 
 
 
GCF core indicators 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent (t CO2 eq) to be reduced or 
avoided (Mitigation only) 
Annual 
Lifetime 
• 
Expected total number of direct 
and indirect beneficiaries, 
disaggregated by gender 
(reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience); 
• 
Number of beneficiaries relative 
to total population, 
disaggregated by sex 
(adaptation only) 
Total = 330,000 Direct and 
990,000 Indirect 
beneficiaries 
0.4% direct and 1.5 % 
indirect beneficiaries of total 
population of Ethiopia) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other relevant indicators 
1. 330,000 individuals with year round access to potable water supplied through low- 
emission energy; 
2. 1,320,000 people benefiting from the use of climate information in decision making 
3. By the end of the project 66,000 households, of which 19,800 are female headed are 
estimated to be food secure, have access to year round potable water supply and use 
climate information in decision making. 
• 
5,421 ha of irrigation land watered through low-emission energy 
• 
7,850 ha of land rehabilitated, out of which trees planted on 5,000 ha of land 
• 
264,000 households benefiting from climate informed decision making process 
• 
264,000 households aware of the potential impacts of climate change and range 
of possible responses 
• 
30% Increase in the number of children being enrolled into schools 
• 
Increase in women’s income and in the number of women involved in productive 
economic activities (comparative time use and household survey  between 
project beneficiaries and others) in each Kebele, for M&E purposes 
• 
Decrease in child mortality from water-related deaths 
• 
Increased use of hydro-geological and weather data for planning by decision- 
makers 
• 
Increased use of budgeting and tracking of climate-related expenditures at the 
Woreda level 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above. 
98. The total number of beneficiaries is projected based on the scale of the Outputs (i.e., as described in detailed in 
Section C.3), where an average family size of five per household is assumed. In Ethiopia, there are in average 
1000 Households per kebele and 10 to 15 Kebeles within each Woreda. The beneficiary numbers are calculated 
on this basis where direct beneficiary number relates to the communities residing in the targeted Kebeles (1,000 
HH X 3 Kebeles X 22 Woredas) and benefiting from the infrastructures built in addition to the  structural 
adjustment this project will bring about at the Woreda level. Indirect beneficiaries include the  communities 
residing  under  the  Woredas.(1,000  HH  X  12  Kebeles  X  22  Woredas)  and  benefiting  from  the  structural 
adjustments that will be implemented at the Woreda level. The additionally element that this project entails in the 
targeted kebeles  will  bring about  increased  adaptive capacity spill  overs  through  out  the  Kebeles  in  in   the

=== PAGE 31 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
targeted Woredas. 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale) 
99. The rural economy is constrained by various factors including climate change induced drought which is the 
dominant shock that frequently affects rural livelihoods. Several barriers have been identified through project 
preparation and consultation of the stakeholders including lack of improved agricultural practices, limited access  
to water for both potable and productive use, environmental degradation (in the form of soil erosion), declining 
water supply, and limited institutional and regulatory capacity. The combined effect of these barriers leads to 
increased vulnerability of rural households to the adverse impacts of climate change. The project intends to 
address these barriers through three interrelated water-focused interventions: improved access to water, 
management of natural resources, and enabling environment. The inter-linkages between project components 
enable the resilience-building process envisaged in the project to enable farmers to increase investments, 
translating into higher yields, assets and incomes, and therefore improved food security and livelihoods. Note that 
sustainable water supply for both irrigation and potable requires effective management of water resources 
through soil and water conservation, afforestation and reforestation, restoration of degraded lands, etc. These 
activities ensure stability of water resources. Provision of climate information system help minimize adverse 
effects of climate change-induced hazards through monitoring water use and supply. All the above interventions 
need to be supported by continuous capacity building within local and national government to plan and address 
rural vulnerabilities in a holistic way, giving high priority to climate change impacts and other environmental 
concerns. These interventions would lead to increased resilience, with climate-vulnerable communities continuing 
to maintain and build resilience. As the project will support the implementation of GTP-II (the National 5-year Mid- 
term development plan), there is significant opportunities to streamline interventions and lead to paradigm shift. 
The GTP-II targets to increase potable water supply coverage in the rural areas to 59% by 2020 on a standard of 
25 litres consumed per day (l/c/d) within 1km radius from the communities. Various rural water supply schemes 
including deep and shallow boreholes, gravity fed systems have been identified and costed. This project will 
enhance rural water supply through a piped system and pressurized systems focusing only on shallow water 
supply systems (max depth of 150 meters) which can be pumped using solar energy. There is potential to extend 
this technology to the full objective of the GTP-II, which constitutes the construction of over 3,200 rural water 
supply infrastructures by 2020 across Ethiopia. 
100. 
There is potential for scaling up and replicating this project in replicating this project’s success to incorporate 
the use of Solar PVs as opposed to the conventional Diesel powered generators. The paradigm shifting potential 
of this project lies in the potential of avoiding GHG emissions of 3.1 Mt Co2Eq, avoiding the use and importation 
of 115 M litres of Diesel over a period of fifteen years ; and annual savings of USD 107M from the import of  
diesel.

=== PAGE 32 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rural livelihoods of the target communities are resilient to climate 
change related impacts 
 
 
 
 
 
Enhanced  food  security  of 
Improved  resilience of ecosystems 
Strengthened     institutional 
targeted   population in  the 
and ecosystem services 
and  regulatory systems for 
face  of  climate change and 
 
climate- 
responsive 
variability 
planning and development 
 
 
Improved Access to Water to 
Management of Natural Resources 
Enabling environment 
build resilient livelihoods 
for improved water availability 
Rural  communities  and  local authorities 
Rural  communities  are  able  to 
Rural    communities    are   able   to 
are able to plan for and address  capacity 
access    water   for   agriculture, 
improve   soil   characteristics,   water 
constraints   through   climate-responsive 
livestock and human use in the 
retaining 
capacity 
and 
manage 
integrated 
planning 
and 
budgeting 
face 
of 
changing 
rainfall, 
degraded lands. 
systems, 
strengthening 
institutional 
increasing  drought and sporadic 
capacity,   and   establishing   an efficient 
floods. 
project management system. 
 
 
 
Strengthen 
 
 Stren 
 
Establi 
Developin 
 
Constructin 
 
Improving water retaining 
 
ing and 
 
gtheni  
 shing 
g 
g small- 
capacity through building 
establishin 
ng  
projec 
groundwa 
scale 
biological and physical soil 
g climate 
regula 
t 
ter  using 
irrigation 
structures, constructing water 
responsive 
tory 
coordi 
solar- 
(SSI) and 
harvesting structure 
planning 
refor 
nation 
and 
powered 
associated 
budgetary 
ms 
units 
pumping 
water- 
systems 
 
 
Impacts due to barriers: Increased vulnerability to the climate change induced drought and shortage of 
water 
 
 
Barrier 1: Limited 
 
Barrier 2: 
Barrier 3: Limited capacity 
Barrier 4: Climate 
Barrier 5: 
access to water for 
Environmental 
 
to withstand increased 
 change risks not 
 Limited 
potable and 
degradation (e.g. 
frequency of drought, 
fully integrated into 
institutional 
productive needs 
increased soil erosion 
variability of rainfall and 
district, local and 
and 
declining water supply due 
and deforestation) 
to climate change 
regional plans 
manageme 
 
Figure 7: Project theory of change 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning

=== PAGE 33 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
101. 
This project will create proper links among research institutions, educators, extension workers, and local 
communities (Component 3) to share knowledge and innovation from the diverse activities and agro-ecological 
base to adopt climate-smart agricultural practices. In line with the M&E plan of this project, this shall be the basis 
to establish a participatory research and knowledge-sharing systems that will help farmers and rural communities 
to develop, test and scale-up locally-adapted farm and land management systems. This will also create an 
opportunity for household members, local communities and the cooperatives to open commercial  services, 
cottage and agro-processing industries in line with the technical support they are receiving from these institutions. 
102. 
During implementation, the project will hire fulltime experts at federal and regional levels who will be paired 
with existing staff in each sector. At Kebele level, the existing Development Agents (who are on the government 
payroll) and one community facilitator hired by the project, will provide advisory support, technical trainings, and 
other extension services to project beneficiaries. The pairing of project staff with existing staff at the various levels 
of governance aims to foster learning and knowledge transfer for the design and implementation of future projects 
and programs. Early adopter of technologies and skills will also share knowledge with other communities and 
households. Kebeles outside the scope of this project can benefit through positive spillovers and information 
sharing. The annual and final evaluations will also be conducted in line with the CRGE Facility M&E Manual to 
capture the lessons learned from the periodic evaluations of the outcomes of project results from the various 
agro-ecological landscape (represented by the 22 Woredas included in the project). As a result, the GoE, the AE 
and even the GCF will have practical resilience building knowledge on how to apply the lessons learned from 
implementing this project on a variegated agro-ecological landscape to upscale and replicate the success of this 
project to other projects and programs. 
103. 
The project activities will be implemented through partnerships of Government, communities and the private 
sector, and will thus create and strengthen institutions, community-based organizations, small business 
enterprises, youth and women groups, and the like. Consequently, best practices available in one region can be 
adapted to others. Action research in line with the project M&E plan will be integrated throughout the project, with 
the full engagement of communities, research and development partners, allowing their recommendations to 
improve future approaches. Currently lead ministries already regularly engage with academic/research  
institutions,  and  these  institutional  linkages  will  be  reinforced  during  project  implementation.  In  this regard, 
relevant development-oriented research will be conducted as per the M&E plan of this project to identify means 
for the creation or strengthening of knowledge, collective learning processes and institutions. 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
104. 
The project will contribute to the on-going efforts of the GoE in attaining the GTP-II goals and streamline the 
CRGE strategies at all levels. The GoE has gained tangible results in streamlining the CRGE strategy in to the 
local planning process at its various Woredas. However, the geographic scale of the country, the population size 
and the level of education and awareness of its communities on the effects of climate change has been a 
challenging task being faced by the GoE to implement the reform process at all Woredas. 
105. 
To this end, the project will create an enabling environment in the targeted Woredas and build on the 
momentum of the on-going policy and legal reforms with respect to improving women representation at all levels, 
developing equitable benefit-sharing mechanisms, and establishing sustained community ownership of project 
results. 
106. 
The enabling environment component of this project articulates activities to ensure that the resilient solutions 
such as potable water systems and irrigation infrastructures will be adopted and managed through gender 
balanced water management committees. IWMR procedures and practices shall be mainstreamed at the Woreda 
level, thus ensuring other on-going initiatives throughout the Kebeles will be aligned to the national level planning 
process and procedures and further ensure project sustainability. This is important as having  an  effective 
enabling environment at the Woreda level will allow for not only this project but also for other projects to be 
implemented in a coordinated fashion thus increasing impact, and thus creating an environment that will enable 
the attainment of the overarching GTP goals. 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
107. 
This project will significantly support the implementation of the CRGE strategy at the local kebele level, and 
streamlining at the woreda level. This is crucial for the CRGE to achieve its objectives as it requires local and 
regional action that goes beyond the GoE efforts to date. 
108. 
Ethiopia is has made significant progress in the development of national regulatory and policy frameworks to 
progress investment in climate-resilient development. Achievements to date include the Climate-Resilient  
Strategy for Water (MoWIE) as well as the One WASH National Programme. The current water resource 
management policy objective is to enhance and promote national efforts towards the efficient, equitable and 
optimal utilization of the available water resources of Ethiopia for significant socioeconomic development on a 
sustainable basis.

=== PAGE 34 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
109. In this project, the establishment of PPPs, community-based organizations, women’s associations and 
cooperatives and youth groups will help foster the development of local regulatory frameworks that encourage the 
participation of cooperatives, communities and the private sector in similar initiatives, and the up-scaling of these 
elements of the project. 
 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential 
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive development impact 
Environmental co-benefits 
Reducing CO2 Emissions – 
110. 
Carbon emission mitigation benefits will accrue from both degraded land restoration as well as solar water 
pumps. The overall GHG emission reduction potential of the project is 1.142 Mt CO2e over the project lifetime (15 
Years). 
 
111. 
Given that land use sectors are the largest source of GHG emissions in Ethiopia (88%) 18 , significant 
mitigation benefits will be achieved; 
• 
In a business as usual scenario, rural water wells are fitted with diesel generators to power the submersible 
pump. This inherent design emits 2.64 KgCO2 Eq for every litre of Diesel used. Activities in this project, that 
enhance access to water through the replacement of diesel generators by solar PV pumps will result in 
reducing 0.112 MtCO2 Eq over the life of this project (15 years). The implementation of this project shall be 
in line with the IWRM approach and will yield additional CO2 sequestered from the rehabilitation of land 
resources. 
• 
In the context of forests, a combination of afforestation/reforestation, management of degraded lands, to 
reduce deforestation will reduce an estimated 1.03 Mt CO2e over fifteen years19. 
Ecosystems and Ecosystem Services - 
112. 
Restoring degraded 7,850 ha of land will improve the supply of ecosystem services such as the provision of 
water services, biodiversity as well as production of wood and fodder. The promotion of best-practices through 
farmer training and soil conservation practices will help reduce soil erosion and degradation, improve soil fertility 
through increased organic content, increase ground water recharge and increase sequestration of carbon in the 
soil. 
Reduced noise, soil and water contamination - 
113. 
The replacement of diesel generators with Solar powered pumps will increase the air quality, reduce the  
noise pollution as well as the risk of contaminating surface and subsurface soil and water with spillage of diesel 
and oil lubricants. 
Social co-benefits 
Access to Education – 
114. 
Access to Education, mainly by girls who have been sidelined due to their socially designated task of fetching 
water shall be increased. 
Lower cost of water supply - 
115. 
The business as usual design of rural water supply has incorporated the use of Diesel Generators to power 
the pumps. These generators daily require Diesel to be purchased, and lubricants and spare parts to be changed 
in a periodic manner by the community. 
116. 
The introduction of the Solar powered pumps will enable the community to shift this daily and periodic 
expenses incurred to power the generators to a more productive purposes such scaling up infrastructures built by 
this  project or to increase the liquid capital of  the communities  association  as  a leverage to access more funds 
 
18 The main activities responsible for GHG emissions within Ethiopia´s land use sector are: livestock (42% of total national 
emissions), deforestation and forest degradation (37%), and agriculture (9%) (FDRE, 2015). 
19 Ethiopian Forest Resources: Current Status and Future Management Options in view of Access to Carbon Finances; 
ECRC and UNDP 2010

=== PAGE 35 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
from the local Micro Finance Institutions (MFI). 
117. 
The project will also improve the health and safety of project beneficiaries through improved availability of 
water, nutrition and food security, the reduced need for women to travel long distances to fetch water, and 
increased incomes. Increases in household income and improved access to water sources will also result in 
improved access to education, particularly for girls and children. This will reduce social inequality by improving  
the wealth and income of the most vulnerable, mostly poor women. 
Economic co-benefits 
 
118. 
There will be 12 contractors and 6 consultant firms, 112 guards, 112 Water Associations to sell water,  
creating a total direct job opportunity for 240 HH and additional 2,000 job opportunity that will indirectly present 
itself through the management of communal lands and irrigation schemes and supply of parts, labour and 
equipment by local enterprises to the construction firms. These will improve the purchasing power of households, 
which will in turn drive local economies. 
Foreign Currency Savings - 
119. 
This project will bring about a foreign currency saving of USD 1.6 billion over a period of fifteen years as a 
result of avoiding the purchase of diesel. Furthermore, an additional foreign currency saving estimated at USD 
440 million in a period of fifteen years from avoiding lubricants and spare parts is envisioned. 
120. 
The project will reduce disaster-induced loss of crops, livestock and their distress sales. Nationally, the  
project will improve the foreign currency reserve through reduced spending on fertilizers, increased exports of 
high value, and reduced expenditure on importing food for relief and other purposes. 
Gender-sensitive development impact 
 
121. 
The project will ensure women’s equal opportunities to participate in planning, implementation, monitoring  
and evaluation of the project with clearly identified gender-sensitive indicators; building the resilience of female- 
headed households and women in male-headed households by giving them training and technologies; and 
alleviating conditions that have adverse consequences on the health and safety of women in the project area. 
Furthermore, this project will revise existing manuals, frameworks, plans and institutional architecture at the 
Woreda level to be more gender responsive.

=== PAGE 36 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient 
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only) 
122. 
Ethiopia is a large, landlocked and diverse country, with an area of 1.1 million km2 and ranks 174 out of 186 
countries in the UNDP 2016 Human Development Index. Albeit this facts, Ethiopia’s economy has been growing 
by an average rate of 10.8% since 2004 and is committed to reach a lower middle-income status by 2025 guided 
by its overarching national plan, the GTP. 
123. 
Notwithstanding such progress, there exist significant threats to Ethiopia’s continued development. In 
particular, climate change – evident through increasing temperatures, changing rainfall patterns, and higher 
frequency and intensity of extreme weather events – represents an additional and major risk to the goals 
established by GTP-II and beyond. The anticipated impacts of climate change have the potential to hold back 
economic progress, or reverse the gains made in Ethiopia’s development, as well as to exacerbate social 
problems,20 as compared to a situation without climate change. 
124. 
In the target project Woredas, the adverse impacts of climate change have been visible in the shortage of 
water for human beings, animals as well as for productive use. This is directly attributed to the lack of integrating 
climate resilient strategies, lack of integrating water resource management procedures and addressing gender 
issues at the local level. The main barrier identified has been capacity constraints at the Woreda and lack of 
educated men and women at the local level. 
125. 
Ethiopia is a large country and the GoE is conducting a wide scale reform process to sustain the development 
agenda and is addressing vulnerability of its community against the shocks of Climate Change on the ground.  
This requires resources and capacity beyond GoE means. Albeit these actions bringing about commendable 
result in some Woredas, it remains to trickle down to the Woredas targeted in this project. 
126. 
In the targeted Woredas, increasing temperatures have led to a high evapo-tranpiration rate of the surface 
water sources and are drying up every quickly. Erratic rainfall and degraded landmass has led to reduction in the 
ground water table. Lack of water resources, capacity, awareness and lack of an enabling environment has 
brought about the following implications in the livelihood of the targeted community; 
• 
The distance to the nearest source of water is increasing by the year as water sources that were close to 
the community are drying up. This has led to increasing women’s work burden and decreased the hours 
available for productive use as the number of hours spent collecting water is increasing;
• 
Girls are assigned to the chore of collecting water. The increased distance to fetch water has led to an 
increased trend in girls abduction, that ends up with child marriage and exposing them to dire health and 
social issues. Those girls that safely make their way back to their community have to drop out of school as  
it takes an average of 4 – 6 hours to fetch water. This has led to an early gender gap within the community, 
as the numbers of educated women available within the community in later stages in life are limited. This 
has also been noted as the main reason why women are sidelined in the planning as well as the decision 
making process in the society as their education level is considered “not enough” by their male 
counterparts;
 
The rainfall pattern being highly erratic and unpredictable has directly exposed the farmers to a higher 
degree of uncertainty on when to prepare their land and when to plant their seeds. This has immensely 
decreased agricultural productivity not only in the targeted communities but in the nation as a whole. The 
targeted community being highly vulnerable are facing extreme drought situations.
• 
The climate resilient strategy not being integrated into the local planning process, IWRM procedures not 
being practiced; poor Women’s representation; and critical gap in capacity and awareness at the local level 
has inherently pulled the target communities from coping with the shocks of climate change.
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
127.  Due to high population growth, the absolute number of poor (about 25 million) has remained unchanged over 
the past fifteen years, despite rapid economic growth. The country’s per capita GDP of US$631 is substantially 
lower than the regional average of US$1,257 and among the ten lowest worldwide Ethiopia is devoting more than 
half of its annual budget to investments in infrastructure and social services, including health and education. 
However, a large funding gap remains, analysis conducted by GoE having concluded that the additional 
investment  needed  to  achieve  desired  levels  of  resilience  is  around  $236millionper  year  until  2030.  This 
represents a budget uplift of 18%. This uplift should be seen in the context of an assumed increased spending on 
 
20Overseas Development Institute (2011), Climate Finance in Ethiopia.

=== PAGE 37 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
resilience options of almost 200% by 2030 under a baseline scenario (rising from $0.3billion to $0.8billion). 
Other sources of financing 
128. 
All alternative sources of financing have been explored and analyzed; the results of such analysis are 
summarized in Section D.1. Ethiopia suffers from budget deficits, which are remedied by borrowing internationally 
and locally. There is, however, a limit to the extent to which the country can borrow without resulting in major 
macroeconomic shocks. Traditional development partners already make significant contributions, many of which 
are complementary to/would benefit from the proposed project. 
Institutional and Implementation Capacity Needs 
129. 
Ethiopia has built strong core institutions responsible for designing sectoral policies and strategies, and 
overseeing their implementation, these benefitting from extensive experience in the implementation of different 
national and global commitments (e.g. the MDGs). The majority of project implementation will occur through 
existing institutional structures, effective coordination being a critical success factor. Having said this, a recent 
nationwide capacity needs assessment found significant capacity limitations, which the proposed project will help 
to address. In particular, further support is needed at the central level with respect to specific knowledge and  
skills in the area of MRV and building public-private partnerships. At regional and district levels, the capacity 
needs are more related to the tools and procedures to implement national policies and strategies. Among the 
main stumbling blocks is poor follow-up on training and ineffective M&E. Limitations in capacity also extend to 
infrastructure needed for a robust early warning system. 
130. 
The Executing Entities (EEs) to this project have replica structures that stretch to district and Kebele (Sub- 
district) levels. They do have extensive experience in management and coordination of big national flagship 
programs and projects. The MoANR, one of the EEs, has a mandate to implement agricultural development 
strategies, ensuring the food security of the country. It has extensive and rich experience in managing and 
implementing large-scale donor and Government funded projects and programs. Apart from its project 
management capabilities, the Ministry has rich experience in engaging with several stakeholders and 
development partners for national priorities. The Ministry of Water, Irrigation and Electricity (MoWIE), has 
substantial accumulated experience in project and programme management. It is currently administering 72 
international projects and 56 national accounts. The fast-track programme managed by MoWEI has five 
components/projects include: (1) Accelerating the National Biogas Program Ethiopia (NPBE); (2) Strategic 
support upgrading climate and hydrological information systems 3) Improving the Livelihoods and Lifestyles of 
Rural Communities through the Dissemination of Solar Energy Technologies; (4) Solar power for water supply 
and irrigation. The ministry is also implementing Energy+ funded by the Norwegian Government. There is also a 
National Meteorological Agency (NMA) which is an autonomous Government Agency, mandated to establish 
meteorological stations, monitor, produce and communicate weather and climate information, provide weather  
and climate services to national stakeholders, and share meteorological data in line with its international 
obligations. NMA has eleven Regional Meteorological Branch Directorates throughout the country, which are 
mandated to further tailor and communicate products within their area of responsibility as well as administer 
meteorological stations networks. Its data communication systems are networked though computer LAN and 
WAN, particularly with its eleven branch offices. 
131. 
In spite of the strong organizational structure, experience and functional systems of the EEs, the project has 
incorporated organizational, system and human capacity building activities under the “Enabling Environment” 
component. The project will recruit dedicated staff at federal, regional and Woreda levels. It will also organize 
tailored trainings, workshops, etc. as well as make available tools, equipment and other facilities. The proposed 
capacity building actions in this project are designed to respond to the “CRGE Capacity Need Assessment” that 
was conducted by the MoFEC in the year 2015. The main objective of the capacity needs assessment was to 
understand the gaps and needs in relation to deliver the CRGE objectives and vision. The capacity needs 
assessment report has identified sector specific capacity development measures that are required to better 
understand climate change impacts, response measures and to plan, monitor and report accordingly on active 
Climate Change initiatives. Specifically, it has identified measures to mainstream CRGE into policy responses, 
attract  international and  domestic  resources,  disburse  funds  to  priority actions  and  apply effective   financial 
management to ongoing activities. 
E.5.  Country Ownership 
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs

=== PAGE 38 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
132. 
As set out in its INDC (2015), Ethiopia’s long-term goal is to ensure that adaptation to climate change is fully 
mainstreamed into development activities. This will reduce vulnerability and contribute to an economic growth  
path that is resilient to climate change and extreme weather events. Ethiopia has already undertaken several 
strategic and programmatic adaptation actions; these include: the NAPA (since 2007); the Ethiopian Program of 
Adaptation to Climate Change (2011); the development of adaptation plans for nine regional states and two city 
administrations; five sectoral adaptation plans; and the agriculture sector adaptation strategy. Several large-scale 
sustainable land and natural resource management program are ongoing, for example the Sustainable Land 
Management Program (SLMP) and the Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP), which both contribute to building 
resilience to climate change. 
133. 
Moving towards the long-term adaptation goal, the main effort up to and beyond 2020 is to increase the 
resilience and reduce the vulnerability of livelihoods and landscapes in three pillars, two of which concern drought 
and floods. Of nine measures under the drought category and three under the flood category, six are concerned 
with water: 
• 
Protect humans, wildlife and domestic animals from extreme droughts, at least to the extent that they will 
have water for drinking by diverting streams, digging wells and enhancing water harvesting techniques and 
thereby making available dependable watering points in all rural Woredas (districts); 
• 
Enhance irrigation systems through rainwater harvesting and conservation of water, including improved 
water use efficiency; 
• 
Ensure the uninterrupted availability of water services in urban areas to make them comfortably and 
productively habitable irrespective of droughts through planning and construction of dams or deep wells, 
deployment of water saving technologies and wastewater treatment infrastructure; 
• 
Enhance ecosystem health through ecological farming, sustainable land management practices and 
improved livestock production practices to reverse soil erosion, restore water balance, and increase 
vegetation cover, including drought tolerant vegetation; 
• 
Expand electric power generation from geothermal, wind and solar sources to minimize the adverse effects 
of droughts on predominantly hydroelectric energy sector. 
• 
Enhance the adaptive capacity of ecosystems, communities and infrastructure through an ecosystem 
rehabilitation approach in the highlands of Ethiopia. Rehabilitation of degraded lands/ forests will also 
increase resilience of communities, infrastructures and ecosystems to droughts and floods. 
134. 
In addition, the climate resilient strategy for water (MOWIE, 2014) highlights the following strategic priorities: 
• 
Accelerating irrigation plans, ensuring that irrigation systems are well designed and are developed in sites 
only where sufficient water is available: 
• 
Strengthening the management, co-ordination and streamlining of water resource planning, to accelerate 
delivery of existing plans, manage growing water demands, and ensure allocation according to the water 
that is available; 
• 
Increasing the resilience of rain fed agriculture; 
• 
Accelerating universal access to water and sanitation, thereby increasing climate resilience by shifting 
people from using exposed surface water sources to more resilient sources, and by focusing on the most 
vulnerable; 
• 
Enhancing the climate resilience of self-supply, for example by improving local water storage facilities or 
participatory water resource management; 
• 
Strengthening data systems so that they provide timely, reliable and usable data to decision makers at all 
levels. 
135. 
There also close links between several of these strategic priorities and a key pillar of the climate resilient 
strategy for agriculture (MOA, 2014) – sustainable agriculture and land management. This strategy identifies 15 
priority resilience options for immediate investment of which several fall under the sustainable agriculture and  
land management pillar. This pillar includes the priority option of soil and water conservation (SWC) structures 
(bunds, trees, grass strips, contour leveling, terraces, shade trees, waterways). This is seen as an intervention in 
which there is a high existing adaptation deficit and where  investment therefore provides  immediate benefit 
(MOA, 2014, page 59). 
136. 
Ethiopia has demonstrated its determination to fight climate change nationally (notably through the CRGE 
strategy) as well as globally, and has already made important international adaptation commitments, including the 
following: 
• 
At the global level, at the UN Summit on Forest Action Statements and Action Plans in September 2014, 
Ethiopia pledged to restore 15 million ha of degraded and deforested lands by 2025. This significant pledge 
is  additional  to  the  7  million  ha  afforestation/reforestation  pledge  stated  in  the  CRGE  Strategy. The 
Government of Ethiopia has also made an international commitment to implement REDD+. The national

=== PAGE 39 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
REDD+ strategy emphasizes resilient green growth in rural Ethiopia, through productive forest landscapes, 
healthy forests and productivity of land around the forests to achieve: (i) reduced GHG emissions through 
avoided deforestation and forest degradation and carbon sequestration through tree planting; (ii) reduced 
vulnerability of rural populations and the rural economy to exogenous shocks from climate risks, disasters, 
drought, flood and disease; and (iii) reduced level of stress on biodiversity, water and soil resources. 
• 
Ethiopia was also the first LDC nation to submit its INDC to the UNFCCC on June 2015. Its INDC  
articulates committing the nation to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions from 150 megatons of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (Mt CO2e) in 2010 to 145 Mt CO2e in 2030. Ethiopia’s contribution represents a 64 
percent emissions reduction from business-as-usual emissions by 2030. 
• 
At the regional level, Ethiopia is a principal actor in the New Partnership for African Development (NEPAD), 
whose strategic framework for pan-African socio-economic development features climate change and 
sustainable natural resource management as a cornerstone. The country’s climate change strategy is fully 
aligned with the endorsements of climate change adaptation and mitigation strategies made by the African 
Heads of State and the Regional Economic Communities (for example, IGAD). 
• 
Overall, the project has been designed to contribute not only to national policies such as NAPA but also 
regional and global initiatives. In particular, the key priority areas of NAPA include agriculture and 
livestock to address climate change. As a national policy, NAPA identifies list of priority activities 
including promoting drought/crop insurance and early drought and flood warning systems, 
development of small-scale irrigation and water harvesting schemes, community based 
sustainable use of wetland and capacity building and improved rangeland resources management 
practice. The project intends to develop and promote small scale irrigation, water development, 
natural resources management, and capacity building which are aligned to NAPA and contributes 
to the national policy 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
Experience and track record of the accredited entity – MOFEC 
137. 
MOFEC has capacity and long-standing experience of overseeing financial management and programme 
implementation nationally. This included the implementation of climate change mitigation and adaptation  
initiatives valued over USD 400 million, across the six priority sectors, namely – agriculture, water and energy, 
forestry, buildings, industry, and transport – resulting in co-benefits for the Ethiopian population and contributing  
to the global goal of reducing emissions. MOFEC, through its Channel One Programmes Coordination Unit 
(COPCU), also directly implements other large-scale programs, such as the USD 2 billion Protection of Basic 
Services (PBS) and the Productive Safety Net Programmes. It also coordinates and has the oversight role on the 
execution of the other national flagship programs such as the SLMP, AGP, One WASH, etc. MOFEC signs the 
grant or loan agreement for almost all of the completed and ongoing big-national program with bilateral 
development partners and multilateral development banks and UN Agencies on behalf of the Government of 
Ethiopia. 
138. 
The CRGE Facility was established under the MoFEC to mobilize, blend, combine and sequence domestic 
and international, public and private finance to support the institutional building and implementation of Ethiopia’s 
CRGE Strategy. The CRGE Facility has principal/functional organs, including a Management Committee,  
Advisory Board, Technical Team and Financial Team. The Facility has adopted an Operations Manual that 
articulates the overall governance and implementation frameworks as well as the fiduciary standards that needs  
to be adhered to by executing entities and has been able to attract climate finance from Development Partners. 
The standards followed by the CRGE Facility comply with the requirements of donors and reflect GCF standards. 
Furthermore, the CRGE Facility has established and operationalized a monitoring and evaluation system 
including an environmental and social safeguard framework for climate change related projects and programs it 
supports. 
139. 
The Facility is staffed by the MOFEC, with additional support from national and international technical 
advisers on request. It uses the existing Channel One fund disbursement and financial reporting systems of the 
MoFEC in which over 1000 Finance Officers are deployed across the nation. Fund received from the GCF will be 
disbursed to designated CRGE accounts of the Executing Entities at Federal level as well as CRGE accounts of 
the Bureau of Finance and Economic Development (BOFED) at the regions. The Federal Executing Entities will 
receive funds for project activities, which they directly execute such as technical support, monitoring and follow  
up. Other than this, all funds for project activities at Regional, Woreda and Kebele levels will be disbursed to a 
dedicated project account of BOFED in each region. The amount of project fund to be disbursed to federal 
executing entities and BOFEDs will be governed by the work and budget plan on annual basis. The BoFED will 
then make direct transfer to the Regional Sector Bureaus for regional level activities and to WoFEDs for activities

=== PAGE 40 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
at the kebele level. The financial reporting follows the same channel in a reverse direction (see figure 2) . Since  
its establishment in 2013, the CRGE Facility has been able to manage climate funds worth over USD 60 million 
from development partners and has successfully delivered the projects. 
 
Experience and track record of the executing entity – MOWIE 
140. 
The MoWIE, which is mandated for energy, water supply and irrigation projects and programmes, is currently 
administering 72 international and 56 national programs and projects including the one WASH program. The 
MOWIE has been coordinating the construction of dams, wind farm, for electricity generation. The one WASH 
program is being implemented by three ministries (water, education and Health) and coordinated by the Ministry 
of Finance and Economic Development (MoFEC). It covers about all woredas and all regions: 889 rural woredas 
and 144 urban woredas. Through the successful implementation of this program, Ethiopia has met the millennium 
development target and is moving towards universal access. The Program has a budget of $485 million, 
contributed by the World Bank, AfDB, DFID, UNICEF and the Government of Ethiopia. The Ministry is well 
organized and has substantial experience in financial management and procurement, including financial 
accounting, disbursement methods and auditing of the current 128 ongoing projects its managing. 
141. 
The CRGE fast-track programme that was also implemented by the MoWIE has five individual projects, 
including: (1) Accelerating the National Biogas Programme Ethiopia (NBPE); (2) Strategic support to upgrading 
climate and hydrological information systems; 3) Improving the Livelihoods and Lifestyles of Rural Communities 
through the Dissemination of Solar Energy Technologies; and (4) Solar Power for Water Supply and Irrigation; all 
have direct relevance to this project. The Ministry is also implementing the Energy+ initiative funded by the 
Norwegian Government. The MoWIE will be responsible to lead the implementation of potable water component 
including the development of water schemes for both irrigation and household use. 
 
Experience and track record of the executing entity – MOANR 
142. 
The MOANR has a wealth of experience in managing and implementing large-scale donor or Government 
funded projects and programmes including the Sustainable Land Management Program (SLMP), Agricultural 
Growth Program (AGP) Productive Safety Net (PSNP), etc. The PSNP is a component of the Ethiopian 
Governments’ Food Security Programme, which is an essential feature of food security investments strategy for 
chronically food insecure Woredas of Ethiopia with the overall objective of reducing household vulnerability and 
improving resilience to shock. It provides such services to 318 woredas covering eight regions. The MONAR is 
the lead executing entity of this national program. PSNP has been financed by the Bank, the government of 
Ethiopia and other development partners, and has helped scale up community-led watershed management. The 
current phase of the PSNP covers 411 woredas and aims to reach 10 million people per year with a total budget 
of $3.6 billion. The sector has a well-established field extension system, in which communities actively participate. 
The SLMP is also a national flagship program of the government of Ethiopia. MOANR is the lead executing entity. 
The objective of Sustainable Land Management Project is to reduce land degradation and improve land 
productivity in selected watersheds in targeted regions in Ethiopia. Currently, it is in the second phase of 
implementation. The first phase of SLMP, which lasted from 2010-2015, was implemented in 45 critical 
watersheds of six regions. The program supported a comprehensive strategic approach to improved natural 
resources management, which included a highly participatory identification of degradation factors and impacts,  
the subsequent planning and design of the most appropriate interventions, and the  community-led 
implementation of improved practices and infrastructure. As a result, a total of 98,000 rural households (190,000 
ha) benefitted from a combination of environmental and productive interventions. The second phase of SLMP, 
which is currently under implementation, covers 135 watersheds/woredas (including the 45 watersheds that were 
partially supported by SLMP-1), covering 937 kebeles in six National Regional States of of the country. Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries of the Project include an estimated 1,850,000 people. The total budget of SLMP-II is $107.6 
million. The AGP has been under implementation by the MOANR in high agricultural potential areas of the 
country. The overall objective of this program is to increase agricultural productivity and commercialization of 
small holder farmers. AGP1 has benefited communities in 96 woredas including through the construction of 
irrigation, feeder roads, footbridges and market centers, the establishment and support to farmer groups, 
strengthening public agricultural services, and improving smallholder farmers’ access to markets. The Second 
Agricultural Growth Project (AGP2) operates in 157 woredas (districts) in Amhara, Oromia, SNNPR, Tigray, 
Benishangul-Gumuz, Gambella and Harari regional states as well as Dire Dawa city administration. The project 
directly benefits 1.6 million smallholder farmers, who live in areas with the highest potential for agricultural growth. 
The total budget of AGP-II is $350 million. The MOANR has also successfully implemented initiatives funded by 
UNDP,  the  IMF,  World  Bank,  African  Development  Bank,  DFID,  USAID,  Irish  Aid,  DFATD,  EU,  SIDA, the 
Netherlands, DANIDA and WFP, among others. The MoANR will be responsible for the small scale irrigation, and

=== PAGE 41 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
management and conservation of landscapes around water sources. 
143. 
Apart from its project/program management capabilities, the Ministry has rich experience in engaging with 
several stakeholders and development partners for national priorities. Some of the development partners actively 
engaged include; Climate Change Forum – Ethiopia, (a National Civil Society Organization), UNDP, SG-2000, 
Oxfam GB and Oxfam America, WFO, FAO, JICA, GIZ, and NORAD and SIDA, ADB, World Bank and the IMF. 
144. 
In addition to the on-going programs and projects, the MoANR  is also experienced in several programmes 
and projects which have concluded effectively and efficiently.. 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
The Letter of No Objection is provided in Annex I. 
 
145. 
The MOFEC, as an institution mandated for resource mobilization, and MEFCC, as an NDA to the GCF and 
as a technical institution mandated to coordinate the delivery of the CRGE Vision, closely collaborate in a number 
of areas. They are the two co-chairs of the CRGE Facility Inter-ministerial Management Committee and jointly 
decide on funding of climate change projects and programs. The NDA and MoFEC have jointly provided training 
at all levels on how to develop bankable pipeline proposals, and together have appraised bankable proposals that 
were submitted by line Ministries. The CRGE Management Committee ensures strong country ownership by 
closely and regularly following the development of project proposals. They undertake joint monitoring and 
evaluation of CRGE Facility financed projects and programs. The NDA and AE have jointly developed a guidance 
book focusing on accessing and channeling of climate finance in general, and the Green Climate Fund and the 
Adaptation Fund in particular. They consult each other on provision of no-objection for international institutions, 
which have interest to mobilize climate finance from international sources on behalf of Ethiopia. The CRGE 
Facility governance arrangement ensures the engagement of non-state actors through the “Advisory Board”, 
which is comprised of representatives of development partners, private sector, academia, multilateral 
development partners, UN Agencies, private sector. The Advisory Board reviews and comment project and 
program proposals, provides advice on procedural and process related issues with no decision-making authority. 
146. 
The project design follows a demand-driven bottom-up approach, which is well suited to climate resilience- 
building in Ethiopia’s rural context. This approach – in which affairs are steered by communities, have a voice in 
determining priorities and are actively involved in project identification, planning, development and  
implementation – has in the past contributed to positive results due to enhanced ownership by beneficiary 
communities and local authorities. This type of engagement commenced during the preparatory stages, as 
possible project approaches were considered and refined through stakeholder consultations on the CRGE 
Strategy. The project proposal was prepared by seven sectoral teams involving more than 50 experts from more 
than 20 leading Government institutions. It was discussed during regional and sectoral consultations to ensure 
national alignment on priorities, confirm initial findings, create awareness and build collaboration. The MoANR 
facilitated consultations with, among others: 75 participants from the regions; Government line ministries and 
regional and local governments; UN agencies (such as UNDP and WFP), non-government organizations 
(including Oxfam GB, Oxfam America); CSOs (such as Climate Change Forum Ethiopia); private companies (e.g. 
construction and consultancy firms); and research organizations (the Ethiopian Institute of Agricultural Research 
(EIAR), the Agricultural Transformation Agency (ATA), the Ethiopian Seeds Enterprise); and development 
partners (Climate and Development Knowledge Network (CDKN) and the Global Green Growth Institute (GGGI)). 
To support implementation of GCF-supported projects and other similar interventions in the future, the Agro- 
Meteorological Stakeholders Platform has been established. 
147. 
In the water sector, and working with stakeholder representatives from universities,  regions/local 
communities, Government bodies and NGOs, consultation meetings were held in five river basins, to create 
awareness of the importance of the envisaged approaches to water management, and to begin to build support 
for responsive solutions. In every river basin, a committee comprising high-level professionals of different 
disciplines has been established to facilitate future work. 
148. 
During proposal development, at least two separate missions of technical experts were undertaken to each of 
the 22 target Woredas. This missions conducted substantive discussions with local government officials, local 
development partners and local communities. Engagement such as this will be sustained during project 
implementation, as an intrinsic part of learning and capacity building. As indicated in the theory of change, limited 
institutional management capacity has been identified as one of the barriers. The project intends to address this 
through targeted interventions including strengthen and build institutional and implementation capacity needs 
through various interventions such as better communication and learning strategy (e.g. database establishment), 
developing and strengthening human capability through tailor-made training on IWRM and climate responsive 
planning and budgeting, and strengthen institutional infrastructural capacity (e.g. ICT tools, operational manuals, 
and M&E systems) (see Section H for details).

=== PAGE 42 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
149. 
Reports  of   stakeholders  meetings  including  regional  and  federal  consultations   and  multi-stakeholders 
engagement plan are available see Annex XIV Stakeholder Consultation. 
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the project/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
150. 
Ethiopia is a Least Developed Country (LDC) with limited resources that have to be allocated to a wide range 
of adaptation initiatives. The proposed grant from the GCF will help promote transformative change without 
crowding out private and other public investment. The grant will be targeted at activities that tend to have pay-offs 
that fully accrue only in the long-run or which are of a ‘public good’ nature, and which therefore cannot be 
addressed by the private sector. The combination of GCF grant financing and stakeholder involvement has been 
designed to stimulate systemic change that can be rapidly scaled-up. 
151. 
The costs of the activities identified are determined in a way to cover the minimum cost possible to achieve 
project objectives. Thus, the project is intrinsically efficient and cost-effective. As shown in section E.6.5, a 
comparison of total project financing with the adaptation impact the project aims to achieve suggests that a 
substantial amount of adaptation benefit (as well as incidental mitigation co-benefit) is expected to result from the 
project. 
152. 
Activities to be undertaken by the project specifically address the climate change adaptation needs of 
stakeholders, who are mainly farmers and pastoralists. The Outputs involve creating awareness and capacity 
building as well as actual implementation of activities on the ground. Thus, they are expected to have positive 
effects on long-term investments to be made by the stakeholders. 
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only) 
E.6.3. Financial viability 
153. 
The financial rate of return has not been calculated because the benefits of the proposed activities that the 
Government implements (benefits such as increased production or cost savings) do not directly generate 
revenues to the Government. Rather, the Government is providing support to farmers, pastoralists and other 
agents so that these groups can adapt to climate change in addition to benefitting in other ways. Hence, only the 
expected economic rate of return for the project, where it is possible to estimate benefits of the proposed 
interventions, have been calculated for a 15-year period. The economic returns in terms of economic net present 
value (ENPV) and economic internal rate of return (EIRR) are briefly presented in Section F.1 below. Results of 
sensitivity analyses are also reported in Section F.1 below. More details for the economic analysis are shown in 
Annex XII and Annex XIII. 
154. 
Without the proposed GCF contribution the project would need to be down-scaled considerably, either by 
reducing or eliminating some of the Activities that are integral to the longevity and sustainability of the project. 
Given the focus of GCF contributions on vital capital investments, it would likely not be possible to achieve the 
paradigm shift, as this requires the introduction of new technologies as well as practices. This in effect means that 
the project in the form it is proposed now would not be viable without GCF funding. 
Please describe financial viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention. 
155. 
It is expected that the activities started in the project will continue after the GCF intervention. In particular, 
given that the GCF grant is used to cover investment costs, other costs will be covered after the fifth year of the 
project following the exit strategy indicated elsewhere in this document (see Annex IV co-financing letter). 
E.6.4. Application of best practices 
156. 
The overall design of this project is based on a number of best practices, in particular the Landscape 
Approach, Climate-Smart Agriculture (CSA) and the Livelihoods-based Approach. 
157. 
Various investments in agriculture, forest, and water have been undertaken over years in Ethiopia. 
Consequently, compelling diagnostic review of existing and previous programs and projects on climate resilience 
and adaptation has underpinned the design of this GCF proposal. Such investments include Ethiopia’s 
afforestation and reforestation regular programs; Sustainable Land Management programs, Agricultural Growth 
Programs, Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP); WASH Sector-Wide Approach and UNDP GEF projects, 
including Climate Information and EWS, Promoting Autonomous Community and Adaptation Project and Coping

=== PAGE 43 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
with Climate Change and Drought Projects, implemented in Ethiopia. 
158. 
In Ethiopia, landscape approach has been experimented in different context and scale, for instance, farming 
system and (micro) watershed are the commonly applied approaches. Currently, however, Integrated Watershed 
Management (IWM), Participatory Forest Management (PFM), Integrated Water Resource Management (IWRM) 
and Integrated River Basin Management (IRBM) are slowly picking up and being practiced in some sectors. In 
addition, ecosystem approach is followed in the protected areas management. However, there are still constraints 
and challenges reported with regard to collaborative planning and implementation across boundaries, sectors and 
actors for achieving integrated landscape management. 
159. 
As a fundamental starting point the project will implement a gender responsive, landscape approach in the 
design and implementation of interventions. In this case, Kebele (sub-district) will be a landscape unit, where bio- 
physical, social-cultural, economic and institutions interface with each other and thereof, it is chosen as the  
project intervention unit. This approach is likely to successfully build women’s leadership capacities from bottom 
up and demonstrate the investment returns of a gender focused approach. 
160. 
Particular attention has also been given to the best ways of gathering learning and promoting innovation in an 
integrated manner. The project has drawn on international best and emerging practice in the design and 
implementation of adaptive learning and up-scaling systems for climate change adaptation. Particular reference 
has been made to a review of a flagship five-year climate change adaptation programme covering 49 villages in 
rain-fed regions of rural India, including the monitoring, evaluating and learning and up-scaling practices that 
supported this programme.21 This programme was selected as a benchmark for the following reasons: (1) its 
technological focus was integrative and covered a range of resilience issues (ecological restoration, health and 
livelihoods) as well as low-carbon community development; (2) learning practices underpinned its design and 
valuable lessons can be drawn from the experience of the programme in combining learning and M&E tools;  and 
(3) up-scaling was a major focus of the programme, at district, state and national level. Two key lessons applied  
in the project design are: (a) the importance of taking an iterative, learning-based approach in the development of 
local adaptation solutions; and (b) the focus on the design of up- and out-scaling pathways from the outset of the 
project, again taking an iterative, learning-based approach. These lessons will help ensure the continual 
application and adaptation of best technologies and practices. 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only) 
17) (a) Total project financing 
(b) Requested GCF amount 
18) (c) Expected lifetime emission reductions 
overtime 
19) (d) Estimated cost per tCO2eq (d = a / c) 
20) (e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eqremoved 
(e = b / c) 
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in 
a comparable context. 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
 
 
21 Colvin J,Chaturvedi M, Stantchev Skeie D (2014),External Review of the WOTR-SDC-NABARD Project: ‘Climate Change Adaptation in Rain-Fed 
regions of Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh’. Delhi.

=== PAGE 44 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only) 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme) 
 
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme appraisal document. 
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis 
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the detailed economic and financial analysis (including the financial 
model, taking into consideration the information provided in section E.6.3). 
The detailed economic analysis and assumptions are presented in Annexes XII 
 
161. 
As noted in section E.6.3 an economic analysis was conducted for the proposed project. Appraisal guidelines 
for public sector projects prepared by MOFEC have been followed (MoFED 2004 and MoFED 2008). The 
Economic Analysis - Annexes XII shows the conclusions of the economic analysis, together with related 
assumptions and information. 
162. 
Economic net present value (ENPV) is calculated using a 10% discount rate. The ENPV at a 10% discount 
rate for the project is USD 14,591,795 and the corresponding economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is 20%. 
Tests of sensitivity of the ENPV and EIRR show the following: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
163. 
This sensitivity analysis shows that economic returns are more sensitive to changes in benefits of the project 
compared with changes in investment costs and operating costs of the project. The lowest economic internal rate 
of return from this sensitivity analysis is 8%, which is lower than the 10% discount rate used for NPV calculation. 
However, this still implies that the project would have significant net benefits (with 9% rate of return) even when 
benefits are assumed to decrease by 10%. When possible overestimation of costs and underestimation  of 
benefits discussed above are considered, the (rate of) return is expected to be larger. 
 
164. 
It should be noted that, as explained in Annex XII, there are reasons to believe that net benefits of the project 
may be underestimated. These include: 
• 
The period considered for the economic analysis is 15 years; the fact that infrastructure such as irrigation 
canals typically have an expected life of 20 years or more implies that some net benefits that accrue after 15 
years are not considered and terminal value is not considered in the analysis. 
• 
Cost estimates for the period after the fifth year of the project are assumed to be the average yearly operating 
costs of the project during the first five years except that 50% of the labour cost is assumed as labour 
requirements will be much less after the fifth year. Note also that operation and maintenance costs of capital 
equipment are also included. The assumption about the reduction in labour cost afteryear 5 is because 
training and labour use for construction of infrastructure for potable water supply, irrigation and rehabilitation 
of degraded lands is much more intensive during the five years of project implementation. While training 
would be completed during the first five years, labour costs after the fifth year are mainly for operation and 
maintenance and guarding activities (some of which are already included under the cost of operation and 
maintenance of capital equipment). This is likely to imply overstatement of costs as the 50% assumption 
mentioned above may be higher labour costs than what it could be. 
• 
There are some benefits not captured in the economic analysis, including the economic value of different 
ecosystem services provided by forests and natural resource management activities such as increased 
groundwater  recharge,  reduced  soil  degradation  and  mitigation  of  floods  on  lower  catchments. 
GHG 
NPV (at 10%) in USD 
IRR 
Increase in investment cost by 10% 
12,420,508 
11% 
Increase in operating cost by 10% 
1,303,094 
11% 
Decrease in total benefits by 10% 
-1,158,293 
9%

=== PAGE 45 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
emissions reduction from agriculture and use of solar powered pumps are also not included as benefits. 
Based on the above analysis, please provide economic and financial justification (both qualitative and quantitative) for 
the concessionality that GCF provides, with a reference to the financial structure proposed in section B.2. 
 
165.  The GoE is contributing co-finance for the implementation of  the proposed project. However, though the  
degree of reliance on the Fund’s support varies across Outputs, the project cannot be accomplished without the 
Fund’s support. The proposed project is expected to have a high impact when the all activities are implemented 
together in the project areas. Taking these points into account, and noting that Ethiopia is an LDC with very 
limited resources to devote to climate change adaptation, the concessionality that the GCF provides in reference 
to the proposed financial structure is justified. 
F.2. Technical Evaluation 
166. 
Project preparation has validated this technology package as being economically-viable, environmentally- 
friendly, socially-viable and cost-effective for users (in terms of operation and maintenance). The project requires 
investment in technology at a scale that can deliver a sustainable climate-resilient development pathway in 
vulnerable communities through a combination of the following technologies, tailored to local circumstances. 
• 
Restoring/rehabilitating degraded land; 
• 
Provision of potable water supply through solar-powered schemes for increased gender equity, and social 
and environmental improvement; and 
• 
Provision of underground and surface water for small-scale PV irrigation schemes to facilitate the shift from 
rain-fed subsistence agriculture and to increase productivity. 
167. 
These technologies have been assessed to be the most appropriate in view of: (i) the extent of the climate 
shock and its impact on vulnerable communities in Ethiopia; (ii) the experience gained from similar interventions  
in the past (see Section E.6.4 for an overview of selected best practices); and (iii) their consequences on 
ecosystems, current practices (considering in particular the inadequacy of current production techniques) and the 
economic context (most starkly evident through the deterioration in the living conditions of vulnerable 
communities). These considerations suggest that the selected technologies are the most relevant ones and, 
crucially, that is the combination of these that is necessary if effective economic, financial and technical  
responses to drought are to result in improved living conditions and increased resilience of communities. 
168. 
At the sectoral level, the project focuses on building the resilience of agriculture and water resources. In the 
agriculture sector, investments in small-scale irrigation schemes will have a transformational impact on climate- 
vulnerable communities. Initial results show that these irrigation systems have considerable impact in terms of 
enhancing crop productivity and income. Investment in small-scale irrigation generates higher average income 
compared to rainfed systems, i.e. incomes of those farmers that used irrigation experienced higher average 
income compared with those under rainfed agriculture.22 Small scale irrigation also helps farmers stabilize 
production across years, adapt to climate change and reduce poverty and food insecurity. The effectiveness of 
micro schemes, which are relatively inexpensive and technically straightforward to implement, has been 
particularly high. To ensure sustainability of irrigation schemes, management capacity development programmes 
are embedded both within the user associations and within public support services. 
169. 
The technologies required to deliver safe water and climate-smart water management schemes include  
Clean Energy Technology (CET), such as photovoltaic solar panels, which has the potential to simultaneously 
address three key global challenges of energy, poverty and climate change. CET can help not only in the 
reduction of GHG emissions but also promote access to energy and link sustainable energy with productive uses, 
small businesses and job opportunities, especially in rural areas which often are not connected to the national 
grid. 
170. 
The project’s approach of using solar energy-based technology to provide safe water for the community and 
also water for irrigation from the ground or the surface will replace the current trend of installing diesel-based 
generators. Diesel generators consume fuel, require frequent maintenance (e.g. lubricants and spare parts) and 
have a very short expected lifetime. Thus, the solar-driven option has been selected as the most viable in terms 
of financial and environmental results. The solar water pumping system has been chosen due to reduced 
maintenance needs compared to the conventional (diesel-based) water pumping system; as no fuel is needed, 
this also greatly reduces transport costs. In addition, as the targeted communities are dispersed, grid connectivity 
is not a viable option. Therefore, the solar pumping system is technologically and economically advantageous for 
 
22 A study by Hagos et al (2009) indicates that irrigation increased average income of approximately US$323/hectare (ha) under smallholder- 
managed irrigation systems compared to an average income of US$147/ha for rainfed systems. After taking adjustment costs into account, the 
gross margin from irrigated agriculture would be 219.7% higher than the gross margin from rainfed agriculture.

=== PAGE 46 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
the selected  sites. The proposed  approach  is  also  highly sustainable, as  it  will continue  working for relatively 
longer years and is economically, socially and environmentally friendly. Technical evaluation for Irrigation and 
potable water supply schemes has been attached as part of the Annex II - Feasibility Study 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations 
171. 
As part of the requirements of the GCF, an Environmental and Social Assessment of the Project has been 
conducted and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been prepared in accordance with 
the GCF safeguard policies and the GoE policies, encompassing the legal and institutional frameworks related to 
environmental and social assessment  see Annex VI. 
172. 
The major social benefits of the project include: 
 increased productivity of livelihoods and their capacity to adapt to climate change;
 provision of employment opportunities to local populations, with a special focus on the needs of local youth 
and women);
 provision of direct employment during the construction phase and at operational stage of sub-projects, such 
as pond construction, water facilities, and irrigation projects;
 provision of indirect employment through aspects such as operation of water facilities and maintenance 
activities,
 benefit to child education, in function of the reduced distance and time required to collect water, 
improvement of women inclusion,
 increase health by providing adequate water supply systems,
• 
increasing opportunities for high –value crop production, in promoting irrigation practice, resulting in 
enhancing their quality of life.
173. 
Environmental benefits of the planned conservation structures include: 
 
protection of soil against damage due to excessive runoff,
 
increase in yield of springs and water wells,
 
and avoidance of soil erosion.
 
Better productivity on less tilled land due to improved seeds will also contribute to soil conservation. 
Conservation structures are essentially environment-enhancing projects and agro-forestry provides shade 
to plants, conserves water and protects from soil erosion.
174. 
The potential adverse impacts identified include those related to: 
 Biophysical impacts, including erosion, vegetation clearing, noise, and dust during the construction phase
 Social impacts, during operation phase of the project as a result of change of land-use
175. 
. Appropriate mitigation measures with budget estimates are provided in the full ESMP report see Annex VI. 
In due consideration that the impacts identified are in general localized to the project implementation site and will 
be rectified with the implementation of the appropriate mitigation measures, the project is assessed as Category 
B. This categorization is in due recognition that the project will be conducted in food insecure, drought affects, 
and marginal lands and not in sensitive ecosystems (i.e. in wetlands, forests, or others). Moreover, it will have 
minimal adverse social impacts and impact on cultural heritage. Furthermore, the anticipated impacts will also be 
restricted to the project site and will not affect a broader area beyond the immediate project implementation sites. 
Finally, all impacts identified will be addressed through implementation of mitigation measures and there will be 
minimal residual impact after the implementation of the proposed mitigation measures. 
176. 
This project does not involve expropriation of land from individuals. The essence of the project is to improve 
water availability to farmers, hence will make sure that water for irrigation is available for their use. Through a 
consultative process the project will use communal lands for community ponds and reservoirs. Communities in 
Ethiopia in general make use of such communal lands for such services and the project will make sure that this 
process is consent based. In case applicable, the Ethiopian government laws and GCF performance standards 
contain appropriate provisions with regards to compensation. 
177. 
To create an enabling environment focused on building gender skills is highly relevant for the achievement of 
the project goals. To achieve this a Gender Action Plan was prepared separately see Annex XV in order to 
institutionalize gender responsive climate change planning, implementation, management and delivery system  
by: a) developing capacities for gender mainstreaming in all sectors by all stakeholders and b) establishing 
supportive systems and processes that sustain women´s benefits, transform gender equity and change 
perceptions on the gender differential impact of climate change on women. As regards to ESMP implementation 
governance and coordination, in Ethiopia federal line ministries have Delegation of Authority to conduct ESIA 
(Environmental and Social Impact Assessment) for projects under their jurisdiction, as provided to them by the 
Environment Protection Authority (EPA), currently Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change (MEFCC), 
which is still valid. However, since this is a cross-sectoral project that requires engagement of both the water and 
irrigation, and agriculture and natural resources sector – the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change

=== PAGE 47 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
will have a prominent role, while both the Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, and Ministry of Water, 
Irrigation and Energy will play an important role as delegated authorities in their areas of their mandate. The 
Figure below provides a schematic diagram of the institutional arrangement for ESMP implementation. Picture 
depicting the ESMP implementation and coordination arrangement is provided below. 
 
 
 
 
178. In the context of the project, the MEFCC directorate General  for  Environmental  and  Social  Impact 
Assessment and Licensing will be responsible for the project-level grievance redress mechanism. The contract 
details of the focal person responsible is: 
Shiferaw Negash (Mr.), 
Director General, 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Licensing, 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
Email – shifeabbagada@gmail.com 
Telephone: +251911936802 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement 
179.  The financial management and procurement of this project will be guided by the public finance management  
and public procurement regulations of the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. Project 
finance will be transferred to the MOFEC in accordance with the financial disbursement arrangement defined for 
the CRGE Facility, which is consistent with the Channel One fund flow arrangement. The Treasury Directorate of 
MOFEC is responsible for opening and closing of accounts for all public institutions at the National Bank of 
Ethiopia. The CRGE Facility account, into which the GCF fund will be deposited, is opened in the Name of 
MOFEC and the day to day management of the account will be done by the Head of the Facility and of COPCU. 
After receiving funds from GCF, the Facility will transfer the necessary amounts to the Federal Executing Entities 
from the CRGE Facility National Account for activities, which will be implemented by the Federal Executing Entity

=== PAGE 48 ===
F 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 64 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
directly. For regional executing entities, which are sector bureaus, funds will be transferred to the respective 
BoFEDs on a regular basis. The project finance will be subject to the financial regulations and management 
including auditing by an independent auditor in line with Auditors General requirements of the Government of 
Ethiopia. The OFAG adopts international standards on Auditing and financial reporting, which will also apply to 
this project. 
180. 
Project finance will be disbursed to the executing entities based on approved quarterly Work Plans. 
Subsequent disbursements will be made based on satisfactory (not less than 75%) settlement of previous 
advances. The CRGE Facility Finance Officer will clear this before disbruement processing and sending letter of 
transfer request to the National Bank of Ethiopia. The utilization of funds will be monitored through an internal 
control framework illustrated under section 7, which depicts the fund transfer and reporting channels; it shows  
that funds received by MOFEC in the CRGE Facility are channeled through the Government structure – federal, 
regional and Woreda – and reported back through the same channels. The Channel One Fund  Flow  
Arrangement is staffed by over 1,000 finance professionals, who will be responsible for fiduciary assurance and 
facilitation of reporting. 
Procurement Management (PM) 
 
181. 
Detailed annual Project Procurement Plans will be prepared by the Executing Entities and submitted to Public 
Procurement and Property Administration Agency (PPPAA). The Public Procurement and Property 
Administration regulation and directives of the government will be applied for any type of procurement including 
goods, work and services. The different methods of procurement, the conditions to be met to use anyone of the 
methods, (including thresholds) and the procedures to be followed will be paid due attention. Depending on the 
threshold, volume and type, procurement could be conducted by the Executing entities at federal, regionial and 
woreda levels. The PPPA however ensures that the procurement policies and procedures are respected and 
strictly followed at all times by all public institutions. For bulk Procurement of goods and services the EEs can 
request the services of the Federal PPPAA and the PPPAA will procure using agency specific rules and 
regulations. The EEs entities implementing this project are public bodies whose procurement activities shall be 
subject to procurement audit by PPPAA. The PPPAA is an entity under MoFEC established under proclamation 
No. 649, with a mandate to conduct federal public procurement in line with the Federal Public Procurement 
Directive23 The procurement plans submitted by the EE’s shall be effected by the PPPAA at the federal level and 
in line with the directive issued to ensure the procurement of goods and services is based on the value-for-money 
principle and guided by competitive bidding. The directive has a standardized International and national bidding 
documents to ensure a uniform and competitive bidding process is followed. Price, quality, delivery time and 
procurement feasibility shall determine the procurement source, modality and delivery mode of required 
equipment and associated supplies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 Federal Public Procurement Directive, MoFEC 2010

=== PAGE 49 ===
G 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |PAGE 46 OF 64 
 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
 
 
 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary 
182. 
Available research24 shows that effective risk assessment should consider the following: 
 
• 
Category 1: Preventable Risks – internal risks that are controllable or avoidable, and that ought to be 
eliminated or avoided. This risk category is best managed through active prevention: monitoring operational 
processes and guiding people’s behaviours and decisions toward desired norms; 
• 
Category 2: Strategy Risks, which are different from preventable risks because they are not inherently 
undesirable. These represent the risks inherent in the project in order to achieve the transformative results 
being sought. This category needs a risk-management system designed to reduce the probability that the 
assumed risks actually materialize and to improve the ability to manage or contain the risk events should  
they occur; and 
• 
Category 3: External Risks, arising from events outside the project and beyond its influence or control. 
Sources of these risks include natural and political disasters and major macroeconomic shifts. Because such 
risks cannot be prevented from occurring, their management must focus on rapid identification and mitigation 
of their impact. 
183. 
By applying this approach, the risk assessment has concluded that the proposed project is medium risk.  
This is considered a tolerable risk, given the ambitious nature of the project; low risk would imply an inadequate 
level of innovation. 
184. 
Eight specific risk factors have been identified, four each from the Preventable and Strategic risk  
categories25. Half of these eight factors are assessed as having high risk, in that their occurrence would have 
major impact on project results. However, for three of the four preventable risks (which focus on the financial, 
technical and operational, social and environmental and similar risks that might prevent the project objectives 
from being achieved), the likelihood of these occurring is assessed to be low (with “Inadequate operational 
capacity to support the introduction of the proposed project approaches” being assessed as medium probability), 
this largely reflecs the range of risk management and mitigation methods in place. Accordingly, with respect to 
“preventable” factors, the project is assessed to be low risk. 
185. 
By comparison, the majority of the strategic risk factors have been assessed as having a medium likelihood  
of occurrence. Ultimately, the project seeks to achieve sustainable behavioural change. For this to happen, there 
is a need to have a shared understanding of the medium and long-term benefits of the project among target, 
communities, private enterprises, NGOs and public bodies to participate, contribute, learn and adapt in the ways 
that are envisaged. If they do not, then the risk is that new technologies and practices may not be adopted, new 
support infrastructure does not develop, and new rules and regulations are not introduced. In addition, if climate 
change-induced disaster worsens in the target communities, there is very little scope that vulnerable people will 
be encouraged to think beyond their immediate survival activities. This also affects government’s resources 
allocation from investments to emergency responses. For the project to achieve its intended objective of bringing 
sustainable changes in the target communities, there is a need to address disaster responses so that the project 
interventions will support government’s efforts through building the resilience of the communities by focusing on 
long-term solutions. In addition, the history of drought-induced vulnerabilities in the target communities requires 
synergies and sustainable changes in the livelihood interventions. In this regard, the project is assessed to be 
medium risk for the majority of strategic risk factors, reflecting efforts taken to mitigate the identified risks, 
including the application of lessons-learned from the considerable body of relevant past experience, which 
among other things demonstrates the critical importance of using fully-participative approaches that help all 
stakeholders to incrementally adapt solutions based on a common understanding of the challenges  
encountered.. 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures 
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
24Reference is made in particular to the article ‘Managing Risks: a New Framework’, by R. S. Kaplan and A. Mikes, 
published in Harvard Business Review, June 2012. 
25 While the assessment includes identification of External Risks, as these are beyond the project’s direct control or 
influence, they have not been addressed in the mitigation measures described in Section G.2.

=== PAGE 50 ===
G 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |PAGE 47 OF 64 
 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of risk 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Insufficient availability of necessary financial 
resources 
Preventable, 
financial risk 
High 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
186. Initial mitigation of risk has been achieved through detailed project design and planning, and related financial 
forecasting and modelling, including identifying what local stakeholders can contribute and how the GCF can  
best add value. While the risk that this factor represents to project success is high, the likelihood  of  its 
occurrence has been reduced. This reduction has been reinforced through the collaborative planning process 
that has been adopted, which has built the commitment of the relevant stakeholders to mobilize resources in 
support of the project, and in particular in relation to operational items. With the GCF finance, relevant 
stakeholders have expressed to their commitment as expressed by allocating resources (e.g. human and other 
resources) to implement and manage project activities. Given that GCF support targets towards capital 
expenditures, this should ensure the sustainability of developed solutions. Detailed monitoring of the utilization of 
financial resources against plan and projected results is a priority of the project management system, which will 
further help reduce the risk of inadequate resources being available, or that they are used inappropriately or with 
sub-optimal effect. The Ethiopian government has established a system regarding the use of public finance by 
sector ministries. Such systems include Office of Federal Audit General, responsible for evaluating public 
institutions regarding their use of public finance and the office reports to the Office of the Prime Minister and 
House of Representatives, the highest law makers in the country. Each sector ministries is under strict scrutiny  
by this office. In addition, there is Anti-Corruption Commission (with its branch offices in public institutions) which 
is responsible for controlling improper use of public resources including abuse of leadership. In addition, sector 
ministries have internal audit system to ensure that public resources are used properly according to the country’s 
public finance management systems. These systems help report any breach of rules and abuse of resources. 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of risk 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Inability of communities to successfully adopt 
new technologies 
Preventable, 
technical risk 
Medium 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
187. For resilience building to be feasible, it is essential that communities are able to successfully adopt the new 
technologies and associated practices; this factor therefore carries a medium level of risk. However, the proposed 
technologies have been proven (in other programmes in Ethiopia or elsewhere) and their appropriateness has 
been established. There remains the risk of a reluctance to adopt them (which is part of the strategic risk 
associated with bringing about systemic change), but this will be addressed through the high levels of support  
that the project intends to provide during their introduction, including in training that targets women beneficiaries  
in particular and developing the abilities of new users, and helping them to gain maximum benefit from their 
utilization. Given the desperate situation that many targeted communities face, the reluctance to try new 
approaches  is  expected  to  be  relatively  low,  the  training  and  development  therefore  representing  the  key 
mitigation measure that will be required. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of risk 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Inadequate operational capacity to support the 
introduction of the proposed project approaches 
Preventable, 
operational risk 
Medium 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
188. Ultimately, the project aims to build the resilience and adaptive capacity of men and women in the targeted 
communities. Nevertheless, it is appreciated that these communities will be heavily dependent on the additional 
capacity that the project will provide including skills and leadership training for women in order to address the 
severe challenges they face and build a sustainable development path. The required operational capacity has 
been identified through project design and planning, and the various institutions involved have committed to 
provide the support essential to success. Each of the sectors will be fully represented by the relevant line 
ministries. The risk of this capacity not being available is considered low, given that all project plans are clearly 
aligned with the evolving strategies of the relevant line ministries, which in turn are clearly aligned with national 
priorities. The levels  of  support required  will be continually monitored  and adjusted through the  project’s  M&E

=== PAGE 51 ===
G 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |PAGE 48 OF 64 
 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
 
system. In the unlikely event of capacity gaps arising, these will be addressed through the cross-sectoral project 
governance system, reflecting the shared responsibility for the success of the project. 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of risk 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
The proposed approaches to resilience building 
are found to be unfeasible 
Preventable, 
operational risk 
Medium 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
189.  Building sustainable resilience and livelihood capacity is unlikely to be easy. The project has addressed this   
risk through a number of design strategies. The first is the integration of a variety of natural resource  
management approaches that, introduced in a coherent and adaptive way, have the potential to move people 
away from traditional methods and to create increasing demand for the new products and services being offered. 
The second is the rigorous approach to selection of participating communities, which ensures that the viability of 
the approaches has at the outset been validated in the local contexts. During project execution, action learning 
mechanisms will help share information across participating communities so that the best ways of addressing 
specific implementation challenges can be developed and applied as appropriate. 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of risk 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Communities fail to respond to the dangers 
brought by climate change 
Strategic, social 
risk 
High 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
190. At the heart of adaptation lies the need to raise community awareness of their vulnerability to climate change. 
The severity of the situation in the targeted communities should provide initial impetus for change. This will be 
reinforced by initiatives designed to raise awareness of, and improve access to, relevant information for the men 
and women in the targeted communities. At the outset, this will be used to show what options should be 
considered and to then guide people along the appropriate adaptation routes. Over time, the project will introduce 
participative mechanisms for review and use early warning and other relevant information to modify plans, in the 
process empowering communities, women and youth and individuals to continually adapt in the face of changing 
circumstances. The aim of the project is to complement disaster response efforts, building on any initial  
recoveries to add sustainable capacity to continually adapt through realistic livelihood improvement strategies. 
While this is considered to be the optimum response, two factors remain outside the direct influence of the  
project, namely the extent and impact of the drought, and the resources made available to the disaster response. 
These have to be taken into consideration when assessing the probability of the risk occurring. If the drought 
conditions worsen and continue as was the case in the last two years, then it may become more difficult to 
channel efforts towards longer-term sustainable change as communities and other stakeholders focus on short- 
term survival mechanisms making it difficult to induce target communities to think about longer-term solutions in 
the face of severe droughts. Similarly, if Ethiopia is unable to attract necessary external assistance for the  
disaster and humanitarian response, the ability of this project to bring about sustainable change may be severely 
compromised. To some extent, this project hopes to strengthen the country’s ability to attract the external 
assistance it urgently requires, by demonstrating a vision for, and commitment to, more transformative change  
that will reduce the likelihood of the future incidence of such emergencies. Note also that this project will support 
the government in its effort to tackle two resource competing activities: development and humanitarian 
interventions. In the face of drought, the government often tends to focus on addressing disaster responses by 
shifting resources away from investments, while the project will fill the gap in building long-term responses in the 
target communities, thereby ensuring complementarities between short-term responses and long-term 
interventions to address climate change-induced droughts and disasters. The likelihood occurrence of this risk is 
low as the country has been able to mobilize both domestic (budgetary) and external resources for emergency 
and humanitarian assistance for drought affected communities in the last couple of years. 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of risk 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Institutions fail to build the new capacities/adopt 
the new planning approaches that will be 
required 
Strategic, 
institutional risk 
Medium 
Medium

=== PAGE 52 ===
G 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |PAGE 49 OF 64 
 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
191.    While, ultimately, this project intends to build the resilience of the participating communities, it is essential that 
an institutional framework able to continually support community efforts emerges in parallel. Creation of such 
sustainable institutional capacity has been beyond other such initiatives for a variety of reasons, including, but not 
limited to, resistance to change, protection of vested interests in the status quo, gender bias, and the creation of 
unsustainable cost structures. This risk will be mitigated by applying the lessons learned from the considerable 
body of relevant past experience, which, among other things, demonstrates the critical importance of using fully 
participative and gender responsive approaches. In this case, it is known that there is a significant demand for 
change, given the necessary resources and support. By bringing together an array of stakeholders including 
women’s groups in participatory processes, the momentum for change will be increased, and the risk of these 
becoming challenged will be reduced. By working with existing institutions, and concentrating GCF funds on 
capital expenditures, the risk of building unsustainable cost structures will be avoided. At the outset, existing 
organizations (including Government institutions at national, regional and local levels) will assume responsibility 
for delivery, while being supported by the project to continually collaborate and seek the integrated solutions 
needed in the future. It is through this facilitation of the collaboration of existing institutions that the project will 
manage this risk and contribute to its ultimate success. 
Selected Risk Factor 7 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of risk 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Necessary improvements to rules and regulations 
are not introduced 
Strategic, 
institutional risk 
Medium 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
192. Appropriate rules and regulations are vital parts of the enabling environment. The fact that such rules and 
regulations do not already exist indicate a risk that there is either a lack of understanding of, or a reluctance to 
introduce, what is required in the context of the development of a climate-resilient economy. Preparatory work 
indicates that the problem is uncertainty as to what steps should be taken to create an appropriate enabling 
environment, and a need for support in finding the answers. The project has been designed to deliver such 
support. Given alignment with national priorities, there is impetus for the introduction of appropriate solutions. 
Where  difficulties  are  encountered  in  introducing  necessary changes,  the  cross-sectoral  project governance 
mechanisms will provide a forum in which the nature of obstacles can be determined and political solutions can 
be engineered. 
Selected Risk Factor 8 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of risk 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
The project governance mechanisms fail to bring 
about the necessary collaborative work and/or 
the new institutional systems for climate- 
responsive planning and development 
Strategic, 
institutional risk 
High 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
193. A key element of the project’s innovation is the participative planning that will bring about cross-sectoral 
integration. This innovation implies the need to try new things, which in turn suggests there is a risk these 
approaches will not work in practice. If this were to prove the case, it would undermine the fundamental aim of the 
project to bring about and institutionalize new systems for climate-responsive planning and development. This is  
a risk that has been confronted through the preparatory work, as the sectors have worked together to design the 
project as well as the collaborative management systems that are to be employed. Again, given the alignment of 
the project’s aims with national priorities, there is a momentum and appetite for the kind of climate-responsive 
management systems that the CRGE strategy has helped envisage. Again, should difficulties be encountered in 
introducing necessary changes, the cross-sectoral project governance mechanisms will provide a forum in which 
the nature of obstacles can be determined and political solutions can be conceived. At the highest level, guidance 
will be provided to implementing entities on cross-sectoral project governance and synergies through the CRGE 
Secretariat where implementing entities are members of the Secretariat. This is expected to minimize  the 
likelihood of occurrence of silo approach in climate-responsive planning and development across implementing 
entities. 
Selected Risk Factor 9 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of risk 
Probability of

=== PAGE 53 ===
G 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |PAGE 50 OF 64 
 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
 
risk occurring 
Irrigation structures, water schemes and other 
infrastructures might not be properly and timely 
maintained or fixed 
Technical risk 
High 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
194. Communities will be adequately familiarized with irrigation technologies, which  will be introduced  by the 
project. Operation and maintenance training manual will be prepared in the local language and training will be 
given to project beneficiaries through Farmers Training Centers (FTC). Furthermore, women will be involved in 
decision making regarding appropriate technologies and they will take part as key-members and leaders in  
water committees formed for the operation and maintenance of their water and irrigation schemes. Farmer 
Organizations (FO) that have been established to manage water supply systems through the formation of a 
water committee and that make valuable contribution to planning, improving, upgrading and maintenance of 
water supply and irrigation schemes, will include women leaders and receive training on operation and 
maintenance of facilities and financial management. Use of indigenous knowledge and women’s contributions to 
water provision will be an integral part that will be aligned with the organizational and management aspects of 
the schemes. Water User Associations (WUAs) will have equal numbers of men and women to take charge of 
the implementation process and own the process so the WUA will be responsible for the continuing O&M of the 
schemes  when  they have  been  completed.  Periodically, Woreda  experts,  Development  Agents  (DAs)  and 
farmers will receive training of trainers so O&M knowledge is inherited and practice sustained after project 
closure. 
Selected Risk Factor 10 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of risk 
Probability of 
risk occurring 
The project involves procurement of technologies, goods, 
equipment and services from domestic and international 
markets. Hence there might be delays in procurement 
processes, supply of items, and other malpractices in 
procurement management. 
Strategic, 
Financial risk 
High 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
195. The Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation (MoFEC) is mandated to ensure that public finance 
management is being practiced across public institutions. Each public institution is required to follow and abide 
by the public finance rules of the country including the procurements. Given that this project is going to be 
implemented by sector ministries, they are required to respect the overall public financial management (e.g. 
Financial Management Proclamation No.970/2008 EC) and procurement and property administration guideline 
(e.g. Procurement and Property Administration No. 648/2009 EC). As an accredited entity MoFEC has  
significant experience with domestic and international procurement and strong relationships with the Federal 
Public Procurement and Property Administration Agency (PPA), which is responsible for management  of 
national and international procurement activities of public institutions. To ensure uniformity and accountability, 
sector ministries have procurement units or directorates, which undertake procurement of goods and services 
according to the procurement guideline. In addition, each sector ministries have internal audit units/directorates 
to enforce relevant finance and procurement guidelines are respected. As required by the public finance 
management guideline of MoFEC, sector ministries are required to prepare and submit performance reports 
including physical and financial utilization to MoFEC which will be subject to critical review and evaluation by 
MoFEC. The procurement directorate of MoFEC will actively engage with PPA and the procurement units/ or 
directorate of the implementing entities. Thus, two issues are worth noting. First, procurement capacity building 
trainings will be also organized. Specifically, project implementing entities will be given prior training on financial 
and procurement modalities with a focus on this project. Second, procurement planning will be prepared and 
executed at all levels together with procurement units/or directorates of implementing ministries. 
Selected Risk Factor 11 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of risk 
Probability of 
risk occurring 
The successful implementation of the project seeks 
engagement of various stakeholders and actors at 
federal, regional, Woreda and Kebele level. Lack of 
Strategic, 
institutional 
risk 
Medium 
Low

=== PAGE 54 ===
G 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |PAGE 51 OF 64 
 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
 
strong coordination arrangement will hamper the success 
of the project 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
196. MoFEC is the implementing partner of this project. It has rich experience of coordinating various national 
flagship programs and projects. The CRGE Facility, under MOFEC will be responsible for the overall 
coordination of the project. The Facility secretariat, in addition to its existing staff, will hire relevant experts 
(preferably a gender trainer/expert) who will coordinate the project. The CRGE Facility Management Committee 
(which is comprised of State Ministers from the two project delivery ministries) will also serve as Steering 
Committee of this project. MOFEC will ensure that the two line ministries (MOANR, and MOWIE,) will establish 
Project Coordination Unit (PCU), which will be responsible for the overall coordination and leadership of sector- 
specific activities. The line ministries in turn will ensure the establishment of similar coordination arrangement at 
regional and district level. Bureau of Finance and Economic Development (BOFED) and Office of Finance and 
Economic Development (WOFED) will respectively play the overall coordination of the project at regional and 
Woreda levels. In this connection, adequate budget is allocated for recruitment of project staff at federal,  
regional and Woreda levels including gender experts. 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon 
197. The likely emerging risks have been addressed through the risk  analysis.  Methodologically,  the  key to 
effective risk management will be the high degree of stakeholder participation that ensures the project can learn 
and adapt to circumstance as implementation progresses. 
* Please expand this sub-section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.

=== PAGE 55 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |H
PAGE 52 OF 64 
 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework under the Results Management Framework. 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Increased climate 
resilience of population, 
environment and 
economy to the adverse 
impacts of climate 
change 
• 
Year round availability food and water for homestead use and agriculture during times of drought 
• 
Reduced loss of livestock and other assets during times of drought; 
• 
Restoration of the natural habitat 
• 
No school drop-out of girls and children due to drought induced shortage of food and water; 
• 
Improved representation of women in decision making positions, 
• 
The extent to which communities and local administration practices climate smart planning process 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification (MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
(if applicable) 
Final 
Fund-level impacts 
A1.0 Increased resilience 
and enhanced livelihoods 
of the most vulnerable 
people, communities and 
regions 
Extent to which lives and 
livelihoods of the most 
vulnerable groups are enhanced 
and made more resilient to 
climate related hazards in the 
geographic area that can be 
attributed to GCF intervention. 
Monitoring and 
evaluation reports, 
Survey report 
0 
99,000 direct 
male and female 
beneficiaries 
demonstrating 
improvements in 
both adaptive 
capacity & 
livelihood 
productivity 
330,000 direct 
(out of which 
99,000 female) 
beneficiaries 
demonstrating 
improvements in 
both adaptive 
capacity & 
livelihood 
Disaggregated at project/programme 
level by vulnerable group. Vulnerable 
groups can include women, children, 
elderly and disabled individuals. 
This indicator is envisioned to be 
measured in the form of an index, 
composed by a set of sub-indicators. The 
methodologies, to be developed, can be 
informed by similar indicators adopted by 
productivity 
AF, LDCF/SCCF, PPCR, GIZ and ICF 
among others. 
Sub indicators composing this index 
would look at specific aspects of what 
constitute resilience and well-being such 
as access (to services and resources), 
reduced risk of losses (economic, health, 
lives, etc.) and enhanced 
production/productivity (in agriculture,

=== PAGE 56 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |H
PAGE 53 OF 64 
 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
 
livestock, and other economic activities) 
Change in expected losses of 
livelihoods and economic assets 
due to the climate change 
induced drought in the project 
intervention areas 
Baseline 
data will be 
determined 
by the 
project 
commence 
ment 
Over USD 12 
million worth of 
livelihood and 
economic assets 
loss saved 
Over USD 23 
million worth of 
livelihood and 
economic assets 
loss saved 
Number of males and females 
with year-round access to 
reliable and safe water supply 
despite climate shocks and 
stresses 
Household surveys; 
Monitoring and 
evaluation reports 
12,500 
Male and 
Female 
251,829 male 
and female 
beneficiaries 
(M= 128431 
F= 123,398) 
330,000 male 
and female 
beneficiaries 
The livelihood and climate information system 
and services fully sustains at grassroots levels 
Smooth handover of project deliverables and 
materials to the communities and regions 
ensured to sustain achieved changes and 
manage the overall project risks 
Improved resilience of 
ecosystems and 
ecosystem services 
Coverage of degraded lands 
managed and protected in 
response to climate variability 
and change 
Periodic surveys, 
terminal evaluation 
report 
1,200 ha of 
restored 
degraded 
land 
1,570 ha of 
degraded land 
protected & 
managed and 
1000 ha of land 
planted with 
trees 
7,850 ha of 
degraded land 
protected & 
managed out of 
which 5,000 ha 
planted with 
trees 
A3.0 Increased resilience 
of infrastructure and the 
built environment to climate 
change threats 
Number of physical assets 
constructed or modified to 
increase resilience to climate 
variability and change 
Supervision and 
monitoring and 
evaluation, surveys, 
0 drilled 
wells using 
solar 
energy 
13 BH 
operated by 
diesel 
generators, 
26 hand 
dug wells 
112 drilled wells 
(82 deep and 30 
shallow) and 80 
hand dug wells, 
30 springs and 
31 community 
ponds built, 70 
water reservoirs, 
60 water points 
112 drilled wells 
and 80 hand dug 
wells, 30 
springs, 31 
community 
ponds, 150 
water reservoirs, 
140 water points 
Assets will be disaggregated by sector, 
type of asset, action (constructed or 
strengthened). The methodology will 
delineate an assessment of the extent 
and quality of the constructed/modified 
asset depending on asset type (Coastal 
erosion defenses constructed to 
withstand impacts of climate change 
(km);  Road constructed to withstand 
0 springs26 
15 
impacts of climate change (km)). 
reservoirs 
 
26 The feasibility study identified 309 springs outcrops which can be developed

=== PAGE 57 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |H
PAGE 54 OF 64 
 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
 
15 water 
points 
Project Outcomes 
A5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and regulatory 
systems for climate- 
responsive planning and 
development 
Institutional and regulatory 
systems that improve incentives 
for climate resilience and their 
effective implementation 
Annual plans, 
Project periodic 
reports, Monitoring 
and Evaluation 
reports 
0 
22 Woredas, 9 
regional bureaus 
practice 
integrated and 
participatory 
planning, 
implementation 
and M&E in a 
coordinated 
manner. 
22 Woredas, 9 
regional bureaus 
and practice 
integrated and 
participatory 
planning, 
implementation 
and M&E in a 
coordinated 
manner. 
Government enforces integrated approaches 
to project implementation. This covers both 
the vertical institutional integration and 
horizontal sectoral synergies of project 
planning and implementation. There is also a 
systemic platform that readily avails climate 
information at all levels. 
Number and level of effective 
coordination mechanisms and 
synergy at the national and 
regional levels, including 
between and among relevant 
sector ministries 
Annual plans, 
Project periodic 
reports, Monitoring 
and Evaluation 
reports 
0 
22 Woredas, 9 
regional bureaus 
practice 
synergetic 
coordination in 
climate smart 
planning at local 
level. 
22 Woredas, 9 
regional bureaus 
and 5 sectors 
practice 
synergetic 
coordination in 
climate smart 
planning at local 
level 
Government enforces integrated approaches 
to project implementation. This covers both 
the vertical institutional integration and 
horizontal sectoral synergies of project 
planning and implementation. There is also a 
systemic platform that readily avails climate 
information at all levels. 
A8.0 Strengthened 
awareness of climate 
threats and risk-reduction 
processes and regulatory 
systems for climate- 
responsive planning and 
development 
Number of males and females 
made aware of climate threats 
and related appropriate 
responses 
Monitoring and 
evaluation reports 
0 
129,360 men & 
134,640 women 
directly benefit 
from the project 
in the 22 target 
Woredas 
646,800 men & 
673,200 women 
directly benefit 
from the project 
in the 22 target 
Woredas 
The community is willing to make use of 
climate information provided 
Improved resilience of 
ecosystems and 
ecosystem services 
Hectare of land rehabilitated or 
existing forest protected around 
the water sources and water 
points 
Periodic surveys, 
terminal evaluation 
report 
260, 343 ha 
of 
degraded 
land 
1,570 ha of 
degraded land 
protected & 
managed and 
1000 ha of land 
planted with 
trees 
7,850 ha of 
degraded land 
protected & 
managed out of 
which 5,000 ha 
planted with 
trees 
Project outputs 
Component 1 
Improved access to water to build resilient livelihoods

=== PAGE 58 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |H
PAGE 55 OF 64 
 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
 
Outputs 
Indicators 
MoVs 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
(if applicable) 
Final 
Output 1.1 Water 
Number of wells drilled and 
Field survey 
0 drilled 
112 drilled wells 
Groundwater with a discharge of 10 l/s is 
schemes developed 
pumping groundwater using 
reports; progress 
wells using 
112 drilled wells 
and 80 hand 
developed. The groundwater extracted is of 
solar energy 
reports 
solar 
(82 deep and 30 
dug wells, 30 
potable quality. Firms are able to drill, construct 
energy 
shallow) and 80 
springs, 31 
and install the solar pumps inside the wells in 
Number of hand - dug Wells 
13 BH 
hand dug wells, 
community 
the required period of time. 
constructed 
operated 
30 springs and 
ponds, 150 
by diesel 
31 community 
water reservoirs, 
Number of springs developed 
generators, 
ponds built, 70 
140 water points 
Number of community ponds 
26 hand 
water reservoirs, 
developed 
dug wells 
60 water points 
Number of water reservoirs 
0 springs27 
constructed 
15 
Number of water points 
reservoirs 
constructed 
15 water 
points 
Activities 
Descriptions 
Inputs 
Description of inputs 
Develop Groundwater 
using PV-powered 
pumping systems 
This Activity is designed to minimize the adverse 
impacts of climate-induced rainfall variability on the 
production and productivity of smallholder agriculture. 
This activity also intends to augment the supply of 
potable water through access to groundwater using 
solar-powered pumping systems, which will involve 
organizing water well drilling, construction of shallow 
water wells, and installing PV-powered submersible 
and surface pumps in the target communities. This 
encompasses activities such as construction of, hand- 
dug wells, spring development, water retention 
structures (dams), etc. 
• 
Prepare detailed design 
and tender document; 
• 
Organize water well 
drilling, construction, 
supervision and 
commissioning of shallow 
wells (100-150 meters 
depth with 6-8 inch PVC 
casing) 
• 
Geophysical surveys 
• 
Water well drilling, 
construction and 
supervision (shallow wells) 
• 
Install submersible and 
surface PV pumps 
The inputs are largely investments in rural water supply schemes, 
and substituting design generation in water pumping. 
Specifically, the inputs will finance the preparation and design of 
tender documents for consultants and contractors, conduct 396 
geological and hydrological studies; construct of 396 water wells; 
procurement of complete set of solar powered submersible and 
surface water pump systems including all electro-mechanical 
works. 
 
27 The feasibility study identified 309 springs outcrops which can be developed

=== PAGE 59 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |H
PAGE 56 OF 64 
 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
Indicators 
MoVs 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
(if applicable) 
Final 
Output 1.2 Small-scale 
irrigation (SSI) and 
associated water-retaining 
structures established 
• 
Hectare of irrigated land 
Progress reports, 
field survey reports 
129 ha 
1,625 ha of land 
irrigated 
5,421 ha of land 
irrigated 
The community will be willing to shift to SSI and 
also contribute to the development of the 
scheme. By-laws will be respected in the 
equitable distribution of the water resources. 
Activities 
Descriptions 
Inputs 
Description of inputs 
Construction of small-scale 
irrigation (SSI) and 
associated water-retaining 
structures 
This Activity envisage a combination of interventions 
including development of small-scale irrigation, 
upgrading traditional irrigation schemes, construction 
of diversion weirs, and development of pipe-supported 
irrigation schemes in the target communities. 
• 
Provide water harvesting 
structures 
• 
Construct community 
ponds and hand-dug wells 
to irrigate farmland 
• 
Develop springs to irrigate 
farmland 
• 
Develop and expand 
small-scale irrigation 
technologies to irrigate 
farmland, including 
traditional irrigation 
These inputs will address the development and upgrading of 320 
traditional irrigation schemes, construction of 1100 diversion weirs 
for irrigation, installation of 550 pipe supported irrigation schemes, 
support 22 community pond construction activities; finance 
development of 990 springs for irrigation, and development of 1632 
scale irrigation canals. 
• 
Indicators 
MoVs 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
(if applicable) 
Final 
Output 1.3 Water 
Resource Monitoring 
instruments installed and 
used for groundwater 
monitoring 
Number of Wells installed with 
groundwater monitoring system 
Progress reports; 
field survey reports; 
GPS spatial data 
sets 
0 
0 
44 Ground water 
Monitoring 
Devices installed 
Federal, regional and Woreda bodies 
collaborate for effective use and operation, and 
maintained 
Activities 
Descriptions 
Inputs 
Description of inputs

=== PAGE 60 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |H
PAGE 57 OF 64 
 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
 
Water Resource 
Monitoring 
instruments installed 
and used for 
groundwater 
monitoring 
This activity helps to install water resource monitoring 
devices within the targeted Woredas to provide 
meaningful data to inform decision-making at all 
levels. GPS equipment’s shall also be supplied to 
monitor and accurately document project results 
• 
GPS equipment’s and 
ground water well 
monitoring devices. 
Provision of Garmin, GPS for monitoring and documenting 
purposes, 
Supply and install ground water well monitoring device - 
Component 2 
Management of natural resources for improved water availability 
• 
Indicators 
MoVs 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
(if applicable) 
Final

=== PAGE 61 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |H
PAGE 58 OF 64 
 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 2.1: Degraded 
• 
Number of community 
nurseries established; 
• 
Hectare of degraded 
land around the water 
sources covered with 
trees and existing 
forest protected 
• 
Hectare of land on 
which soil fertility 
management practiced 
Reports, field 
surveys 
10 
community 
66 nurseries 
established and 
66 nurseries 
established and 
The communities actively engage in the 
rehabilitation of degraded lands surrounding 
landscape surrounding the 
nurseries; 
functional 
functional, 
the water sources and protect and manage 
water sources rehabilitated 
1,200 ha of 
2,075 ha of 
7,850 ha of 
planted trees and existing forest (if any) in line 
and managed 
restored 
degraded land 
degraded land 
with their bylaws 
degraded 
rehabilitated or 
rehabilitated or 
land 
protected 
protected 
1500 ha of land 
2,850 ha of land 
threated with 
treated with soil 
soil fertility 
fertility 
management 
management 
Activities 
Descriptions 
Inputs 
Description of inputs 
Establish and 
The project will support establishment and 
• 
Procure seeds that will be 
used for 
afforestation/reforestation 
purposes 
• 
Support 
afforestation/reforestation 
of degraded forest land 
• 
Enable area closure of 
severely degraded land 
through enrichment 
planting 
•
The inputs will invest in rehabilitating degraded forestlands. The 
operationalize nursery 
operationalization of one community nursery in each 
support includes among others procurement of seeds; carry out 
target Kebele. These will be used to raise seedlings, 
seedling production/Tree and grass seedling planting on 7,850 ha 
Treat land with soil fertility 
which will be planted on degraded land surrounding 
of land 
management 
the sources of water schemes, which will be used for 
both domestic consumption and irrigation 
Component 3 
Strengthen institutions, build capacity of communities and government staff and Facilitate communication and learning 
• 
Indicators 
MoVs 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
(if applicable) 
Final 
Output 3.1 Improved 
# of experts/community 
Periodic progress 
0 
850 out of which 
1,500 out of 
The Woredas assign the right persons for the 
capacity of both men and 
members with knowledge and 
report, filed survey 
40% are 
which 40% are 
capacity building trainings on the key areas 
women beneficiaries on 
skills; operations and 
Workshop reports; 
females 
females 
mentioned 
use, management and 
maintenance; and irrigation 
5 experience 
10 experience 
administration of irrigation 
agronomy 
exchange 
exchange and 
and potable water 
# of in country experience 
events; 
learning events; 
schemes and enhanced 
exchange visits and learning 
720 persons, out 
1,150 out of 
communication and 
events organized, 
of which 40% 
which 40% are 
learning 
# of persons with knowledge 
are females, on 
females on KM

=== PAGE 62 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |H
PAGE 59 OF 64 
 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
 
management and information 
KM and 
and 
communication skills, 
communication, 
communication; 
# of persons trained on ESSF 
2,000 persons 
# of climate responsive planning 
trained on ESSF 
and budgeting manual 
22 woreda 
specific climate 
responsive 
planning and 
budgeting 
manual 
prepared 
Activities 
Descriptions 
Inputs 
Description of inputs

=== PAGE 63 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |H
PAGE 60 OF 64 
 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
 
Build the capacity of 
manpower at community 
and sector levels 
This activity will enhance implementation capacity of 
the project through developing and strengthening 
human capability through tailor-made training on 
IWRM and climate responsive planning and budgeting 
• 
Provide tailor-made 
training at all levels; 
These inputs support the provision of trainings for Federal regional, 
and Woreda experts on irrigation agronomy; conduct capacity 
building and training for DAs. 
Learning and 
communication systems 
This activity will establish learning and communication 
systems through workshops, experience sharing. 
• 
Organize workshops, 
events and awareness- 
creation forums 
• 
Synthesize, prepare and 
disseminate 
communication and 
knowledge materials 
• 
Share in-country 
experiences 
• 
Develop one central 
• 
Develop a project-specific 
M&E template 
These inputs invest in awareness building, exchange visits, and 
knowledge generation and sharing to promote targeted 
communities resilience. Inputs finance awareness creation on 
closure and improvements of community grazing land; scaling-up 
good practices/knowledge on forest management; experience 
sharing on climate smart villages and demonstrations; document 
lessons and develop mechanism for scaling-up and ensuring 
sustainability, organizing a field day; conduct demonstration of 
post-harvest technologies, and exposure visit for different 
stakeholders. 
These inputs also address the issue of establishing PIM to ensure 
the engagement of National, Regional, Woreda and Kebele-level 
actors, plus communities and other relevant stakeholders, to 
effectively and efficiently implement the project. 
The inputs will also support to strengthen the links between 
Kebeles to at least one nearby University / Research institution 
/TVET/ training center. 
• 
Indicators 
MoVs 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
(if applicable) 
Final 
21)  Output 3.2 
Institutional framework 
and  local 
management 
instruments 
strengthened 
# of Woreda level institutions, 
which have started practicing 
climate smart planning and 
budgeting, 
# of database established and 
operationalized 
# of linkages established with 
higher institutions/ research 
centers 
, 
Field survey, 
reports 
0 
22 sector offices 
prepare and 
implement 
climate smart 
plans; 
1 central 
database 
system; 
4 linkages with 
higher learning 
institutions/ 
44 sector offices 
(two sectors per 
woreda); 
1 central 
database 
system; 
9 linkages with 
higher learning 
institutions/ 
research centers 
5,100 persons 
The Woredas are committed to assign the 
appropriate individuals for the capacity building 
trainings and workshop

=== PAGE 64 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL |H
PAGE 61 OF 64 
 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
 
 
 
 
research centers 
on ESSF 
Activities 
Descriptions 
Inputs 
Description of inputs 
Strengthen institutional 
infrastructural capacity 
This Activity addresses the means of implementation 
of other interventions proposed in this project in the 
target Woredas and is central to the sustainability of 
the project. 
• 
Procure and distribute 
office and ICT equipment 
and tools 
• 
Establish/strengthen 
community-based 
organizations and systems 
• 
Develop a project 
operational structure and 
implementation manual, 
and 
• 
Provide institutional 
backstopping 
• 
database management 
system to capture all 
relevant data 
These inputs support forest sector capacity need assessment in 22 
Woredas; provision of equipment and materials for the forest 
sector in targeted Woredas, improve Farmers' Training Centers 
(FTCs) to demonstrate and train farmers on climate proof 
measures.

=== PAGE 65 ===
H 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 64 
 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
 
 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
198. 
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) is one of several implementation and management tools that support 
successful delivery of this project. Without careful monitoring, the necessary data are not collected; hence 
learning cannot be achieved and evaluation cannot be done well. Monitoring and evaluation is one of the 
core responsibilities of MOFEC. The CRGE Facility, the Federal Sector Ministries, Regions and local 
stakeholders will conduct regular monitoring and supervision of this project. 
 
199. 
The monitoring and reporting system of the proposed project will be gender sensitive and will follow 
guidance from the GCF and comply with GCF M&E policy, ensuring that the project maintains a simple and 
interactive monitoring system allowing for regular reporting and learning at all levels. It is expected that it  
will be based on the following core activities: 
 
200. 
Activity 
Recording/Process 
Documentation: 
Progress 
monitoring 
will 
provide 
evidence 
on 
accomplishment of the core activities planned under each Output and Activity, which will be scrutinized by 
assigning milestones and implementation timelines. This will help the strategic and operational managers to 
identify which activities are ahead, behind or on schedule. The Accredited Entity and executing entities will 
be responsible for ensuring routine monitoring on the use of inputs (including finances) and implementation 
of activities. 
 
201. 
Quarterly Progress Report: The Executing entities will submit aggregated quarterly physical progress 
reports to the CRGE Facility, which will coordinate the overall implementation and delivery of the project. 
The CRGE Facility will aggregate and submit a consolidated report (both financial and physical) to GCF. 
Quarterly reporting will capture activity and output-level information. The narrative section of the quarterly 
report, therefore, will include a summary of activities and outputs contributing to expected outcomes. 
 
202. 
Annual Institutional Learning Events: The EE’s will undertake an annual learning event to reflect on the 
changes being observed and to take stock of progress made. These learning events will help sharing of 
experiences and lesson-learning among the participating entities (including regional entities, as relevant). 
 
203. 
Annual Performance Assessment: The Executing entities will submit an annual Performance 
Assessment Report (PAR) on the project Outputs. The PARs inform two monitoring activities at the project 
coordination level – annual monitoring missions and annual reviews/reports – and will leverage the lessons 
and insights from responses to the M&E. The reporting process is similar to that for quarterly reports. 
Executing entities will aggregate component reports before submission to their respective Project 
Coordination Units, which will then submit to the CRGE Facility. PARs capture Activity, Output and 
Outcome-level information. The report combines national and GCF reporting requirements, which include 
but are not limited to, reporting on: 
 
• 
Progress made towards project Objective and project Outcomes – each with indicators, baseline data 
and end-of-project targets (cumulative); 
• 
Project Outputs delivered per project Outcome (annual); 
• 
Financial reports; 
• 
Lesson learned/good practice; and 
• 
Annual Work Plan (for the following year). 
 
204. 
Joint Monitoring Missions: Joint monitoring missions will provide an opportunity to engage stakeholders 
of the project, including those that do not have a direct role in implementation. These missions will be 
organized by the CRGE Facility or line ministries, to be undertaken annually, and involve the Executing 
entities and other development partners. 
 
205. 
Ad-hoc Quality Assurance Missions: These will be co-organized by the relevant ministry and the CRGE 
Facility for the purpose of validating M&E information during site visits. A key part of these missions is to 
hold reflection meetings at regional and Woreda levels. Observations, decisions and action points arising 
from the mission will be distributed to participants. 
 
206. 
Mid-term Review and Terminal Evaluation: Half-way through the project lifetime and during the final 
three months, an independent mid-term review /terminal evaluation will be conducted by an independent 
consultant/evaluator.  Both  reports  will summarize the  results  achieved (Objectives, Outcomes, Outputs),

=== PAGE 66 ===
H 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 64 
 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
 
 
lessons learned, problems met and areas where results may not have been achieved. Output-level 
evaluation will be based on assessing results against the baseline. It will also lay out recommendations for 
any further steps that may need to be taken to ensure sustainability and replicability of the project’s results. 
Evaluations will be implemented in line with GCF standards. The review/evaluation will be guided by best- 
practice approaches to evaluation of climate change interventions 28. At mid-term, there should be an 
emphasis upon project or process review, with learning-oriented enquiry; the terminal evaluation will be 
more focused upon success in delivering outcomes and the impact on climate change adaptation in 
Ethiopia. 
 
207. 
Learning and knowledge sharing: Results from the project will be disseminated within and beyond the 
project intervention zone through existing information-sharing networks and forums. The CRGE Facility, in 
collaboration with the entities involved in the project, will identify and participate, as relevant and  
appropriate, in scientific, policy-based and/or any other networks, which may be of benefit to project 
implementation though lessons-learned. Further, the CRGE Facility, in collaboration with the entities 
involved in the project, will identify, analyze and share lessons-learned that might be beneficial in the design 
and implementation of similar future projects. A two-way flow of information will be maintained between this 
project and others of a similar focus. 
 
208. 
The reporting path of the project is depicted as below (see Figure 3), with a description in the box 
underneath. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Project Reporting Path 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 Colvin J, Williams A, Ebi K &Patwardhan A (eds) (2016), Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning for Climate Change Adaptation at the 
National Level. Washington: STAP/Provia, in press. 
Description of the reporting path: 
• 
Level-1: Woreda’s report on monthly, quarterly and annual basis to regional sector bureaus.
 
Level-2: Regional sector bureaus consolidate the quarterly and annual physical reports received from Woredas 
into one report and submit this to the respective federal ministry.
 
Level-3: Federal ministries aggregate the physical reports received from regional sector bureaus into one report 
and submit to the CRGE Facility.
 
Level-4: The CRGE Facility presents the report to the Management Committee for discussion and approval.
 
Level-5: After obtaining endorsement and approval of the Management Committee, the CRGE Facility will send 
the report to GCF.

=== PAGE 67 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 64 
 
 
I. Supporting Documents for Funding  Proposal 
☒ 
NDA No-objection Letter (Annex I) 
☒ 
Feasibility Study (Annex II) 
□ 
Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (Annex III) 
☒ 
Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co-financing commitment (Annex IV) 
☒ 
Project Confirmation/Term Sheet (Annex V) 
☒ 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(Annex VI) 
☒ 
Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (Annex VII) 
□ 
Evaluation Report of the  baseline project (Annex VIII) 
☒ 
Map indicating the location of the project/programme (Annex IX) 
☒ 
Timetable of project/programme implementation (Annex X) 
☒ 
Project confirmation (Annex XI) 
☒ 
Economic analysis (Annex XII) 
☒ 
Additional background details (Annex XIII) 
☒ 
Additional Supporting Documents (Annex XIV) 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable 
supporting documents. 
H

=== PAGE 68 ===
Kind Regards, 
Name: 
• 
251- (0)11-170-4001 
251-(0)11-170-4012
u12760 
TELE FAX: 251-(0)11-170-4158/45 
 
 
 
O>vl-f-A- f l.. &-1\'P. ..c;.'l°h&-1\.f'P. cr-11,th 
fi'l'1'11l: f "} 1''r fi'lfC 'Hl -l- t\a>-'I' "U.fl•f;C 
The Federal Democratic Republic of  Ethiopia 
Ministry of  Environment Forest and Climate Change 
 
 
 
Green Climate Fund 
Songdo Business District 
Republic of South Korea 
Re:  Funding  proposal  for  the  GCF  by  the  United  Nations  Development  Programme  (UNDP)re garding 
"Responding to the increasingthreat of drought: building the resilience of the most vulnerable communities 
through climate-smart and landscape-based investments". 
 
Dear Madam/Sir, 
 
We refer to the project "Responding to the Increasing Risk of Drought: Building Gender Responsive 
Resilience of the Most Vulnerable Communities" in Ethiopia as included in the funding proposal submitted by 
MoFECto us on June 012017. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change (MEFCC), the National Designated Authority of Ethiopia. 
Pursuant to GCF decision 8.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby 
communicate our no-objection to the project as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection,  it is implied that: 
 
(a) The government of Ethiopia has no-objection to the project as included in the funding proposal; 
(b) The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Ethiopia'i t national priorities, 
strategies and plans; 
(c) In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the project as included in the 
funding proposal is in conformity with relevant nationa l laws and regulations. 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the project as included in the 
funding proposal has been duly followed. 
,.... - ·-  -"'- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
251-(0)11-170-4138 
 
A.\l'I 1\0'11 A.:t-r-kJ' 
Addis Ababa-Ethiopia 
 
Website: www.epa.gov.et

=== PAGE 69 ===
Page 1 
 
 
 
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
 
Basic project/programme information 
Project/programme title 
Responding to the increasing risk of drought: building gender- 
responsive resilience of the most vulnerable communities 
Accredited entity 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation (MOFEC) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website 
Language(s) of disclosure 
Link to disclosure 
Other link(s) 
http:// 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website 
2017-08-30 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Amharic 
Link to disclosure 
http://www.mofed.gov.et/web/guest/home/- 
/asset_publisher/St3ndGdsJZFl/content/annex-vi-ethiopia-esmp- 
final-report-11-aug--1?redirect=%2F&inheritRedirect=true 
Other link(s) 
http://www.mofed.gov.et/web/guest/home/- 
/asset_publisher/St3ndGdsJZFl/content/esmf-amharic-translation-11-1- 
?redirect=%2F&inheritRedirect=true 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website 
Click here to enter a date. 
Language(s) of disclosure 
Link to disclosure 
http:// 
Other link(s) 
http:// 
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable) 
Description of report/disclosure 
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website 
Click here to enter a date. 
Language(s) of disclosure 
Link to disclosure 
http:// 
Other link(s) 
http://
