=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Microsoft® Word for Microsoft 365
producer: Microsoft® Word for Microsoft 365
creationDate: D:20240930141012+09'00'
modDate: D:20240930141500+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
21 – 24 October 2024 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 10 
GCF/B.40/02/Add.15 
30 September 2024 
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum XV 
Funding proposal package for FP253 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following six parts: 
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Greening Financial Systems: Delivering
Climate Finance for All” by the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development;
b) No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
c)
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure;
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
f)
Gender documentation of the funding proposal.
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated authority(ies) or 
focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund, the funding 
proposal titled “Greening financial Systems: Delivering Climate Finance for All” submitted by the European Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board Members and 
Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged or commercially 
sensitive information of the entity.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.15 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
91 
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure 
110 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
115 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
127 
Gender documentation 
129

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
Greening Financial Systems: Delivering Climate Finance 
for All  
Country(ies): 
Armenia, Egypt, Jordan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz 
Republic, Moldova, Mongolia, Morocco, North Macedonia, 
Serbia, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan 
Accredited Entity: 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) 
Date of first submission: 
2023/08/21 
Date of current submission  
2024/09/27 
Version number 
V.15 Final Public

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.5.0 | PAGE 0 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
 
NOTE TO ACCREDITED ENTITIES ON THE USE OF THE FUNDING PROPOSAL TEMPLATE 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 
60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service 
standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11. 
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project 
 and programme funding proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the 
submission to the Board, subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed 
pursuant to the IDP. Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section 
G.4.  
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 1 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Programme 
A.2. Public or 
private 
sector 
Private 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals 
(RFP) 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result 
area(s) 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme 
targets below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of 
GCF and Co-financers’ contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when 
summed should be 100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively. 
 
GCF  
contribution 
Co-
financers’ 
contributio
n 
Mitigation total 
85%i 
85% 
☒ Energy generation and access  
20% 
20% 
☒ Low-emission transport  
5% 
5% 
☒ Buildings, cities, industries and 
appliances  
60% 
60% 
☐ Forestry and land use 
 
 
Adaptation total  
15%ii 
15% 
☐ Most vulnerable people and 
communities 
 
 
☒ Health and well-being, and food and 
water security  
10%iii 
10% 
☐ Infrastructure and built environment  
 
 
 ☒  Ecosystems and ecosystem services 
5% 
5% 
A.5. Expected 
mitigation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 1: 
GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided 
or removed / 
sequestered) 
 
3,3 billion tCO2eq indirect 
emission reductions 
 
12,8 million tCO2eq direct 
emission reductions 
 
A.6. 
Expected 
adaptation 
outcome 
 
(Core 
indicator 2: 
direct and 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
reached)

=== PAGE 6 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2 
 
 
 
 306,870 
direct 
beneficiaries 
 
(0.12% of total 
population 253 
million) 
17+ million 
indirect 
beneficiaries  
 
(6.7% of total 
population 
253 million)  
A.7. Total 
financing (GCF 
+ co-finance1)  
 669,000,000 USD 
A.9. 
Project 
size 
Large (Over USD 250 million) 
A.8. Total GCF 
funding 
requested  
200,000,000 USD 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) 
requested for 
the GCF 
funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should 
be consistent with A.8.  
☒ Grant 
14,000,000 
 
☒ Loan 186,000,000 
☐ Guarantee 
0 
☐ Equity  
 
 0 
☐ Results-based payment 0  
A.11. 
Implementation 
period 
13 years  
A.12. 
Total 
lifespan 
30 years (n.b. the estimated 
lifespan is different for each 
technology, 30 years being the 
maximum, all details per technology 
type are available in Annex 22) 
A.13. Expected 
date of AE 
internal 
approval 
By 2/18/2025 
 
A.14. 
ESS 
categor
y  
I-2  
A.15. Has this 
FP been 
submitted as a 
CN before? 
Yes ☐ No ☒ 
A.16. 
Has 
Readine
ss or 
PPF 
support 
been 
used to 
prepare 
this FP? 
Yes ☐ No ☒ 
 
1 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.

=== PAGE 7 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3 
 
A.17. Is this FP 
included in the 
entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☒ No ☐ 
A.18. Is 
this FP 
include
d in the 
country 
progra
mme? 
Yes ☒ No ☐ 
A.19. 
Complementarit
y and 
coherence  
Yes ☒ No ☐ 
A.20. Executing 
Entity 
information 
EBRD for Component 1 
Partner Financial Institutions (PFIs) for Component 2 
A.21. Executive summary

=== PAGE 8 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4 
 
1. 
The programme "Greening Financial Systems: Delivering Climate Finance for 
All" (the “GFS Programme” or the “Programme”), in its first Phase, will directly support 
307 thousand end beneficiaries to reduce vulnerabilities to the impacts of climate change 
and accelerate mitigation actions across 13 emerging economies (the “target countries”): 
Armenia, Egypt, Jordan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, Mongolia, 
Morocco, North Macedonia, Serbia, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan. 
  
2. 
The Programme targets financial institutions (FIs) and financial market stakeholders 
as its main beneficiaries, as intermediaries to reach the ultimate targeted end beneficiaries 
of this programme which include especially underserved groups, including the micro, 
small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) that are the backbone of emerging 
economies, households, farmers and hard to reach segments such as those in rural areas 
and women alongside midcaps that are drivers of employment and climate impact in 
emerging markets. 
  
3. 
In addition to delivering USD 620 million in green finance and 12.8 million tonnes in 
reduced CO2 equivalent emissions directly, the Programme represents a significant step 
up in ambition and enhancing the financial sector’s resilience: it puts forward a unique 
catalytic platform of transition planning to enable a paradigm shift of the financial sector 
towards Paris-aligned pathways, ultimately catalysing the target countries’ financial 
sectors’ US$ 1.2+ trillion of assets2, while strengthening the sector’s ability to address 
climate shocks. This will unlock tens of billions of dollars in climate finance to benefit 
millions of businesses and households, and initiate a shift in thinking in the financial sector 
that will impact whole economies and preserve the future integrity of the financial system 
against the imminent impact of physical and transition climate-related risks.  
 
4. 
Partnership with the GCF on this Programme offers a vital opportunity to impact 
and leverage the financial sector’s financial flows at scale, in line with the GCF’s Strategic 
Plan 2024-2027 and Private Sector Strategy, as well as partnering with target countries 
currently under-represented in climate finance support programming. 
-- 
5. 
Without systemic transformation of the financial sector, the world will not meet the 
objectives of the Paris Agreement. Although currently available technologies and solutions are 
adequate to see the world get back on track to 1.5°c pathways, the changes required can only be 
realised for beneficiaries on the ground if the private sector is willing and able to substantially 
accelerate and scale up climate investment. On the other hand, climate-related risks present 
additional challenges for the financial sector, and financial market regulators need to guide FIs on 
how to mitigate the impact of these risks on their assets. In light of the nascent state of climate 
regulations imposed by financial market regulators in the target countries, the Programme will 
support partner FIs (‘’PFIs’’) to proactively become first-movers to adopt Paris-aligned transitions 
and enhance their resilience against vulnerabilities resulting from climate-related risks. 
 
6. 
Aligning banking practices with climate transition goals necessitates banks acquiring the 
necessary knowledge and governance policies to better manage climate-related risks. Banks 
have numerous business and regulatory priorities, and most do not have the capacity to also plan 
how to smoothly transition their portfolios towards the acceleration of low greenhouse gas 
emissions and climate-resilient development.

=== PAGE 9 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5 
 
7. 
Without transition planning, banks will be unprepared to manage climate-related risks 
within their portfolios. This could lead to a more risk-adverse approach where banks reduce their 
exposure to sectors deemed high-risk in terms of climate impact, potentially leaving those sectors 
without the crucial financial support needed for the climate transition. 
 
8. 
Unfortunately, these high-risk sectors are often the ones most in need of investment to 
adopt more sustainable technologies and practices. This highlights the critical role of banks to 
help avoid a disorderly transition that could disproportionately affect vital sectors of the economy 
and established livelihoods. 
  
9. 
Given that transition planning is not expected to become mandatory any time soon, 
incentivising the prioritisation of transition planning can help banks acquire the necessary 
knowledge and tools to facilitate a climate transition that is not only orderly but also accelerates 
the shift towards low greenhouse gas emissions and climate-resilient development. 
 
10. 
The Programme adopts a multi-pronged approach which aims to considerably scale 
climate finance across the thirteen countries and promote FI transition planning as well as 
ambitious climate target setting. The Programme is expected to build on the foundational work 
with PFIs established by the GCF-EBRD Green Economy Financing Facilities3 (“GCF GEFFs”) in 
the nine overlapping countries4, identifying complementarities with existing PFIs’ to scale their 
climate finance ambitions and support them in undertaking transition plans building on the 
successful momentum under the GEFF engagements, while also establishing opportunities with 
new PFIs in the five additional countries under this Programme. Engagements with new PFIs, that 
are nascent in their climate financing journeys, will entail some overlapping activities with the GCF 
GEFF, as the existing programme is envisaged to shortly expire5 and the Programme presents 
opportunities to replicate the GCF GEFF success with new PFIs and across the new five additional 
countries, as well as ensuring continuity and maintaining the momentum with existing PFIs.  
 
11. 
These overlapping activities are considered to be staple building blocks for climate finance 
and will remain relevant to support early stage PFIs as they embark on the initial steps of their 
climate finance journey and will require identifying sub-loan opportunities for PFIs, reducing their 
perceived risk and establishing their commercial viability, supporting PFIs to see the climate 
finance opportunities available in their markets i.e. ‘seeing the trees’. Additional activities of the 
Programme that will build on the GCF GEFF will target existing and or more advanced PFIs within 
their climate finance journey which will entail supporting them in developing transition plans to 
assess the impact of climate risks on their assets and shift their financing flows towards Paris-
aligned pathways thus supporting PFIs to identify opportunities within the larger realm of climate 
finance opportunities i.e. ‘seeing the forest’. 
 
12. 
The Programme recognises the multifaceted challenges that FIs in the target countries 
face as the primary intermediaries for channelling the required financing and focuses on 
addressing two main inter-linked barriers: 
1) Limited enabling environment for climate-compatible financial systems, particularly for 
segments like MSMEs, farmers, women, and households; and  
2) Low access to affordable climate mitigation and adaptation finance from financial 
institutions.  
 
2 Total banking sector assets in the proposed countries in 2022 
3 GCF FP025. 
4 Armenia, Egypt, Georgia, Jordan, Moldova, Mongolia, Morocco, Serbia, Tajikistan 
5 End date for the signature of loans on 2 February 2026

=== PAGE 10 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6 
 
13. 
Relevantly, for the target countries, these challenges have been only exacerbated in 
recent years, as the spillover effects of the war on Ukraine have played out in energy prices, 
energy security concerns and access to technologies, which has severely impacted momentum 
on the climate transition. The Programme further recognizes, and has been developed, to cater 
for the varying stages of the Target Countries’ regulations (as further illustrated in the next section 
B.1) in their climate finance and transition journeys. While some of the most advanced Target 
Countries have already issued regulations to FIs on sustainable finance, a few of which are 
binding, these guidelines remain very distant from addressing the adoption of climate transition 
plans and focus largely on introductory steps to environmental, social and corporate governance 
requirements and broad requirements for the establishment and designation of sustainable 
finance departments and their segregation of duties from existing divisions. 
 
14. 
When it comes to financial regulators, there is, indeed, a widespread perception that the 
risks associated with climate change can affect the stability of the financial system and the 
macroeconomy. This leads to the conclusion that central banks / financial regulators may 
increasingly expect banks to adopt transition plans. 
 
15. 
However, financial supervisors that have investigated the relationship between climate-
related risks and financial stability, recognise that the supply of finance is relatively short-term 
compared to the timelines of most climate risk scenarios. They identified a trend of over-
collateralisation in emerging markets, and the ability of the financial sector to respond to increased 
risk, if necessary, by reducing tenors and increasing collateral requirements, among other 
responses. 
 
16. 
Furthermore, the assumption that financial supervisors need to ensure that their activities 
are in step with government policy on net-zero, neglects the fact that independence from 
government policy is still seen as a cornerstone for the effective economic policymaking of 
financial supervisors. At the same time, climate policy frameworks, which are necessary for 
effective transition planning by the final sector, are still lacking in many emerging markets, 
including in those countries targeted by the funding proposal. 
 
17. 
Therefore, by taking a transformational approach, the Programme will harness FIs in their 
capacity as effective intermediaries to efficiently channel the required financing to end 
beneficiaries at scale, reinforced by work at the regulatory and market level to further promote 
transition of the financial sector to sustainable climate pathways.  
 
18. 
The Programme is built around mutually reinforcing components that together enable 
these paradigm-shifting pathways. 
• 
Component 1. Greening Financial Systems: Enabling financial institutions, 
regulators and financial actors adopting and implementing ambitious and 
sustainable climate finance portfolios and practices - technical assistance and 
financial 
incentive 
grants 
enabling 
climate-compatible 
financial 
systems 
and 
mainstreaming climate finance 
• 
Component 2. Delivering Climate Finance for All: Investments to unlock and scale 
up climate capital – investment mechanisms for unlocking climate capital 
 
19. 
The dedicated technical assistance component will allow to achieve systemic change in 
helping financial institutions across participating countries build their climate capacities and 
develop transition plans to shift their financing flows towards Paris-aligned pathways, including 
developing financial institutions’ non-financial-service (NFS) capacity, as well as extensive 
knowledge sharing among FIs, financial regulators and other relevant stakeholders. Component 
1 will offer a full suite of technical assistance and capacity building that caters to the varying

=== PAGE 11 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7 
 
maturity levels of PFIs within their climate transition journeys, as well as the necessary policy and 
regulatory support to establish a conducive and enabling market that will be integral in achieving 
the paradigm shifting impacts of the Programme. In addition to technical assistance, this will 
include financial incentives to be disbursed to partner FIs to further incentivise commitment to the 
development and implementation of transition plans6, that would enable institutional 
transformation throughout governance, climate risk management, strategies, targets and 
disclosure, and compensate them for the costs associated with undertaking such transformation. 
These costs are comprised of fixed costs incurred in setting up and staffing new dedicated 
departments, hiring of climate specialist, auditing, reporting, disclosures, etc which cannot be 
directly linked to increased profitability in the short-term, thus financial incentive grants will offer 
front-loaded fixed and quantifiable incentive payments to the PFIs that are tied to milestones for 
developing and implementing transition plans. While climate financing presents clear opportunities 
for FIs to generate additional business and profits from financing and cross selling activities to a 
new target of clients, FIs struggle with the cost-benefit analysis of how adopting transition plans, 
climate risk management and disclosures can contribute to increasing their bottom lines in the 
short to medium term. This issue is exacerbated by the absence of mandatory guidelines and 
incentives provided by the regulators. Currently, transition planning and climate risk management 
in general are at nascent stages in emerging economies, including the EBRD region. The EBRD 
conducted a survey on the Readiness of the Financial Sector for the Impacts of Climate Change 
in 2021 – more than 20% of respondents in the selected 13 countries (52 FIs) stated there was 
no specific department in charge of climate risk management in their organisation. The survey 
also revealed that 44% of respondents in these countries did not anyhow take into account the 
impacts of climate change in their operations and investment decisions. Furthermore, less than 
4% of participating FIs said they considered their approach to climate risk management robust 
enough to not require improvements within the coming 2 years. And when asked what the main 
obstacles to improving climate risk management were, 65% mentioned the lack of regulatory 
guidance or in-house resources. Finally, when it comes to the public disclosure of climate-related 
risks and management practices, only 10% of respondents already do at least some disclosure in 
the Central Asian region and less than 17% across the selected regions.  
 
20. 
Through financing agreements (linked to Component 2), the EBRD will create legally 
binding mechanisms with partner FIs, extending finance to an estimated 307 thousand direct 
female and male beneficiaries for climate adaptation and mitigation investments across priority 
sectors and also committing FIs to gradually align their resources with a low greenhouse gas 
emissions and climate-resilient development pathway. A special emphasis is placed on 
adaptation, through systemic climate risk assessment and opportunity identification, capacity 
building and awareness-raising to promote adaptation investments by end beneficiaries. 
Additionally, as a side effect of the capacity building component, the Programme will also enable 
interested partner FIs by increasing their capabilities to prepare for GCF accreditation, as 
evidenced by the FIs participating to the GCF GEFF programme that have already become 
Accredited Entities in their own right.  
 
21. 
The GFS Programme aims to be scaled over the course of two phases, recognising the 
multiplied impact realised if the Programme can operate at scale to mobilise a variety of PFIs in 
each country. The Programme will be delivered in a manner fully responsive to the specific needs 
and aligned with the strategic climate priorities of the different target countries. EBRD’s network 
of Resident Offices across each of the thirteen countries will ensure close presence and 
coordination with local stakeholders. EBRD anticipates delivering the Programme in all 13 
countries; actual levels of funding will depend on market demand and pace of implementation in 
each country (up to 100% of GCF funding allocation under the Programme). 
[2] Total banking sector assets in the proposed countries in 2022.

=== PAGE 12 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)  
Global climate context  
22. 
The world is set to get hotter by 2.9 °C even if countries deliver their current, unconditional nationally 
determined contributions (UNEP Emissions Gap Report, “NDC” scenario in NGFS climate scenarios). 
Continued emissions of greenhouse gases have already led to about 1.1 °C of global temperature rise since the 
industrial revolution. Climate change already poses threats to human health and livelihood in various types of 
physical climate risks, and those in the emerging economies like the target countries are particularly vulnerable 
in the absence of adequate access to technologies and finance and knowledge, most notably acutely underserved 
groups like micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), women, households, farmers and those that are 
based outside of main cities. 
 
23. 
The world can get back on track to 1.5°C pathways with currently available technologies and solutions 
only if the private sector globally accelerates and scales up climate investment, adding to limited public finance 
funds. Financial institutions are the key providers of financing to the private sector, particularly SMEs, and hence 
financial sectors play a key role to enable the urgent and system-wide transformation required to achieve a Paris 
Aligned climate scenario. Aligning economies with the objectives of the Paris Agreement will require an ambitious 
transition across all sectors of the economy, with substantial financing needs for such transition – for example, 
decarbonising the electricity supply, replacing fossil fuels with clean renewable energy, increasing energy 
efficiency, and introduction of technology solutions to tackle hard-to-abate emissions. Changes in policy, business 
and consumer preferences and higher emission costs locally can pose significant transition risks to those in 
developing economies, particularly to SMEs and the wider economy, and in turn to the financial sector in the 
absence of commensurate local regulatory requirements, policies and guidance. 
  
 Figure 1. Climate Scenarios – Current Policies, NDCs, Net Zero 2050 (Source: NGFS)

=== PAGE 13 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 
7 Such as coal-fired power and thermal coal mining 
24. 
Despite a relatively sophisticated financial system and reasonable availability of credit, green financing 
has remained in short supply within the selected countries, and especially for the underserved and vulnerable 
individuals and MSMEs who often face difficulties in accessing financing due to lack of sufficient collateral as well 
as restrictive financing terms mainly due to high interest rates resulting from higher credit spreads due to their 
perceived risks. Moreover, financial institutions often do not have dedicated products, and lack the capacity to 
identify, tag and monitor green assets within their existing portfolios to measure their climate mitigation impact, 
while on adaptation they possess limited capacity and awareness to assess and manage the projected impact of 
climate-related risks. 
 
25. 
Most leading financial institutions in advanced countries have set net zero targets and are publishing plans 
on how they aim to meet these targets. These plans, often referred to as transition plans, set out the steps 
through which they plan to meet their climate ambitions, grow resilient to climate risk, and capitalise on climate 
opportunities. For many banks, this includes setting near-term emissions targets for GHG-emitting sectors7, 
setting climate finance targets, introducing fossil fuel policies, and engaging with clients on managing material 
climate-related risks in their sectors to enhance their resilience. On the other hand, financial regulators have a 
key role to play in ensuring the resilience of the financial sector against the impact of physical and transition 
climate-related risks associated with FIs portfolios, and ensuring the readiness of the financial sector in adopting 
sustainable finance practices through the development of guidelines, corporate governance, taxonomies and 
reporting requirements among others, as well as to ensure the financial sector’s alignment with the countries’ 
NDCs and LTSs. 
 
26. 
Transition planning has gained the interest of regulators and is supported by leading international 
initiatives on climate change for financial institutions. Standards from the International Sustainability Standards 
Board (ISSB), set to become the global baseline for sustainability disclosures, and the European Sustainability 
Reporting Standards (ESRS) include provisions relating to transition planning. The Glasgow Financial Alliance 
for Net Zero (GFANZ), an alliance of global financial institutions, also put forward standards for transition 
planning .Financial institutions in emerging economies however show low adoption of climate target setting, 
transition planning and climate risk management practices due to less stringent regulatory requirements, limited 
access to knowledge, and constraints on extending finance to end beneficiaries on adequate terms that reflect 
market needs. For example, the EBRD’s survey Readiness of the Financial Sector for the Impacts of Climate 
Change[1] – showed that FIs in EBRD regions have a low level of awareness of climate risk management and do 
not yet tap sufficiently into the knowledge offered by international best practice initiatives. 90% of FI respondents 
consider the impact of their financing on climate change relevant to their operations, but few have a clear view of 
how to operationalise climate risk management and disclosure and incorporate them into business operations. 
The survey also shows more than 20% of respondents in the selected 13 countries (52 FIs) stated there was no 
specific department in charge of climate risk management in their organisation, and also revealed that 44% of 
respondents in these countries did not anyhow take into account the impacts of climate change in their operations 
and investment decisions. Furthermore, less than 4% of participating FIs said they considered their approach to 
climate risk management robust enough to not require improvements within the coming two years. And when 
asked what the main obstacles to improving climate risk management were, 65% mentioned the lack of regulatory 
guidance or in-house resources. Finally, when it comes to the public disclosure of climate-related risks and 
management practices, only 10% of respondents already do at least some disclosure in the Central Asian region 
and less than 17% across the selected regions. As a result, any commitments by FIs to greening of finance or net 
zero, are voluntary and resource-consuming. The ability of an FI to embark on non-mandatory transition planning 
requires a significant amount of in-house resources to be prioritised above other business needs and regulatory 
requirements and current EBRD perception of the target markets is that motivation to embark on this process is 
low. Given this absence of regulatory guidance, coupled with lacking capacities and knowledge among FIs, 
transition planning is at nascent stages in emerging markets (including in the targeted 13 countries).

=== PAGE 14 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
 
27. 
Aligning banking practices with climate transition goals necessitates banks acquiring the necessary 
knowledge and governance policies to better manage climate-related risks. Banks have numerous business and 
regulatory priorities, and most do not have the capacity to also plan how to smoothly transition their portfolios 
towards the acceleration of low greenhouse gas emissions and climate-resilient development. Without transition 
planning to effectively understand and manage climate risk in their portfolios, FIs may instead take a more risk-
averse approach to high-risk sectors, potentially leaving those sectors without the critical financial support needed 
for their climate transition and hence heightening their risk. FIs therefore can play a pivotal role in helping to avoid 
a disorderly transition that would be particularly harmful for vital sectors of the economy and vulnerable livelihoods, 
such as agriculture.  
The spillover effects of this lack of knowledge or strategic approach to transition planning on the real economy 
are clear. 
 
28. 
As the market demand studies in Annex 2 illustrate, there are already viable technical and behavioural 
change solutions for climate adaptation and mitigation across priority sectors specified in NDCs. But available 
climate mitigation and adaptation technologies and solutions are out of reach for many in emerging markets due 
to market barriers. Many adaptation solutions identified are not commercially viable at present and hence face 
systemic under-investment. Long-term decarbonisation or adaptation solutions cannot be financially justified 
despite their significant long-term benefits due to their higher upfront costs compared to current prevailing market 
practices, inadequate access to finance, and low awareness. MSMEs, farmers and households in particular have 
limited awareness of their own exposure to physical climate and transition risks and viable solutions, which in turn 
can also affect the stability of financial systems and the economy as a whole.  
 
29. 
The Programme aims to address these barriers and accelerate and scale up climate finance and foster a 
transformation of the financial systems to create an enabling environment for economy-wide transition to low GHG 
emissions and climate resilient pathways. Moreover, the targeted countries still significantly lack national 
standards and regulation related to climate disclosure and green finance taxonomy. However, international norms 
and standards and global networks such as, among others, the ISSB and the Network for Greening Financial 
Systems (NGFS) will drive actions of financial regulators and financial stakeholders and in turn FIs. 
 
30. 
The Programme is targeting the following countries – Armenia, Egypt, Jordan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, 
Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, Mongolia, Morocco, North Macedonia, Serbia, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan in its first 
Phase. These countries represent a diversity of climate, financial, economic and social systems. The counties 
were selected on the basis of (a) EBRD countries of operations, (b) vulnerability to physical climate and transition 
risks and mitigation and adaptation impact potential, and (c) readiness and demand of financial institutions and 
financial sector stakeholders.  
 
31. 
As the main ambition of the Programme is to green the financial systems and to incentivize FIs to 
systemically invest in green and Paris-aligned projects, it has been designed to have a large sectoral scope, 
to allow for such systemic greening. All sectors where FIs are active in our regions that can lead to mitigation 
(such as renewables, low-emission transport, energy efficiency), or adaptation outcomes (such as water-
efficiency and sustainable agriculture) are eligible. Of course, the sectoral focus and portfolio composition might 
vary depending on country and PFI specificities, as well as national climate priorities (see Annex 2 for country-
specific climate challenges and associated relevant climate technologies). Table 1 includes examples of 
exposures and vulnerabilities in sectors and means to address them.

=== PAGE 15 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
 
Country regulatory environment overview 
The target countries are all progressing towards developing sustainable financial systems, albeit at different 
paces and with varying approaches as outlined in brief below and in more detail in Annex 2. Common challenges 
include the need for capacity building, standardizing methodologies for evaluating green projects, and integrating 
green finance into the broader financial system. Countries with more structured approaches, like Kazakhstan 
and Mongolia, are better positioned to overcome these challenges compared to those still developing their 
frameworks or without a clear body providing centralised leadership in this area. Given the emerging market 
context, even where there is openness and interest on the part of the regulator, financial sector players report a 
lack of a unified approach and a comprehensive framework for promoting green finance. Moreover, where 
regulators are advancing towards increasing disclosure requirements, this highlights the challenges faced by FIs 
to meet such disclosure requirements, such as limited technical expertise, a large financing gap, and a lack of a 
common methodology and reporting framework. 
Kazakhstan: Kazakhstan has a well-developed regulatory framework for sustainable finance, aligned with the 
UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the Paris Agreement. Key institutions include the National Bank 
of Kazakhstan (NBK), the Agency of the Republic of Kazakhstan for the Regulation and Development of the 
Financial Market (ARDFM), and the Astana International Financial Centre (AIFC) Green Finance Centre (GFC). 
Notable achievements include the issuance of green bonds and the adoption of a green taxonomy and ESG 
reporting framework, however capacity is limited among financial institutions to accurately and effectively 
disclose against such frameworks.  
Kyrgyz Republic: The Kyrgyz Republic is in the nascent stages of developing its green finance framework. 
Initiatives such as the establishment of a green projects taxonomy and a sustainable finance center in Bishkek 
are recent developments. The first green bonds were issued in 2023, focusing on eco-tourism and eco-
agriculture, with support from the AIFC GFC. 
Mongolia: Mongolia has established a robust basis for green finance, driven by the Mongolia Bankers 
Association and the Sustainable Finance Association (SFA). Key initiatives include the Sustainable Finance 
Principles and the Green Finance Taxonomy. Despite a supportive regulatory environment, green loans remain 
a small percentage of total loans, highlighting the need for further growth. 
Uzbekistan: Uzbekistan's sustainable finance framework is emerging, with the Ministry of Economic 
Development and Poverty Reduction playing a significant role. The country focuses on integrating ESG factors 
and developing green finance instruments, although concrete steps such as issuing green bonds are still in the 
early stages. 
Tajikistan: Tajikistan is at the preliminary stage of integrating sustainable finance. Efforts include developing a 
green finance strategy and collaborating with international partners. However, a lack of infrastructure and 
financial resources poses significant challenges. 
Armenia: Armenia has made strides in green finance, primarily through the Central Bank of Armenia's initiatives. 
The country has issued green bonds and developed frameworks for ESG integration, though challenges remain 
in scaling these efforts. 
Georgia: Georgia's approach to green finance includes the adoption of green bonds and the integration of ESG 
factors into financial regulations. The National Bank of Georgia plays a crucial role in these initiatives, aiming to 
enhance the financial sector's resilience to climate risks. 
Moldova: Moldova is in the early stages of green finance development. Efforts include integrating ESG factors 
into financial regulations and collaborating with international partners to enhance sustainable finance practices. 
North Macedonia: North Macedonia has taken steps to align with regional and international environmental 
strategies, such as the Western Balkans Green Agenda. The National Bank has implemented measures to 
encourage green lending, although a dedicated green taxonomy is yet to be developed.

=== PAGE 16 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
 
Serbia: Serbia has made recent advancements in sustainable finance, particularly with the adoption of green 
bonds and the integration of ESG criteria into its financial sector. The National Bank of Serbia and the Ministry 
of Finance have been key players in these developments. Initiatives include issuing the first green bond in 2021 
aimed at financing renewable energy projects, developing a national green finance strategy to encourage 
sustainable investment and aligning with the EU Green Deal and adopting related environmental standards. 
Despite these efforts, Serbia faces challenges in implementing a comprehensive green taxonomy and increasing 
public awareness of sustainable finance. 
Jordan: Jordan has taken significant steps towards integrating sustainable finance into its national agenda, 
supported by institutions like the Central Bank of Jordan and the Ministry of Environment. Key initiatives include 
establishing a green finance framework to support projects in renewable energy, water management, and waste 
management, collaborating with international organizations to develop green bonds and sustainability-linked 
loans and promoting ESG practices among financial institutions and enhancing capacity building for sustainable 
finance. Challenges in Jordan include the need for greater regulatory support and the development of a 
comprehensive green taxonomy to classify eligible green projects. 
Morocco: Morocco has made significant progress in green finance, focusing on energy efficiency and renewable 
energy projects. Public institutions and development finance institutions (DFIs) play a crucial role in providing 
green finance options, although there is a need to expand these to include other green projects. 
Egypt: Egypt has made significant strides in sustainable finance, particularly through the development of green 
bonds and sustainable development strategies. The Egyptian Financial Regulatory Authority (FRA) has been 
instrumental in this progress, establishing guidelines and frameworks to support green finance. Key initiatives 
include issuing the first sovereign green bond in 2020 to finance environmentally friendly projects, developing a 
green taxonomy to classify projects eligible for green financing, promoting ESG disclosure among publicly listed 
companies. Egypt faces challenges in scaling these initiatives but benefits from strong regulatory support and 
international collaboration. 
32. 
Given that, based on market analysis of the proposed target countries, transition planning is not expected 
to become mandatory for FIs in the near term, incentivising the prioritisation of transition planning is vital to help 
banks acquire the necessary knowledge and tools to facilitate a climate transition that is not only orderly but also 
accelerates the shift, as required by the science, towards low greenhouse gas emissions and climate-resilient 
development.

=== PAGE 17 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 
8 The higher the score, the more vulnerable a country is. Vulnerability measures a country's exposure, sensitivity 
and ability to adapt to the negative impact of climate change. ND-GAIN measures the overall vulnerability by 
considering vulnerability in six life-supporting sectors – food, water, health, ecosystem service, human habitat and 
infrastructure. See: Vulnerability rankings | ND-GAIN Index/  
9Global Climate Risk Index 2021. See: Germanwatch 
Country-specific climate context and needs[2]  
33. 
The target countries’ major climate hazards, sectoral exposure and vulnerability are summarised in Table 
1. Further details are outlined in Annex 2. 
 
Table 1: Major climate hazards and sectoral impacts by country  
Country Major 
Climate 
Hazards 
Exposure 
and 
vulnerability 
Programme 
activities 
addressing 
these 
ARM  
Heatwaves, 
droughts, 
extreme 
precipitation, 
floods, landslides 
 
 
Floods, heatwaves and water 
stress 
reduce 
agricultural 
output, threaten food security, 
damage the natural ecosystem, 
affect energy generation due to 
heavy reliance on water for 
cooling 
in 
thermal 
power. 
Buildings 
not 
resilient 
to 
heatwaves and heat stresses 
threaten the well-being and 
health of residents. 
ThinkHazard ranks the risk of 
floods, landslides and wildfires 
as high, and the risk of extreme 
heat as medium. 
ND-GAIN Vulnerability Index8: 
Score: 0.368 
Country Rank: 48 
German Watch Global Climate 
Risk Index (CRI)9 score: 98.17 
n.b. for all countries, the following criteria apply 
(see Annex 25 for full eligibility criteria): 
 
Requirements 
for 
Sub-projects 
addressing 
climate adaptation that rationalise water use : 
Eligible water efficiency investments shall include 
investments in materials, equipment, appliances 
and technologies that enable reduction in water 
consumption and/or improve water use. Water 
efficiency investments shall achieve (i) a water 
savings of at least 20% when compared to the 
"Reference Water Baseline"; or (ii) sustainable 
water generation installations including those of 
capacity equal to or greater than 100m3/year, 
provided that if the existing national minimum 
requirement is above 20%, the national minimum 
requirement will apply.  
 
Requirements 
for 
Sub-projects 
addressing 
climate adaptation that improve sustainable land 
management: 
Eligible 
sustainable 
land 
management 
investments 
shall 
include 
investments in materials, equipment, appliances 
and technologies that enable reduction in soil 
erosion. 
Sustainable 
land 
management 
investments shall achieve a reduction in soil 
erosion of at least 20% when compared to the 
"Reference Soil Loss Baseline”, provided that if 
the existing national minimum requirement is 
above 20%, the national minimum requirement 
will apply. 
 
Heatwaves - investments in energy-efficient 
thermal comfort measures 
 
Extreme precipitation and flooding – investments 
in drainage systems

=== PAGE 18 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
 
Droughts 
– 
investment 
in 
water-efficient 
technologies and measures, investment in drip 
irrigation 
EGY  
Increase in temperatures, 
sea level rise, extreme 
weather events  
 
 
Sea level rise will result in a 
considerable 
loss 
of 
the 
northern part of the Nile Delta, 
with 
consequential 
loss 
of 
agricultural land, infrastructure 
and urban areas. Loss in 
agricultural land, infrastructure 
& urban areas. Threat to the 
wellbeing 
and 
health 
of 
occupants and residents of 
buildings 
not 
resilient 
to 
heatwaves and heat stresses. 
Reduction of the availability of 
water resources not only affects 
agriculture and food security 
but also energy generation due 
to heavy reliance on water for 
cooling 
in 
thermal 
power. 
Exacerbation of poverty rates 
among the rural populations 
who heavily rely on agriculture 
and are vulnerable to extreme 
weather events, as well as 
water 
availability and heat 
stresses over the longer term.  
 
ThinkHazard ranks the risk of 
floods, water scarcity, extreme 
heat and wildfires as high.  
 
ND-GAIN Vulnerability Index: 
Score: 0.420 
Country Rank: 92  
German Watch Global Climate 
Risk Index (CRI) score: 102.00 
Increase in temperatures - investments in 
energy-efficient thermal comfort measures 
 
 
Extreme weather events – investments in 
drainage 
systems, 
sustainable 
agriculture 
practices, 
investments 
in 
water-efficient 
technologies 
 
 
GEO  
Increased frequency of 
heat waves, retreat of 
glaciers, 
recurrent 
floodings 
 
 
River flow reductions resulting 
from temperature rises will also 
affect energy security, reducing 
Georgia’s capacity to produce 
energy from hydropower (the 
main source of the country’s 
renewable generation), as well 
as 
negatively 
impacting 
agriculture, which is the main 
source of income for rural 
populations. 
 
ThinkHazard ranks the risk of 
floods, landslides, extreme heat 
and wildfires as high. 
 
ND-GAIN Vulnerability Index: 
Increased frequency of heat waves - investments 
in energy efficiency in buildings 
 
Recurrent floodings - investments in drainage 
systems, sustainable agriculture practices

=== PAGE 19 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
 
Score: 0.400 
Country Rank: 81 
German Watch Global Climate 
Risk Index (CRI) score: 93.17 
JOR  
Droughts, 
extreme 
temperatures, 
storms, 
landslides, flash floods 
and earthquakes 
 
 
Climate 
variability 
damages 
Jordan’s infrastructure, affects 
its services, and constrains 
agricultural growth, resulting in 
increased 
food 
insecurity. 
Jordan ranks already as the fifth 
most water-stressed country in 
the world. Educed availability of 
water resources undermining 
both agriculture and public 
health. 
 
ThinkHazard ranks the risk of 
floods, 
landslides, 
extreme 
heat, 
water 
scarcity 
and 
wildfires as high. 
 
ND-GAIN Vulnerability Index: 
Score: 0.369 
Country Rank: 49 
German Watch Global Climate 
Risk Index (CRI) score: 118.00 
Extreme temperatures - investments in energy-
efficient thermal comfort measures 
 
Flash floods – investments in drainage systems, 
sustainable agriculture practices 
 
Droughts 
– 
investment 
in 
water-efficient 
technologies and measures, investment in drip 
irrigation 
 
KAZ    
Temperature rise faster 
than 
global 
average, 
melting of glaciers, floods, 
droughts, 
reduced 
soil 
moisture 
 
 
Physical climate risks will i) 
threaten the wellbeing and 
health 
of 
occupants 
and 
residents 
of 
buildings 
not 
resilient to heatwaves and heat 
stresses, 
ii) 
reduce 
the 
availability of water resources 
not only affecting agriculture 
and food security but also 
energy generation due to heavy 
reliance on water for cooling in 
thermal power, iii) exacerbate 
poverty rates among the rural 
populations who heavily rely on 
agriculture and are vulnerable 
to extreme weather events, as 
well as water availability and 
heat stresses over the longer 
term.  
ThinkHazard ranks the risk of 
floods, 
landslides, 
water 
scarcity and wildfires as high. It 
ranks the risk of extreme heat 
as medium. 
 
ND-GAIN Vulnerability Index: 
Score: 0.322 
Country Rank: 22 
Increase in temperatures - investments in 
energy-efficient thermal comfort measures 
 
Floods – investments in drainage systems, 
sustainable agriculture practices 
 
Droughts 
– 
investment 
in 
water-efficient 
technologies and measures, investment in drip 
irrigation 
 
Reduced soil moisture – investments in irrigation 
technologies, 
and 
sustainable 
agriculture 
practices

=== PAGE 20 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
 
German Watch Global Climate 
Risk Index (CRI) score: 118.00 
KGZ  
Extremeweather 
events, 
recurrent heatwaves and 
droughts 
 
 
Extreme 
temperatures 
and 
pose a serious threat on human 
health, 
livelihoods 
and 
ecosystems. The recurrence of 
heatwaves and droughts will 
result in serious losses of 
agricultural land and viable 
habitat (especially for higher 
altitude species). This will in 
turn 
have 
an 
important 
economic impact especially for 
rural 
populations. 
Multidimensional poverty and 
undernourishment are already 
prevalent in the country. 
 
ThinkHazard ranks the risk of 
floods, landslides and wildfires 
as high. It ranks the risk of 
extreme heat and water scarcity 
as medium. 
 
ND-GAIN Vulnerability Index: 
Score: 0.331 
Country Rank: 28 
German Watch Global Climate 
Risk Index (CRI) score: 118.00 
Extreme heat conditions - investments in energy-
efficient thermal comfort measures 
 
Droughts 
– 
investment 
in 
water-efficient 
technologies and measures, investment in drip 
irrigation 
 
MDA 
Climate 
aridity 
from 
extreme weather events 
such as heatwaves and 
frost, floods, storms with 
heavy rains and hails, and 
severe droughts. 
 
 
Decreased 
resilience 
of 
transport and energy sector 
infrastructure, including assets 
useful lifespan, higher capital 
expenditure and running costs, 
as well as decreased food 
security due to diminished 
agricultural output and water 
shortages.  
 
ThinkHazard ranks the risk of 
floods and wildfires as high. It 
ranks the risk of extreme heat 
and water scarcity as medium. 
 
ND-GAIN Vulnerability Index: 
Score: 0.406 
Country Rank: 85 
German Watch Global Climate 
Risk Index (CRI) score: 118.00 
Flooding, heavy rainfall – investments in 
drainage 
systems, 
sustainable 
agriculture 
practices 
 
Droughts 
– 
investment 
in 
water-efficient 
technologies and measures, investment in drip 
irrigation 
 
MNG  
Extreme climate events 
including 
heatwaves, 
droughts and river floods 
 
 
Extreme stress on ecosystems 
results in shifts in species 
ranges and forest cover losses. 
Agriculture will be affected 
especially through losses in 
yields, posing a food security 
Extreme heat conditions - investments in energy-
efficient thermal comfort measures 
 
Droughts 
– 
investment 
in 
water-efficient 
technologies and measures, investment in drip 
irrigation

=== PAGE 21 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
 
threat 
to 
the 
population. 
Moreover, Mongolia is one of 
the very few countries in the 
world that is subject to dzuds, 
which cause very severe loss 
and damage to agriculture, and 
this will only increase with 
climate change.  
 
ThinkHazard ranks the risk of 
floods, 
landslides, 
water 
scarcity and wildfires as high. It 
ranks the risk of extreme heat 
as medium. 
 
ND-GAIN Vulnerability Index: 
Score: 0.375 
Country Rank: 59 
German Watch Global Climate 
Risk Index (CRI) score: 31.67 
 
MAR 
More frequent and severe 
droughts and higher rates 
of evaporation caused by 
temperature rises 
 
 
Water 
shortage 
will 
pose 
significant economic and social 
threats, as well as health 
hazards. 
Without 
adequate 
investment in adaptation, the 
country could i) face significant 
losses in agricultural yields, 
leading 
to 
exacerbation 
of 
inequalities between rural and 
urban population, as well as 
posing a threat to food security 
ii) 
experience 
increased 
damage 
to 
human 
health 
(including mortality) caused by 
more frequent extreme heat 
conditions, without investment 
in 
buildings, 
and 
iii) 
face 
reduced availability of water 
resources undermining both 
agriculture and public health.  
 
ThinkHazard ranks the risk of 
floods, landslides, extreme heat 
and wildfires as high. It ranks 
the risk of water sacrcity as 
medium. 
 
ND-GAIN Vulnerability Index: 
Score: 0.379 
Country Rank: 64  
German Watch Global Climate 
Risk Index (CRI) score: 79.67 
Droughts, higher evaporation – investment in 
water-efficient 
technologies 
and 
measures, 
investment in drip irrigation, investments in 
sustainable agriculture 
 
MKD  
Decreases 
in 
precipitation, as well as 
more frequent extreme 
Extreme 
weather 
events 
increase risks to the agricultural 
sector, which accounted for 
Extreme heat conditions - investments in energy-
efficient thermal comfort measures

=== PAGE 22 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
 
weather events, such as 
heat waves 
 
 
more than 8% of the GDP in 
2022 and is a major source of 
income for rural populations. 
Without 
investment 
in 
adaptation 
and 
resilience, 
climate change will induce an 
increase in inequalities. Without 
adequate 
investment 
in 
adaptation the country could 
face 
significant 
losses 
in 
agricultural yields, posing a 
threat 
to 
food 
security, 
experience increased damage 
to human health (including 
mortality) 
caused 
by more 
frequent 
extreme 
heat 
conditions, without investment 
in buildings, and face reduced 
availability of water resources 
undermining public health. 
 
ThinkHazard ranks the risk of 
floods, 
landslides, 
water 
scarcity and wildfires as high. It 
ranks the risk of extreme heat 
as medium. 
 
ND-GAIN Vulnerability Index: 
Score: 0.378 
Country Rank: 62 
German Watch Global Climate 
Risk Index (CRI) score: 118.00 
 
Decrease in precipitation, droughts – investment 
in water-efficient technologies and measures, 
investment in drip irrigation 
 
SRB  
Extreme weather events 
 
 
Negative effects on energy, 
infrastructure 
and 
transport: 
Without adaptation investment, 
the country faces significant 
losses in agricultural yields, 
posing a threat to food security. 
Increased damage to human 
health 
(including 
mortality) 
caused 
by 
more 
frequent 
extreme 
heat 
conditions, 
without investment in buildings. 
Reduced availability of water 
resources undermining both 
agriculture and public health. 
 
ThinkHazard ranks the risk of 
floods and wildfires as high. It 
ranks the risk of extreme heat, 
water scarcity and landslides as 
medium. 
 
ND-GAIN Vulnerability Index: 
Score: 0.413 
Country Rank: 86 
Increase 
in 
temperatures, 
extreme 
heat 
conditions - investments in energy-efficient 
thermal comfort measures 
 
Seasonal 
flooding, 
prolonged 
rainfall 
– 
investments in drainage systems, sustainable 
agriculture practices 
 
Droughts 
– 
investment 
in 
water-efficient 
technologies and measures, investment in drip 
irrigation

=== PAGE 23 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
 
German Watch Global Climate 
Risk Index (CRI) score: 92.00 
TJK   
Recurrent 
heatwaves, 
droughts, and floodings 
caused by the melting of 
mountain glaciers 
 
 
Drought will cause an increase 
of arid lands and loss of 
agricultural lands. The drying 
will also affect the variability of 
hydropower supply, on which 
the country is currently heavily 
dependent. 
 
ThinkHazard ranks the risk of 
floods, landslides and wildfires 
as high. It ranks the risk of 
extreme heat, water scarcity as 
medium. 
 
ND-GAIN Vulnerability Index: 
Score: 0.372 
Country Rank: 55 
German Watch Global Climate 
Risk Index (CRI) score: 104.33 
Heatwaves - investments in energy-efficient 
thermal comfort measures 
 
Floods – investments in drainage systems, 
sustainable agriculture practices 
 
Droughts 
– 
investment 
in 
water-efficient 
technologies and measures, investment in drip 
irrigation 
 
UZB 
Warming 
significantly 
exceeds 
the 
projected 
global average, increased 
frequency and severity of 
droughts, desertification, 
changing 
precipitation 
patterns, 
floods, 
and 
landslides 
 
 
The 
vulnerability 
of 
Uzbekistan’s 
irrigated 
agriculture (85% of the cropland 
is 
irrigated) 
to 
projected 
declines in water availability, 
and hence decreased yields, 
will pose a major threat to food 
security 
and 
subsequently 
health and labour productivity, 
directly affecting the population 
at large. More frequent extreme 
temperatures will threaten the 
wellbeing 
and 
health 
of 
occupants and residents of 
buildings 
not 
resilient 
to 
heatwaves and heat stresses. 
Reduced availability of water 
resources will not only affect 
agriculture and food security 
but also energy generation due 
to heavy reliance on water for 
cooling in thermal power.  
 
ThinkHazard ranks the risk of 
floods, 
landslides, 
extreme 
heat, 
water 
scarcity 
and 
wildfires as high. 
 
ND-GAIN Vulnerability Index: 
Score: 0.364 
Country Rank: 43 
German Watch Global Climate 
Risk Index (CRI) score: 118.00 
Increase in temperatures - investments in 
energy-efficient thermal comfort measures 
 
Floods – investments in drainage systems, 
sustainable agriculture practices 
 
Droughts 
– 
investment 
in 
water-efficient 
technologies and measures, investment in drip 
irrigation

=== PAGE 24 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
 
34. 
The Programme’s alignment with the countries’ mitigation goals is summarised in Table 2 below. 
 
Table 2: Programme’s alignment with national mitigation goals. 
Country   
Mitigation Goals  
NDC-GFS Alignment   
ARM  
Target: GHG reduce emissions by 40% 
between 1990 and 2030.  
Target 
encompasses 
the 
following 
priority 
sectors: 
Energy, 
Industrial 
Processes and Product Use, Agriculture, 
Waste, Forestry and Other Land Use 
Given the sectoral priorities as identified in 
NDCs, financial institutions play an important 
role to effectively and efficiently reach out to a 
large number of economic actors and extend 
finance to stimulate the adoption of much 
needed mitigation and adaptation solution. 
Armenia aims to leverage additional finance 
into climate action and seeks to innovate the 
technical aspects of the debt-for-climate 
transaction, for which the Programme will be a 
catalyst.   
EGY
  
Targets: GHG reduction between 2015 & 
2030 
- Transport: 7% 
- Oil and Gas: 65% 
- Electricity Generation, Transmission, 
and Distribution: 37% 
Other NDC priority sectors without 
specific targets: Industry, Buildings & 
Urban Cities, Tourism, Waste Management 
 
The Programme coverage largely overlaps 
with Egypt’s NDC priority areas. The NDC 
emphasises that the implementation of the 
country’s mitigation and adaptation measures 
are conditional on the provision of adequate 
finance through international development 
partners and funds in multiple types of 
channels, such as blended finance, green 
bonds, and grants, all of which the Programme 
promotes. The mitigation interventions require 
an estimated USD196bn and adaptation 
USD50bn.   
GEO
  
Target: 35 % below 1990 level of its 
greenhouse gas emissions by 2030.  
GHG reduction target by sectors: 
Transport: 15% 
Energy generation and transmission: 15% 
Industry: 5% 
Forestry: 10% 
Other NDC priority sectors without 
specific targets: Buildings, Agriculture, 
Waste 
The Programme will engage in nearly all 
economic sectors that Georgia has prioritized 
for its adaptation and mitigation targets. 
JOR
  
Target: a 31% GHG emission reduction by 
2030 compared to 2012. 
Target 
encompasses 
the 
following 
priority 
sectors: 
Energy, 
Transport, 
Industry Processes and Product Use, 
Agriculture, Waste 
 
There is a strong alignment between the 
programme and the NDC focus areas. The 
estimated cost of mitigation actions is USD 
7.54bn from which the government plans to 
secure USD 565m by its own means. Jordan 
acknowledges the fundamental role of the 
private sector in achieving its targets. It calls 
for increased climate finance in recently 
developed national strategies that aim to 
enable sustainable industrial growth    
KAZ 
   
Target: GHG emission reduction by 15% 
from 1990 to 2030.   
There 
is 
full 
alignment 
between 
the 
programme and the NDC focus areas, as

=== PAGE 25 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
 
Target 
encompasses 
the 
following 
priority 
sectors: 
Energy, 
Agriculture, 
Waste, Industrial Processes and Product 
Use, Forestry and other Land Use  
Kazakhstan focuses on a limited number of 
priority sectors.  
KGZ  
Target: emissions reduction of 16.63% by 
2025 and by 15.97% by 2030. 
Target 
encompasses 
the 
following 
priority 
sectors: 
Energy, 
Agriculture, 
Industrial Processes, Solvents and other 
Product Use, Land Use, Land Use Change 
and Forestry,  
The Programme largely aligns with Kyrgyz 
Republic’s climate strategy and sectors. Only 
the priority area of Forestry is not part of this 
Programme. 
MD
A 
Target: GHG emissions reduction by 70 per 
cent below its 1990 level by 2030.     
Target 
encompasses 
the 
following 
priority 
sectors: 
Energy, 
Agriculture, 
Industrial Processes and Product Use, Land 
Use, Land Use Change and Forestry, 
Waste 
Except for Forestry and Land Use, the 
Programme supports all NDC priority sectors. 
It also aligns with Moldova’s objective to 
engage the banking sector in scaling up 
private sector climate finance. 
MN
G  
Target: 22.7% reduction in GHG emissions 
by 2030 compared to 2010.   
Target 
encompasses 
the 
following 
priority 
sectors: 
Energy, 
Industrial 
Processes and Product Use, Construction, 
Transport, Agriculture, Waste 
 
There is strong alignment between the NDC 
and the Programme. The financial needs for 
the NDC implementation are estimated at 
USD11.5 billion, of which USD6.3bn for 
mitigation, and USD5.2bn for adaptation. By 
mobilizing climate finance, the programme will 
be 
a 
key 
contributor 
to 
the 
NDC 
implementation. 
MA
R 
Target: 18.3% reduction in GHG emission 
between 2030 and 2020 
Target 
encompasses 
the 
following 
priority 
sectors: 
Energy, 
Industrial 
Processes and Product Use, Agriculture, 
Forestry, Waste 
The Programme largely aligns with Morocco’s 
climate strategy and targets.  
MK
D  
Target: 51% reduction in GHG emissions 
by 2030 compared to 1990 levels.   
Target 
encompasses 
the 
following 
priority 
sectors: 
Energy, 
Agriculture, 
Industrial Processes and Product Use, 
Waste  
Similar to Mongolia, North Macedonia focuses 
on a limited number of priority sectors, which 
largely align with the Programme. North 
Macedonia stresses the pivotal role of the 
private sector to mobilise the investment 
needed to achieve the targets.  
SRB
  
Target: Reduction of GHG emissions by 
2030 is 13.2 % compared to 2010 and 
33.3% compared to 1990.   
Target 
encompasses 
the 
following 
priority 
sectors: 
Energy, 
Industrial 
Processes and Product Use, Agriculture, 
Waste 
Serbia’s priority sectors fully align with the 
Programme. The NDC idenitifies the need for 
financial support and capacity building to be 
able to achieve both mitigation and adaptation 
targets. 
TJK 
  
Target: Not to exceed 60-70% of GHG 
emissions by 2020 compared to as of 1990. 
Target 
encompasses 
the 
following 
priority sectors: Agriculture, Forestry and 
Other 
Land 
Use, 
Energy, 
Industrial 
Processes and Product Use, Waste  
The Programme supports almost all priority 
sectors of the country. Tajikistan estimates 
that at least 7% of the country’s GDP is 
required for financing climate change activities 
throughout 
the 
decade 
of 
2020-2030 
representing more than USD 1 bn per year.

=== PAGE 26 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
 
UZB 
Target: Reduce specific GHG emissions by 
35% by 2030 compared to 2010. 
Target 
encompasses 
the 
following 
sectors: Energy, Industrial Processes and 
Product Use, Agriculture, Forestry and 
Other Land Use and Waste 
The Programme covers all key sectors of the 
NDC except forestry and other land use. The 
country stresses that the achievement of the 
goals is envisaged with the support of 
international financial institutions, access to 
advanced 
resource-saving 
and 
environmentally friendly technologies, and 
climate finance resources, hence the key 
elements of the Programme.  
 
35. 
The Programme will help financial institutions and economic actors identify and manage location-specific 
climate risks and address vulnerability to such risks by stimulating investments that contribute to adaptation and 
build FIs’ institutional capacity to manage climate risks and to extend adequate financial services. Likewise, 
financial institutions will play a major role in delivering the national mitigation objectives.  
The role of financial institutions in delivering national adaptation and mitigation goals is summarized below: 
36. 
Armenia: Improved capacity of financial institutions to identify, manage and advise on climate risks, and 
increased availability of green finance will help decrease the vulnerability to physical climate hazards (for example 
by making buildings more resilient to extreme temperatures through insulation) and help MSMEs be better 
prepared for climate transition risks. 
  
37. 
Egypt: Direct finance alone cannot bridge Egypt’s huge financing gap (mitigation interventions require an 
estimated USD196bn and adaptation USD50bn), and systemically greening the FI sector will be essential to 
mobilise more private climate finance, including through the local FIs participating in global capital markets. The 
transition planning of the FI sector supported by the Programme will allow to create an adaptation-enabling 
environment and the financial support will allow to invest directly into activities with adaptation benefits or co-
benefits, especially in agriculture. 
 
38. 
Georgia: Given that buildings, transport and agriculture are the main sectors targeted by the NDC for 
mitigation, and agriculture is a clear priority for adaptation, delivering green finance for these goals through the FI 
sector will be very efficient. These priorities are also perfectly aligned with the GFS Programme’s result areas 
(low-emission transport, buildings, food security) and will support making the targeted economic actors 
(households, MSMEs, farmers) less vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and better prepared for climate 
transition. The capacity-building component under the Programme will allow the FI sector to better understand 
the climate risks in the portfolio and better manage those risks at all levels.  
 
39. 
Jordan: Climate finance includes accelerating renewable energy and energy efficiency, sustainable water 
use, and waste management in the industrial sector, as well as sustainable transport initiatives linked to industrial 
supply chains. Improving access to green finance is also increasingly recognised as a priority area in Jordan. For 
example, the Central Bank has recently developed a Green Finance Strategy that constitutes a roadmap to green 
the Jordanian financial sector and covers the period 2023-2028.  
 
40. 
Kazakhstan: With the country’s recent adoption of ambitious mitigation and adaptation targets, such as 
the latest adoption of the “Strategy for achieving carbon neutrality of the Republic of Kazakhstan until 2060” 
approved in February 2023, the need for concessional green finance exponentially grows and financing through 
FIs will be necessary to cover MSMEs and the residential sector, as well as to help the FI sector align with these 
LT national targets. Finally, the Programme will support investment in climate-resilient agriculture, hence reducing 
the sector’s vulnerability to climate change, as well as increasing overall food security.

=== PAGE 27 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23 
 
41. 
Kyrgyz Republic: Delivering support through intermediated finance and greening the FI sector will be an 
efficient way to achieve climate impact at the national level and to make most vulnerable populations (such as 
the rural population and households in heat-stressed regions) less vulnerable to physical climate hazards (through 
investment in buildings and climate-resilient agriculture).  
 
42. 
Moldova: Moldova aims to engage the banking sector in scaling up private sector climate finance through 
domestic financial institutions, promote innovative structured financing solutions, and create incentives to scale 
up private sector engagement in adaptation investments. These envisaged actions will be critical to support the 
estimated adaptation investment of USD 4.22 bn to mitigate the impact of climate change. The total cost of climate 
change adaptation inaction is estimated at about USD 600m, equivalent to 6.5 percent of the country’s GDP, and 
it is expected that this value will double in real terms by 2050, emphasizing the additional costs associated with 
delaying action to efficiently adapt to changes in the climate. The Programme’s technical assistance component 
(especially support to transition planning) will allow to achieve these targets. Support to investments in buildings, 
transport and agriculture deployed through FIs to households, farmers and MSMEs will allow to decrease the 
vulnerability of the local population to physical climate hazards.  
  
43. 
Mongolia: Delivering climate finance through FIs and aligning the FI system with climate targets is 
essential to be able to mobilise climate finance at scale and make it available for all economic sectors and actors. 
Deploying green finance through partner FIs, will allow to cover households, MSMEs and farmers to make them 
less vulnerable to the above-mentioned climate hazards (for example through investments in building insulation 
and climate-resilient agriculture). Moreover, investments in zero-water renewables (such as solar PVs) will allow 
to reduce the vulnerability of the energy systems to water-stress.  
 
44. 
Morocco: Morocco’s demand for green finance is increasingly growing. A significant part of those needs 
must transit through the FI sector, also in line with Morocco’s national strategy aiming at aligning the financial 
sector with sustainable development goals, adopted at COP22 in 2016.  
 
45. 
Serbia: Helping the FI sector plan transition and increasing the availability of green finance will significantly 
help the country achieve those targets. The country will face significant economic disadvantages and climate 
transition risk if it fails to make necessary investments to keep up with EU standards and regulations. 
 
46. 
North Macedonia: North Macedonia’s climate finance priorities are increasing energy efficiency, 
renewable energies and improving waste management, all of which key elements of the Programme. Delivering 
climate finance through FIs will allow to make households and farmers more resilient to physical climate risks. 
Transition planning of the FI sector will also create an enabling environment for all economic actors, including 
MSMEs, to be better prepared for climate transition risks.  
 
47. 
Tajikistan: The country being particularly vulnerable to climate risks, it is essential to attract sufficient 
climate finance from international sources and to mobilise private finance. Greening the financial systems will 
allow to keep up with the region and to tap into international capital markets.  
 
48. 
Uzbekistan: Uzbek households and businesses continue to have limited access to vital finance, leading 
to an estimated financing gap of over USD10.2 billion for SMEs, which account for 80 percent of businesses and 
78 percent of jobs in the country. With the recent actions taken by the government to incorporate climate change 
considerations into their national strategies, plans, and governmental decrees, the interest in green finance, 
specifically in renewable energy and climate mitigation actions, has significantly increased.

=== PAGE 28 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 
10 Armenia, Egypt, Georgia, Jordan, Moldova, Mongolia, Morocco, Serbia, Tajikistan 
11 Kyrgyz Republic, North Macedonia, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan 
Complementarity and synergy with existing programmes, strategies, and initiatives 
GCF-EBRD Green Economy Financing Facilities (“GCF GEFFs”)  
49. 
Transformation to a low carbon, sustainable model is one of key strategic objectives of the EBRD in its 
countries of operations and understands the vital role the financial sector plays in realising this objective. Since 
2017, the GCF and the EBRD have partnered on tackling market barriers to energy efficiency, renewable energy 
and climate resilience loans in the financial sector through the “GCF GEFFs” by introducing the EBRD’s climate 
taxonomy to participating FIs, providing technical assistance with assessing and originating climate loan portfolios 
and raising awareness of specific energy efficiency, renewable energy and water efficiency solutions. The GCF 
GEFF programme will be fully committed, hence the timing of the GFS Programme is well aligned to build on the 
commitment and momentum developed with partner FIs and local markets. 
 
50. 
The FIs that gained implementation experience of GCF GEFFs from the nine countries10 and FIs that 
participated in similar EBRD programmes from the five countries new to this Proposal11 have developed the 
capacity to identify specific climate finance opportunities among their client base. They are therefore well placed 
to advance into ambitious climate actions and institution-wide transformation in the proposed GFS programme. 
This in turn will facilitate the adoption of more ambitious climate strategies and increase the Programme’s 
probabilities of success in achieving the desired impact through reduced implementation risks. 
 
51. 
The GFS programme will build on this experience, magnifying the delivery of direct mitigation and 
adaptation impacts with a transformative approach to the financial sector via introducing emerging corporate 
climate governance and transition planning practices to FIs to help them identify and manage climate-related 
risks, target additional climate finance opportunities that help them manage these risks, and ultimately pivot their 
business models, assets, and operations towards a trajectory consistent with the Paris Agreement objectives. As 
international standards and methodologies on Paris alignment and transition planning are continuously evolving, 
this component of the Programme will adapt throughout the implementation period to offer the most-up-to date 
knowledge and capacities to partner FIs. 
 
52. 
The EBRD has therefore to the extent possible taken into account lessons learned and key ingredients for 
success determined through the implementation of the GCF GEFF programme in the design and implementation 
approach of this Programme, for example in setting realistic timelines for signing and disbursement of loans, 
flexibility in country allocations to respond to changing market dynamics, as well as utilising market knowledge 
on key trends and technologies at the country level to focus and tailor activities on key barriers and ensuring the 
Programme represents a step forward. 
 
53. 
Further, the experience of the GCF GEFF programme has demonstrated that the concessionality provided 
through the provision of GCF concessional loans and associated technical assistance is often not sufficient to 
generate movement in the local market. Concessional loans are particularly relevant for addressing supply side 
constraints in the provision of green finance, compensating PFIs for the additional complexity and administrative 
efforts required while enabling FIs seeking to build entry points into a new potential market that will show 
commercial returns to differentiate their new green product from other financing product, while potentially passing 
on the reduced costs of funding to the end beneficiary. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, economic shocks 
and the escalation of conflicts in the target region have resulted in persistent heightened inflation in many markets, 
contractionary monetary policies that resulted in higher interest reference rates, leading to higher default rates 
alongside increased cost of funding leading to increased risk aversion in the financial sector, in particular for 
financing higher perceived risk segments such as MSMEs and farmers. However, concessional loans cannot 
address demand side constraints arising from affordability constraints and price differentials for high performing 
technologies compared to purchase of prevailing technologies to meet lower local standards, or address the

=== PAGE 29 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25 
 
knowledge and awareness gaps on the part of FIs and end beneficiaries that limit uptake. Hence under the GCF 
GEFF, GCF and EBRD funds were often complemented with other concessional instruments funded through 
partnerships with other donors, such as providing investment incentive grants to end borrowers and expanding 
the technical assistance provided. It is therefore instrumental for the efficient and rapid deployment of this GFS 
Programme to have the appropriate level of concessionality, to ensure lessons learned have been taken into 
considerations in order to achieve the anticipated impact in a timely manner. The EBRD also expects to mobilise 
US$ 2.5 in grants for every US$ provided in grants by the GCF to deliver the Programme’s structure. 
 
EBRD and the financial sector stakeholders 
54. 
The EBRD is a trusted institutional investor in its countries of operations in strong and ongoing partnership 
with a network of approximately 300 FIs. In addition, the EBRD will leverage its extensive engagement with 
Central Banks, Ministries of Finance, business communities and the Nationally Designated Authorities of the GCF, 
engaging in complementary policy projects that will strengthen the regulatory and enabling ecosystem for climate 
finance in the target countries, thereby reinforcing the objectives of the Programme. As an example, the EBRD 
has been providing advisory and peer-review support to regulators with their sustainable finance, climate risk and 
disclosure policies and guidelines across Armenia, Egypt, Georgia, Kazakhstan and Morocco as well as 
supporting on a demand-driven basis concrete and focused policy initiatives, such as via the currently ongoing 
work with Morocco’s Bank Al-Maghrib (the Central Bank) on the state of the financial sector building on corporate 
climate governance and climate-related financial risk management, with an aim to achieve the operationalisation 
of the Directive 5/W/21 on financial risk management (incl. climate-related risks), or the creation of a Gender 
Responsive Investment Climate Assessment tool in Tajikistan to enable new business climate legislation, 
including climate-related legislation, to be screened for potential differentiated impacts on women. EBRD also 
plays an important role in raising the voice of the private sector with regulators and legislators at various levels; 
for example EBRD has been pivotal in the creation of Investment Councils in several of the target countries, as 
well as frequently participating in and organising convening events such as roundtables and conferences, with a 
technical, rather than purely policy, such as the Pathways to Paris conference in 2023 that brought together for 
the first time 150 financial institutions from 45 countries and discussed in very concrete terms for the industry key 
topics ranging from the emerging regulatory environment, climate and sustainability disclosures, navigating 
finance opportunities, innovative financial instruments including capital markets, important green sectors. As 
illustrated below, the GFS Programme will aim at ultimately catalysing the target countries’ financial sector 
US$ 1.2+ trillion of assets under management, leveraging the GCF funds with the EBRD and partner FIs’ co-
financing. In parallel, the EBRD continuously engages with other relevant authorities, such as the Ministry of 
Environment, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Natural Resources, etc, to ensure better alignment 
between its work with the financial sector and the national climate priorities and objectives, and to help develop 
an enabling environment for the greening of the financial sector. 
EBRD operations that are complementary to the Programme’s objectives and activities 
55. 
The EBRD has extensive experience supporting the institutional reform of partner FIs and empowering 
their green transition. In the EU member states, many of the FIs were able to launch dedicated green finance 
products in the local markets under the GEFFs, and build on the enhanced institutional capacity to develop 
Green-, and/or Sustainable-Bond/Finance Framework, and subsequently issue Green- and Sustainability-bonds 
in local capital markets. The EBRD participates in green bond issuances of participating banks as an institutional 
investor and helps develop local capital markets and sustainable finance products through engagement with 
financial institutions, stock exchanges, and capital market regulators.  
 
56. 
The EBRD has facilitated global transfer of climate technologies through its Trade Facilitation 
Programme, which will continue to be active in all the target countries throughout the lifetime of the GFS 
Programme. With a network of over 800 banks globally, the EBRD has provided guarantees to mitigate country-

=== PAGE 30 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
 
and counterparty risks in global trade and supported green trade finance volume in excess of €1.3 billion through 
more than 1,300 transactions in 26 countries.  
 
International stakeholders, and global climate best practices  
57. 
The GFS Programme is the only regional programme focused on the green transformation of the local 
financial sectors (with ultimate objective towards a systemic shift that will benefit SMEs, householders, farmers 
and other underserved segments while helping meet climate goals), with scope at an ambitious scale across 13 
countries and a substantial (15%) focus on adaptation. The Programme is designed to be complementary to 
ongoing programmes and national strategies in the target countries, given the acute constraints facing the private 
sector across the target countries and the unique value proposition of the GFS Programme. EBRD will actively 
coordinate throughout implementation with stakeholders on their respective programmes, noting in particular the 
ongoing GCF-funded Mongolia Green Finance Corporation project (FP153), approved in 2020, as well as the 
GCF-funded Agence Francaise de Developpement Transforming Financial Systems for Climate (FP095) covering 
Egypt and Morocco that was approved in 2018. 
 
58. 
The Programme will build on and leverage the EBRD’s leadership in climate finance partnerships with 
relevant international initiatives and standard setters as well as the financial sectors in the advanced economies, 
effectively and efficiently bringing global best practices into the proposed countries’ context.  
• 
Institutional commitment to align with goals of the Paris Agreement – the EBRD’s 
commitment to aligning financial flows with the goals of the Paris Agreement, and its methodology 
is based on years of stakeholder consultation – many international financial institutions followed 
suit and consulted with the EBRD on their Paris alignment aspects. As of January 2023, the EBRD 
has consulted with all the relevant PFIs with new transactions regarding their commitment to the 
Paris Agreement, and, with selected PFIs, explored their commitment to preparing a transition 
plan.  
• 
The EBRD annually discloses its climate risk management and related practices in line with the 
Task Force on Climate Related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) – which cover its climate risk 
management, corporate climate governance, strategies and targets. This practice of ‘leading by 
example’ provides the EBRD with first-hand experience to support its partners and clients. 
• 
The EBRD’s networks with the globally leading FIs on climate finance through its participation 
in the TCFD as well as United Nations Environment Programme Finance Initiative (UNEP FI), and 
exchange of experience on implementing TCFD and climate risk-related processes to promote the 
adoption of best practices on climate issues.  
• 
Network of Banking supervisors and Central Banks for Greening the Financial Systems 
(NGFS) The EBRD is an active observer of the NGFS and through this bilateral and multilateral 
engagement processes, obtains significant feedback on the needs of the regulators and the 
financial system as a whole and validates its support and activities.  The EBRD is an active member 
of the NGFS sub-team on transition plans. As part of the sub-team the EBRD is helping shape the 
understanding of how transition planning applies to the context of emerging and developing 
countries. While most credible standards and guidance on transition planning is largely reflective 
of the context of advanced countries, there is a great need to understand how transition planning 
can be adopted globally. The EBRD is providing such guidance and advice, being in a unique 
position of supporting transition planning by financial institutions in developing countries. The 
EBRD supported central banks and financial regulators from Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan to join 
the Network of Supervisors and Central Banks in Greening the Financial System (NGFS). 
• 
The EBRD’s partnership with the Climate Governance Initiative and engagement with senior 
management of business communities and FIs on corporate climate governance through the 
Chapters to the Climate Governance Initiative (Chapter Zero in Egypt, Uzbekistan, Georgia and 
Armenia) and EBRD Corporate Climate Governance Facility to mainstream consideration of

=== PAGE 31 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27 
 
climate risk into business and investment decision-making and strengthen country ownership of 
such actions.  
• 
The EBRD is an active observer of the EU Platform of Sustainable Finance, members of the 
International Capital Markets Associations, and actively coordinate with IFRS International 
Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB), International Energy Agency (IEA) and other crucial 
standard setters, policy makers and partners to develop global best practices and climate science-
based methods to implement its activities and engagement with beneficiaries.  
 
Tools, methodologies and other knowledge resources 
59. 
The Programme will build on and leverage the EBRD’s tools and climate finance infrastructure:  
• 
The EBRD’s Paris Alignment methodology, which builds on extensive stakeholder consultations 
and two public consultations and published in December 2022. The Programme will use this solid, 
well-consulted methodology, particularly that on the EBRD indirect investment into the countries in 
helping PFIs to gradually align their activities with the Paris Agreement objectives. The EBRD will 
review the methodology regularly (at least annually) and will consult with the public if any major 
updates are envisaged.  
• 
The EBRD’s Green Economy Transition Technical Guide (with detailed green finance qualifying 
guidance), and Environmental and Social Policy, which are under regular updates following 
extensive consultation processes  
• 
Green Technology Selector, a platform for available climate technologies and supplier network. 
The tool enhances public awareness and business opportunities with best-in-class technologies 
available across EBRD’s countries of operations and technology suppliers. 
• 
Green Finance Academy, a platform for knowledge from green finance opportunities to climate risk 
management.  
• 
Knowledge sharing channels (e.g. online platform such as ebrdgeff.com and knowledge sharing 
events such as Pathways to Paris: EBRD conference for financial institutions and others to provide 
information in a one-stop shop approach, disseminate success stories and open communication 
channel to directly receive feedback from a wide range of actors.  
• 
Centre of excellence for corporate climate governance for corporates, financial institutions, and 
stock exchanges on climate governance and disclosure matters. 
 
[1] GCF FP025.  
[2] Armenia, Egypt, Georgia, Jordan, Moldova, Mongolia, Morocco, Serbia, and Tajikistan.  
[3] Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, North Macedonia and Uzbekistan 
 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram) 
60. 
IF the GCF-EBRD GFS Programme successfully results in increased capacities of financial institutions to 
develop and monitor portfolios of climate investments and enhanced capabilities of PFIs to develop ambitious 
climate performance targets and credible transition plans and IF the Programme successfully delivers increased 
investments in climate mitigation and climate adaptation technologies and approaches, THEN the Programme 
will successfully shift the paradigm driving financial sector decision-making in the target markets and spark an 
economy-wide green transition supported by Paris-aligned financial systems, unlocking capital coupled with 
appropriately-designed green financing instruments to finance new opportunities in low-carbon and climate-
resilient development for the private sector, including financially underserved groups such as women-led SMEs, 
farmers and households, BECAUSE an enabling environment for more resilient and sustainable financial systems 
will have been created, GHG emissions from energy supply, manufacturing, residential, commercial, transport

=== PAGE 32 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
 
and the public sector will have been avoided, and the climate resilience of beneficiaries for water and food 
security, will have been increased, including gender considerations. 
 
61. 
The expected Outcomes of the Programme are (1) Reduced and avoided GHG emissions from energy 
supply, manufacturing, residential, commercial, transport, and public sectors; (2) Increased climate resilience for 
water and food security, including gender considerations; (3) Enabling environment for more resilient and 
sustainable financial systems, including gender considerations. 
 
62. 
Expected Outputs of the Programme are 1.1 Increased capacities of financial institutions to develop and 
monitor portfolios of investments for climate mitigation and adaptation projects, including gender considerations; 
1.2 Enhanced capabilities, tools and processes of financial institutions to develop ambitious climate performance 
targets and credible climate transition plans; 2.1 Increased investment in climate mitigation technologies and 
approaches through concessional finance; 2.2 Increased investment in climate adaptation technologies and 
approaches through concessional finance. 
 
63. 
Expected Co-benefit is Economic inclusion. This is expected to result from the creation of an enabling 
environment for more resilient and sustainable financial systems, including gender considerations (Outcome 3), 
that fosters opportunities for FIs to unlock access to finance to a wider segment of beneficiaries across various 
sectors, through activities that will enhance FIs’ capacities to develop portfolios of investment projects, as well as 
credible climate targets and transition plans. Economic inclusion is further expected to result from the increased 
climate resilience for water and food security, including gender considerations (Outcome 2), that will enable the 
provision of financing for adaptation that also targets the most climate vulnerable sectors or the markets with a 
particularly low penetration of climate solutions, e.g. supporting individuals and businesses along agricultural 
value chains to acquire technologies and technological packages for adaptation and resilience.  
 
The Programme addresses two inter-linked barriers: 
1) Limited enabling environment for climate-compatible financial systems.  
64. 
Greening financial systems requires an enabling environment to avoid restricting the availability of finance 
to the sectors of the economy that are most in need for transitioning to low-carbon or climate-resilient practices, 
particularly segments like women-led SMEs, farmers and households that are particularly unequipped for and 
vulnerable to the impacts of climate change but least able to access this finance. FIs may perceive sustainable 
investments as riskier, particularly if they lack the tools and methodologies to assess environmental and social 
risks adequately, which prevents capital allocation to green projects. Moreover, underserved segments are 
perceived as less bankable due to more limited access to collateral or more limited credit history or experience 
with financial institutions. Unclear or inconsistent regulations and policies targeting sustainable finance can create 
uncertainty for financial institutions, discouraging them from fully integrating sustainability considerations into their 
practices and instead relying on exclusions to comply with regulations. FIs require highly specialized expertise 
and training to assess environmental risks and identify targeted sustainable investment opportunities to be ready 
for greening their portfolios without restricting financial flows to the overall economy. Coordination and 
collaboration among various stakeholders, including governments, financial institutions, regulators, and civil 
society is a vital enabler of transformation. 
 
2) Low access to affordable climate mitigation and adaptation finance from financial institutions. 
  
65. 
Many FIs have started to pilot green financial products and services. However, the funding and 
implementation resources available are usually short-term, can incur higher cost and are ill-suited for certain 
beneficiaries – a major barrier to deploying green financial instruments. Moreover, many emerging economies 
lack access to high performance technologies, which are often more expensive and perceived as riskier.

=== PAGE 33 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
 
Therefore, FIs can benefit by accessing long-term and concessional financing, which partially compensate for 
these additional costs and perceived risks.  
 
66. 
Core assumptions underlying the ToC are: (1) The core of financial institutions business model is risk 
management as to protect the quality of the assets on their books and therefore they will want to manage climate-
related and borrower risks as soon as they recognise these will develop into financial risks for their business 
activity, (2) There is continued growth of demand from individuals and entities for mitigation and adaptation 
solutions from local FIs, (3) Local FIs are willing to lend to climate risk sectors based on educated assessment of 
risk and with appropriate financing instruments and technical assistance support to engage with them, (4) There 
are systemic barriers that impact women’s unequal access to finance, and in particular climate finance. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Programme’s Theory of Change Diagram

=== PAGE 34 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
 
B.2 (b). Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization 
 
Outcome 
number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation 
and access 
 
MRA 2 
Low-
emission 
transport 
 
MRA 3 
Building, 
cities, 
industries, 
appliances 
MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use 
ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities 
ARA 2 
Health, well-
being, food 
and water 
security 
ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment 
ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services 
Outcome 1. 
Reduced and 
avoided GHG 
emissions 
from energy 
supply, 
manufacturin
g, residential, 
commercial, 
transport, 
and public 
sectors. 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Outcome 2 
Outcome 2. 
Increased 
climate 
resilience for 
water and 
food security, 
including 
gender 
consideration
s. 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☒ 
Outcome 3 
Outcome 3. 
Enabling 
environment 
for more 
resilient and 
sustainable 
financial 
systems, 
including 
gender 
consideration
s 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
 
 
☒ 
☐ 
☒

=== PAGE 35 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31 
 
 
12 Links: https://www.ebrd.com/get-technical.pdf  
https://www.ebrd.com/get-technical-annexes.pdf 
Co-benefit 
number 
Co-benefit 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
Gender 
Adaptation 
Mitigation 
Economic 
inclusion 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B.3. Project/programme description  
67. 
The Programme, through its transformative approach to greening the FI system, will contribute to the 
achievement of NDC mitigation and adaptation goals in the targeted countries. The Programme will directly 
support 307 thousand end beneficiaries to reduce vulnerabilities to the impacts of climate change and will be able 
to accelerate mitigation actions across 13 emerging economies. Beneficiaries will include underserved groups, 
including women, households, the micro, small and medium-sized businesses that are the backbone of emerging 
economies, and hard to reach segments such as farmers and those in rural areas, alongside larger businesses 
that are drivers of employment and climate impact in emerging markets. Moreover, in addition to delivering USD 
620 million in green finance and 12.8 million tonnes in reduced CO2 equivalent emissions directly, the Programme 
represents a significant step up in ambition: it will create an enabling environment to unlock finance well beyond 
the Programme scope towards pathways consistent with the objectives of the Paris Agreement, ultimately 
catalysing greening of the target countries’ financial sectors’ US$ 1.2+ trillion of assets.  
 
 
68. 
Eligible criteria for the Programme, beneficiaries (of technical assistance and financial incentive grants), 
borrowers, sub-borrowers/lessees and sub-projects, and for each of the above components are detailed in Annex 
1 of the Term Sheet (Annex 14). PFIs, on a demand-driven basis, will benefit from technical assistance including 
developing FIs’ Non-Financial Services (NFS) capacity to close green skills gaps (esp. among women), as well 
as financial support for on-lending to their clients, Finally, local regulators, and other financial institutions in the 
eligible countries will also benefit from capacity building, and knowledge dissemination activities accessible to 
them. Sub-projects’ specific technical eligibility criteria will be in accordance with the Policy Statement as defined 
in the Term Sheet (Annex 14), which is an integral part of the loan agreements that will be entered into between 
the Accredited Entity and the PFI, which will set forth among others, the eligibility criteria of sub-loans or financial 
lease (in the case of Component 2), and/or the eligibility criteria and the implementation arrangements of financial 
incentive grants (in the case of Component 1 (Activity 1.2.2 only)). Technical eligibility criteria will be in accordance 
with EBRD’s methodology to determine Paris Agreement alignment and relevant technical guide (e.g., EBRD’s 
technical guide on implementing its Green Economy Transition approach 2021-202512). 
 
69. 
Phase 1 of the Programme is built around mutually reinforcing components that together address market 
barriers and enable paradigm-shifting pathways, which are illustrated below. 
• 
Component 1. Greening Financial Systems: Enabling financial institutions, regulators and financial 
actors adopting and implementing ambitious and sustainable climate finance portfolios and 
practices - technical assistance and financial incentive grants: enabling climate-compatible financial 
systems and mainstreaming climate finance 
• 
Component 2. Delivering Climate Finance for All: Investments to unlock and scale up climate capital 
- investment mechanisms for unlocking climate capital

=== PAGE 36 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
 
70. 
The Programme components are designed to enable and scale both the use-of-proceeds approach and 
introduce the transition plan approach. Use of Proceeds – where the EBRD specifically guides FIs to orient 
finance towards climate mitigation and adaptation and those population groups facing disproportionate barriers 
in the context of the green economy, especially women, as well as away from projects with adverse effects on 
climate. The Programme aims to build on the success achieved under the GCF GEFF Programme with new FIs, 
while scaling climate ambitions for existing PFIs. Transition plan approach – where FIs and the financial sector 
as a whole will embark on institutional transformation by developing a Paris alignment transition plan. EBRD 
assesses the needs for each of the activities under the components at the country level based on existing 
provision and sophistication of the financial sector and particular counterparty, but it is expected that the greatest 
impact comes from the delivery of this holistic approach and that in most cases, all activities under the two 
components will be deployed in a country.  
 
71. 
Based on this use-of-proceeds approach, the EBRD will enable FIs to scale up climate mitigation and 
adaptation finance, and support FIs and the financial sector as a whole through transition planning, capacity 
building, including developing FIs’ non-financial services (NFS) capacity for green skills training, knowledge 
dissemination, and regulatory and policy advisory services, including the provision of financial incentives to drive 
climate transition planning among PFIs (Component 1). Through financing agreements (Component 2), the EBRD 
will create legally binding mechanisms with partner FIs, which will not only extend the programme finance to 
female and male beneficiaries for climate adaptation and mitigation investments across priority sectors but also 
require FIs to commit to gradually align their own resources to the Paris Agreement goals while tackling the 
challenges faced by those most affected by climate change.  
 
72. 
The EBRD will specify and guide the use-of-proceeds as part of legal agreements so that programme 
proceeds (Component 2) are channelled to generate intended, concrete mitigation and adaptation impacts in 
alignment with social objectives. Where PFIs and end beneficiaries exhibit knowledge or capacity gaps impacting 
their ability to implement such investments, the EBRD will provide targeted technical support (Component 1) to 
reduce technical and implementation risks as well as green skills gaps. Building on legal agreements with the 
EBRD, partner FIs will commit to develop an ambitious and credible transition plan with the support of technical 
assistance and capacity building on transition planning, as well as financial incentive payments to be granted at 
the achievement of specific milestones to incentivize PFIs to undergo transition planning (Component 1) that 
would enable institutional transformation throughout their governance, climate risk management, strategies, 
targets and metrics and disclosure, multiplying gender-responsive impact well beyond the financing provided 
under the Programme.  
 
Component 1. Greening Financial Systems: Enabling financial institutions, regulators and financial actors 
adopting and implementing ambitious and sustainable climate finance portfolios and practices. 
73. 
Technical assistance measures under Component 1 will seek to overcome the barrier of limited capacity 
and awareness of FIs, sub-borrowers (targeting female but also male), and all relevant economic actors and 
contribute to a systematic reorientation of market behaviour by helping pivot FIs’ business models, operations, 
and assets towards a transition pathway aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement. Technical assistance to 
FIs for transition planning will be complemented by financial incentive payments to FIs to incentivize them to 
develop climate strategies and implement their climate ambitions.   
Component 1 consists of two outputs in bold below: Output 1.1 and 1.2. 
1.1 Increased capacities of financial institutions to develop and monitor portfolios of investments for 
climate mitigation and adaptation projects, including gender considerations 
Activity 1.1.1 Supporting financial institutions in the development of portfolios of investments for climate mitigation 
and adaptation projects, including gender considerations

=== PAGE 37 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
 
The EBRD will support partner FIs to originate investment opportunities and provide finance into a range of climate 
mitigation and adaptation technologies, practices with high market potential and set gender metrices. Activities 
will include but are not limited to: 
• 
Supporting outreach to potential beneficiaries (including share of women) and developing investment 
opportunities 
• 
Supporting PFIs with the assessment of projects (investment priorities; technical eligibility and feasibility; 
financial, economic, and risk analysis; mitigation and adaptation impact analysis; environmental social 
safeguards), including via digital tools 
• 
Building capacity to develop and issue green financial instruments 
• 
Train end beneficiaries to close green skills gaps and increase demand for PFIs’ green finance portfolio, 
including gender considerations 
Activity 1.1.2 Monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) of the portfolios of investments for climate mitigation 
and adaptation projects, including increasing PFI MRV capacity and gender considerations: 
The EBRD will regularly monitor FIs' portfolio of projects invested and/implemented, conduct spot checks and/or 
hire independent verification experts to ensure the integrity of the climate technologies implemented. Activities 
will include but are not limited to: 
• 
Portfolio-level monitoring and reporting (at financial institution level, amount of sub-loans disbursed, list of 
sub-projects and sectors, project values, gender, etc.) 
• 
Target result monitoring (at financial institution level, monitoring and reporting of targets set at inception, 
such as envisaged energy savings, renewable energy installations, expected emission reductions and 
specific adaptation benefits) 
• 
Activity and deliverables monitoring (at financial institution level, marketing activities, training and capacity 
buildings to advise the most effective and efficient solutions) 
• 
Independent verification (at country and/or financial institution level, verification consultants to verify the 
results reported and conduct on-site or desk-top verification of projects implemented) 
 
1.2 Enhanced capabilities, tools and processes of financial institutions to develop ambitious climate 
performance targets and credible climate transition plans. 
The EBRD will work with partner financial institutions and financial stakeholders across the proposed countries in 
a first-of-its-kind effort in the region to develop and implement transition plans, to transform their business 
practices and enhance their capacity to increase climate finance, supporting low-carbon and climate-resilient 
development in the target countries, through the following activities: 
Activity 1.2.1 Supporting financial institutions with Paris Agreement alignment and climate transition planning 
through technical assistance. 
These activities will enable participating partner FIs to become pioneers in their respective regions in developing 
and implementing a Paris alignment transition plan and strengthen institutional capacity to achieve the climate 
performance targets and/or ambitions, thereby setting important precedents and demonstration cases that will 
motivate change across the sector. The participating FIs will commit to a multi-year cooperation with EBRD on 
activities, including but not limited to the following: 
• 
Building capacity to understand physical climate and transition risks as well as opportunities in relation to 
portfolios of investments and business practices  
• 
Building capacity to assess portfolios of investments in relation to climate risk exposure and impacts on 
GHG emissions 
• 
Building capacity to develop climate performance targets and metrics and define milestones across 
climate-related governance, disclosure, risk management and strategy planning

=== PAGE 38 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
 
• 
Monitoring financial institutions’ transition plans (and/or equivalent deliverables) and advising towards 
progress with Paris alignment  
The transition plan, as defined in the EBRD’s Paris alignment methodology, will set out credible milestones to 
demonstrate that the FI is on a trajectory to become aligned with the Paris Agreement goals. A transition plan 
sets out the steps through which an organisation will improve its business practices in relation to climate change, 
leading to Paris-aligned financial flows. These steps will be set out as clear, time-bound milestones, associated 
human resources and budget. The EBRD will also help establish a strong climate corporate governance (CCG) 
approach within FIs, building on their existing internal organisation, to ensure the efficient and timely delivery of 
the plan. The EBRD will engage with partner FIs to make progress towards best climate practices along the 
following five dimensions.  
 
 
Figure 3. Paris Alignment 
 
The EBRD will introduce, propagate and/or mainstream transition planning and implementation practices in the 
target markets and facilitate knowledge dissemination, driving market-level actions within regulators, banks, 
beneficiaries and the wider financial system. The transition plan approach will help FIs sustain comprehensive 
climate and decarbonisation actions and is particularly powerful when combined with the “use of proceeds” model 
provided under the Programme – where environmental, social, and climate-related strategies and requirements 
are specifically reflected in dedicated financial activities, initiated by the financing provided by the EBRD and 
GCF.  
Activity 1.2.2 Enabling financial institutions to develop climate transition plans through financial incentives on the 
achievement of key milestones. 
In addition to the above technical assistance activities, financial incentive grants will be provided to FIs for 
developing and implementing an ambitious, credible and comprehensive transition plan. This will partially 
compensate and further unlock FIs’ up-front investments needed to build the necessary internal infrastructure and

=== PAGE 39 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
 
accelerate FIs’ actions at the market level to prioritise climate adaptation and mitigation investment on a systemic 
basis. Eligible financial incentive payments to PFIs will be defined in the Policy Statement that forms part of Loan 
Agreements, and will be against the achievement of the below key milestones: 
• 
25% of the incentive grants payable on the Accredited Entity’s approval of the project leader at the PFI, 
who will work on the PFI's climate transition planning in accordance with the methodology provided by 
the Accredited Entity and discuss a draft climate transition plan with the Accredited Entity;  
• 
25% of the incentive grants payable on the adoption by the PFI’s board or other equivalent governing 
body of a climate transition plan in form and substance satisfactory by the Accredited Entity; and 
• 
50% of the incentive grants payable on the public disclosure by the PFI of the core elements of the 
climate transition plan in form and substance satisfactory to the Accredited Entity. 
Eligible criteria for the use of the financial incentive grant to PFIs may be associated with following:  
• 
Launching new green financial products (e.g., marketing, internal incentive mechanisms). 
• 
Climate target setting and development of green investment portfolio, 
• 
Risk management and disclosure (e.g., strengthening environmental and social management information 
systems – where much of the climate-related risk management information would be held). 
 
The EBRD is committed to the principles of minimum concessionality and avoiding market distortion and is a 
signatory to the DFI Enhanced Blended Concessional Finance Principles. Financial incentive grants play an 
important role with regards to addressing the root challenges to getting commercial buy-in for FIs to invest 
resources in building internal capacity, infrastructure and strategic focus at PFI-level to enable scale up of climate 
lending well beyond the direct impacts of the Programme’s financing, while also promoting rapid utilisation and 
hence rapid impacts and demonstration effects 
The amount of the financial incentive grants will be proportionate to the amount of the loans (Component 2) 
undertaken by the PFIs, reflecting their ambitions. The use and amount of financial incentive grants will be 
determined on a case-by-case basis to adjust to country/FIs needs. The use and amount of the financial incentive 
grant will be approved by EBRD’s Investment Committee as part of the Loan approval process, hence approved 
alongside the corresponding Loan (Component 2). As part of this approval, the proposed amounts are reviewed 
by EBRD’s blended finance experts and impact economists against the principals of minimum concessionality 
and country relevance.  
Financial incentive grants to PFIs will enable them as first-movers in their respective markets to proactively 
undertake transition efforts, thus establishing the business case for transition and creating a demonstration effect 
down the line. The long-term sustainable effect of the programme is supported by: 
• 
The financial incentive grant as an effective mechanism to transform FIs’ core operating policies towards 
climate risk management which shall remain in place, 
• 
The complementary technical assistance at the policy and regulatory level that is required for regulators 
to develop their capacities, to enable them to guide FIs on adopting and effectively implementing 
transition plans beyond, thus ensuring the sustainability of the programme beyond its lifetime. 
 
Activity 1.2.3 Building the capacity of regulators, policy makers and other financial actors, including knowledge 
sharing and public dissemination of information. 
As part of the wider systemic impact of the Programme, the EBRD will help build and disseminate good practices 
among FIs and relevant stakeholders including policy makers, financial regulators, and central banks. The EBRD 
will actively advise and engage with policy makers and the regulator community (central banks, banking 
supervisors, Ministry of finance, stock exchanges, etc.) to facilitate knowledge sharing among regulators and FIs 
and share emerging market best practice, building on its expertise and significant track records in policy support.  
This knowledge sharing will focus on advancing the global climate agenda and provide recommendations to 
emerging regulatory frameworks from global climate best practices (e.g. Task Force on Climate-related Financial

=== PAGE 40 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
 
Disclosures (TCFD), Taxonomies, European Sustainability Reporting Standards, Science Based Targets, etc.). 
In this workstream, the EBRD will leverage its strategic partnership with international standard setting bodies, 
leading policy makers and initiatives such as the EU (an Observer to the Sustainable Finance Platform), Network 
for Greening the Financial System (NGFS), and International Sustainable Standards Board (IFRS ISSB) and the 
Climate Governance Institute (CGI), and Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero (GFANZ).  
Knowledge products, trainings, events and/or alumni networks will be organised to systemically share knowledge 
created with wider members of the financial community, and to allow FIs and regulators at various stages of 
climate practices to be supported. As an example, the EBRD’s inaugural Pathways to Paris conference proved to 
be an effective knowledge sharing mechanism where central banks, FIs, financial service parent groups and other 
financial stakeholders participated and exchanged experience from investment opportunities, risk management 
and regulatory approaches, to accelerate climate actions. 
Activities will include but are not limited to: 
• 
Organising knowledge sharing events and initiatives to facilitate exchange of best practice and knowledge 
among FIs and financial regulators  
• 
Publication of related methodologies and findings, and/or encourage participating FIs with public 
disclosure of their good practices 
• 
Helping regulators and policy makers to understand the latest trends and global best practices in climate 
risk management, transition planning and other related areas.  
• 
Facilitating knowledge exchange between regulators and FIs to ensure development of market specific 
and globally coherent regulatory practices. 
 
Component 2. Delivering Climate Finance for All: Investments to unlock and scale up climate capital 
74. 
Component 2 will address the limited financial flows and affordability challenges currently constraining 
climate finance in the target countries and supports FIs to extend climate finance flows at scale via deploying 
concessional loans, which will be provided to FIs to support energy efficiency, renewable energy, and climate 
resilience projects. The proceeds will support investments including, but not limited to, high performance climate 
technologies, their local manufacturing and supply chains and promote that women are well represented among 
sub-borrowers. The use of proceeds will follow the strict eligibility criteria set by the EBRD (see Annex 25 for 
detailed eligibility). This instrument also targets the most climate vulnerable sectors or the markets with a 
particularly low penetration of climate solutions, such as supporting individuals and businesses along agricultural 
value chains to acquire technologies and technological packages for adaptation and resilience.  
 
Component 2 consists of two outputs:  
2.1 Increased investments in climate mitigation technologies and approaches through concessional 
finance. 
Activity 2.1.1 Deployment of concessional loans to unlock and scale up climate mitigation projects 
Under this Component, PFIs will extend loans to support mitigation sub-projects. Mitigation sub-projects will cover 
investments in renewables (mainly solar PV), low-emission transport (including charging infrastructure), as well 
as energy efficiency in buildings (both fuel and electricity savings), industry and agriculture, in line with the 
eligibility criteria set out in Annex 25. The EBRD Green Technology Selector provides a good overview of the 
types of technologies that might be supported under the GFS program.  
The loans will target some of the underserved economic actors, such as the households, MSMEs and farmers. 
The Program targets to commit at least 30% of the total Programme loan proceeds end beneficiaries outside of 
the capital city.

=== PAGE 41 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
 
Activity 2.1.2 Promoting women’s access to climate mitigation finance 
A special attention will be given to MSMEs, and women-owned or women-led businesses. To gain an 
understanding of current disparities, reporting of sub-borrowers will be done on a sex-disaggregated basis. In 
some cases, the data can then be used to encourage a higher share of women sub-borrowers by, subject to 
donor funding availability, providing technical assistance to understand the country, sector and segment-specific 
constraints, promote the Programme among potential women sub-borrowers and work with PFIs to understand 
how best to encourage lending to women sub-borrowers, and subsequently allocating a higher share the 
Programme’s proceeds to women sub-borrowers. 
 
 2.2 Increased investments in climate adaptation technologies and approaches through concessional 
finance. 
Activity 2.2.1 Deployment of concessional loans to unlock and scale up climate adaptation projects 
PFIs will extend loans to eligible sub-borrowers to support adaptation sub-projects. These will include mainly 
investments in water-efficient technologies and measures in agriculture, as well as investments in sustainable 
land management practices (refer to Annex 22 and Annex 22-methodology for further details). These investments 
will lead to increased water and food security. The loans will target some of the underserved economic actors, 
such as the households, MSMEs and farmers. The Program targets to commit at least 30% of the total Programme 
loan proceeds end beneficiaries outside of the capital city.  
 
Activity 2.2.2 Promoting women’s access to climate adaptation finance 
A special attention will be given to women-owned or women-led businesses, in order to increase the share of 
female clients in the PFIs portfolios.  To gain an understanding of current disparities, reporting of sub-borrowers 
will be done on a sex-disaggregated basis. In some cases, the data can then be used to encourage a higher 
share of women sub-borrowers by, subject to donor funding availability, providing technical assistance to 
understand the country, sector and segment-specific constraints, promote the Programme among potential 
women sub-borrowers and work with PFIs to understand how best to encourage lending to women sub-borrowers, 
and subsequently allocating a higher share the Programme’s proceeds to women sub-borrowers. 
Deployment of concessional financing.  
75. 
GCF loans will be provided in the form of concessional loans at below-market interest rates to support 
climate adaptation, mitigation, and resilience projects across women and men sub-borrowers. EBRD operates on 
the principles of minimum concessionality and is a member of the DFI Working Group on Blended Concessional 
Finance for Private Sector Projects.  
 
76. 
The Programme can leverage its full flexibility to deploy each component/financial instruments 
(concessional loans, technical assistant grants, financial incentive grants) either independently or in conjunction 
with each other, depending on specific market conditions and additionality. Certain instruments may also be 
implemented in the context of A/B (syndicated) structure to catalyse private institutional capital. The Programme's 
goal to offset market barriers/market failures will be carefully balanced with the objective to provide economically 
viable solutions to PFIs and sub-borrowers that can be sustained beyond the Programme’s period.  
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements  
77. 
Sequence for implementation. The Programme brings high impact potential also enabled through South-
South exchange via an opportunity to maximize synergies through a sequenced (via Phases) and coordinated 
implementation framework that will enable later joining FIs and countries to benefit from the experience and peer 
networks developed under the GCF GEFF Programme and Phase 1 of this Programme.

=== PAGE 42 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
 
78. 
The phased structure of the Programme will provide critical mass, predictability, and continuity to clients 
and simultaneously ensures high impact potential and speedy deployment. Under Phase 1, the Programme will 
be executed in 13 countries: Armenia, Egypt, Jordan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, Mongolia, 
Morocco, North Macedonia, Serbia, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan.  
GCF and EBRD 
79. 
Following the approval of Phase 1 by GCF Board, the EBRD and GCF will, based on the Accreditation 
Master Agreement (AMA), enter into a Programme-specific legal agreement (the “Funded Activity Agreement” or 
the “FAA”). The FAA will outline, among other aspects, the sectoral and geographical scope (the “Mandate”) of 
the proposed EBRD/GCF Co-financing Programme (the “Programme”).  
80. 
The GCF funds will be placed in the dedicated GCF Special Fund (the “Special Fund”), and such funds 
will benefit from the same privileges and immunities as the EBRD’s resources. The EBRD will be solely 
responsible for the management and administration of GCF resources and will carry out such management and 
administration in accordance with its policies, procedures and practices, and with at least the same degree of 
care as it uses in the administration of its own funds or other donor funds, pursuant to the provisions of AMA. 
 
EBRD and Partner Financial Institutions (“PFIs”) 
81. 
EBRD will carry out the functions of the Accredited Entity and Executing Entity (“EEs”) for Components 1 
of this Programme. For the implementation of Component 1 (all activities with the exception of the financial 
incentive grants), procurement of services will be conducted in accordance with EBRD’s procurement policies 
and procedures. In addition, the Accredited Entity will enter into technical assistance agreements in relation to 
the relevant technical assistance activities to be carried out under this Component for the benefit of the selected 
technical assistance beneficiaries. 
 
82. 
PFIs will be considered EEs under Component 2 of the Programme. PFIs will include local commercial 
banks, microfinance institutions and leasing companies in each of the target countries. In providing financing, the 
EBRD shall pay due regard to the prospect that PFIs will be able to meet their obligations under the loan 
agreement. An up-to-date and robust due diligence will be in place before EBRD approves each PFI under this 
Programme and be presented to the EBRD’s investment committee for review. Applying the Loan Agreement’s 
conditions, PFIs will disburse the GCF funds to sub-borrowers. The PFIs under the Programme are not 
determined ex-ante; however, making this Component 2 available to a broad selection of PFIs with coverage in 
different geographies across the target countries is an important consideration to achieve the objectives of the 
Programme. The Programme will be actively marketed to all potential PFIs with which EBRD is able to work in 
the country and ultimately, PFIs will be selected based on their commitment to the Programme’s objectives and 
capacity to implement. 
 
83. 
EBRD will seek to sign legal agreements (the “transactions”) with individual PFIs. These transactions will 
make available EBRD finance as well as GCF co-finance, as relevant, for investments, financial incentive grants 
and technical assistance in line with the Mandate of the Programme. During the implementation of the 
Programme, the EBRD will be responsible for providing the necessary governance, oversight, and quality 
assurance in accordance with its policies, procedures, and any specific requirements in AMA. 
 
84. 
To ensure compliance with EBRD policies and strategic documents for each country, all transactions are 
approved by relevant EBRD operational and investment committees, including as necessary the EBRD’s Board 
of Directors. All counterparts will meet EBRD’s standards regarding risk, environmental and social standards, 
integrity, development impact and additionality.  
 
85. 
Built into the EBRD’s investment approval process is a robust methodology for assessing projects that 
deliver transformational impacts in EBRD’s region of operations, with or without additional support from donors

=== PAGE 43 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
 
such as GCF. EBRD has a mandate to pursue sustainable development (“Transition Impact”) through its activities, 
by combining investments with policy dialogue and technical assistance to promote market-oriented sustainable 
development.  
 
86. 
Implementation period for the Programme is thirteen years for each phase (including the full repayment 
of loans). This will allow the continuity in offering a wide range of climate products on an on-going basis in the 
local market and PFIs to have the most cost-effective approach for launching new innovative green products.  
Operational Arrangements 
87. 
The EBRD will directly offer concessional loans, technical assistance and financial incentive grants to be 
funded by GCF alongside financing and technical assistance from its own capital resources and other donors for 
specific, covenanted purposes in line with the Programme proposal. At the individual transaction level, 
components may be provided in conjunction or separately, based on the relevance of these instruments to the 
transaction, needs of the market and counterparty. Financing and grant approvals including those for GCF 
resources will follow EBRD’s guidelines and procedures. EBRD will engage third party service providers to deliver 
some technical assistance activities under Component 1, Output 1.1. No third party service providers will be 
engaged in the delivery of Component 1, Output 1.2.  
The projects will be implemented according to the following structures (Figure 4 and Figure 5). 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Indicative implementation arrangements.

=== PAGE 44 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
 
 
Figure 5. Flow of funds 
 
 
Roles and responsibilities 
Accountable Entity 
Activity 
EBRD 
Programme Overall Implementation, including 
signing and disbursement of Loans to PFIs, risk 
management, M&E and reporting to the GCF 
EEs (PFIs) 
Disbursement of Programme Loans to sub-
borrowers in line with the Loan Agreement signed 
with EBRD 
Reporting on use of proceeds of the Loan to EBRD 
Project consultants 
Delivery of technical assistance to PFIs and sub-
borrowers, including verification of sub-projects.  
Direct beneficiaries (Sub-borrowers)  
Implementation of funded sub-projects in line with 
the agreements signed between the sub-borrower 
and the PFI.  
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request  
88. 
The role of the private sector to mobilise capital on a much larger scale, is critical to addressing climate 
change. However, the magnitude and duration of the global climate finance gap is made worse by challenges 
brought on by existing barriers to their economic development, the COVID-19 crisis, and the on-going war on 
Ukraine.

=== PAGE 45 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
 
 
13 EBRD Survey (2021), “Readiness of the Financial Sector for the Impacts of Climate Change”. 
89. 
The Programme will offset a range of barriers to achieve systematic change in the target countries. There 
are existing financial instruments in the countries, however they are not yet on-track to deliver the scale of 
financing necessary to achieve the NDCs. They are often limited in scope, incur prohibitive costs, fail to address 
diverse beneficiary needs and are available on a short-term basis, making it difficult to finance assets that have 
longer operating lifetimes.  
 
90. 
To offset such barriers, the Programme will provide grants to support FI capacity building to incorporate 
climate-related information into risk management, business strategy, decision-making and disclosures as well as 
close green skills gaps preventing equal access to green finance. This approach will help FIs adapt to market 
changes and strengthen their ability to mitigate climate-related risks, while benefitting from new market 
opportunities. The grants will also support FIs to commit, develop, and work on implementation of climate 
transition plans to bring about systemic change across the FIs’ whole business process. Concessional loans will 
also be provided through the Programme to encourage the PFIs to address these underserved markets and 
segments.  
 
91. 
Globally, financial regulators acknowledge the need for improved climate risk and management practices 
across the world. However, developing markets still frequently lack clear price or regulatory signals for private 
sector investment in climate-related practices. Also, the practical implementation of risk management and 
disclosures remain a challenging factor. Such challenges are magnified by a fragmented landscape of climate 
change initiatives and a lack of regulatory expectations in most emerging economies. The introduction of climate-
related requirements or supervisory expectations by governments, policymakers or regulators is (as shown by 
the EBRD Survey) by far the most important external factor motivating FIs to strengthen their climate risk 
management13. Regulators can also play a critical role to influence the approach of FIs towards a low-emission 
pathway, especially through the engagement with NGFS (e.g., 71 per cent of the respondents who do not consider 
the impact of their operations on climate change relevant are regulated by a non-NGFS member). A GCF-EBRD 
programme will catalyse engagement with relevant stakeholders such as central banks and support their 
engagement with climate change initiatives to enhance their capacity and create a more conductive environment 
for the delivery of climate finance.  
B.6. Exit strategy  
92. 
The Programme has been designed to ensure that experience and exposure gained by FIs to enable them 
to sustain a market in climate investments after the Programme’s implementation period. The sustainability of the 
Programme impact beyond the implementation term of the activities will be achieved by:  
 
93. 
Increasing potential for PFIs to crowd in private sector investment, such as through introducing an 
innovative green finance instruments that leverage the improved data and capacity of PFIs to create and ringfence 
green portfolios. PFI’s increased capacity to robustly determine and report on a legitimate green portfolio will 
increase potential for these PFIs to crowd in private sector investment seeking such investments, for example via 
green capital market instruments in markets that are sufficiently mature. Moreover, GCF’s concessional finance 
complemented by EBRD’s finance on commercial terms will provide a minimum level of concessionality to support 
new and innovative financial products within the country context to kick-start activities related to specific 
customers, markets segments or technologies with low market penetration, which will reduce the needs for donor 
funding in the long-term. Furthermore, by combining both finance and capacity building, the Programme will 
strengthen FIs’ capacity to introduce more complex and innovative to the context products at the scale to be 
commercially viable. 
 
94. 
Strengthen the capacity of FIs to manage climate-related risks and identify market opportunities together 
with lending experience will lead to sustainability of access to finance in the market. The Programme will help FIs 
factor climate risk into their risk management practices and develop new products for their clients to strengthen

=== PAGE 46 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
 
their resilience and adapt to the climate change impacts as well as close green skills gaps preventing equal 
access to green finance. The Programme will also raise awareness about climate mitigation and adaptation 
technologies among potential clients and key stakeholders. These activities provide access to a knowledge-based 
of high-performance technical solutions that result in clear climate benefits, helping to originate new investment 
opportunities that are a business priority.  
 
95. 
Supporting countries in building a healthy and sustainable market through working closely with the relevant 
stakeholders including regulators and central banks. Providing capacity building to different stakeholders and 
developing enabling policies and regulation around green finance linked to addressing climate risk, including 
voluntary disclosure will allow countries to be better positioned to enable climate investments. Such 
transformational change will allow projects to be replicable at the level of the countries themselves and the 
benefits to continue beyond the life of the Programme.  
 
96. 
The Programme will promote innovative financing instruments while adopting standardized and simplified 
operational process. Repayments under concessional loans provided with GCF funds under the Programme will 
be managed through the EBRD GCF Special Fund in accordance with repayment schedules set forth in EBRD’s 
legal agreement. All GCF resources will be fully repaid to GCF in accordance with the terms of the Funded Activity 
Agreement (FAA).

=== PAGE 47 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv 
+ v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
200,000,000 
USD ($) 
GCF financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) Senior 
loans 
$186,000,000 
As defined in the 
term sheet (FAA 
Tenor 13 years) 
As defined in the 
term sheet 
As defined in the 
term sheet 
(ii) 
Subordinated  
loans 
0 
 
 
 
(iii) Equity 
0 
 
 
 
(iv) 
Guarantees 
0 
 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable 
grants 
0 
 
 
 
(vi) Grant  
$14,000,000  
N/A 
 
 
(vii) Results-
based 
payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-
financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
469,000,000 
USD ($) 
Name of 
institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
EBRD 
Senior 
Loans 
 
$434,000,00
0 
  
As defined in 
the term 
sheet 
Market rate 
 
 
EBRD 
Grant 
$35,000,000 
  
N/A 
N/A 
 
Other Co-
financiers 
Options 
(loans) 
 
private 
sector co-
financing 
(equity) 
 
To be 
tracked 
  
N/A 
 
N/A 
 
Total 
financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
669,000,000 
 USD ($) 
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
Financial resources from other climate funds, donors and other institutions will be 
accessed to co-finance the Programme.

=== PAGE 48 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
 
 
 
 
and 
contributions  
C.2. Financing by component14  
 
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
million 
USD 
($)million 
USD ($) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
million USD 
($)million 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
million 
USD 
($)million 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name of 
Institutions 
Component 
1 
Output 1.1 
Increased 
capacities of 
financial 
institutions to 
develop and 
monitor 
portfolios of 
investments for 
climate 
mitigation and 
adaptation 
projects, 
including 
gender 
considerations 
18.5 
1 
Grants (TA) 
17.5 
Grants (TA) 
EBRD/Other 
Donors 
Output 1.2 
Enhanced 
capabilities, 
tools and 
processes of 
FIs to develop 
ambitious 
climate 
performance 
targets and 
credible 
climate 
transition plans  
30.5 
13 
Grants  
(USD 1 
million TA + 
USD 12 
million 
financial 
incentives) 
17.5 
Grants (TA) 
EBRD/Other 
Donors 
Sub-total 
49 
14.0 
Grants 
(USD 2 
million TA + 
USD 12 
million 
financial 
incentives) 
35.0 
Grant (TA) 
EBRD/Other 
Donors 
 
14 Programme budget is to be further revised to reflect the proposed phased structure and accelerate the 
allocation period of financial instruments (Component 2).

=== PAGE 49 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
 
 
 
 
Component 
2 
 
Output 2.1 
Increased 
investments in 
climate 
mitigation 
technologies 
and 
approaches 
through 
concessional 
finance 
Output 2.2 
Increased 
investments in 
climate 
adaptation 
technologies 
and 
approaches 
through 
concessional 
finance 
620.0 
186.0 
Concession
al Loans 
 
434.0 
Loans 
EBRD 
Indicative total cost  
(US$ in million) 
669.0 
200.0 
 
469.0 
 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 
0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity 
building activities? 
Yes ☒ No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer? 
Yes ☒ No ☐ 
97. 
GCF funding under Component 1 (US$14 million) will include financing for the capacity 
building of local FIs and wider financial sector stakeholders to assess climate risk and opportunities, 
develop and implement according to strategies, improve corporate climate governance, close green 
skills gaps preventing equal access to green finance, and formulate and implement ambitious climate 
performance targets. This will include financial incentive grants to be provided to FIs upon 
achievement of specific milestones for developing ambitious, credible, and comprehensive transition 
plans and setting specific climate-related targets and time-bound delivery mechanisms with their own 
resources. Over the programme implementation period, FIs will not only be provided with targeted and 
direct capacity building support and financial incentives to develop ambitious Paris alignment transition 
plans (Component 1), but also opportunities to apply the knowledge to develop a portfolio of climate 
investment (Component 2). 
 
98. 
Component 1 will also serve to develop a toolkit for FIs to finance and hence accelerate 
technology transfer. The toolkit will build on the success of the EBRD Green Technology Selector, 
which turn green taxonomies into a user-friendly database of concrete products, local suppliers, and 
manufacturers. The new toolkit, envisaged in digital form, would create awareness of adaptation and 
mitigation technologies, and help facilitate technology trade to, from and within the proposed countries. 
The toolkit will help FIs globally as well as FIs in the proposed countries to identify technology 
transactions/ financing opportunities. This toolkit will create synergy with the EBRD’s Trade Facilitation 
Programme (TFP), which would guarantee technology trade transactions to, from and within the 
proposed countries, and has established a network of 800 confirming banks (exporters’ banks) globally 
and 40+ issuing banks (importers’ banks) in the proposed countries.

=== PAGE 50 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
 
 
 
 
D. EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
D.1. Impact potential  
99. 
The GFS Programme will allow to reduce vulnerabilities to the impacts of climate change, as 
well as accelerate climate change mitigation actions across 13 emerging economies. The Programme 
aims to especially serve underserved groups, including the micro, small and medium-sized 
businesses that are the backbone of emerging economies, households, farmers and hard to reach 
segments such as those in rural areas or women, alongside midcaps that are drivers of employment 
and climate impact in emerging markets. 
 
100. 
The Programme will result in significant GHG emission reductions through investments in 
renewables (mainly solar PV), energy efficiency in buildings, industry and agriculture, as well as in 
low-carbon mobility (including charging infrastructure). It will also lead to adaptation outcomes, by 
supporting water-efficient technologies and measures in agriculture, as well as sustainable 
agriculture practices, thus increasing water and food security. Further details on eligible sub-projects 
and resulting climate change outcomes can be found in Annexes 22 and 25. 
 
101. 
In addition to these direct impacts, the Programme targets transformative change for the FI 
sector at each country level. Through significant and tailored TA support, capacity building (including 
transition planning) and financial incentives for the adoption of transition plans and the setting of 
climate-related targets, the Programme will transform key FIs in each country into climate 
champions who would learn how to pivot their business model, assets, operations, and extensive 
branch networks towards a pathway consistent with ambitious low-carbon and climate resilient 
trajectories. With concrete investment and extensive product development experience, and targeted 
capacity building across entire functions – risk management, strategy and target development, 
governance, operations, and communications, as well as closing green skills gaps preventing equal 
access to green finance, these FIs will contribute to significant adaptation and mitigation actions.  
 
102. 
Structured knowledge exchange mechanisms between these FIs and wider financial 
stakeholders including regulators will contribute to enabling market environment to scale up climate 
actions with relevant and effective climate related regulations and enhanced local knowledge and 
experience. This will allow to reach impact that goes well beyond the Programme scope and beyond 
the FIs directly covered by Programme support. The selection of financial tools and targeted sectors 
was carefully designed to allow for a maximization of mitigation and adaptation impacts. The direct 
beneficiaries will be the current and potential clients of participating FIs in the selected 
countries across sectors and population groups vulnerable to the impacts of climate change as well 
as sectors that can bring substantial mitigation impact. This will allow the Programme to reach 
economic actors that otherwise have limited access to green or climate finance and are among the 
most vulnerable to the effects of climate change. 
 
103. 
Thanks to the strong capacity building component (esp. transition planning), the availability of 
green finance will continue to grow over time and well beyond the Programme support, as: (i) in line 
with transition plans, FIs will develop green finance products, and help close green skills gaps, (ii) by 
aligning with international standards, FIs will be able to tap into global capital markets and offer more 
green finance; (iii) other FIs will align (thanks to the enabling environment and knowledge sharing) 
and increase their offer of green finance. In line with this, it is estimated that the total related banking 
assets in the selected countries will be impacted, and their clients will become indirect 
beneficiaries of the Programme – hence impacting a share of the 1.2 trillion in banking assets 
estimated in the target countries.

=== PAGE 51 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
 
 
 
 
 
104. 
The Programme’s intervention will not only enable partner FIs to align their resources with the 
Paris objectives but also catalyse a shift in financial flows towards Paris objectives in a gender-
responsive way. The chart below illustrates the impacts of unlocking climate capital at scale in this 
way. Under a gradual shift scenario of 0.25%, 0.5% to 1% to 5% of finance to climate mitigation and 
adaptation investments alone can unlock climate capital that is 100 times greater than the 
Programme’s finance. This gradual shift is based on the assumption that the transition planning 
component will make PFIs Paris-aligned and oblige them to set clear targets for climate finance, thus 
creating constant and growing financial flows towards Paris objectives. The 5% figure is a 
conservative estimate. It is also considered that the Paris alignment and climate finance offerings of 
the PFIs, as well as the knowledge sharing activities under the Program, including with financial 
authorities and regulators, will incentivise other financial institutions to also develop climate finance 
portfolios.  
 
 
105. 
If the redirection of such financial flows towards Paris-aligned pathways are realised, an 
additional US$ 180+ billion of climate finance can be achieved through the country’s own private 
sector resources. This will, in addition to 12.8 million tCO2eq of lifetime GHG emission reduction from 
the Programme use of proceeds, bring another 3,327 billion tCO2eq of lifetime GHG emission 
reductions. 
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential  
106. 
FIs are crucial for delivering the large financial flows needed for climate change mitigation and 
adaptation investments in the economy, in support of achieving developing countries’ NDCs, National 
Adaptation Plans (“NAPs”) and Long-Term Strategies (“LTS”). However, they face several barriers, 
including limited access to affordable, long-term finance; capacity constraints in implementing green 
investments; and the lack of an adequate regulatory framework to allow for a low-carbon transition.  
 
107. 
In this context, the Programme facilitates a systemic change of the local financial sectors 
through 1) accelerating financial flows aligned with the PA in support of low GHG emission economies 
and climate-resilient development; 2) mainstreaming climate considerations into FI’s business 
practices to improve their climate-related risk and climate corporate governance; and 3) creating an 
enabling environment for inclusive and climate resilient economies. 
 
108. 
The Programme is designed to be scalable, replicable, and deployable across all thirteen 
countries. Leveraging EBRD’s financial market knowledge and strong presence in the market, the 
Programme aims to ensure continuity in the form of the well-tested methodologies and tools that 
EBRD has in place while introducing innovative solutions to access to finance and build capacity in 
the targeted countries. The Programme is based on a proven delivery mechanism and established 
network of over 300 partner banks with a track record of successful deployment, even in regions 
where availability of concessional resources and risk-sharing financial tools remains scarce. The 
Programme will enable the expansion and roll-out of climate finance across targeted regions and 
introduce innovative financial solutions to facilitate access to high-performing technologies that are 
otherwise largely unavailable in those geographies.

=== PAGE 52 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
 
 
 
 
109. 
FP025 introduced EBRD’s climate taxonomy to PFIs and delivered awareness and technical 
support services to originate prospective projects from their client base. This Programme introduces 
leading transition planning practices to PFIs to help them identify climate-related risk and to target 
additional climate finance opportunities that help them manage these risks. The Programme’s wide 
range of financial instruments is expected to support the increase the inflow of climate finance, help 
FIs and financial sector stakeholders develop credible transition plans to mainstream climate change 
across its whole business practices and capabilities to grow green portfolio. 
 
110. 
The Programme aims at transition planning for financial institutions within thirteen countries, 
with strong co-leadership of the leading local FIs and regulators to low-emission and climate-resilient 
pathways, tackling systemic barriers and unlocking a multiple of the GCF contribution in climate 
investments, ultimately catalysing the financial sectors’ US$ 1.2+ trillion of assets under 
management and leveraging the GCF funds with the EBRD and partner FIs’ co-financing a 
hundredfold. 
The Programme’s intervention can not only enable partner FIs to align their resources with the Paris 
objectives but also catalyse shift in financial flows towards Paris objectives, as described above.  
 
111. 
The Programme is expected to contribute to the development of capacity-building activities 
for enabling an environment conducive to climate finance solutions. It provides upstream engagement 
with relevant stakeholders including FIs and regulators through creating a network and assisting 
central banks to join international climate initiatives such as the NGFS, which are consistent with 
relevant national climate change strategies and plans.  
 
112. 
The Programme will contribute to a paradigm shift in financial systems of thirteen countries 
through dedicated climate finance and capacity building for FIs. Through a combination of financial 
instruments, technical assistance, and capacity building, FIs are expected to become leading market 
players that offer green products and trainings to individuals, MSMEs, corporates, entities invested 
via private companies, technology suppliers, producers, vendors, and installers/service providers. 
Dedicated green products with concessional elements are effective at increasing the capacity, 
interest, and confidence of FIs in mainstreaming the climate financing business line through learning-
by-doing and at changing their perceptions so that they recognize that climate investments are a 
profitable business opportunity. Through the Programme, more transactions would be known and 
proven to be commercially viable, being recognized as new business opportunities especially for non-
participating banks and non-bank financial institutions, leading to a systemic change across the 
financial sector. The programme aims to address this through the development of the enabling 
environment supported by the TA provided to PFIs as well as workshops and events to wider financial 
system stakeholders including regulators i.e. central banks. Along with the TA and financial incentive 
grants supporting the PFIs transition plans, the programme is expected to benefit other PFIs given 
the expected market spill-over opportunities as well as through demonstration effects of the PFIs that 
will pilot transition planning in each of their respective countries. Under the Programme, bespoke 
capacity-building for FIs will broaden their outreach and opportunities across regions, sectors, and 
customer sectors. The relevant training and technical tools will also help FIs set targeted benchmarks 
to priorities and integrate the financing of climate projects in their daily business practices. The 
Programme will also enable FIs to tap into a large number of small-scale project opportunities by 
addressing the new segment of clients that have often been neglected in traditional banking. Lastly, 
through the development of targeted green skills trainings for currently underserved population 
segments (especially women), the Programme will support the FIs in developing NFS and contribute 
to closing gendered green skills gaps.  
113. 
To summarise, it is expected that the Programme will result in a paradigm shift in the whole 
financial system, through the following:  
1) PFIs developing and publicly disclosing transition plans will incentivise other financial 
institutions in the country to follow their example (spillover effect) 
2) Regulators will align regulation, driven by this market dynamic, and also facilitated by the 
capacity building/knowledge sharing activities they will be part of under the programme

=== PAGE 53 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
 
 
 
 
3) Paris-alignment of FIs will mean constantly growing financial flows towards climate 
investments, in line with NDCs, NAPs and international climate objectives 
 
Moreover, the Programme design – blending necessary capacity building, incentives for transition 
planning and green credit lines – coupled with EBRD’s extensive experience of working with FIs, 
makes the Programme easily replicable in other countries of the EBRD region, and beyond. EBRD’s 
upcoming expansion to Sub-Saharan Africa will allow potential to also expand this model to that 
region and help African states mobilise much-needed climate finance through their national financial 
sector.  
 
Programme Alignment with the GCF Private Sector Strategy  
The Programme is aligned with four key priorities set out in GCF’s Private Sector Strategy (B/32/06):  
114. 
Promote a conducive investment environment for combined climate and economic 
growth activities. The Programme recognizes that transparent, long-term, and clear policies and 
regulations that internalize the positive externalities of low emissions and climate-resilient growth are 
required to reduce investment risk in developing countries. The Programme through its Components 
1 and 2 is targeted at aligning financial markets and institutions with climate goals. Building on the 
EBRD existing tools, the Programme will create standardized definitions and taxonomies for green 
investments to provide clarity and transparency to investors to distinguish genuine green projects that 
will build investor confidence in a long run. In addition, it will provide financial incentives for FIs to 
channel funds into green projects in the form of financial incentive grants and access to concessional 
green lending. A programmatic approach allows for fostering collaboration between FIs, 
Governments, international organizations, and other stakeholders that drive green finance initiatives 
collectively (Component 1). Such an approach facilitates knowledge and best practices sharing 
towards a long-term vision of climate-compatible financial system.  
 
115. 
Accelerate innovation for business models, financial instruments, and climate 
technologies. The Programme is designed to support innovative financial instruments deploying 
climate technologies across its focus verticals of Market Assessment. The programmatic engineering 
allows fostering of a long-term vision and commitment to climate innovation while allowing for 
strategic fit-for-purpose knowledge sharing, sustaining the efforts that are necessary to develop and 
refine solutions over time. In terms of instruments, the Programme will deploy loans, financial 
incentives, and technical assistance grants. EBRD has a track record of introducing innovative, 
flexible terms into its investment agreements to ensure incentives are aligned, upside is shared, and 
risks are managed appropriately. The flexibility and fitness for purpose is an innovative feature of the 
Programme. It relies on the DFI Enhanced Principles for Blended Concessional Finance for Private 
Sector Projects and will ensure that the GCF resources are: 1) additional, 2) crowding-in and with 
minimum concessionality 3) commercially sustainable in the long run, 4) reinforcing markets, and 5) 
promoting high standards.  
 
116. 
Catalyse market-creating investments to crowd in private climate finance. The 
Programme will leverage its wide range of financial instruments (financial incentives, technical 
assistance grants, and concessional loans) to enable the development of fit-for-purpose blended 
finance instruments to support flow of capital at scale to target countries based on the national 
circumstances. By blending concessional resources with private finance, GCF funds will help reduce 
the high risks, both perceived and real, faced by private sector actors seeking to scale successful 
climate solutions in new developing markets to demonstrate their commercial viability. GCF’s 
contribution to the Programme through Component 2 will unlock opportunities for FIs to expand their 
lending to the most climate vulnerable sectors and population groups by providing more attractive 
risk adjusted return potential and will increase the capacity of local financial institutions, and 
enterprises including mid-cap size businesses and MSMEs in developing countries to attract private 
capital for climate action.

=== PAGE 54 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
 
 
 
 
 
117. 
Strengthen domestic and regional financial institutions to scale up private climate 
finance. Public and commercial FIs play a significant role in providing access to finance to scale up 
the adoption of climate investments. The Programme, with the support of the GCF, will boost the 
involvement and strengthen the capacity of private and public financial institutions to catalyse climate 
investment, including through extending green credit lines. Under Component 1, FIs will develop 
comprehensive climate strategies that outline their commitment to sustainability and climate-related 
investments aligned with the PA. These strategies will include measurable targets for climate 
financing, emission reduction goals, and integrating climate risks into their decision-making 
processes. Under Component 2, the GCF funds will be catalytical to create opportunities and promote 
green financial products, including innovative instruments. The Programme for example will crowd in 
private sector finance via direct and indirect mobilization, such as via syndication (A/B loans). PFIs 
will also be better able to launch innovative financing structures such as capital market instruments 
(e.g. green bonds or a wide variety of Paris-aligned financing products for their customers) as well as 
EBRD acting as an anchor investor whose participation encourages other investors to these offerings 
that are seeking environmentally responsible investment opportunities and enable financial 
institutions to channel funds into climate-friendly projects. Likewise, FIs will assess climate-related 
risks in their portfolios and investments. Conducting robust climate risk assessments allows them to 
identify potential vulnerabilities, adapt their strategies, and ensure the long-term sustainability of their 
investments. The Programme also has a strong country ownership focus to ensure robust 
partnerships with the country NDAs, relevant public and private sector stakeholders, and went 
through the consultations with local Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) (further detail in Section D.5 
below).

=== PAGE 55 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
 
 
 
 
D.3. Sustainable development  
118. 
The Programme will be targeted to strategically attribute to the SDG 13: Take urgent action 
to combat climate change and its impacts, investing and implementing concrete adaptation and 
mitigation activities, and creating enabling financial system. Financial systems play a pivotal role in 
mobilizing and allocating resources for sustainable development initiatives.  
 
119. 
The Programme will deliver an important co-benefit contributing to several other SDG goals 
and goal-specific targets as follows but not limited to:  
SDGs 
GCF Result areas and Programme 
activities 
SDG 3. Good Health and Well-being. 
Target 3.9 By 2030, substantially reduce the number 
of deaths and illnesses from hazardous chemicals and 
air, water and soil pollution and contamination 
Buildings, cities, industries, and 
appliances. 
The Programme will help accelerate 
phase-out of outdated and harmful 
appliance, 
heating 
system, 
and 
transport 
vehicles 
with 
local 
air 
pollutants.  
SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all 
women and girls. 
Target 5.A Undertake reforms to give women equal 
rights to economic resources, as well as access to 
ownership and control over land and other forms of 
property, financial services, inheritance, and natural 
resources, in accordance with national laws 
Target 
5.B Enhance 
the 
use 
of 
enabling 
technology, 
in 
particular 
information 
and 
communications 
technology, 
to 
promote 
the 
empowerment of women 
 
Through gender-focused activities and 
investment 
mechanisms,, 
the 
Programme 
will 
promote 
women’s 
access to green finance and skills 
related to finance and technologies 
SDG 6: Ensure access to water and sanitation for 
all. 
6.4 By 2030, substantially increase water-use 
efficiency across all sectors and ensure sustainable 
withdrawals and supply of freshwater to address water 
scarcity and substantially reduce the number of 
people suffering from water scarcity 
6.A By 2030, expand international cooperation and 
capacity-building support to developing countries in 
water- 
and 
sanitation-related 
activities 
and 
programmes, 
including 
water 
harvesting, 
desalination, 
water 
efficiency, 
wastewater 
treatment, recycling, and reuse technologies 
 
Health and well-being, and food and 
water security. 
The Programme will promote, finance, 
and 
implement 
water 
efficiency, 
recycling and reuse techniques in 
agriculture, manufacturing or service 
sectors, and buildings among MSMEs, 
farmers and households financed via 
local FIs.

=== PAGE 56 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
 
 
 
 
SDG 7. Ensure access to affordable, reliable, 
sustainable and modern energy#. 
Target 7.2 By 2030, increase substantially the 
share of renewable energy in the global energy mix 
Target 7.3 By 2030, double the global rate of 
improvement in energy efficiency 
 
Energy generation and access. 
The Programme will promote, finance, 
and implement small to medium scale 
renewable energy projects and energy 
efficiency improvement in buildings, 
industry and appliance. 
SDG 9. Build resilient infrastructure, promote 
sustainable 
industrialization 
and 
foster 
innovation. 
9.3 Increase the access of small-scale industrial and 
other enterprises, in particular in developing countries, 
to financial services, including affordable credit, and 
their integration into value chains and markets 
9.4 By 2030, upgrade infrastructure and retrofit 
industries to make them sustainable, with increased 
resource-use efficiency and greater adoption of clean 
and 
environmentally 
sound 
technologies 
and 
industrial processes, with all countries taking action in 
accordance with their respective capabilities 
Buildings, cities, industries, and 
appliances. 
The Programme will have extensive 
outreach to corporates and MSMEs in 
the proposed countries to access 
finance 
and 
implement 
climate 
mitigation and adaptation projects and 
clean technologies appropriate to their 
businesses.  
As a co-benefit, the Programme will lead to increased economic inclusion of underserved 
groups, including households, MSMEs, farmers, as well as women owned/women-led 
businesses. This will be achieved by providing sub-loans to these groups to invest in 
green technologies and sustainable activities. Moreover, these groups will benefit from 
capacity building and knowledge sharing activities under the Programme. To ensure the 
economic inclusion co-benefit is achieved, the Programme sets a minimum target of 30% 
of the Programme finance to be committed to sub-borrowers outside of the capital city.

=== PAGE 57 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
 
 
 
 
D.4. Needs of recipient  
120. 
The Programme has been designed based on extensive consultations with all relevant 
stakeholder groups in all 13 countries and adapted to their needs and specific requests (see Annex 
7 for details).  
 
121. 
Our consultations, both bilateral and via recent banking sector-wide and financial sector-wide 
surveys, including the Banking Environment and Performance survey, the Climate Pulse Survey and 
the Readiness of the Financial Sector for the Impacts of Climate Change survey presented in Annex 
7, have revealed the following: 
• 
The lack of regulatory environment is a major obstacle to the greening of the financial 
systems; 
• 
Financial institutions lack knowledge and capacities to identify, manage and disclose climate 
risks and opportunities in their operations and portfolio (one third of responding FIs to the 
Readiness of the Financial Sector for the Impacts of Climate Change survey revealed no 
department is in charge of climate risk within their institution); 
• 
Financial institutions lack access to affordable climate finance and request concessional 
support, as well as local currency funding in most of the target countries; 
• 
Standardised financing tools and procedures would incentivise financial institutions to offer 
more climate finance to clients; 
• 
The lack of data availability is another major barrier.  
 
122. 
The Programme’s target countries share similar climate vulnerability profiles, risks and needs. 
As described in more detail in Annex 2, these countries are broadly exposed to significant carbon 
transition risk, arising from the countries’ reliance on coal and other forms of fossil fuels in their energy 
mixes, energy intensive industries or business practices, and a number of other influencing factors. 
The physical climate risks are significant and include acute water stress, heat waves, droughts, 
extreme precipitation, floods and landslides, and other risks. Armenia, Egypt, Kazakhstan Mongolia, 
and Uzbekistan experience a temperature rise at a faster rate than the global average. Similarly, 
these countries face significant transition risks, especially given their reliance on energy-intensive 
industries. Altogether, the targeted sectors of this proposed Programme, i.e., energy, manufacturing, 
residential, commercial, transport, agricultural and public services, account for the bulk of GHG 
emissions in the target countries. Concurrently, as these sectors are also vulnerable to the impacts 
of climate change, they require resilience-building interventions. Cognisant of the high impact 
potential, these sectors are consistently identified by the countries’ NDCs as the priority sectors for 
their climate change mitigation and adaptation actions (see section D5). 
 
123. 
However, these countries recognise (and many mention in their NDCs) that the financing 
needs of to achieve their NDC targets exceed by far the current financial offerings, ultimately limiting 
the countries’ capacities to adequately cope with the adverse climate impacts. For example, Egypt 
even explicitly expresses in its 2023 NDC that the implementation of its mitigation and adaptation 
measures is conditional on the provision of finance through international development partners and 
funds in multiple types of channels, such as blended finance, green bonds, and grants, all of which 
are key elements of the proposed Programme. Egypt projects its NDC mitigation interventions require 
USD196bn and adaptation USD50bn. Another example is the financing gap of Uzbek businesses, 
which, considering the current climate risk profile, is estimated to be over USD10.2 billion, affecting 
80 percent of businesses and 78 percent of jobs in the country.  
 
124. 
Moreover, many of the target countries face significant levels of income inequality, particularly 
between urban and rural populations and for many sectors and actors such as women-led 
businesses, farmers, households, and MSMEs in particular and many of the projected impacts of 
climate change on the target countries will disproportionately impact the poorest in society, for 
example heavy industry jobs, still very present in the target economies, which are highly vulnerable 
to heat stress, or smallholder farmers who are least able to afford the storage and cooling solutions

=== PAGE 58 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
 
 
 
 
required to maintain crop quality standards and therefore livelihoods. It is also these groups that most 
significantly lack access to long-term affordable climate finance and climate knowledge, creating also 
significant inequalities in access to climate finance and risking exacerbating these inequalities. 
Despite the growing interest locally towards sustainable solutions and the increasing penetration of 
green technologies into the production processes and operations in the target countries (with differing 
degrees of penetration as described in Annex 2), green investments remain relatively unknown, also 
noting the rapid development and ever-growing complexity of such technologies, and often have 
higher upfront costs and misunderstood payback potential. This is particularly challenging in the case 
of high-performing (and more expensive) green technologies. Typically, the incremental investment 
costs compared to worse performing ‘Business-as-Usual’ technologies are not justified commercially 
as energy or resource savings might not compensate for the increased costs of these technologies. 
These constraints of both affordability and knowledge are correspondingly most acute among the 
vulnerable groups targeted by the Programme, namely women, MSMEs, households and those 
rurally based.  
 
125. 
Given the scale and diversity of the climate financing needs, the financial sector is therefore 
the best intermediary to support and drive the decarbonisation and climate adaptation efforts of these 
underserved segments. While the role of the private sector is crucial in meeting the high financial 
needs, financial intermediation through the banking sector in the region is low, resulting in low vital 
climate funding. The target countries being some of the world’s most carbon-intensive economies, 
the shift towards decarbonization of the economy will require deep, structural changes in the real 
economy with significant implications for the financial system. However, the EBRD survey “Readiness 
of the Financial Sector for the Impacts of Climate Change” shows that financial institutions in the 
region are at the beginning of the journey: they have limited awareness of risks associated with 
climate change (only 43%) and for those that do, the majority (93%) adopts exclusion lists rather than 
reflect climate considerations more comprehensively in their operations and only 15% publicly 
disclose some climate risk information, highlighting that climate risk is far from the central risk 
consideration it needs to be to fundamentally shift financial flows for the future. The reasons for this 
are diverse. For instance, as Uzbekistan transitions to a market economy, its banking sector faces a 
range of issues, including the lack of good governance and risk management, limited green-financing 
capacities, as well as heavy dependence on state funding. Additionally, access is limited for the 
financial sector in the target countries to longer-term finance of the type appropriate to support more 
complex climate investments with longer payback periods, and to local currency financing; the 
Programme will contribute to both aspects. Moreover, despite an intensification of efforts to promote 
climate finance, including under the GCF GEFF programme, over recent years, macroeconomic 
headwinds through the COVID-19 pandemic and spillover effects of the war on Ukraine, continued 
skepticism and limited organic demand (due to limited market awareness of the technologies and 
commercial benefits) in the target markets mean that while progress has been made and solid 
groundwork built within participating financial institutions, there is still considerable way to go to 
achieve a true paradigm shift in the financial sector.  
 
126. 
In addition, EBRD experience provides evidence that the effects of climate change on the 
financial sector are not gender-neutral, as women are among the highest-risk groups. Key factors 
include gender-based differences in access to assets and credit and treatment by formal institutions, 
which constrain women’s economic opportunities. Such gender inequalities are prominent in the 
target countries, especially when it comes to women’s access to loans, female labour force 
participation in the banking sector (horizontal segregation), and women in managerial roles (vertical 
segregation). EBRD experience working with intermediation, including with the GCF, shows that 
access to finance is a main existing barrier for women entrepreneurs and borrowers, often due to 
structural differences in access to collateral, less asset intensive businesses, institutional bias and/or 
differing experience with or perceptions of working with financial institutions. Most FIs in the target 
countries still lag behind in terms of gender-responsive approaches in their work. As an illustrative 
example, the financing gap for women-led SMEs in Georgia alone – one of the more gender equal of 
the target countries - is estimated at over USD899 million.

=== PAGE 59 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
 
 
 
 
D.5. Country ownership  
127. 
The Programme was built on extensive consultations with public stakeholders, including, 
among others, Central Banks and financial regulators, Ministries of Environment, Ministries of 
Finance, Ministries of Economy, and the GCF NDAs. To achieve their NDC targets, the selected 
countries need to ensure economy-wide green transition.  
 
128. 
Moreover, preparing the financial system for the fast-evolving international standards and 
regulations in terms of sustainability will allow them to remain competitive and be able to access 
much needed capital on global markets (including concessional support from donors, such as the 
GCF via direct accreditation). A crucial part of the Programme’s activities will be promoting PFIs to 
assess and address the climate implications of their whole portfolios via support to the development 
and disclosure of a Transition Plan. This is vital in developing institutional capacity at the financial 
sector level to understand, assess and disclose to the regulator, as well as creating important 
demonstration and peer learning cases in the market.  
 
129. 
The knowledge sharing component included in the Programme, coupled with EBRD’s ongoing 
policy dialogue with the target countries, will ensure continuous cooperation and exchange between 
the Programme and the public authorities throughout implementation. The Programme will be 
implemented in a context of active coordination to reinforce policy dialogue efforts both with 
implementing state actors and other international and local stakeholders. EBRD’s engagement is 
tailored at the country level and may focus on strategic areas such as enhancing the legal and 
regulatory framework for renewable energy (covering areas such as distributed energy 
generation/private-to-private renewables), climate risk management and involving the financial sector 
in development of industrial low carbon sectoral pathways, more specifically in discussing  required 
financing needs. Paragraphs 55 and 136 provide more details of EBRD’s approach and track record 
in this area.  
 
130. 
The Programme’s GCF Results Areas are strongly aligned with the NDCs’ priority sectors of 
the target countries, meaning that the Programme will strongly support the implementation of the 
climate targets. More specifically, the Programme's support areas, ranging from energy, industry, and 
agriculture to water and health sectors are closely tailored to each country's specific NDC priorities. 
This alignment ensures that the Programme’s activities are not only relevant and effective but also 
owned and driven by the countries themselves, reflecting their commitment to achieving their climate 
goals. Annex 2 provides further detailed information on the current regulatory positioning of each of 
the target countries and EBRD will tailor its knowledge-sharing work accordingly to promote concrete 
steps forward across the target countries.  
 
131. 
For example, Egypt emphasises that its mitigation and adaptation measures are conditional 
on the provision of adequate finance. Egypt’s NDC highlights its reliance on international 
development partners, funds, and innovative financial instruments like blended finance, green bonds, 
and grants —all promoted by the Programme— to achieve its climate targets. Egypt's engagement 
with the Programme hence signifies a strategic approach to securing the necessary funds for its 
climate actions, demonstrating strong ownership by actively seeking international support to fulfil its 
NDC commitments. Likewise, Armenia's intent to leverage additional finance into climate action 
demonstrates proactive engagement and ownership in utilizing international support to meet its 
ambitious climate targets.  
 
132. 
The Programme’s emphasis on engaging with regulators and the financial community on 
creating the appropriate enabling environment, while simultaneously facilitating private sector 
engagement in climate action, underlines the importance placed by the Programme on supporting a 
collaborative approach between regulators and FIs at national level, peer learning opportunities 
among regulators, and among FIs across countries. The Programme builds on extensive stakeholder

=== PAGE 60 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
 
 
 
 
consultations and will continue to reflect the feedback from programme stakeholders through regular 
dialogue as specified in Annex 7. Stakeholder Consultation. 
 
133. 
The EBRD has developed a large palette of policy initiatives to help its countries of operations 
close the gaps when it comes to climate policy. Some examples include:  
- Helping governments design and organise renewable energy auctions (Serbia, Egypt, Kazakhstan, 
Uzbekistan, etc);  
- Supporting municipalities in making their cities greener and more resilient through Green City Action 
plans and investments in identified projects under its Green Cities Initiative (Armenia, Georgia, 
Moldova, etc); 
- Developing low carbon pathways for hard-to abate sectors (Jordan, Uzbekistan, Egypt, etc) 
- Helping countries set-up multi-donor, multi-stakeholder country platform for systemic change (such 
as the Just Energy Transition Platform in North Macedonia launched at Cop28; the Nexus for Water, 
Food and Energy (NWFE) in Egypt launched at Cop27) 
 
Regarding the financial sector, some examples of EBRD’s support include: 
• 
Analysing the Paris Alignment progress of the financial sector through the climate practices 
diagnostics tool; 
• 
Building capacity of Central Banks/regulators on corporate climate governance; climate risk 
management, sustainability reporting and disclosure and transition planning; 
• 
Supporting Central banks/financial regulators joining the NGFS and developing Sustainability 
Disclosure Regulation; 
• 
Supporting the development of green finance roadmaps; 
• 
Supporting the development of green and climate taxonomy; 
• 
Supporting the development and launching of sustainable sovereign bonds; etc. 
 
134. 
Moreover, EBRD has very strong local presence and expertise: EBRD has offices with 
operational staff based in all of the target countries. Building on the geographic scope of previous 
EBRD engagements, the proposed Programme is informed by the on-the-ground knowledge of 
markets and potential for their transformation.

=== PAGE 61 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
 
 
 
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness  
135. 
The GCF’s cost of mitigation from Programme portfolio (Direct impact) is 13.3 USD (GCF 
finance with contribution to mitigation) per tonne of CO2eq (lifetime emission reductions).15 The 
GCF’s cost of mitigation, if indirect impact on paradigm shift through transition planning is taken into 
account, is 0.05 USD (GCF finance with contribution to mitigation) per tonne of CO2 eq (lifetime 
emission reductions). 
 
136. 
There are multiple constraints in mobilising private capital for climate finance, particularly in 
developing countries. This includes limited availability of financing resources dedicated to climate 
change, future policy uncertainty, high cost of capital for technology solutions, data limitations and 
unattractive risk-return profiles. Specifically macroeconomic constraints are primarily related to 
mitigation and adaptation investments and are particularly high in developing countries. These 
include long timeframes, lack of large investment grade investments and liquid markets, high upfront 
capital and transaction costs, and significant project risks. As a result, challenges remain in attracting 
financing to climate projects. The Programme will address such barriers through offering a variety of 
sustainable financial instruments for climate change.  
 
137. 
There are no separate operating expenses allocated to the Programme since EBRD has a 
single Profit & Loss (P&L) statement where all operating expenses for individual projects are 
aggregated together.  
 
138. 
Concessional loans are an important instrument to offer the necessary longer-term 
financing, with technical experts into a package that promotes targeted investment. This will follow 
the well-tested EBRD GET approach and will benefit from the EBRD’s expertise on providing market-
driven innovative climate projects. The financing can be provided to target a wide range of financial 
institutions, including NBFIs and sub-borrowers in one of the smallest and emerging markets which 
have limited access to finance for climate projects.  
 
139. 
Financial incentives to FIs will be vital to encourage them to develop efficient and 
sustainable green financing business models by partly compensating for the related costs. 
 
140. 
As there are currently limited climate instruments in the local markets, GCF’s involvement will 
be crucial and have significant demonstration effects on how to use this for the local FIs. In this 
respect, the GCF’s financing in the combination with the grant for technical assistance (in co-
operation with potential other donors) is expected to play a pivotal role in the implementation of a 
variety of different instruments and activities. The crucial role of the Programme in this respect is also 
the cooperation with the relevant stakeholders including regulators to establish a network for 
knowledge sharing and capacity building to ensure a successful transition to a greener economy. 
 
 
15 Total lifetime emissions 12,8 million tCO2 eq, and the GCF cost to contribute to mitigation calculated as 85% 
of total GCF Resources.

=== PAGE 62 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
 
 
 
 
 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework to which the 
project/programme contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus 
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential  
  
Assessme
nt 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Scale 
There is growing awareness 
amongst financial markets, 
regulators, and policymakers of the 
systemic threat that climate change 
poses to economic activity across all 
sectors and all geographies. Central 
banks and financial supervisors in 
particular have identified this as a 
potentially major source of financial 
instability and are beginning to set 
expectations on how financial and 
non‐financial firms should assess 
and manage climate‐related risks in 
their portfolios and operations as set 
out for example by the Task Force 
 Low  
The financial systems in target countries are 
transformed from focusing solely on financing green 
investments through limited interventions to be fully 
aligned with the Paris Agreement through tangible 
principles of the TCFD and based on the EBRD-
developed Paris alignment methodology for transition 
of the financial sector. This approach will mandate the 
FIs to assess, manage and incorporate climate 
considerations into their governance, strategy, and risk 
management structures, thus influencing the loan 
books and an estimated total banking asset of $ 1,000 
billion in target countries.  
The approach works at scale when leveraging EBRD 
network of over 300 financial institutions (28 of which 
are targeted by the Programme). Provided with the 
To ensure scaling, the Programme 
will deliver a systemic capacity 
building and transition planning 
approach through Component 1 to 
support to FIs. Capacity related 
barriers will be further addressed 
through engagement with financial 
regulators, including knowledge 
transfer, skills training and 
awareness raising events. 
As a result of introducing leading 
climate governance practices, local 
financial institutions will be able to 
identify climate-related risk and to 
target additional climate finance

=== PAGE 63 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
 
 
 
 
for Climate‐related Financial 
Disclosures (TCFD) and by the 
Network for Greening the Financial 
System (NGFS). 
Quantifiable results, while being 
meaningful, are limited to the scope 
of individual investments in certain 
FIs in a limited number of countries. 
These include important investments 
by the GCF (GCF-EBRD GEFFs) in 
some economies using a use of loan 
proceeds approach to climate 
financing. There is still a long way to 
go beyond the individual 
investments to achieve paradigm 
shift and fully align the financial 
systems with the Paris Agreement. 
There is still a significant scope to 
green the financial system and 
expand green financing by local 
financial institutions to drive 
sustainability and access funding 
from an investor base that is 
becoming increasingly focused on 
climate and green impact. 
Leading FIs and some of the policy 
makers and regulators in the 
proposed countries have started to 
engage in climate related financing 
and actions, but the scale of those 
actions is not sufficient to deliver 
meaningful impact to fundamentally 
shift finance towards climate 
compatible pathways.  
necessary tools and capacity for climate risk 
management, central banks create an enabling 
environment by issuing standardized green finance 
guidelines.  
FIs will formulate a credible time-bound action plan 
(Transition Plan) to align all financing activities to 
manage climate risks, respond to climate finance 
opportunities, address expectations of regulators and 
investors, and transition the real economy towards 
low-carbon and climate-resilient development.  
Capital provision coupled with the innovative use of 
financial incentives, will have systemic influence on 
capital flows from the financial sector, influencing the 
business practices of millions of male and female 
beneficiaries. 
As a result, the Programme will serve as a catalytic 
market signal and millions of beneficiaries will directly 
benefit to transition to low emission and climate 
resilient development.  
opportunities that help them 
manage these risks.  
The Programme will enable these 
financial institutions to leverage a 
range of financial instruments 
(concessional finance and financial 
incentive grants) to enable the 
development of fit-for-purpose 
blended finance instruments to 
support flow of capital at scale to 
target climate solutions based on 
national circumstances.

=== PAGE 64 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
 
 
 
 
GCF-EBRD GEFFs introduced 
EBRD’s climate taxonomy to local 
financial institutions and 
demonstrated good practices in 
implementing energy, water 
efficiency, and renewable energy 
investments in six countries, but the 
funding towards green investment 
opportunities still lags the 
incumbent, business as usual 
practices due to lack of economic 
and market incentives, low 
knowledge, and a lack of leading 
climate governance practices among 
local financial institutions.  
Replicabili
ty 
Transition planning and climate 
related financial disclosure and risk 
management are emerging/early 
practices in emerging economies 
and with few exemplary cases where 
such practices are replicated widely 
in the emerging markets.  
Medium 
Transition planning, and systemic prioritisation of 
mitigation and adaptation investments by FIs become 
widespread practices in the market through transition 
plan development, disclosure, regulator guidance and 
knowledge sharing and dissemination.  
Through knowledge sharing initiatives, good practices 
are shared beyond the proposed countries to be 
replicated in other emerging economies.  
The Platform introduced through 
the Programme, coupled with a 
targeted programmatic 
communication strategy, will enable 
knowledge sharing and replicability 
beyond individual investments and 
countries. 
Sustainabi
lity 
FIs in the countries that participated 
in the GCF-EBRD programme 
continue to operate green finance, 
but the scope and the scale remains 
limited.  
Medium 
 
Participating FIs in the Programme will formulate and 
implement a comprehensive climate and 
decarbonisation strategy at the institutional level, 
which will support sustained growth in green finance.  
Regulators’ adoption of global best practices and/or 
development of related regulatory framework will lead 
to transformational impact to mainstream climate into 
mandatory compliance matters.  
FIs in the respective countries will follow the course of 
the pioneering FIs in transition planning to stay 
Central to this transformational 
approach is the design and 
implementation of a PFI-specific 
transition plan.  
Through public disclosure of the 
champion FIs’ transition planning 
and knowledge dissemination 
activities across the financial 
sector, good practices and lessons 
learned will be widely shared in the 
financial community.

=== PAGE 65 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
 
 
 
 
competitive, access capital from international investors 
and better respond to emerging regulatory 
environment.  
 
 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of Verification (MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
 
Final1 
2 
Total GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered  
 Core 1: 
GHG 
emissions 
reduced, 
avoided or 
removed/s
equestere
d  
 
Ex-ante and ex-post analyses16  
Independent verification report17 
commissioned by EBRD to a terms 
of reference agreed with the GCF 
 
FI reporting provided to EBRD on 
the portfolio of sub-loans generated 
in the period (geographic 
distribution, enterprise size) and 
portfolio performance (non-
performing loans) 
 
 
0 
Total 3 million TCO2eq 
Total 9.9 
million 
tCO2eq 
Annual emission 
reduction 760,000 
tCO2 eq/year  
based on country-
level impact 
calculations, which 
include illustrative 
country specific 
funding allocation, 
sector portfolio, 
emission factors, 
and asset life.  
Lifetime GHG 
emission reductions 
– 9.9 million 
tCO2eq within 
project timeframe, 
and 12.8 million 
 
16 Ex-post analysis is based on, among others, the volume of disbursement, number of beneficiaries, impact indicators (quantified and validated by specialized Implementation Consultants) 
based on sub-loan data that comes on a regular basis into the EBRD’s Management Information System (MIS). 
17 There will be 2 independent evaluations - interim and final. The verifications will include the verification of documents/reports, sample of site-visits, interviews with PFIs and end beneficiaries.

=== PAGE 66 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
 
 
 
 
tCO2eq considering 
asset lifetimes 
 
Detailed sector and 
country-specific 
calculations can be 
found in Annex 22, 
along with a 
methodological 
document in Annex 
22-methodology.   
 
 MRA1 Energy 
generation and access  
 
Core 1: 
GHG 
emissions 
reduced, 
avoided or 
removed/s
equestere
d  
Ex-ante and ex-post analyses  
Independent verification report  
0 
MRA1 – 0.7 million TCO2eq 
 
MRA1 – 2.3 
million 
TCO2eq 
 
 Detailed sector and 
country-specific 
calculations can be 
found in Annex 22, 
along with a 
methodological 
document in Annex 
22-methodology.   
MRA2 Low-emission 
transport 
Core 1: 
GHG 
emissions 
reduced, 
avoided or 
removed/s
equestere
d  
Ex-ante and ex-post analyses  
Independent verification report  
 
0 
 
 
MRA2 – 0.1 million TCO2eq 
 
 
MRA2 – 0.3 
million 
TCO2eq 
 
 
Detailed sector and 
country-specific 
calculations can be 
found in Annex 22, 
along with a 
methodological 
document in Annex 
22-methodology.   
MRA2 Low-emission 
transport 
Suppleme
ntary 1.5 
Improved 
Ex-ante and ex-post analyses  
0 
 
 
Detailed sector and 
country-specific 
calculations can be

=== PAGE 67 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
 
 
 
 
low-
emission 
vehicle 
fuel 
economy 
Independent verification report  
 
1.1 billion MJ 
 
3.4 billion MJ found in Annex 22, 
along with a 
methodological 
document in Annex 
22-methodology.    
MRA3 Buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances  
Core 1: 
GHG 
emissions 
reduced, 
avoided or 
removed/s
equestere
d  
Ex-ante and ex-post analyses  
Independent verification report  
 
0 
 
 
MRA3 – 2.2 million TCO2eq 
 
 
 
MRA3 – 7.2 
million 
TCO2eq 
 
Detailed sector and 
country-specific 
calculations can be 
found in Annex 22, 
along with a 
methodological 
document in Annex 
22-methodology.   
MRA3 Buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances 
Supplemen
tary 
indicator 
1.1 Annual 
energy 
savings 
(MWh) 
Ex-ante and ex-post analyses  
Independent verification report  
 
0 
4,760,000 MWh 
 
15,600,000 
MWh 
Detailed sector and 
country-specific 
calculations can be 
found in Annex 22, 
along with a 
methodological 
document in Annex 
22-methodology.    
MRA1 Energy 
generation and access  
 
Suppleme
ntary 
indicator 
1.3 
Installed 
renewable 
energy 
capacity 
(Solar PV) 
 
Ex-ante and ex-post analyses  
Independent verification report 
 
 
0 
 
100 MW 
 
 
300 MW 
 
See Annex 22 for 
estimations 
 
Based on our 
portfolio, we expect 
to support mainly 
solar PV.

=== PAGE 68 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
 
 
 
 
Per country 
installed capacity is 
included in Annex 
22. 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and access 
Suppleme
ntary 
indicator 
1.4 
Renewabl
e energy 
generated 
(MWh) 
Ex-ante and ex-post analyses  
Independent verification report 
0 
1,715,300 MWh 
5,146,000 
MWh 
See Annex 22 for 
estimations 
 
Based on our 
portfolio, we expect 
to support mainly 
solar PV.  
 
Per country 
installed capacity is 
included in Annex 
22. 
Total Programme 
adaptation beneficiaries 
without overlaps 
Core 2: 
Direct and 
indirect 
adaptation 
beneficiari
es 
Ex-ante and ex-post analyses 
FI reporting  
Independent verification report 
0 
Direct - 100,000 people (of 
which 50,000 female) 
 
Indirect – 5.2 million people 
(of which 2.6 million female) 
Direct -
306,870 
people (of 
which 
153,435 
female) 
Indirect – 
17.2 million 
people (of 
which 8.6 
See Annex 22 for 
ex-ante beneficiary 
estimation 
methodology and 
disaggregation per 
country data.18 
Ex-post data will be 
monitored at the 
sub-project level 
and will be 
aggregated at 
 
18 Ex-post analysis will be done on the basis of the Annex 22 methodology, i.e. deriving the number of beneficiaries from the ex-post water savings figures.

=== PAGE 69 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
 
 
 
 
million 
female) 
programme level.19  
. 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
 
 
 
 
 Core 2: 
Direct and 
indirect 
beneficiari
es  
  
 
 
Ex-ante and ex-post analyses 
FI reporting  
EBRD monitoring independent 
verification 
0 
Direct - 100,000 people (of 
which 50,000 female) 
Indirect – 5.2 million people 
(of which 2.6 million female) 
 
Direct -
306,870 
people (of 
which 
153,435 
female) 
Indirect – 
17.2 million 
people (of 
which 8.6 
million 
female) 
 
See Annex 22 for 
ex-ante beneficiary 
estimation 
methodology and 
disaggregation per 
country data. 
Ex-post data will 
be monitored at the 
sub-project level 
and will be 
aggregated at 
programme level. 
20 
ARA4 Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services 
 
Core 2: 
Direct and 
indirect 
beneficiari
es  
Ex-ante and ex-post analyses 
FI reporting  
EBRD monitoring independent 
verification 
0 
Direct -100,000 people (of 
which 50,000 female) 
 
Indirect – 5.2 million people 
(of which 2.6 million female) 
306,870 
people (of 
which 
153,435 
female) 
 
Indirect – 
17.2 million 
people (of 
which 8.6 
million 
female) 
See Annex 22 for 
ex-ante beneficiary 
estimation 
methodology and 
disaggregation per 
country data. 
Ex-post data will 
be monitored at the 
sub-project level 
and will be 
aggregated at 
 
19 Detailed methodologies for indicators will be included in the Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan. 
20 Detailed methodologies for indicators will be included in the Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan.

=== PAGE 70 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
 
 
 
 
programme level. 
21 
ARA4 Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services 
Core 4: 
Hectares 
of natural 
resource 
areas 
brought 
under 
improved 
low-
emission 
and/or 
climate-
resilient 
managem
ent 
practices 
Ex-ante and ex-post analyses 
FI reporting  
EBRD monitoring independent 
verification 
0 
TBD 
TBD 
See Annex 22 for 
ex-ante beneficiary 
estimation 
methodology and 
disaggregation per 
country data. 
Ex-post data will 
be monitored at the 
sub-project level 
and will be 
aggregated at 
programme 
level.22.   
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
 
Suppleme
ntary 
Indicator 
2.1 
Beneficiari
es 
(female/m
ale) 
adopting 
improved 
and/or 
new 
Ex-post analyses 
FI reporting 
EBRD monitoring 
Independent verification 
0 
53 people (15% of total 
number of sub-borrowers for 
adaptation projects by mid-
term) 
177 people 
(15% of total 
number of 
sub-
borrowers for 
adaptation 
projects) 
Relevant 
methodologies to 
be provided by the 
AE for chosen 
Supplementary 
indicators.  
 
 
 
21 Detailed methodologies for indicators will be included in the Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan.   
22 Detailed methodologies for indicators will be included in the Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Plan

=== PAGE 71 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
 
 
 
 
climate 
resilient 
livelihood 
options 
(number 
of 
individuals
) 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for current 
state (baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
 Core Indicator 5: 
Degree to which 
GCF investments 
contribute to 
strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory 
frameworks for low 
emission climate-
resilient development 
pathways in a 
country-driven 
manner  
ex-ante and ex-post 
analyses, EBRD 
reports or 
any other source of 
information available 
 
medium 
Champion FIs that 
commit and 
implement transition 
planning in target 
countries 
The project will 
provide dedicated 
technical assistance 
including capacity 
building and training 
Multi-country 
(Armenia, Georgia, 
Egypt, Morocco, 
Jordan, Kyrgyz 
Republic, Moldova, 
Tajikistan, Mongolia, 
Kazakhstan, 
Uzbekistan, North 
Macedonia and 
Serbia) 
 Core indicator 7: 
Degree to which 
GCF Investments 
contribute to market 
development/transfor
mation at the 
sectoral, local, or 
national level  
ex-ante and ex-post 
analyses, EBRD 
reports or 
any other source of 
information available 
medium 
 
Green financial 
products offering in 
target countries 
The project will 
provide dedicated 
green finance 
through deploying 
concessional loans, 
and financial 
incentive grants 
Multi-country 
(Armenia, Georgia, 
Egypt, Morocco, 
Jordan, Kyrgyz 
Republic, Moldova, 
Tajikistan, Mongolia, 
Kazakhstan, 
Uzbekistan, North

=== PAGE 72 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
 
 
 
 
Macedonia and 
Serbia) 
 Core indicator 8: 
Degree to which 
GCF investments 
contribute to effective 
knowledge 
generation and 
learning processes, 
and use of good 
practices, 
methodologies and 
standards  
ex-ante and ex-post 
analyses, EBRD 
reports or 
any other source of 
information available 
medium 
 
Knowledge sharing 
platforms launched in 
target countries 
The project 
dedicated technical 
assistance including 
capacity building and 
training 
Multi-country 
(Armenia, Georgia, 
Egypt, Morocco, 
Jordan, Kyrgyz 
Republic, Moldova, 
Tajikistan, Mongolia, 
Kazakhstan, 
Uzbekistan, North 
Macedonia and 
Serbia) 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) 
Project/program
me results  
(outcomes/ 
outputs)  
 
Project/programme 
specific Indicator 
 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
 
Final 
 
Outcome 1. 
Reduced and 
avoided GHG 
emissions from 
energy supply, 
manufacturing, 
residential, 
commercial, 
transport, and 
public sectors.  
 
N/A 
N/A 
 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Output 2.1 
Increased 
Investment volume 
through FIs 
FI reporting 
to EBRD 
0 
US$220 in million 
 
US$658 in 
million 
Up to 25% co-financing with 
sub-borrowers’ equities

=== PAGE 73 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
 
 
 
 
investment in 
climate mitigation 
technologies and 
approaches 
through 
concessional 
finance 
 
 
 
extended through 
programme 
concessional loans 
(US$ in million) 
EBRD 
Monitoring  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and/or other private sector 
co-financing. 
Disaggregated data by 
country and technology can 
be found in Annex 22. 
 
 
 
Outcome 2. 
Increased climate 
resilience for 
water and food 
security, 
including gender 
considerations. 
Water savings (m3) 
FI reporting 
to EBRD 
EBRD 
Monitoring 
and reporting 
Independent 
Verification 
0 
160.5 million m3 
535.5 million 
m3 
Country-specific data is 
available in Annex 22 
 
 
Output 2.2 
Increased 
investment in 
climate 
adaptation 
technologies and 
approaches 
through 
concessional 
finance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Investment volume 
through FIs 
extended through 
programme 
concessional loans 
for adaptation sub-
projects 
(US$ in million) 
 
FI reporting 
to EBRD 
EBRD 
Monitoring 
and reporting 
Independent 
Verification  
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USD 40 million 
USD 117 
million 
Assumptions are made on 
the amount of finance that 
will be dedicated to 
adaptation sub-projects in 
agriculture. Estimated 
investment volume across 
target countries. Further 
details can be found in 
Annex 22 and Annex 22-
methodology.

=== PAGE 74 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
 
 
 
 
 
Outcome 3. 
Enabling 
environment for 
more resilient and 
sustainable 
financial systems, 
including gender 
considerations. 
Number of additional 
Central 
Banks/regulator or 
national body joining 
NGFS or equivalent 
body  
Regulator 
public 
disclosure 
0 
1 
4 
 
The Network of Greening the 
Financial System (NGFS) 
membership or active 
participation (membership or 
observer status) of a similar 
cross-national initiative.  
 
Currently 9 of the 13 
countries are NGFS 
members. The objective is to 
have the remaining 4 joining 
before the end of the 
Program.  
% of PFIs assets 
invested in Paris-
aligned pathways 
and supporting 
climate investments  
FI reporting 
public 
disclosure 
 
0 
2% 
5% 
Assumes complementary 
improvements in enabling 
environment and availability 
of financial incentives under 
Activity 1.2.2 
Output 1.1 
Increased 
capacities of 
financial 
institutions to 
develop and 
monitor portfolios 
of investments for 
climate mitigation 
and adaptation 
projects, 
including gender 
considerations 
Number of PFI staff 
enhancing their 
green skills via 
training, capacity 
building and 
knowledge-sharing 
activities 
FI reporting 
EBRD 
reporting 
 
 
Ad hoc 
surveys 
 
 
 
 
 
  
0 
200 (of which 
minimum 60 
women) 
600 (of which 
minimum 150 
women) 
This reflects the number of 
key PFI staff being trained, 
assuming a minimum of 20 
staff trained per PFI, with 
variation across PFIs 
depending on appetite to 
engage.

=== PAGE 75 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
 
 
 
 
Output 1.2 
Enhanced 
capabilities, tools, 
and processes of 
financial 
institutions to 
develop 
ambitious climate 
performance 
targets and 
credible climate 
transition plans 
 
Number of PFIs 
receiving technical 
assistance around 
transition planning 
 
  
FI and 
consultant 
reporting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
 
 
 
28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Volume of sub-
projects supported, 
monitored and 
verified (US$m) 
 
FI and 
consultant 
reporting 
0 
 
195 
620 
Signed sub-projects 
supported by technical 
assistance. Excludes 
additional 25% sub-borrower 
equity. 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators 
Project/programm
e results  
(outcomes/ 
outputs)  
 
Project/programme 
specific Indicator 
 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target (Mid) 
Target (FINAL) Assumptions / Note 
Economic 
Inclusion 
Share of total 
number of sub-loans 
disbursed to sub-
borrowers outside of 
the country’s main 
city 
EBRD, FI 
and 
consultant 
reporting  
0 
At least 20% 
At least 30% 
 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
Component 1. Greening Financial Systems: Enabling financial institutions, regulators and financial actors adopting and implementing 
ambitious and sustainable climate finance portfolios and practices 
Output 1.1 Increased capacities of financial institutions to develop and monitor portfolios of investments for climate mitigation and 
adaptation projects, including gender considerations

=== PAGE 76 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
 
 
 
 
1.1.1 Supporting 
financial 
institutions in the 
development of 
portfolios of 
investments for 
climate mitigation 
and adaptation 
projects, 
including gender 
considerations 
  
  
  
The EBRD will support partner FIs to originate 
investment opportunities and provide finance into a 
range of climate mitigation and adaptation 
technologies, practices with high market potential 
and set gender metrices.  
 
The EBRD will provide support FIs in a market-, 
technology- and institution-specific manner to 
address the specific market barriers and knowledge 
gaps.  
  
Sub-activities: 
-1.1.1.1 Supporting outreach to 
potential beneficiaries (including 
share of women) and developing 
investment opportunities   
-1.1.1.2 Supporting PFIs with the 
assessment of projects (investment 
priorities; technical eligibility and 
feasibility; financial, economic, and 
risk analysis; mitigation and 
adaptation impact analysis; 
environmental social safeguards), 
including via digital tools 
-1.1.1.3 Building capacity to develop 
and issue green financial 
instruments  
-1.1.1.4 Train end beneficiaries to 
close green skills gaps and increase 
demand for PFIs’ green finance 
portfolio, including gender 
considerations 
 
Technical assistance 
delivered to 28 PFIs, 
including marketing and 
promotion activities and 
project review 
documentation, advisory 
provided product 
development for green 
financial instruments 
 
Green Technology Selector 
adapted for eligible 
technologies for each 
country 
 
Minimum 4 industry and 
regional events for financial 
sector stakeholders  
 
Minimum 28 trainings and 
capacity building events with 
PFIs and end beneficiaries 
 
1.1.2 Monitoring, 
reporting and 
verification (MRV) 
of the portfolios 
of investments for 
climate mitigation 
and adaptation 
projects, 
including 
increasing PFI 
MRV capacity and 
The EBRD will regularly monitor FIs' portfolio of 
projects invested and/implemented, conduct spot 
checks and/or hire independent verification experts 
to ensure the integrity of the climate technologies 
implemented. 
Sub-activities: 
-1.1.2.1 Portfolio-level monitoring 
and reporting (at financial institution 
level, amount of sub-loans 
disbursed, list of sub-projects and 
sectors, project values, gender, etc.)  
-1.1.2.2 Target result monitoring (at 
financial institution level, monitoring 
and reporting of targets set at 
inception, such as envisaged energy 
savings, renewable energy 
installations, expected emission 
EBRD regular reporting to 
the GCF that will include 
reporting on all the sub-
activities, which will draw on 
deliverables provided to 
EBRD such as verification 
reports, site visits, results 
dashboards, consultant 
reports, communications 
materials, PFI portfolio 
reporting.

=== PAGE 77 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
 
 
 
 
gender 
considerations 
 
reductions and specific adaptation 
benefits) 
- 1.1.2.3 Activity and deliverables 
monitoring (at financial institution 
level, marketing activities, training 
and capacity buildings to advise the 
most effective and efficient solutions) 
-1.1.2.4 Independent verification (at 
country and/or financial institution 
level, verification consultants to 
verify the results reported and 
conduct on-site or desk-top 
verification of projects implemented) 
 
  
 
Component 1. Greening Financial Systems: Enabling financial institutions, regulators and financial actors adopting and implementing 
ambitious and sustainable climate finance portfolios and practices 
Output 1.2 Enhanced capabilities, tools and processes of financial institutions to develop ambitious climate performance targets and 
credible climate transition plans. 
1.2.1 Supporting 
financial 
institutions with 
Paris Agreement 
alignment and 
climate transition 
planning through 
technical 
assistance 
The Programme will support PFIs to commit to 
develop an ambitious and credible Paris alignment 
transition plans and to set and implement the climate 
performance targets. To do so, the Programme will 
provide transition planning and implementation 
related support coupled with conditional financial 
incentive grants.  
 
Below illustrate possible results: 
• 
Portfolio level GHG emissions  
• 
Portfolio level sector-exposure targets 
• 
Developing exclusion policy  
• 
Revision of existing governance structure e.g., 
appointment of climate responsibility among 
board or senior management  
Sub-activities: 
-1.2.1.1 Build capacity to understand 
physical climate and transition risks 
as well as opportunities in relation to 
portfolios and business practices.  
-1.2.1.2 Building capacity to assess 
portfolios of investments in relation 
to climate risk exposure and impacts 
on GHG emissions. 
-1.2.1.3 Building capacity to develop 
climate performance targets and 
metrics and define milestones 
across climate-related governance, 
disclosure, risk management and 
strategy planning 
Training events delivered for 
28 PFIs to build capacity in 
understanding climate risks, 
how to assess investment 
portfolios including in relation 
to Paris Alignment, and on 
developing metric, targets 
and milestones.

=== PAGE 78 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
 
 
 
 
• 
Revision of risk management and/or 
operations policy in sector-specific  
• 
Increased offerings of green finance products 
in the local markets 
 
-1.2.1.4 Monitoring financial 
institutions’ transition plans (and/or 
equivalent deliverables) and advising 
towards progress with Paris 
alignment  
 
1.2.2 Enabling 
financial 
institutions to 
develop climate 
transition plans 
through financial 
incentives on the 
achievement of 
key milestones 
GCF will provide financial incentives to FIs for 
committing to develop and implement an ambitious, 
credible and comprehensive transition plans. 
 
Eligible financial incentive payments to PFIs will be 
defined in the Policy Statement that forms part of Loan 
Agreements, and will be against the achievement of 
the below key milestones: 
• 
 25% of the incentive grants payable on the 
Accredited Entity’s approval of the project 
leader at the PFI, who will work on the PFI's 
climate transition planning in accordance with 
the methodology provided by the Accredited 
Entity and discuss a draft climate transition 
plan with the Accredited Entity;  
• 
25% of the incentive grants payable on the 
adoption by the PFI’s board or other 
equivalent governing body of a climate 
transition plan in form and substance 
satisfactory by the Accredited Entity; and 
• 
50% of the incentive grants payable on the 
public disclosure by the PFI of the core 
elements of the climate transition plan in form 
and substance satisfactory to the Accredited 
Entity. 
Eligible criteria for the use of the financial incentive 
grant to PFIs may be associated with following:  
Sub-activity: 
1.2.2.1 Provide financial incentives 
to FIs to incentivize them to achieve 
sustainable milestones with 
significant positive externalities 
Regular reports that include 
the amount and/or 
percentage of incentive 
grants disbursed to FIs as 
incentive payments, and 
number of PFIs who have 
received them.

=== PAGE 79 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
 
 
 
 
• 
Launching new green financial products (e.g., 
marketing, internal incentive mechanisms). 
• 
Climate target setting and development of 
green investment portfolio, 
• 
Risk management and disclosure (e.g., 
strengthening 
environmental 
and 
social 
management information systems – where 
much of the climate-related risk management 
information would be held). 
 
 
1.2.3 Building the 
capacity of 
regulators, policy 
makers and other 
financial actors, 
including 
knowledge 
sharing and 
public 
dissemination of 
information 
The EBRD will facilitate knowledge sharing among 
participating FIs and regulators and beyond and 
disseminate good practices through a range of 
structured knowledge sharing mechanisms.  
 
The EBRD will actively engage with the policy 
makers and regulator community (central banks, 
banking supervisors, Ministry of finance, stock 
exchanges, etc.) to help them learn from global best 
practices on policy and regulatory support, and to 
reflect feedback from FIs’ experience.  
  
For this, the EBRD will leverage its policy leadership 
and institutional relationship with institutions such as 
EU Sustainable Finance Platform, Network for 
Greening the Financial System (NGFS), and 
International Sustainable Standards Board. 
 
Sub-activities: 
- 1.2.3.1 Organise knowledge 
sharing events and initiatives to 
facilitate exchange of best practice 
and knowledge among FIs and 
financial regulators  
- 1.2.3.2 Publication of related 
methodologies and findings, and/or 
encourage participating FIs with 
public disclosure of their good 
practices 
- 1.2.3.3 Help regulators and policy 
makers to understand the latest 
trends and global best practices in 
climate risk management, transition 
planning and other related areas.  
- 1.2.3.4 Facilitate knowledge 
exchange between regulators and 
FIs to ensure development of market 
specific and globally coherent 
regulatory practices. 
 
4 Conference, webinars 
and/or workshops for 
financial sector stakeholders  
 
14 publications by end of 
implementation period 
 
 
 
Component 2. Delivering Climate Finance for All: Investments to unlock and scale up climate capital

=== PAGE 80 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
 
 
 
 
Output 2.1 Increased investments in climate mitigation technologies and approaches through concessional finance  
Output 2.2 Increased investments in climate adaptation technologies and approaches through concessional finance 
 
Activity 2.1.1 
Deployment of 
concessional 
loans to unlock 
and scale up 
climate mitigation 
projects  
 
 
GCF loans will be provided in the form of 
concessional loans at below-market interest rates to 
support climate mitigation projects.  
 
The loans will target some of the underserved 
economic actors, such as the households, MSMEs 
and farmers. The Program targets to commit at least 
30% of the total Programme loan proceeds end 
beneficiaries outside of the main city. 
Sub-activity:  
-2.1.1.1 Provide concessional loans 
to FIs to scale up climate mitigation 
sub-projects 
28 concessional EBRD-GCF 
loans signed with PFIs to 
support mitigation projects  
 
Activity 2.1.2 
promoting 
women’s access 
to climate 
mitigation finance 
 
GCF loans will be provided in the form of 
concessional loans at below-market interest rates to 
support climate mitigation projects. A special 
attention will be given to MSMEs, and women-owned 
or women-led businesses 
Sub-activity: 
2.1.2.1. Provide concessional loans 
to FIs to scale up climate mitigation 
sub-projects incorporating a focus on 
women’s access to finance 
20% of the EBRD-GCF loans 
signed with PFIs to be 
committed to 
women/women-led/owned 
businesses to invest in 
climate mitigation projects 
Activity 2.2.1 
Deployment of 
concessional 
loans to unlock 
and scale up 
climate 
adaptation 
projects 
GCF loans will be provided in the form of 
concessional loans at below-market interest rates to 
support climate adaptation and resilience projects. 
 
The loans will target some of the underserved 
economic actors, such as the households, MSMEs 
and farmers. The Program targets to commit at least 
30% of the total Programme loan proceeds end 
beneficiaries outside of the main city.  
 
 
Sub-activity: 
- 2.2.1.1. Provide concessional 
loans to FIs to scale up climate 
adaptation sub-projects 
28 concessional EBRD-GCF 
loans signed with PFIs to 
support adaptation projects 
 
Activity 2.2.2 
promoting 
women’s access 
to climate 
GCF loans will be provided in the form of 
concessional loans at below-market interest rates to 
support climate adaptation projects. A special 
attention will be given to MSMEs, and women-owned 
or women-led businesses 
Sub-activity: 
2.2.2.1 Provide concessional loans 
to FIs to scale up climate adaptation 
20% of the total adaptation 
share of EBRD-GCF loans 
signed with PFIs to be 
committed to 
women/women-led/owned

=== PAGE 81 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
 
 
 
 
adaptation 
finance 
 
sub-projects incorporating a focus on 
women’s access to finance 
businesses to invest in 
climate adaptation projects 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements  
See Annex 11 for additional details 
Monitoring  
1. Monitoring for the Programme will be in line with EBRD’s policies and the terms of the AMA/FAA. Specifically, the implementation of each 
project under the Greening Financial Systems Programme to Deliver Climate Finance for All Programme will be managed and monitored at 
project and Programme level by EBRD’s in-house staff, project management unit and procured consultants. The EBRD has dedicated staff in 
its sectors team, risk departments and regional offices that will conduct due diligence, monitor project risks, and prepare mitigation 
measures throughout the Programme’s lifecycle. The logical frameworks will be aligned at Programme and sub-project level, and the same 
outcome indicators will be applied across Programme portfolio to aggregate Program results from sub-projects at Program level. Under the 
Programme the EBRD will deploy specialist Implementation Consultants to conduct technical assessments of sub-projects, capture impact 
indicators and record data on the EBRD Management Information System (MIS). These Consultants also periodically monitor and track 
implementation of sub-projects. Ex-post analysis is done on the volume of disbursement, no of beneficiaries, impact indicators, etc. based 
on sub-loan data in the EBRD Management Information System (MIS). Independent verification is done by contracted Verification 
Consultants (who are totally separate from the Implementation Consultants and act as a second line of defence), who conduct spot checks 
on a representative sample of sub-projects and this provides a sense-check on the overall ex-post data coming into the MIS system. EBRD 
reports to GCF on results of the Programme (incl. GHG reductions) on the basis of the data in MIS. 
 
Reporting 
A. PFI Reporting to the EBRD: As specified in the legal agreement between PFI and EBRD, the PFI is obliged to report its portfolio on the 
use of proceeds of the Programme to the EBRD.

=== PAGE 82 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
 
 
 
 
B. Consultant Reporting to EBRD  
1. 
Inception report: As soon as a team of local and international consultants is procured to implement the Programme. During the inception 
phase, the team of consultants will report to the EBRD Programme manager their activities including the starting up phases of establishing the 
country or region-specific marketing strategy; establishing processes and procedures in consultation with PFIs and other stakeholders; 
establishing the database, including the market specific list of Green Technology Selectors.  
2. 
Programme monitoring reports: Once the Programme is officially launched, the operational team will consult with the EBRD managers 
on the progress of the Facility and report on a weekly, monthly, and quarterly basis throughout the Programme lifetime. These reporting will 
include (A) Programme and PFI level and (B) end-beneficiary level monitoring. 
3. 
Final report: At Completion Date, the operational team will prepare a completion report at Programme-level. 
  
C. EBRD Reporting to the GCF  
4. 
Once the EBRD receives reporting from clients and consultants, the EBRD reviews the reporting to identify discrepancies and reconcile 
the data. Based on this, EBRD will provide to the GCF a) annual activity performance reports on the status of the GCF funded activities throughout 
the relevant reporting period, b) interim evaluation report at the mid-point of the Implementation period and final evaluation reports at the end 
of the implementation period of the Programme.  
5. 
Impacts will be reported to the GCF through the indicators reporting required for all projects as set out in the Legal Agreements and EBRD 
staff or contracted consultants responsible for monitoring the impacts of the Programme where consultant reports will be used a means of 
verification.  
6. 
Outcomes will predominantly rely on EBRD staff or contracted consultants to monitor and report on the indicators using the means of 
verification specified above.  
7. 
Outputs will be monitored in line with the means of verification described above as provided either by consultants, the Bank’s treasury 
department or clients. Both EBRD staff and contracted consultants will be responsible for ensuring the Bank fully and successfully reports all 
listed indicators and information to GCF.  
8. 
The reporting on all of the above will be aligned with the indicators set out in the Logical Framework of the Programme.

=== PAGE 83 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
 
 
 
 
Evaluations 
9. 
Two evaluations are planned: one interim independent evaluation following year 6 of Programme implementation; and one final 
independent (summative) evaluation looking at the impacts of the Programme at Completion Date.  
10. 
The independent Evaluation Department (EvD) evaluates the performance of the EBRD’s completed projects. The Evaluation Department 
is a department independent of the EBRD’s various banking divisions (and hence of the developers and managers of the projects they evaluate); 
therefore, EvD reports solely to the Board of Directors (i.e., to the representations of the shareholding governments). The EvD evaluates the 
effectiveness, relevance, and input efficiency of projects and provides the Board with important insights into the implementation of projects, 
impacts, success stories and lessons learnt. Under the EBRD’s Public Information Policy, EvD publishes summaries of its independent project 
evaluations. 
11. 
Evaluations will be conducted in compliance with the GCF Evaluation Policy. 
 
 
 
Click here to enter text.

=== PAGE 84 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures 
Selected Risk Factor 1: Political risk  
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
141. 
There is potential political instability at the macro-level in many of target countries as well as localised 
political risks to the Programme. Specifically, some of the targeted countries in the Neighbourhood East have 
significant geo-political uncertainties stemming from the ongoing conflict in Ukraine, in particular Moldova, 
which continues to experience economic and social spillover effects from its proximity to Ukraine and hosts 
high levels of displaced peoples, thereby intensifying fiscal pressures and negatively impacting growth and 
inflation projections. Should this risk materialise, there can be expected material challenges in the 
Programme implementation, disruption to countries’ governance, banking system and other implications of 
the war that could manifest in higher borrowing costs, reduced appetite to borrow from PFIs and sub-
borrowers and therefore lower deployment of the Programme in the affected country. This has been 
considered in the development of the potential pipeline for Moldova and other potentially affected countries 
(e.g. Jordan) and is considered Medium. Furthermore, this could lead to potential legal and administrative 
restrictions that may be imposed on the investment climate and financing conditions for the private sector.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
142. 
Political risks vary considerably between countries and the Programme contexts. The EBRD is 
primarily driven by the sound banking principle, with thorough due diligence processes covering angles 
related to political, integrity and policy risks. The EBRD has local presence and trusted relationships and 
monitors closely the evolution of conflicts and their impacts on the viability of investment contexts. The EBRD 
would also build on its long relationships and policy support activities with the governments of the countries 
it operates to support alignment of political agenda with the broad objectives of the Programme. The 
Programme can be a crucial tool in enabling financing even in crisis situations within sound banking 
parameters. More generally, political risk is not easily ring-fenced and mitigated, with the risk of a jurisdiction 
reflected in higher financing premiums. The GCF’s support through the Programme will be an important risk 
mitigant for catalysing financing flows in these countries, helping address some of the perceived barriers that 
contribute to such higher financing premiums, and, given the Programme’s overall implementation period, 
activities can be scaled down and then rebound should be situation improve. The Programme also includes 
a diverse set of countries across three continents, thereby diversifying this risk, hence the residual impact of 
this risk is considered Medium.

=== PAGE 85 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
 
 
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 2: Economic risk  
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
143. 
Macro-economic risks such as those of general shocks and downturns to aggregate demand, trade, 
or employment, have been rising in the aftermath of the pandemic and now the war on Ukraine, e.g., with 
inflationary cost effects on commodities, energy, food and raw materials globally. The persistence of adverse 
economic conditions related to the war on Ukraine as well as the COVID-19 pandemic and related 
restrictions could affect FIs’ risk appetite (supply side) as well as end-borrowers’ appetite to invest or push 
them towards cheaper, lower-performing technologies (demand side).  
144. 
The war’s effects have reverberated globally and have led to disruptions and greater disparities 
emerging in the rate of recovery across the target countries. Furthermore, the invasion of Ukraine and the 
resulting energy crisis has prompted a reassessment on energy and food security and the interdependencies 
and potential vulnerabilities across targeted countries. Direct and indirect effects of the war have been felt 
across all the countries with inflationary pressures (and correspondingly higher borrowing cost), supply 
shortages, monetary tightening and market unpredictability which remain the key factors hindering the 
economic recovery and growth prospects. This could impact both risk appetite of FIs for new lending, as well 
as FI’s ability to originate sub-portfolios.  
5. 
Credit risk may arise from potential PFIs that will fail to perform and meet a contractual obligation 
that results in financial loss due to credit events and affect the profitability of the investment under the 
Programme.  
146. 
PFIs may face risks associated with currency fluctuation since GCF loans are available only in 
USD/EUR while PFIs may provide local currency lending to their sub-borrowers in some countries. PFIs in 
targeted countries may not have capacity to swap hard currency borrowing themselves or can bear the full 
risk arising from this.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
147. 
EBRD’s presence and processes, including those applied with partner financing institutions, will 
ensure adequate risk management of the Programme. Early detection of emerging challenges will be 
facilitated by EBRD’s strong local presence in all targeted countries. 
148. 
These factors will be monitored carefully throughout implementation to raise and address pertinent 
issues and developments in a timely manner. The Programme’s focus on advisory services for FIs and 
regulators are expected to improve investment contexts together with marketing and awareness raising 
support. The concessionality will also serve to stimulate demand from the target group for adaptation and 
resilience projects. The proposed sectoral and geographic diversification of the Programme is a key mitigant 
to the Programme. Overall, the targeted countries are still expected to report growth rates despite these 
global shocks, which are expected to be temporary not permanent. 
149. 
Furthermore, in line with its mandate, the EBRD applies sound banking principles in its operations, 
and prices its products commercially considering the country and counterparty risk as well as deal term and 
structure and includes appropriate negative and affirmative covenants in its Loan Agreements to mitigate 
specific risks at the transaction level (see Annex 9 for further details). The EBRD is a signatory and active 
proponent of the Principles for Blended Concessional Finance. The EBRD has always acted to operate 
counter-cyclically in difficult macroeconomic situations. The Bank always applies a rigorous internal due 
diligence processes where economic/market sensitivities are assessed and analysed for projects, hence the 
residual impact of this risk is considered Low.  
150. 
EBRD will provide local currency loans in targeted countries when there is a need by procuring local 
currency funding or hedging by entering into currency swaps with third party providers. Furthermore, FX risk 
will be closely monitored for each PFIs under the programme.

=== PAGE 86 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
 
 
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 3: Implementation risk  
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
151. 
Successful deployment of the Programme will require significant efforts and dedicated resources to 
originate, execute and monitor the exposures. Furthermore, there could be unsatisfactory performance of 
engaged consultants in the technical assistance activities with the FIs or lack of commitment from FIs to the 
Programme. This will require additional technical assistance to support them in implementing more advisory 
services, marketing and awareness raising support and climate practice business activities. 
 
EBRD treats all clients as high risk when it comes to integrity, money laundering, sanctions, risk of financing 
terrorism et al. Given the magnitude of these risks, EBRD has not adopted a risk based approach, even for 
the FI sector, and scrutinises all clients and their practices annually as part of annual risk monitoring and 
assessment. In addition, as the first line of response, responsible bankers for a transaction have a duty to 
monitor existing clients not only from the credit risk perspective, but also public information about partner 
financial institutions. Every year each client is required to complete an AML, Integrity and Sanctions 
questionnaire. Information and management attestation from such questionnaires is verified during on-site 
due diligence and as part of on-going monitoring.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
152. 
Relevant for the Programme rollout, the EBRD is gaining valuable implementation experience 
deploying GCF GEFF Programme (FP025). As such, the Bank has established a model for governance and 
operationalisation for how the GCF funds can be deployed in a successful manner. The deployment of the 
GCF finance onto individual loans will be structured in line with the DFI guidelines on the use of concessional 
finance which guard against potential market distortions and ensure there is a strong rationale for using 
concessional financing.  
153. 
The Bank’s Procurement Operations & Delivery Department and Procurement Policy and Advisory 
Department develop and update procurement policies, rules, and methods, and are responsible for 
maintaining a procurement quality assurance system, reviewing complaints and publishing information about 
procurement opportunities and contract awards. Regarding the tracking and usage of funds, EBRD has 
prepared a new and enhanced guidance and processes when dealing with GCF funds (in terms of sanctions, 
AML, and other checks).  
154. 
The Programme’s holistic design, addressing both supply side and demand side constraints mitigates 
this risk, including through support to the FI on product design and roll-out, marketing and awareness-raising 
activities to build demand and pipeline and the use of the investment incentive to stimulate demand. Qualified 
consultants will be selected by the EBRD or its clients in accordance with the organisation’s Corporate 
Procurement Policy and Procurement Policy and Rules and managed using its thorough experience of 
provision technical assistance to its clients under similar programmes. Given these robust procedures and 
the EBRD’s substantial experience in project implementation, the residual impact of this risk is considered 
Low.

=== PAGE 87 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
 
 
 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment  
155. 
 
The backbone of the sustainability strategy is the Environmental & Social policy of the Bank (ESP), 
outlining E&S risks identification and management processes of all operations financed by EBRD, as well 
as excluded activities. The ESP (2019) is currently undergoing revisions and ESP (2024) will be disclosed 
publicly on 1st January 2025. The revised ESP (2024) will apply to all projects initiated and eventually signed 
on/after such date. Up until such date, ESP (2019) will apply. All sub-projects financed by the PFIs must 
comply with EBRD’s Environmental and Social Exclusion List as well as applicable local and national 
environment, health, safety and labour regulations and standards. The proposed Program is classified as I-
2 and will not finance category A sub-projects, hence there will be no requirement for ESIAs (which are a 
requirement for category A sub-projects only). Specific Performance Requirements. All PFIs financed 
through the Facility will also be required to comply with the relevant EBRD’s Performance Requirements, as 
set out below.  
1) Applicable to the PFI internal operations and not the sub-project portfolio:  
2. 
a. PR2: Labour and Working Conditions. The key requirements of PR2 are that the PFIs comply, at 
a minimum, with (i) national labour, social security and occupational health and safety laws, and (ii) the 
fundamental principles and standards embodied in the ILO conventions.  
3. 
b. PR4: Health and Safety. The key requirements of PR4 are that PFIs take steps to identify and 
prevent accidents, injury and disease to workers and affected communities arising from or associated with 
or occurring during the project activities and prepare and implement preventative measures and plans to 
manage health and safety risks in accordance with the mitigation hierarchy approach and GIP.  
2) Applicable to sub projects in the FI portfolio: 
156. 
PR9: Financial Intermediaries. The key requirements of PR9 are that PFIs put in place a clearly 
defined Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), including an environmental and social 
policy and environmental and social procedures commensurate with the nature of the FI, the level of 
environmental and social risks associated with its business activities, and the type of the project and 
subprojects. 
  
157. 
The full PRs can be found following this link. To assist the PFIs in implementing the above 
requirements, EBRD has developed several guidance documents. All of these can be found through this 
link.  
 
158. 
On an annual basis, all PFIs will be required to submit to the EBRD annual environmental and social 
reports on the implementation status of the ESMS, PR9, PR 2, the occupational health and safety 
requirements of PR 4, as well as the environmental and social performance of its portfolio of subprojects. 
EBRD also reserves the right to conduct site visits to PFIs to monitor the implementation of the Bank’s 
requirements and to visit sub-projects, as necessary.

=== PAGE 88 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
 
 
 
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan  
159. 
Gender inequalities in financial systems and access persist across the thirteen countries targeted by 
the Programme. These are especially prevalent in the context of women’s unequal access to finance and in 
particular climate finance. Significant gaps are also prevalent with regards to women’s access to green skills 
and equal opportunities for access to labour force participation in the sector (horizontal segregation), as well 
as in related managerial roles (vertical segregation).  
160. 
The EBRD’s Strategy for the Promotion of Gender Equality (2021-2025) has set ambitious 
organisational level targets to promote gender equality across its programmes and engagements. To achieve 
the targets, multiple tools, including the Gender Smart methodology, have been developed. Their aim is to 
integrate gender considerations into policy engagements, investments, capacity building and other FI 
ecosystem engagements.  
161. 
Under this new GCF GFS Programme, the EBRD will seek to promote gender equality as well as 
including gender focused activities within the Programme and sub-projects. This would include supporting 
financial institutions in developing NFS to provide green skills training to end beneficiaries to ensure they 
are aware of the benefits of investing in climate technologies both for commercial and residential purposes. 
Moreover, EBRD aims to support women’s increased access to finance by incentivizing FIs through 
concessional financing, to promote and increase equal access to climate finance for women for both 
commercial and residential purposes.  
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement  
162. 
The Programme will select consultants in accordance with EBRD’s Corporate Procurement Policy 
and with the Procurement Policies and Rules (PP&R). The EBRD will publish specific Terms of Reference 
(ToR) for each assignment targeted at a specific country, region, Facility or PFI, including a description of 
the tasks to be performed, deliverables, time-schedules, and reporting requirements. Participating 
consultancy providers respond by submitting the specified technical and financial proposal for the 
assignment together with details of the expert(s) proposed to carry out the work. Selection will be done in 
line with EBRD Procurement Policies and Rules (EBRD PP&R), as further defined in Annex 10.  
 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its 
annexes, may be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its 
annexes, may not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. 
Accordingly, the accredited entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding 
proposal, including all annexes: 
• 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, 
together with an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for 
confidentiality under the accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
• 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing 
confidential information.

=== PAGE 89 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85 
 
 
 
 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Market study  
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format  
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template 
provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 6 
 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☐ Others (please specify – E.G. Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy 
Framework, Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.)  
☒ 
 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan 
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance) 
 
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided)  
☒ 
AnneX 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment 
schedule   
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☐ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☐ Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions

=== PAGE 90 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i Contribute to mitigation - Substantial share of investments will generate both mitigation and adaptation benefits but in the 
contribution breakdown table the adaptation co-benefits of buildings and industries are not reported .  
ii Contribution to adaptation - Investment that contribute to adaptation will address location-specific vulnerabilities to physical 
climate risks. They will range from and not limited to technologies and agricultural practices that reduce soil erosion and 
water use and increase yields, to buildings that improve thermal comfort and wellbeing for occupants in heat stressed 
regions, to renewable energy generation that reduce water use in regions with water scarcity. Investments generating both 
adaptation and mitigation benefits are also counted in the mitigation result areas. 
iii Envisaged contribution to adaptation from investments in agriculture that would reduce water use and hence reduce the 
country’s vulnerability to water scarcity, the physical impacts of climate change.  
☒ Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☐ Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or 
replicating a pilot project 
☐ Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities 
undertaking projects financed by the entity 
☐ Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☐ Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance)  
☒ Annex 22  
Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for 
mitigation and cross cutting-projects) 
☒ Annex 23 
Steps to greening financial systems 
☒ Annex 24 
Lessons learnt from GCF GEFF (FP025) 
☒ Annex 24B 
Lessons learnt from GCF GEFF (FP025) 
☒ Annex 25 
Eligibility Criteria 
☒ Annex 26 
EBRD Paris alignment methodology 
☒ Annex 27 
EBRD GET Technical Guide 
☒ Annex 28 
EBRD GET Annexes

=== PAGE 91 ===
No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 110 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or 
programme title 
Greening Financial Systems: Delivering Climate Finance for All 
Existence of 
subproject(s) to be 
identified after GCF 
Board approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or 
private) 
Private 
Accredited entity 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) 
Environmental and 
social safeguards 
(ESS) category 
Category I-2 
Location – specific 
location(s) of 
project or target 
country or 
location(s) of 
programme 
Armenia, Egypt, Georgia, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, 
Mongolia, Morocco, North Macedonia, Serbia, Tajikistan and 
Uzbekistan 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website 
N/A 
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on 
language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website 
N/A 
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on 
language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website 
Friday, September 20, 2024 
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
English, Arabic, Armenian, French, Georgian, Kazakh, Kyrgyz, 
Macedonian, Moldovan Romanian, Mongolian, Russian, Serbian, 
Tajik, and Uzbek

=== PAGE 111 ===
Explanation on 
language 
These are official languages of the target countries.  
Link to disclosure 
 
English:  
https://www.ebrd.com/sites/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395322408
904&d=&pagename=EBRD%2FContent%2FDownloadDocument 
 
Arabic: 
https://www.ebrd.com/sites/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395322410
056&d=&pagename=EBRD%2FContent%2FDownloadDocument 
 
Armenian: 
https://www.ebrd.com/sites/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395322410
301&d=&pagename=EBRD%2FContent%2FDownloadDocument 
 
French: 
https://www.ebrd.com/sites/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395322409
119&d=&pagename=EBRD%2FContent%2FDownloadDocument 
 
Georgian: 
https://www.ebrd.com/sites/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395322409
346&d=&pagename=EBRD%2FContent%2FDownloadDocument 
 
Kazakh: 
https://www.ebrd.com/sites/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395322412
953&d=&pagename=EBRD%2FContent%2FDownloadDocument 
 
Kyrgyz: 
https://www.ebrd.com/sites/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395322430
953&d=&pagename=EBRD%2FContent%2FDownloadDocument 
 
Macedonian: 
https://www.ebrd.com/sites/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395322409
938&d=&pagename=EBRD%2FContent%2FDownloadDocument 
 
Moldovan Romanian: 
https://www.ebrd.com/sites/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395322410
177&d=&pagename=EBRD%2FContent%2FDownloadDocument 
 
Mongolian: 
https://www.ebrd.com/sites/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395322439
394&d=&pagename=EBRD%2FContent%2FDownloadDocument 
 
Russian: 
https://www.ebrd.com/sites/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395322409
010&d=&pagename=EBRD%2FContent%2FDownloadDocument 
 
Serbian: 
https://www.ebrd.com/sites/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395322409
231&d=&pagename=EBRD%2FContent%2FDownloadDocument 
 
Tajik: 
https://www.ebrd.com/sites/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395322413
059&d=&pagename=EBRD%2FContent%2FDownloadDocument

=== PAGE 112 ===
Uzbek:  
https://www.ebrd.com/sites/Satellite?c=Content&cid=1395322409
464&d=&pagename=EBRD%2FContent%2FDownloadDocument 
 
Other link(s) 
https://www.ebrd.com/what-we-do/ebrd-gcf-
funded+portfolio.html 
Remarks 
An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I-2 
programme is contained in the Environmental and Social 
Management System. 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s 
website 
N/A 
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on 
language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Friday, September 20, 2024 
Place 
EBRD Headquarters and Resident Offices in participating countries 
 
Armenia 
 
Yerevan Resident Office 
Piazza Grande Business Centre, 
2nd floor, rooms 95-97, 
10 Vazgen Sargsyan Street, Yerevan 0010, 
Republic of Armenia 
Tel: + (374)10590901 
 
Egypt 
 
Cairo Resident Office 
EGID Building, First Floor 
Block 72, off Ninety Axis 
5th Settlement, New Cairo, Cairo 
Egypt 
Tel: 0020223225900 
 
Georgia 
 
Tbilisi Resident Office 
Tbilisi Resident Office 
Merani Business Center 
31a Griboedov Street, 6th Floor 
0108 Tbilisi, Georgia

=== PAGE 113 ===
Tel: +995 32 2447400 
 
Jordan 
 
Amman Resident Office 
Emmar Towers, 
196 Zahran Street, 
15th Floor 
P.O. Box 852805 
Amman 11185 
Jordan 
Tel:  +962 6 563 50 30 
 
Kazakhstan 
 
Astana Resident Office 
Talan Towers offices BC, 
16, Dostyk street, 23rd floor,  
Astana,  Z05H9K3, 
Republic of Kazakhstan 
Tel: +7 7172 55 42 46 and + 7 7172 55 42 61 
 
Almaty Resident Office 
41 Kazybek Bi St., 3rd floor 
Almaty 050010 
Kazakhstan 
Tel: +7 727 332 0000 
 
Kyrgyz Republic 
 
Bishkek Resident Office 
Business Centre Orion 
21, Erkindik Boulevard, 4th Floor 
720040 Bishkek 
Kyrgyz Republic 
Telephone: (+996 312) 624 016/17/18, 624 023 
 
Moldova 
 
Chisinau Resident Office 
10th floor, 63 Vlaicu Pircalab Street, Sky Tower building 
Chisinau, MD-2012, Moldova 
Tel: +373 (22) 21 00 00 
 
Mongolia 
 
Ulaanbaatar Resident Office 
3rd Floor 
MCS Plaza 
Seoul Street – 4 
Ulaanbaatar 14251 
Mongolia 
Tel: + 976 11 317 974

=== PAGE 114 ===
Morocco  
 
Casablanca Resident Office 
Immeuble Zevaco 
46, Route d’Azemmour, Lotissement El Fath, lot 4 
20230 Casablanca 
Morocco 
Tel: 00 212 522 64 91 50 
 
North Macedonia 
 
Skopje Resident Office 
EBRD Skopje Resident Office, 
Soravia Centre Skopje,  
7th floor,  
Filip II Makedonski no. 3, 
1000 Skopje,  
North Macedonia 
Tel: +389 2 3297 800 
 
Serbia  
 
Belgrade Resident Office 
Blue centre 
Spanskih boraca 3, 6th floor 
11070 Beograd 
Serbia 
Tel: +381 11 21 20 529 
 
Tajikistan  
 
Dushanbe Resident Office 
34 Rudaki avenue, 12 floor 
734025 Dushanbe, Tajikistan 
Tel: +992 48 701 1325 
 
Uzbekistan 
 
Tashkent Resident Office 
13th floor, Banking Association of Uzbekistan 
1, Qoratosh Street, Tashkent, 100027 
Uzbekistan 
Tel.: +998781404400 
 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited 
entity’s Board 
meeting 
N/A  
Date of GCF’s Board 
meeting  
Monday, October 21, 2024 
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above. 
________

=== PAGE 115 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.15 
Page 115 
 
 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP253 
Proposal name: 
Greening Financial Systems: Delivering Climate Finance for All 
Accredited entity: 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) 
Country/(ies): 
Armenia, Egypt, Georgia, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, 
Mongolia, Morocco, North Macedonia, Republic of Moldova, 
Serbia, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan 
Project/programme size: 
Large 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Overview 
1. 
The proposed programme “Greening Financial Systems: Delivering Climate Finance for 
All”, proposed by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) as accredited 
entity (AE), intends to support mitigation and adaptation investments via local financial 
institutions (FIs) covering a broad array of countries:  Armenia, Egypt, Georgia, Jordan, 
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Mongolia, Morocco, North Macedonia, the Republic of Moldova, Serbia, 
Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. 
2. 
The available scientific evidence on the impacts of climate change in these countries 
reveals an increasing prevalence of climate-related hazards, though the specific nature of these 
hazards varies significantly. Drawing from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) assessments, it is clear that many of these countries are witnessing more extreme 
weather events, escalating water scarcity and shifts in agricultural productivity. For example, 
Central Asian countries such as Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan are grappling with rising average 
temperatures, which have led to more frequent and severe droughts, exacerbating already 
limited water resources and undermining agricultural outputs. Agriculture, a cornerstone of 
their economies, faces significant challenges from these climatic changes. 
3. 
In North African countries such as Egypt and Morocco, vulnerabilities to climate change 
are intimately tied to water resource availability and food security. The heavy dependence of 
Egypt on the River Nile for irrigation, drinking water and hydropower renders it particularly 
susceptible to changes in regional precipitation patterns and upstream activities, including dam 
construction. This situation is exacerbated by rising temperatures, which increase evaporation 
rates and further reduce water availability. Similarly, Morocco faces acute challenges from 
declining water supplies, desertification and lower agricultural yields due to heightened 
temperatures. This situation is projected to worsen under most climate scenarios outlined in 
IPCC reports. 
4. 
Despite differences in specific risks, commonalities emerge across these countries, most 
notably the increasing intensity of extreme weather events such as heatwaves, droughts and 
floods. Rising temperatures and greater aridity are affecting vast regions, while shifts in 
precipitation patterns are undermining both water security and agricultural productivity. Given 
that agriculture forms the backbone of many of these economies, particularly in rural areas, the 
heightened climate variability poses significant challenges to food security and rural livelihoods. 
For instance, changes in crop cycles and yields are threatening food production, with vulnerable

=== PAGE 116 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.15 
Page 116 
 
 
 
 
populations in both rural and urban settings feeling the socioeconomic impacts. Moreover, 
competition over scarce resources, particularly water, has the potential to exacerbate existing 
social and political tensions. 
5. 
While common climate-induced vulnerabilities are evident across these countries, 
substantial regional differences in exposure and adaptive capacity must also be recognized. 
Mountainous countries such as Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, for example, are facing the rapid 
melting of glaciers, which provide critical water flows during the warmer months. The loss of 
this glacier-fed water is likely to have profound downstream impacts, particularly for 
agriculture and energy production. In contrast, countries with significant low-lying or coastal 
areas, such as parts of Egypt and the Republic of Moldova, are at greater risk from sea-level rise 
and associated flooding. Coastal zones in Morocco also face threats from rising seas and coastal 
erosion, adding a layer of complexity to their adaptation challenges. These geographical and 
economic differences necessitate tailored mitigation and adaptation strategies at the national 
level. 
6. 
Against this background, the proposed programme submitted by the AE focuses on 
participating financial institutions (PFIs) and other financial market participants as key 
intermediaries in facilitating access to tailored climate finance for private sector enterprises in 
the target region, with the ultimate objective of promoting the transition of local financial 
sectors to sustainable climate pathways. In terms of end beneficiaries, the programme targets 
underserved populations, with a particular emphasis on micro, small and medium-sized 
enterprises (MSMEs). Additionally, the programme targets households, farmers and other hard-
to-reach groups, such as those in rural areas and women. 
7. 
Under the terms of the proposal, the AE requests USD 200 million from GCF to facilitate 
and support private sector-led climate mitigation and adaptation investments. In terms of 
financial instruments, the AE is requesting USD 186 million in the form of a concessional loan 
and USD 14 million in the form of grants. The AE anticipates that, through the programme, it 
will facilitate climate mitigation and adaptation investments amounting to a total of USD 775 
million, of which roughly USD 469 million will be provided by the AE (USD 434 million in 
lending and USD 35 million in grants) (GCF leverage ratio of approximately 1:4). The lending 
that the AE will provide to FIs in the target countries (with GCF funds and its own funds) will 
also trigger additional co-investment (an estimated 25 per cent in equity per project) from 
private sector borrowers of the PFIs. 
8. 
With this proposed programme, the AE would provide support for climate investments 
in the target region via two main programme components: 
(a) 
Component 1 – Greening Financial Systems: This component focuses on equipping 
FIs, regulators and other market participants with the required tools and resources for 
them to adopt and implement robust, sustainable climate finance strategies. Through 
technical assistance and financial incentive grants, it is expected to foster climate-
aligned financial systems and integrate climate finance into mainstream practices. 
(b) 
Component 2 – Expanding Access to Climate Finance: This component focuses on 
investments that unlock and scale climate-related financing through PFIs in the target 
region. The AE will offer concessional credit lines to PFIs, designed to mobilize and 
expand climate capital for end beneficiaries. The objective is to ensure broad and 
inclusive access to climate finance across multiple sectors. 
9. 
Under the terms of the funding proposal, EBRD will act as the AE and as executing entity 
(EE) for component 1; the PFIs will act as EEs for component 2. The selection of advisory and 
investment projects will be on the basis of the criteria set out by the AE in the funding proposal, 
building on GCF eligibility criteria.

=== PAGE 117 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.15 
Page 117 
 
 
 
 
1.2 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
 
  Scale: Medium 
10. 
The funding proposal highlights a wide range of anticipated outcomes resulting from the 
proposed programme across various GCF mitigation results areas (MRAs) and adaptation 
results areas (ARAs), reflecting the broad investment scope of the proposed programme. 
Specifically, the funding proposal references the following main programme outcomes:1 
(a) 
Outcome 1: Reduced and avoided greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from the energy 
supply, manufacturing, residential, commercial, transport and public sectors, with a 
total expected reduction of 9.9 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) 
(Core 1, MRA 1–3). 
(b) 
Outcome 2: Increased climate resilience for water and food security, including gender 
considerations, with 306,870 direct beneficiaries and 17.2 million indirect beneficiaries, 
with each 50 per cent female (Core 2, ARA 2 and 4). 
(c) 
Outcome 3: Enabling environment for more resilient and sustainable financial systems, 
including gender considerations (Core 4, MRA 1–3, ARA 2 and 4). 
11. 
The programme is also expected to trigger the installation of 300 MW of renewable 
energy (solar photovoltaic) with an expected generation of 5,146,000 MWh. 
12. 
The AE/EE expects to accomplish these outcomes via four outputs, namely: 
(a) 
Output 1: Increased capacities of FIs to develop and monitor portfolios of investments 
for climate mitigation and adaptation projects, including in terms of gender 
considerations (measured by the number of PFI staff that have received training or have 
participated in knowledge-sharing activities on green finance, with 600 participants as 
the targeted total). 
(b) 
Output 2: Enhanced capabilities, tools and processes of FIs to develop ambitious climate 
performance targets and credible climate transition plans (measured by the number of 
PFIs receiving technical assistance around transition planning, with the objective of 
delivering training to 28 PFIs). 
(c) 
Output 3: Increased investment in climate mitigation technologies and approaches 
through concessional finance (with a total of USD 658 million anticipated to be deployed 
to mitigation investments by end beneficiaries). 
(d) 
Output 4: Increased investment in climate adaptation technologies and approaches 
through concessional finance (with a total of USD 117 million anticipated to be deployed 
by the AE to PFIs for adaptation investments). 
13. 
The funding proposal’s logical framework is comprehensive but relies on numerous 
assumptions, particularly concerning the final composition of the subproject portfolio to be 
financed via PFIs that receive concessional lines of credit from the AE. The independent 
Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) identifies several factors that could hinder the project’s ability 
to achieve the anticipated outcomes. These factors include the following considerations. 
14. 
Lack of visibility on pipeline of subprojects and resulting uncertainty on expected 
programme outcomes. Like in other Division of Private Sector Facility (PSF) projects 
submitted to GCF, particularly those involving impact investment funds or concessional credit 
lines for on-lending through FIs, the AE necessarily bases its projected programme outcomes on 
a synthetic opportunity pipeline to be supported by PFIs rather than a concrete list of projects 
in which these institutions will ultimately invest. As with other PSF projects, this approach 
complicates the development of a reliable ex ante assessment of the programme’s impacts. 
 
1 See integrated results management framework available at: https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/integrated-
results-management-framework".

=== PAGE 118 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.15 
Page 118 
 
 
 
 
Consequently, the iTAP finds it challenging to rationalize the ambitious outcome targets set for 
the programme. At the very least, it should be anticipated that the outcome estimates provided 
in the funding proposal are likely to change significantly as the programme moves forward with 
implementation. 
15. 
Subproject selection and impact assessment. As a mitigating factor to the above, the 
AE is proposing a comprehensive system aimed at ensuring that the investment projects 
ultimately selected by PFIs will meet the eligibility criteria established in the funding proposal. 
PFIs will evaluate mitigation and adaptation impacts at the subproject level, with independent 
verification conducted by consultants appointed by the AE. This evaluation is designed to 
ensure adherence to the programme’s eligibility criteria and to the guidelines provided in 
annexes 22 and 25, along with the Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning annex, which the AE will 
submit to GCF before the first disbursement. However, it remains unclear how the subprojects 
will meet the requirements for demonstrating adaptation impact potential, as outlined in Board 
decision B.33/12. Specifically, it is not clear how the PFIs will assess climate risks, responses 
and alignment at the subproject level, or how adaptation outcomes will be monitored and 
evaluated over time. The iTAP acknowledges that, due to the programmatic nature of this 
funding proposal, it is not feasible to provide a final quantification of the adaptation outcomes. 
Nevertheless, it is crucial that the funding proposal clarifies who will be responsible and how 
they will ensure that the subprojects meet the principles for demonstrating, monitoring and 
evaluating adaptation outcomes as decided by the Board. 
16. 
In addition, it is not clear how the PFIs will secure the measurement, reporting and 
verification (MRV) of mitigation outcomes as requested by Board decision B.33/12. According 
to this decision, proposals should describe the establishment of an MRV system for the GHG 
emission reductions and removals of the proposed activity which would be aligned with existing 
country MRV systems. The Board further clarified that when describing the MRV of mitigation 
results, proposals should include all indicators, equations, input values to formulas, and any 
other assumptions used to quantify the emission reductions or removals, baseline and project 
scenarios, and information on how the MRV will be conducted. Proposals should also provide 
projections of the annual emission reductions or removals during the lifetime of the project or 
programme (GCF/B33/19, annex VI). The iTAP acknowledges that, due to the programmatic 
nature of this funding proposal, it is not feasible at this stage to clarify how each subproject will 
ensure alignment with the national MRV systems. However, these aspects need to be included as 
a central element of the subproposal’s assessment. These two gaps in the funding proposal 
should be addressed before the second disbursement under the Funded Activity Agreement, 
provided that GCF approves the programme, as stipulated in the condition outlined inpara. 47. 
17. 
Limitations of concessional on-lending approach. In the assessment of the iTAP, the 
on-lending model proposed under component 2 of the programme – where loans are provided 
to PFIs at a blended interest rate with a discount from the GCF below-market rate – has 
limitations in effectively encouraging PFIs to finance new and more challenging customer 
segments or business models, especially those critical for climate mitigation and adaptation 
investments. The AE assumes that pricing is the primary barrier preventing PFIs from 
expanding their climate finance portfolios and that the average reduction in rates achieved as a 
result of the blending will be sufficient to motivate PFIs to increase lending in support of 
adaptation and mitigation projects, particularly to currently underserved client segments, such 
as MSMEs and women-owned/women-led businesses. However, neither the funding proposal 
nor the accompanying market study (annex 2) provide robust evidence to support the notion 
that concessional pricing alone will stimulate such lending behaviour among PFIs. Experience 
from other similar programmes led by multilateral, regional and bilateral development banks in 
emerging markets suggests that concessional financing, on its own, often is insufficient to 
fundamentally alter the lending practices of local commercial banks. In particular, it has proven 
ineffective in prompting PFIs to take on new and underserved clients or to invest in innovative 
and potentially riskier technologies or business models. The key challenge appears to be that,

=== PAGE 119 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.15 
Page 119 
 
 
 
 
beyond pricing, PFIs are often more concerned with the additional credit risk associated with 
financing these new project types, technologies or borrower groups. Without addressing this 
core issue, concessional finance is unlikely to significantly shift PFI lending patterns. Risk-
mitigation mechanisms, such as partial portfolio guarantees or other credit risk-sharing 
instruments, appear to be more effective in incentivizing PFIs to broaden their client base and 
venture into more challenging areas of climate finance. During the question and answer (Q+A) 
session, the AE acknowledged this as a challenge and noted that it will provide technical 
assistance (including for pipeline development) and financial incentives to PFIs alongside 
concessional lines of credit as part of a holistic approach to address the multifaceted barriers of 
scaling up climate finance. The future design of a phase 2 for the proposed programme, already 
anticipated in the current funding proposal, should carefully consider whether partial portfolio 
guarantees or other credit risk-sharing instruments may be more effective to achieve the 
intended programme outcomes. 
18. 
Competitive landscape and lack of investable opportunities. In reviewing the 
funding proposal and accompanying market study, it is evident that the AE has provided a 
comprehensive analysis of the target countries for the proposed programme, including detailed 
insights into the respective financial sectors. However, the proposal lacks an in-depth analysis 
of the “competitive landscape” for climate finance, which is particularly relevant in countries 
where significant climate finance inflows from other multilateral, regional and bilateral 
institutions have already been observed (e.g. Egypt, Georgia and Morocco). This omission raises 
concerns about the programme’s ability to effectively compete in these markets, where the pool 
of eligible and investable projects tends to be limited. One of the primary concerns of the iTAP is 
whether the PFIs involved in the programme will be able to generate a sufficient pipeline of 
high-quality eligible projects within a reasonable time frame to absorb the available programme 
funds. While the AE acknowledges that the transition funding requirements in all target 
countries are substantial, it is likely that the actual list of investable opportunities that meet the 
programme’s eligibility criteria will be relatively short. This potential scarcity of projects raises 
questions about the programme’s overall viability and ability to scale, particularly in markets 
where climate finance has already been extensively deployed. Additionally, the AE has not 
provided a concrete list of the PFIs it expects to partner with, nor has it shared a specific 
pipeline of projects from these institutions to substantiate the scale of funding proposed. While 
the technical assistance provided under component 1 is intended to support the generation of a 
project pipeline, the iTAP expects that it may be at least one or two years before investable 
opportunities fully materialize. This delay further amplifies the risk of insufficient pipeline 
development within the programme’s time frame, particularly given the competition for high-
quality climate finance projects in certain target markets. 
19. 
Targets for MSME and women-owned/women-led business borrowers. In the 
funding proposal (activities 2.1.2 and 2.2.2), the AE outlines its strategy to ensure that MSMEs 
and women-owned/women-led businesses are specifically targeted via the PFIs. The approach 
relies on setting specific targets for the PFIs at the individual transaction level, with the targets 
of each PFI calibrated according to its starting position. In addition, technical assistance will be 
used to implement market development activities aimed at these groups, with the goal of 
increasing demand for climate finance among MSMEs and women-owned/women-led 
businesses. However, during the Q+A process, the AE acknowledged that the availability of 
funding for technical assistance as part of the proposed GCF contribution is highly constrained, 
with only USD 2 million allocated. This amount is insufficient to fully support the necessary 
market development activities targeting these underserved groups. Consequently, the AE plans 
to raise additional co-financing from other donors, as it has done in previous programmes, such 
as the EBRD and GCF Green Economy Financing Facility (GEFF) (FP025). It is unclear what the 
implications are if the AE is unable to raise further funding for these activities, nor is it clear 
how much this may result in a lowering of the ambition set out in the funding proposal around 
targeting MSMEs and women-owned/women-led borrowers.

=== PAGE 120 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.15 
Page 120 
 
 
 
 
20. 
Overall, the iTAP rates the impact potential of the project as medium, with potential for 
improvement if the issues highlighted above are adequately clarified and addressed prior to the 
start of programme implementation. 
1.3 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high 
21. 
The AE asserts that its programme will induce a paradigm shift in financial systems by 
addressing fundamental barriers faced by FIs in facilitating climate-related investments. The 
programme aims to catalyse systemic change by enhancing the flow of finance aligned with the 
objectives of the Paris Agreement, integrating climate considerations into the business practices 
of FIs and fostering a regulatory environment conducive to inclusive, climate-resilient 
economies. Through a scalable and replicable approach across the target region, spanning 13 
countries, the programme will leverage the market expertise of the AE and established 
networks with several hundred partner banks. By introducing innovative financial mechanisms, 
the programme seeks to enhance access to capital and technology, particularly in regions with 
limited availability of concessional resources. Moreover, the programme will introduce 
advanced climate transition planning tools to help FIs mitigate climate-related risks and unlock 
new financing opportunities, further embedding climate finance into their operational 
frameworks. 
22. 
The programme places a strong emphasis on capacity-building and aims to effect 
systemic transformation by engaging with PFIs and regulatory bodies. Through the deployment 
of financial instruments, technical assistance and transition planning, the programme seeks to 
enable FIs to become market leaders in green finance, thereby generating a broader spillover 
effect within the financial sector. This dynamic is expected to inspire other FIs and regulators to 
align with climate objectives, further reinforcing the Paris Agreement’s goals, including 
nationally determined contributions (NDCs) and national adaptation plans. Additionally, the 
programme’s blend of capacity-building initiatives, green credit lines and incentives for 
transition planning positions it for replication in other regions, including sub-Saharan Africa, 
where it can potentially mobilize climate finance through local financial sectors. 
23. 
Overall, in the view of the iTAP, the AE presents a credible pathway for the two main 
components of the fund programme to foster the scale-up of climate finance in the target region, 
thus promoting a paradigm shift. The iTAP would like to emphasize inclusion of the innovative 
incentive grant scheme by the AE to foster transition planning by selected PFIs. Transition 
planning is the process by which FIs align their portfolios and operations with climate transition 
goals, such as reducing GHG emissions and supporting climate-resilient development. It is 
increasingly important as it helps FIs manage climate-related risks, avoid disorderly transitions 
and support sectors critical for climate adaptation, such as agriculture. However, key barriers to 
the adoption of transition planning by banks, particularly in emerging economies, include a lack 
of stringent regulatory requirements, limited access to knowledge, insufficient internal 
resources and inadequate market-driven incentives. Many banks, including those in the target 
region, have low awareness of climate risk management and disclosure practices, and most lack 
the necessary governance structures to prioritize transition planning over other regulatory and 
business needs. This creates a challenge in motivating banks to voluntarily embark on transition 
planning without clear regulatory guidance or sufficient internal capacity. 
24. 
Under the terms of the proposed incentive grant scheme, eligible PFIs, as outlined in 
annex 14, will be selected to receive financial incentives in the form of grants. These financial 
incentives will be tied to specific performance triggers, designed to reward progress and sustain 
commitment on the path to transition planning. The triggers will be time-bound, and PFIs that 
fail to meet their targets within the specified time may either negotiate an extension with 
increased engagement or face the decommitment of funds, which could then be reallocated to 
other PFIs. Given that transition planning is a new and substantial endeavour for PFIs, the AE

=== PAGE 121 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.15 
Page 121 
 
 
 
 
commits to closely monitoring their progress and will remain actively engaged throughout the 
process. The iTAP notes the potential of the mechanism to fundamentally transform the 
business and lending practices of PFIs, thus constituting an important vector for effecting a 
paradigm shift. The incentive grant scheme, however, will only be open to a limited subset of 
PFIs that will receive funding from the AE; if experience with implementing the scheme shows 
positive results, the iTAP encourages the AE to raise additional funding from other sources to 
expand the initiative. 
25. 
The iTAP sought clarification from the AE regarding the anticipated reduction of 
concessional finance in future phases of the proposed programme (already indicated in the 
funding proposal), given the significant financing needs for climate transition in the target 
countries. Specifically, the iTAP queried whether, assuming no external shocks, the subsidy 
requirements for such on-lending programmes would decrease over time, leading to eventual 
phase-out of concessionality, and whether the envisaged phase 2 of the programme would 
feature lower concessionality for countries included in phase 1. 
26. 
In its response during the Q+A process, the AE confirmed that the programme is 
designed to gradually reduce concessionality in line with the needs of the market and PFIs, 
following the approach of the AE of ensuring concessional finance is used strategically and only 
where necessary. The AE pointed to previous successful examples, such as GEFF in Türkiye, 
where concessional finance was phased out in subsequent phases. However, the AE also 
emphasized that the timeline for reducing concessionality in future phases will depend on the 
market’s maturity and potential external challenges, such as macroeconomic shocks or weak 
regulatory environments, noting that it is too early to determine whether concessionality 
requirements could be reduced in phase 2. While the iTAP agrees that any concessionality 
requirements need to be evaluated based on prevailing market conditions at the time, 
identifying pathways to reduce the grant element in funding should be a priority for phase 2 
planning. 
27. 
Overall, the iTAP rates the potential for the project to effect a paradigm shift as 
medium-high. 
1.4 
Sustainable development potential  
           Scale: Medium to high 
28. 
The funding proposal highlights the following sustainable development benefits. 
29. 
Environmental co-benefits: The programme aims to expedite the replacement of 
obsolete and harmful technologies, such as inefficient appliances, heating systems and vehicles, 
which are significant contributors to local air pollution. 
30. 
Social co-benefits: The initiative seeks to actively support and finance subprojects that 
enhance water-use efficiency, recycling and reuse in sectors such as agriculture, manufacturing 
and residential buildings, with a particular focus on MSMEs, farmers and households. 
31. 
Gender-sensitive development impact: By leveraging specialized investment 
mechanisms, the programme has the potential to enhance women’s opportunities to access 
green financial resources and develop essential skills in both financial management and 
emerging clean technologies. During the Q+A process, the iTAP queried why the AE did not 
consider adopting the 2X Challenge indicators2 for directed lending through FIs to drive more 
structural gender impact within the financial sectors of the target countries, noting that the 
gender action plan remains somewhat generic for a multi-country intermediated financing 
programme. In response, the AE explained that its strategy focuses on inducing behavioural 
change among PFIs to better serve women by enhancing the capacity of the PFIs to offer gender-
responsive green finance products. Once PFIs are equipped to serve women in this way and 
 
2 Please see https://www.2xchallenge.org/2xcriteria for further details.

=== PAGE 122 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.15 
Page 122 
 
 
 
 
have enhanced women’s green skills to increase the pipeline of female sub-borrowers, the AE 
considers integrating 2X Challenge-aligned indicators into its financial sector projects. The AE 
further noted that it is currently exploring the willingness of PFIs to incorporate such indicators 
more systematically, potentially as part of the climate transition planning of the AE in areas 
such as strategy, governance and disclosures. 
32. 
Economic co-benefits: The programme will extend its reach to MSMEs across the 
target region, offering them the necessary financial support to implement climate mitigation 
strategies and adopt innovative, clean technologies. 
33. 
Without more specific information regarding the structure of the subproject portfolio 
that the programme will support, the iTAP finds it challenging to fully evaluate the projections 
of the AE concerning sustainable development benefits, given the programme’s wide scope 
across various sectors and project types. Nevertheless, it is reasonable to anticipate that the 
programme will generate positive outcomes. 
34. 
Overall, the iTAP rates the sustainable development impact potential of the project as 
medium-high. 
1.5 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
  Scale: Medium 
35. 
As part of the development of the programme, the AE consulted with stakeholders in all 
13 target countries. Several common barriers to greening financial systems were highlighted. 
These include the absence of robust regulatory environments, limited knowledge and capacity 
within FIs to manage climate risks and a lack of access to affordable climate finance. 
Additionally, data availability and standardized financing tools were identified as crucial factors 
for incentivizing FIs to offer more climate-focused products. The target countries face significant 
climate risks due to their reliance on carbon-intensive industries and fossil fuels, and the 
sectors prioritized by the programme – such as energy, manufacturing and agriculture – are 
both major contributors to GHG emissions and vulnerable to climate change impacts. Financing 
gaps further exacerbate the challenges in meeting NDC targets, making external support critical. 
36. 
Moreover, the funding proposal recognizes the significant disparities in access to climate 
finance, particularly among vulnerable groups such as women, MSMEs and rural populations. 
These groups often face the greatest barriers in adopting green technologies due to 
affordability, limited knowledge and a lack of long-term, affordable financing. Climate 
investments, though increasingly recognized, are still not well understood in the region, and FIs 
have only recently begun integrating climate considerations into their operations. Structural 
challenges in the financial sector, such as governance issues and limited green financing 
capacities, further complicate the shift towards decarbonization. Gender inequality also remains 
a significant issue, with women entrepreneurs facing structural barriers to accessing finance, 
particularly in sectors such as banking, where female participation is low. As the financial sector 
plays a pivotal role in supporting climate transitions, overcoming these challenges is essential to 
driving meaningful change in the target countries. 
37. 
As emphasized earlier (see paras. 2–5 above), while the 13 countries included in this 
programme face the shared challenge of addressing climate change, they exhibit significant 
differences in economic conditions and climate-related needs. As highlighted in table 1 and the 
market study in annex 2, these countries range from lower-middle-income to upper-middle-
income economies, with substantial variations in their gross domestic product per capita and 
their carbon footprints. This diversity underscores the differing capacities and requirements for 
climate action across the region. 
Table: Economic conditions and climate-related needs across the target region

=== PAGE 123 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.15 
Page 123 
 
 
 
 
Countrya 
Income levela 
GDP 
(USD 
billion)
a 
Per capita 
income 
(USD)a 
Carbon 
intensity of 
GDP (CO2 
tons/USD 
million)a 
Public 
debt 
distressa 
Carbon 
footprint of 
loan 
indicatora 
Climate transition 
financing capacityb 
Armenia 
Lower-middle 
income 
15 
~5 000 
~0.35 
Moderate 
risk 
Moderate 
Limited, relies on 
international support 
Egypt 
Lower-middle 
income 
400 
~3 900 
~0.45 
Moderate 
risk 
Moderate 
Moderate, better access 
to international markets 
Georgia 
Lower-middle 
income 
24 
~6 400 
~0.28 
Moderate 
risk 
Moderate 
Limited, depends on IFI 
support 
Jordan 
Upper-middle 
income 
45 
~4 500 
~0.30 
High risk 
Moderate to 
high 
Limited, heavily reliant 
on external financing 
Kazakhstan 
Upper-middle 
income 
200 
~10 500 
~1.20 
Moderate 
risk 
High 
Stronger capacity but 
still uses IFI support 
Kyrgyzstan 
Lower-middle 
income 
10 
~1 500 
~0.20 
High risk 
Low to 
moderate 
Very limited, reliant on 
international donors 
Mongolia 
Lower-middle 
income 
16 
~4 900 
~0.90 
High risk 
High 
Limited, reliant on IFIs 
and donors 
Morocco 
Lower-middle 
income 
140 
~3 700 
~0.26 
Moderate 
risk 
moderate 
Stronger, with significant 
international finance 
North 
Macedonia 
Middle income 
15 
~7 200 
~0.29 
Moderate 
risk 
moderate 
Limited, depends on IFI 
support 
Republic of 
Moldova 
Lower-middle 
income 
12 
~4 700 
~0.25 
Moderate 
risk 
Low to 
moderate 
Limited, depends heavily 
on international support 
Serbia 
Upper-middle 
income 
70 
~10 100 
~0.35 
Moderate 
risk 
Moderate to 
high 
Moderate, some access 
to international markets 
Tajikistan 
Lower-middle 
income 
9 
~1 100 
~0.22 
High risk 
Low to 
moderate 
Very limited, highly 
dependent on IFIs 
Uzbekistan 
Lower-middle 
income 
85 
~2 400 
~0.37 
Moderate 
risk 
moderate 
Moderate, with growing 
international support 
Abbreviations: GDP = gross domestic product, IFI = international financial institution, IMF = International Monetary Fund. 
a Based on data retrieved from IMF and World Bank websites and databases in 2023. 
b Assessment by the independent Technical Advisory Panel. 
38. 
Given this variation, a key question is whether the AE will tailor concessionality levels to 
reflect the differing economic strengths and needs of each country. In the view of the iTAP, the 
extent to which these disparities influence the level of concessional support provided to PFIs 
will be critical in ensuring that the programme is both equitable and effective in mobilizing 
climate finance across the diverse regional landscape. During the Q+A process, the AE clarified 
that the “level of concessionality required to contribute to the programme’s objectives will be 
determined individually for the specifics of each transaction, driven indeed by market dynamics, 
PFI constraints (e.g. with regards to capacity to take on hard currency) and the perceived 
opportunity costs for each PFI in engaging in the programme”. However, it remains unclear how 
in practice the lending conditions provided by the AE to PFIs and from PFIs to subprojects will 
be tailored to reflect the different country environments and project/beneficiary needs. 
39. 
Overall, the iTAP rates the potential for the project to serve the needs of the recipients 
as medium. 
1.6 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high 
40. 
The funding proposal posits that the programme promotes robust country ownership 
through a design tailored to the specific needs and priorities of each target country, identified 
through comprehensive consultations with key public stakeholders, such as central banks, 
financial regulators and relevant ministries. The programme is closely aligned with the NDCs of 
the 13 participating countries, ensuring direct support for their climate objectives. By engaging 
with public authorities and FIs, the programme builds institutional capacity in critical areas 
such as climate risk management, sustainability reporting and transition planning. Regular 
dialogue with stakeholders and a strong emphasis on knowledge-sharing are supposed to 
further solidify the programme’s responsiveness to local conditions and reinforce local 
ownership of the climate transition efforts.

=== PAGE 124 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.15 
Page 124 
 
 
 
 
41. 
In addition, the programme seeks to promote country ownership by fostering 
partnerships between regulators and FIs to create a supportive environment for climate action. 
Through various initiatives – such as renewable energy auctions, green city action plans and 
low-carbon pathways for key sectors – the programme seeks to facilitate concrete steps 
towards decarbonization. The established local presence of the AE, with operational staff in all 
target countries, will enhance the ability for decisions to be made based on detailed market 
insights and local context. This approach ensures that the programme is not only aligned with 
national climate strategies but also effectively tailored to local needs, enabling countries to 
secure the necessary financial resources to meet their NDC targets and strengthen their climate 
resilience. No-objection letters have been submitted by all countries participating in the 
programme. 
42. 
The AE is one of the largest multilateral development banks active in the region and has 
local representation in each of the target countries. It also has a long-standing track record of 
investing in the target region, including in private sector projects. However, many of the PFIs 
that will act as EEs have not yet been identified, meaning that it is not possible to provide 
assessments of their capacity to implement the programme at this stage. The iTAP sought 
clarification from the AE regarding the timing, criteria and methods that will be used to assess 
the PFIs participating in the programme, and whether there will be any differences in the 
assessment process across the various target countries. The AE responded that the list of PFIs 
from GEFF illustrates the types of institutions the AE works with, including commercial and 
state-owned banks, microfinance organizations and leasing companies. According to the AE, a 
key factor in selecting PFIs for the programme will be their capacity to implement it, which will 
be assessed through due diligence by the AE. This process evaluates both the financial capacity 
and the internal ability of PFIs to meet the programme’s standards for MRV. In cases where PFIs 
require capacity-building, technical assistance may be provided by the AE. The iTAP 
recommends that the AE should submit to the Secretariat a detailed list of due diligence 
standards applied by the AE for the Secretariat’s review. Overall, the iTAP rates country 
ownership of the funding proposal as medium-high. 
1.7 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
 
  Scale: Medium 
43. 
As previously noted, the lack of visibility of a pipeline of subprojects to be funded by 
PFIs makes a reliable assessment of the economic soundness of the programme somewhat 
challenging. However, the following can be noted: 
(a) 
Based on historical experience and the synthetic portfolio constructed for the purposes 
of the funding proposal, the AE expects a significant share of co-financing to come from 
its own balance sheet as well as private sector sources (25 per cent of equity 
contribution for any subproject funded by a PFI). The overall leverage of approximately 
1:4 on GCF resources can be considered substantial. 
(b) 
The projected climate benefits (amounting to direct GHG reductions of around 12.8 
million t CO2 eq over the project lifetime) and the numbers of expected direct and 
indirect beneficiaries (306,870 and 17.2 million, respectively) are comparatively 
significant relative to the total amount of GCF funding requested for the programme. The 
projections correspond to USD 15.6 per t CO2 eq avoided. The cost of USD 15.6 per 
t CO2 eq avoided is considered reasonable in international comparison. 
(c) 
The iTAP sought clarification on how the AE determined the overall level of 
concessionality for the proposed programme. The iTAP requested details on the 
underlying assumptions, the rationale for the increased concessionality compared to the 
predecessor programme (GEFF), and how those compare to other multilateral and 
development bank offerings. In that context, the iTAP expressed concern that the 
programme might undercut the offerings of other providers without broadening the

=== PAGE 125 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.15 
Page 125 
 
 
 
 
market for investable opportunities and asked how the AE intends to mitigate this risk. 
In response, the AE explained that the concessionality was determined based on an 
discount on the GCF portion of the credit line, which accounts for 30 per cent of the total 
credit line, resulting in a small difference between commercial and concessional rates. 
The AE highlighted that green finance is still in its early stages, requiring high upfront 
costs and offering uncertain returns, thus justifying the need for concessionality. 
Drawing from its experience with projects under GEFF and lessons from FP025, the AE 
assured the iTAP that the concessionality has been carefully calibrated to avoid 
undercutting other products or distorting the market, and to incentivize first movers. 
While the response acknowledges the rationale for concessionality, it does not provide a 
detailed comparison with other climate finance providers, leaving some uncertainty 
about the programme’s potential to either crowd out or complement other climate 
finance offerings in the market. 
44. 
As noted, this funding proposal builds on a previous programme (FP025) operated by 
the AE under GEFF. In such cases, the iTAP assessment would significantly benefit from the 
Secretariat’s evaluation of the earlier phase of the programme. We believe it is good practice for 
the Secretariat to assess the performance of initial programmes before submitting follow-on 
funding proposals. This would serve to (a) provide a more data-driven basis for evaluating the 
new proposal; (b) prevent entities from prematurely seeking additional funding before 
challenges in deployment, mobilization or impact of the initial funding are fully understood; and 
(c) ensure that lessons learned from earlier initiatives are effectively incorporated into the new 
proposal. While the iTAP has no specific concerns in this instance, it acknowledges that the lack 
of available data prevents a meaningful comparison between the current proposal and past 
results. 
45. 
The iTAP therefore considers the efficiency and effectiveness of the programme as 
medium. 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
46. 
Overall, the funding proposal is comprehensive, and although there are various risks 
and weaknesses (as highlighted above) it shows a credible pathway to achieving notable 
outcomes. The iTAP recommends that the Board approves this funding proposal with the 
following condition precedent to the first disbursement under the Funded Activity Agreement: 
47. 
Delivery to the GCF by the Accredited Entity, in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat, of a detailed Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (“MEL”) plan, which shall 
contain information set out in (i) below;  
Covenant   
(a) 
Ensure that the MEL plan, delivered to the GCF pursuant to (a) above, shall: 
(i) 
clearly specify the results management structure under the Programme (theory 
of change and logical framework, and associated data collection tools) setting 
out specific guidance explaining the process that the Accredited Entity shall use 
for securing the fulfilment by the PFIs of the principles for demonstrating 
adaptation impact potential as approved by the GCF Board in its decision 
B.33/12;   
(ii) 
identify person(s) who shall conduct the assessment with regard to any 
particular investment considered under the Programme, as well as the relevant 
timeline; and  
(iii) 
 include:

=== PAGE 126 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.15 
Page 126 
 
 
 
 
(1) 
the process for selecting methodologies for assessing climate risks, the 
level of climate-resilience of the proposed PFI-funded Sub-projects, the 
alignment with the adaptation priorities of the Host Country and a 
description of the monitoring and evaluation system that will be used to 
assess the outcomes of adaptation activities and to quantify the 
adaptation beneficiaries;  
(2) 
the methods for assessing the assumptions, system boundaries and 
additionality of the mitigation impact potential of the PFI-funded Sub-
projects, as well as the requirements for securing the establishment of 
measurement, reporting and verification (MRV) system of a proposed 
investment and the alignment with the national system of the 
corresponding Host Country;  
(3) 
examples of how (A) and (B) referred to above will be implemented, 
using sample investments from the pipeline that are sufficiently well 
advanced;  
(4) 
detailed, complete and transparent documentation of the monitoring 
methodology for a specific measure including the approach to obtain, 
record, compile, analyse and document monitoring data, including 
assumptions, references, activity data, calculation factors, quality 
management procedures and uncertainty, in a transparent manner that 
enables the reproduction of the determination of emissions and 
calculations of adaptation beneficiaries by an independent verifier and 
the Fund; and  
(5) 
arrangements for ensuring high-quality monitoring data collection under 
the Programme, including capacity building of PFIs, data management 
and quality assurance arrangements under the Programme.

=== PAGE 127 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.15 
Page 127 
 
 
 
 Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP253) 
Proposal name: 
Greening Financial Systems: Delivering Climate Finance for All 
Accredited entity: 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development  
Country/(ies): 
Armenia, Egypt, Georgia, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, 
Mongolia, Morocco, North Macedonia, Republic of Moldova, 
Serbia, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan 
Project/Programme size: 
Large 
 
Impact potential 
The EBRD notes iTAP’s assessment and remarks on the Impact potential, rated by the iTAP as 
“medium” and appreciates the recognition of the climate vulnerabilities and country specifics 
considered within the regional Programme.  
First, the EBRD would like to highlight that the Programme will have a direct impact stemming 
from the green investments financed directly by the Programme, as well as a much larger 
indirect impact resulting from transition planning and systemic greening of the financial 
system. The overall impact of the Programme is therefore expected to be high in the medium 
to long term.  
As the iTAP rightfully mentions, the exact pipeline of sub-projects cannot be established at this 
stage, there is therefore some uncertainty regarding the impact figures. However, this risk has 
been mitigated by the EBRD as projections of future pipeline are largely based on EBRD’s 
current intermediated finance portfolio, as well as the Bank’s solid knowledge of the markets 
and PFIs targeted by the Programme. Regarding the MRV aspects, the TC component of the 
Programme will support PFIs to assess and monitor climate aspects of the sub-projects, as the 
first pass of the MRV process.  EBRD experts and third-party consultants will ensure a second 
phase of MRV that is also able to compare results from multiple PFIs. Ultimately, the EBRD also 
has a solid data system that tracks the ex-post climate impact from a large volume of 
intermediated finance operations at the sub-project level. This large data system can identify 
discrepancies and outliers compared to existing impact proxies, ensuring a third phase of data 
verification against the delivery of similar sub-projects. 
Further details and responsibilities will be provided in the detailed Monitoring, Evaluation and 
Learning plan that the EBRD will submit to the GCF, in line with the iTAP’s suggested Covenant. 
The EBRD notes the point raised by the iTAP that concessional lending is a tool that addresses 
pricing barriers to green finance, but that other barriers may also be in place which it does 
not mitigate, such as risk realities or perceptions, market awareness and demand, availability 
of relevant technologies on local markets. Indeed, the Programme is designed to utilize a 
range of tools in a holistic fashion precisely to address these multi-faceted barriers, including 
technical assistance and financial incentives to PFIs. These tools help to build demand and 
supply side potential in the target markets and expand the pool of bankable investment 
projects, including in countries where there are other parallel green financing efforts.  
 
Paradigm shift potential

=== PAGE 128 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.15 
Page 128 
 
 
 
The EBRD notes iTAP’s positive assessment, remarks and recommendations on the Paradigm 
Shift potential, rated by the iTAP as “medium-high”.  
 
Sustainable development potential 
The EBRD notes iTAP’s positive assessment and remarks on the Sustainable Development 
potential, rated by the iTAP as “medium-high”.  
 
Needs of the recipient 
The EBRD notes iTAP’s positive assessment and remarks on the Needs of the recipient, rated 
by the iTAP as “medium”. The iTAP notes in particular the broad range of countries reflected 
in the Programme, which indeed face differentiated climate challenges and opportunities. 
This differentiation indeed is reflected in the concessionality offered under the Programme 
through the linking of the pricing of Component 2 proportional to the pricing of the EBRD 
Loan offered in parallel, which is determined based on market and transaction specifics.  
Country ownership 
 The EBRD notes iTAP’s positive assessment and remarks on Country Ownership, rated by the 
iTAP as “medium-high”. 
The EBRD commits to continue working closely with relevant local and regional stakeholders 
throughout Programme implementation to maximize local ownership and the potential for 
future synergies/knowledge sharing and replication/scaling.  The EBRD would also note that 
detailed information on the EBRD’s due diligence and transaction assessment processes has 
been shared with the Secretariat as part of the accreditation process and this funding 
proposal.  
 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
The EBRD notes iTAP’s positive assessment and remarks on Country Ownership, rated by the 
iTAP as “medium-high”.  
 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
The EBRD appreciates iTAP’s detailed assessment of the Funding Proposal and takes note of all 
the remarks from the iTAP. The EBRD thanks the iTAP for the positive recommendation to the 
GCF Board to support the Programme. 
The EBRD confirms that the requirements of the Covenant requested by the iTAP can be duly 
fulfilled by the EBRD.

=== PAGE 129 ===
1 
I.
Gender Analysis/Assessments for participating countries to the programme “Greening the
Financial Systems: Delivering Climate Finance for All”
2 
1.
Armenia
2 
2.
Egypt
6 
3.
Jordan
8 
4.
Georgia
10 
5.
Kazakhstan
11 
6.
Kyrgyz Republic
13 
7.
Moldova
15 
8.
Mongolia
16 
9.
Morocco
18 
10. North Macedonia
20 
11. Serbia
21 
12. Tajikistan
23 
13. Uzbekistan
25 
II.
Gender Action Plan
27 
Gender documentation for FP253

=== PAGE 130 ===
2 
 
I. 
Gender Analysis/Assessments for participating countries to the programme “Greening the 
Financial Systems: Delivering Climate Finance for All” 
 
Gender inequalities persist in financial services of the thirteen countries targeted by the programme 
“Greening the Financial Systems: Delivering Climate Finance for All” (the “Greening the Financial Systems 
Programme”, the “GFS Programme” or the “Programme”). In particular, when it comes to women’s access to 
loans disbursed by financial institutions in these thirteen countries, labour force participation for women in 
the banking sector (horizontal segregation), as well as in related managerial roles (vertical segregation) is 
low. 
The sections below describe key gender gaps and gender mainstreaming issues in the thirteen countries 
targeted by the Programme, in line with the GCF gender mainstreaming guidelines (Mainstreaming Gender 
in Green Climate Fund Projects). They use publicly available sources, and sources that the EBRD developed 
internally to mainstream gender considerations into EBRD’s investments. In particular, they build for eleven 
of the thirteen countries on the gender baseline assessments that were developed as part of the Green 
Economy Financing Facility (GEFF) programme. Out of the eleven1, nine assessments build on the gender 
baseline assessments that were developed as part of the GCF-EBRD Green Economy Financing Facility 
(GEFF) programme, formerly known as the GCF-EBRD Sustainable Energy Financing Facilities Co-
financing programme. The existing gender assessments enabled to provide analysis to contribute to the 
design of gender equality opportunities in the programme countries and to specifically address challenges 
related to women’s barriers and opportunities to access to financial services. The results of these 
assessments were publicly presented and discussed during national stakeholder consultants, to which the 
GCF often participated and delivered opening remarks, and were informed in the yearly reporting of the EBRD 
to the GCF. It is noted that the there is still insufficient information related gender issues in green finance in 
some of the programme countries at this time.  
The summaries below are not intended to be exhaustive overviews of all gender-related issues in this country. 
The assessments will be considered in the following stages of the Green Financial Systems Programme cycle 
to incorporate a gender-lens. 
 
1. Armenia  
Besides signing the Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) 
in 1993 and other related protocols2, Armenia has taken firm steps towards the improvement of its legislative 
and regulatory framework to cement gender equality as a national priority. Its Constitution guarantees equal 
rights for men and women. In 2013, Armenia adopted a “Law on equal rights and equal opportunities for 
women and men” in 2013, which ensures equality between women and men in all areas and provides legal 
protection against discrimination and represents a basis for developing additional legislation and government 
policies focused on enacting gender equality3.  
In September 2019, the RA approved a has a Gender Equality Strategy (GES)4 for the period of 2019–
2023 that sets the priorities and next steps to mainstream gender equal treatment across different sectors, 
 
1 For the eleven gender baseline assessments that were developed as part of the EBRD Green Economy Financing 
Facility (GEFF) programmes (2019-2024), the methodology included quantitative research and analysis via survey of 
sub-borrowers, qualitative research and analysis through focus group discussions and in-depth interviews with different 
stakeholders ranging from PFIs, NGOs, business associations, local government organizations to CSOs (incl. women’s 
organisations), along with secondary research. The results of the stakeholder engagement and assessments informed 
all activities conducted as part of the 2019-2024 GEFF programmes. For the other 3 GFS programme countries (which 
do not have GEFF baseline assessments), the gender assessments are based on secondary data. 
2 Armenia ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) in 1993, and the 
Optional Protocol on violence against women in 2006. Armenia is also a member of the Council of Europe and ratified the European 
Convention on Human Rights in April 2002. 
3 For a review of recent developments, see: https://www.unwomen.org/en/get-involved/step-it-up/commitments/armenia. 
4 Gender Equality Strategy 2019 – 2023, draft quoted in the Armenia Country Gender Assessment, 2019 of the Asian Development 
Bank.

=== PAGE 131 ===
3 
 
including entrepreneurship and employability of women. The GES is accompanied by an action plan and its 
priority areas are:   
1. Improvement of national machinery on women’s advancements and equal participation of women and 
men in the leadership and decision-making positions.  
2. Elimination of gender discrimination in the socioeconomic sphere and enhancement of economic 
opportunities for women, including addressing work–family balance, promoting women’s 
entrepreneurship, and expanding economic opportunities for women in agriculture.  
3. Full and effective participation and expansion of equal opportunities for women and men in education 
and science, and balanced gender representation in all the levels of education.  
4. Expansion of equal health-care opportunities for women and men, including prevention of non-
communicable diseases (NCDs) causing early death among women and men. 
5. Prevention of gender-based discrimination, including promoting increased political representation of 
women, addressing gender stereotypes in mass media, and responding to gender biases that are 
contributing to sex-selective abortions.  
6. As per the Constitution and the Civil Code, Armenian women and men have the same rights to own 
and access land, and these rights are protected under marriage as well5. And according to data from 
the Statistical Committee of the Republic of Armenia (ARMSTAT)´s Demographic and Health Survey 
(DHS) database (with data from 2015), overall in Armenia, 75,2% persons own a land deed. However, 
the proportion of women age 15-49 with ownership over agricultural or non-agricultural land, i.e. who 
have a title deed and their name is listed on the title deed is of only 1,6% for women alone, and 13,1% 
of women jointly with someone else. 
With regards to women’s economic rights, as per the Constitution and the Civil Code, Armenian women 
and men have the same rights to own and access land, and these rights are protected under marriage as 
well6. And according to data from the Statistical Committee of the Republic of Armenia (ARMSTAT)´s 
Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) database (with data from 2015), overall in Armenia, 75,2% persons 
own a land deed. However, the proportion of women age 15-49 with ownership over agricultural or non-
agricultural land, i.e. who have a title deed and their name is listed on the title deed is of only 1,6% for women 
alone, and 13,1% of women jointly with someone else. 
Armenia is ranked 97 out of 144 countries in the Global Gender Gap Index as per Global Gender Gap 
Report issued in 2017. The Global Gender Gap index is used by the World Economic Forum to measure the 
magnitude and scope of gender-based disparities in economic participation and opportunity, educational 
attainment, health and survival, and political empowerment. In 2017, Armenia received an overall score of 
0.677, indicating limited progress since 2007 when it scored at 0.665. In terms of the economic participations 
and opportunity index, Armenia has an overall ranking of 71, but has high female participation (61.7%).  
Economic participation for women is reflected in the national statistics. According to the National Statistical 
Service of the Republic of Armenia, the labour force7 in 2016 constituted 2.011 million persons, which shows 
a decrease compared to 2013 date when the total labour force stood at 2.189 million people (1.1214 million 
women and 0.974 million men).  
Barriers to women’s entrepreneurship and access to financial services 
Women’s entrepreneurship.  
According to the Global Gender Gap Report of 2018, 34% of all firms in Armenia have female co-owners and 
24% of firms have female top managers.  
 
As per the Armenian Country Gender Assessment 2016 conducted by the World Bank, self-employment or 
 
5 Women’s property rights are not affected by marriage.  Spouses have equal property rights, and any property purchased during 
the marriage is owned jointly.  Any property that the wife owns before marriage remains hers alone, as does any property that 
she is given or inherits once she is married. Civil Code, Article 201.  
6 Women’s property rights are not affected by marriage.  Spouses have equal property rights, and any property purchased during 
the marriage is owned jointly.  Any property that the wife owns before marriage remains hers alone, as does any property that 
she is given or inherits once she is married. Civil Code, Article 201.  
7 http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2017.pdf

=== PAGE 132 ===
4 
 
microenterprise activities are common for both women and men in Armenia, with 34.9% of women and 35.6% 
of men being self-employed. 
Women´s Financial Inclusion. 
Women’s entry into business ownership is influenced by their level of access to financial services8. According 
to the 2017 Global Findex database for Armenia, close to 50% of adults in Armenia have a bank account at 
a financial institution, yet women surpass men by a slight advantage. On other metrics such as having a 
credit card or a mobile account, it is women who are on a disparity standing as compared with men (see 
graph below). 
 
Global Findex, Armenia 2017: financial inclusion measures, by gender 
 
The GEFF gender baseline assessment, undertaken in 2020, provides an in depth analysis of challenges 
and opportunities for women’s access to finance in the country. According to the survey, the main barrier for 
women to access finance are high interest rates to accessing bank loans, while the short-term loans are only 
intermittent access to finance and hinders constant development of women’s businesses.  
Moreover, short term repayment period combined with high interest rates make access to finance for women 
highly challenging. As well as lack of collateral affects women sub-borrowers significantly, since they have to 
ask for the consent of their husbands, which is often denied due to traditions and patriarchal norms. In addition, 
lack of financial literacy, especially in green finance, became a huge obstacle to use such facilities.  
The data collection for the Baseline assessment was conducted with Armenian micro, small, and medium 
enterprises (MSMEs), as well as interviews and focus group discussions (FGDs) with MSMEs, and 
representatives of partner financial institutions (PFIs). The sample of the survey consisted of 52% of women 
and 48% of men.  
Female participation in the labour force 
A 2017 World Bank study9 at the national level, and across sectors, found that in Armenia social perceptions 
on gender norms still limit women’s education and career choices. Women are more likely to choose careers 
associated with traditional female roles and that allow them to fulfil what they and their social environment 
perceive as their family responsibilities.  
As per Statistical Committee report, Armenia Labour Force Participation is 59% in 2023, unemployment rate 
stood at 13.7%10. The data clearly suggests that the primary cause of women’s economic inactivity in 
Armenia is the gender specific division of labour within society and that women carry out the majority of 
unpaid care work. Nearly the entire gap in labour force participation can be explained by this factor.  
In 2014, 0.6% of working women were entrepreneurs, compared with an almost equally low share of working 
me (2.2%)11. However, it is worth to mention that female participation is not only limited but concentrated in 
certain economic activities. Firms with women top managers are underrepresented in every sector except in 
 
8 World Economic Forum. 2018. The Global Gender Gap Report 2018. Geneva 
9 World Bank. 2017. Republic of Armenia Levelling the STEM Playing Field for Women: Differences in Opportunity and Outcomes 
in Fields of Study and the Labour Market. Washington, DC. 
10 Statistical Committee of the Republic of Armenia. 2023 
11 NSS (2015) 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
Has a debit card Has a credit card Has an account
at a FI
Has a mobile
money account
Male
Female

=== PAGE 133 ===
5 
 
the textile and garment industry and in the hospitality services, where 35% of firms have female participation 
in the top management positions.  
When it comes to the financial services industries, there has been recent progress on gender diversity. 
However, women still only represent 20 per cent of executive committee members and 23 per cent of board 
members12. Only 6 per cent of CEOs of major financial services firms globally are women, as well as only 16 
per cent of vice CEOs. Estimates suggest that, even in some developed markets, less than 30 per cent of 
the fintech workforce is female and 17 per cent of senior roles are held by women. A 2019 report found that 
women represent only 14 per cent of fintech boards (compared to 23 per cent in the financial sector), while 
39 per cent of fintechs did not have a single woman on their boards13. 
This limits women´s capacity to participate in the productive economy. As of 2017, just over half (51.4%) of 
women of Armenia participated in the labour force – i.e. either working or actively looking for a job-, compared 
to a much higher 70.6% of men. Although the average unemployment rate among men and women is similar 
(around 17.5%) the unemployment among young women (aged 15-24) is significantly higher compared to 
men of the same age group (45% versus 33%)14. 
As for sectors of employment, the national panorama as described in a UN Women study of 201815 exhibits 
a typical sex-segregated division of sectors., Armenian women are more involved in education, healthcare, 
wholesale/retail trade, while men are overrepresented in construction, transportation, agriculture, 
electricity/gas, and manufacturing (though the difference in participation in the latter is less prominent). Both 
are almost equally engaged in government/public office jobs and financial services.  
Armenian women in the workforce earn only 64.7% of what men earn16. The wage gap exists across sectors 
and persists even when women enter the non-traditional female fields. For example, research advanced by 
the World Bank showed that in 2016 women earned 32% less than their male counterparts in STEM jobs and 
26% less in non-STEM jobs17 18. 
According to the International Labour Organization’s Global Wage Report 2018/201919, Armenia has the 
second greatest gender wage gap among 17 upper middle-income countries. As per ILO´s labour 
database, Armenia’s workforce is concentrated in areas such as agriculture and education, and this is even 
more relevant for women than men. 
In terms of occupational categories, around 40% of the workforce are employed as craft and trade workers, 
with 42% of women compared with 36% of men. Men and women are fairly evenly represented in sales and 
service positions (around 15%). Although women are over half of the overall workers in the agriculture, 
forestry, and fishery sector20, they only amount to a small minority (8.8%) of skilled workers in the sector21.  
Nearly twice as many women (20%) are employed as professionals compared with men (10%). On the whole, 
more than two-thirds (71%) of managers are men, compared with less than a third for women (29%)22. 
ARMSTAT´s data from 2019 further asserts a low proportion of women in managerial positions (27% in urban 
areas, and of 22,4% in rural areas).  
 
12 ILO Stat 2023 
13 These figures comes from the work that has been undertaken to develop the gender assessments that are part of our internal 
gender-smart tagging process. The detailed references can be provided if needed.  
14 Statistical Committee of the Republic of Armenia. 2017 
15 Women´s Economic Inactivity and Engagement in the Informal Sector in Armenia, UNWomen, Georgia, 2018. 
16 For a complete overview of the most recent gender pay gap by sector, see Annex 7.  
17 Statistical Committee of the Republic of Armenia. 2018. Women and Men in Armenia. 
18 According to 2017 data from Armenia’s Statistical Committee, the finance and insurance sector has the highest wage gap, with 
women earning 60% of what men earn. The gap in technical fields such as electricity and gas and water supply and sewerage was 
lowest, as women’s earnings were more than 90% of men’s. Statistical Committee of the Republic of Armenia. 2017 
19 ILO 2019, Global Wage Report 2018/19: What lies behind gender pay gaps. 
20 The share of women engaged in informal employment in agriculture is 82.1%, compared with 60.8% of male informal workers. 
Furthermore, men account for more than 80% of employers, while women represent 83 percent of the so-called “others” in the 
informal workspace of agriculture (ARMSTAT, data from 2015). This may be related to the overrepresentation of women as 
contributing family workers in family farming. FAO,  
21 Please see a complete description of the division of work in agriculture and food processing in Annex 6.  
22 Statistical Committee of the Republic of Armenia. 2018. Labour Market Survey. Yerevan.

=== PAGE 134 ===
6 
 
Key indicators: Gender gaps in the economy and financial sector 
 
 
2. Egypt  
In 2020, Egypt ranked 134 out of 153 countries in the Global Gender Gap Index, having a score of 0.6323. 
While Egypt has low gender disparity in education and health and survival, with a score of 0.973 and 0.974 
respectively; in terms of economic participation and opportunity, Egypt has a low score, ranking 140 out of 
153 countries24. Although Egypt score relatively well in terms of education attainment and health, the scores 
for economic participation and political empowerment are low. Furthermore, it is important to note that the 
value of the gender gap index has not improved much since 2010 with a score of 0.5925, showing that Egypt 
has not undertaken significant measures to close its gender gap. 
In Egypt, the National Council for Women (NCW) was established to uplift the economic empowerment of 
women. NCW has issued multiple strategies for women’s empowerment, in particular the Women 
empowerment strategy in 2017, which focused on achieving women’s political empowerment, economic 
empowerment social empowerment, and women’s protection. Furthermore, NCW in collaboration with the 
Ministry of International Cooperation, the World Economic Forum and the private sector launched the 
Closing Gender Gap Accelerator Action Plan in 2021. It consists of 10 commandments, each includes 
several tasks and sub-actions for all stakeholders to implement, bringing their own expertise to the gender 
agenda plan. NCW also partnered with the CBE in the financial inclusion initiative, the cooperation between 
the CBE and the NCW served NCW’s major economic empowerment project in the year of women. To the 
same end, NCW conducted several financial literacy programs to businesswomen and women entrepreneurs 
in collaboration with international organizations in various governorates. However, it does not have a clear 
plan for institutional capacity to monitor the impact of the training programs and follow up with trained women 
and take them to the next level. 
Egypt’s private sector predominantly consists of SMEs, and faces many challenges to reach its full 
potential. In 2020, the New MSMEs Development law was enacted to tackle many issues related to MSMEs 
in Egypt and touches on challenges faced by the size of the informal economy. The 2020 MSMEs law 
provided several incentives including tax reliefs for newly licensed enterprises up to 5 years. The law also 
stipulates that at least 30% of the available lands in industrial, touristic, urban communities, and terraformed 
lands will be allocated to MSMEs. The new MSME law is expected to have a direct impact on banks’ 
portfolio to MSMEs and hence women led businesses lending since it is estimated they represent a 
significant part of the target group.  
In spite of the initiatives mentioned above, women in Egypt still face barriers and have limited access to land 
use, control and ownership26.  
Egypt, which hosted CoP 27 last year, is a signatory to the major climate change protocols and has several 
government-led initiatives that seek to protect the environment (or at least minimize damage), in areas 
ranging from energy to waste management to plastic use reduction. Around a decade ago, availability of 
 
23 World Economic Forum, 2020, Global Gender Gap Report 
24 World Economic Forum, 2020, Global Gender Gap Report 
25 World Economic Forum, 2010, Global Gender Gap Report 
26 World Economic Forum, 2020, Global Gender Gap Report

=== PAGE 135 ===
7 
 
finance was identified as one of the major challenges curbing Egypt’s transition to green economy. Since 
then, there has been a significant surge in financing available for green investments.  
Some examples of programmes providing green financing include EBRD’s EgyptSEFF with the National Bank 
of Egypt, UNIDO’s Solar Heating in Industrial Processes, Financial support from the Environmental 
Compliance Office, etc. Many of the newly available funds, especially those deployed by the EBRD, target 
SMEs rather than large corporates. However, very few of these support programmes or policies have 
officially adopted gender-mainstreaming targets. Only GCF/EBRD programmes and the soon to be 
launched credit lines by AFD/Proparco have gender mainstreaming as one of their targets.  
Although some initiatives and organizations provide support to women in business, lack of coordination has 
resulted in the fragmentation, which has reduced the potential impact. Nevertheless, NCW is regarded as the 
organization playing the most pivotal role.  
Barriers to women’s entrepreneurship and access to financial services  
Although SMEs in Egypt represent the majority of businesses, many challenges have remained for decades 
stopping them from reaching their full potential. One of the main challenges is access to finance.  
As per the findings of the GEFF gender baseline assessment, SMEs in general highlighted challenges with 
respect to financial literacy, ability to present bankable projects, ability and time given by loan officers, and 
access to information and different financial products. Moreover, as per the findings, women-led businesses 
in the SMEs sector face a significant challenge in accessing finance from commercial banks as many are not 
aware of the CBE offerings (launched by the Government of Egypt) and other initiatives. Additionally, in most 
cases, women have limited financial literacy, thus they are less able to present bankable projects to 
commercial banks. Moreover, in most cases loan officers do not dedicate enough time to explain in detail the 
bank’s requirements, which discourages women from pursuing with loan signings. Lastly, women in business 
have highlighted that male loan officers often exhibit prejudices when dealing with women compared to men. 
Both women and men led businesses face certain common challenges, although, women in businesses 
raised the additional challenge of facing prejudice.  
Poor women inclusion is not only reflected by the challenges women face in business, but also through their 
inclusion in the financial/banking system in general. Approximately, 27% of Egyptian women have a bank 
account, compared to 39% for men. Furthermore, women account for only 10 to 25 percent of financial 
institutions borrowers, and most of them are microfinance clients, while only 20 percent of women 
entrepreneurs have access to commercial banks for credit and in most cases, they apply for personal loans.27  
With respect to access to green credit lines, there is no significant difference in the awareness level nor 
the ability to access green credit loans between women-led and men-led SMEs. This is independent of 
general challenges related to access to finance. As a part of the GEFF Egypt baseline assessment, 30 in-
depth interviews were conducted with private sector representatives, business associations and chambers 
of Commerce, government bodies and quasi-government bodies, consulting firms, UN agencies, and 
commercial banks. 
Female participation in the labour force 
Egypt faces multiple challenges with respect to economic opportunities for women. Egypt has low female 
economic participation with only 24.7% of women in the labour force as compared to 77% of men in the 
labour force28. Moreover, out of the women in the labour force, around 20% are on a part-time contract29. 
Further, very few women are in managerial roles with only 2.4% of firms having female majority ownership 
and 4.9% of firms having female top managers30. These low participation rates are related to the absence of 
conducive working environment conditions for women in the private sector namely the flexibility to work from 
home, flexible working hours and/or having an on-site nursery for the children. This has resulted in high 
turnover rates for women in the private sector and the preferences of many female workers to work in the 
 
27 World Bank, 2017 
28 World Economic Forum, 2020, Global Gender Gap Report 
29 World Economic Forum, 2020, Global Gender Gap Report 
30 World Economic Forum, 2020, Global Gender Gap Report

=== PAGE 136 ===
8 
 
informal sector or start up their own business (mostly micro projects) from home to be able to take care of 
their family. This reflects that there are barriers that still prevent women to access finance and assets. 
Moreover, in light of the feedback of interviewees, it was revealed that the share of women-led business 
(managing and/or owning) in private sector companies is estimated to be around 10% in Egypt; this is also 
related to the low participation of women in managerial positions in male-led business. In most cases, the 
participation of women in managerial positions would be in family businesses. 
Key indicators: Gender gaps in the economy and financial sector 
  
 
3. Jordan  
Jordan’s legal framework provides for gender equality at the constitutional level, particularly through Article 
6(1) of the Constitution, which guarantees equality before the law without discrimination based on race, 
language, or religion. According to the GEFF Gender baseline assessment however, the enforcement of 
constitutional supremacy is weak, and many laws contradict the principle of gender equality, especially in 
civil and criminal codes, as well as Islamic and ecclesiastical laws. This is especially the case for inter alia 
the Personal Status Law, which disadvantages women in matters of marriage, divorce, and inheritance. The 
Penal Code offers some protections but is criticized for leniency towards perpetrators of “honor crimes” and 
inadequate domestic violence provisions. The Jordanian National Commission for Women (JNCW) 
developed the National Strategy for Women (2020-2025) to enhance women’s political, economic, and social 
participation. The government has also launched initiatives to support female entrepreneurship, vocational 
training, and family-friendly workplace policies, and established quotas to ensure female representation in 
parliament and local councils. Despite these efforts and Jordan’s commitment to international treaties like 
CEDAW, challenges remain in achieving true gender parity. 
 
In the Global Gender Gap Report 2023, which measures disparities between men and women across 
countries, Jordan ranked 126th out of 146 countries with a Global Gender Gap Index of 0.646. Gender 
disparities in Jordan are particularly pronounced in economic participation and opportunity (0.542) and 
political empowerment (0.093). However, Jordan performs better in female education attainment (0.994) and 
health and survival (0.957). Compared to the average indexes of the Middle East and North Africa, Jordan 
scores slightly better in all indicators except political empowerment. 
 
Women’s access to economic opportunities in Jordan remains constrained, despite recent legal reforms. 
According to the 8th World Bank’s Women, Business, and the Law 2024 report, which measures the laws 
and regulations affecting women’s economic opportunities in 190 economies, Jordan scored 59.4 in 2024, 
up from 46.9 in 2023. This improvement is due to the adoption of Law No. 10 of 2023, which introduced 
multiple amendments to the labour code. These amendments include prohibiting gender-based 
discrimination in employment, removing restrictions on women’s work in different industries, and introducing 
penalties for sexual harassment in the workplace. Additionally, the law now expressly prohibits gender-based 
discrimination by employers, which could hinder equal opportunities for women.

=== PAGE 137 ===
9 
 
Barriers to women’s access to entrepreneurship and financial services 
According to the GEFF Gender baseline assessment, women in Jordan own 9.1% of small and medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs) and constitute almost half of home-based businesses, which make up 5.2% of 
SMEs. Due to societal norms that limit women’s ability to work outside their homes, female-owned businesses 
are eleven times more likely to be home-based compared to male-owned businesses. Additionally, women 
who own businesses are 9.4 times more likely to employ other women, reflecting a strong gender-specific 
employment trend within these enterprises. 
The assessment also showed that, despite a relatively high percentage of women entrepreneurs holding 
bank accounts (76%), there remains a 14-percentage point disparity compared to men (90%). Women 
primarily engage with financial services such as ATM usage, online bill payments, and money transfers. 
Although 32% of women entrepreneurs have secured loans in the past two years, their average loan amounts 
are significantly smaller than those of their male counterparts. Notably, 64% of women entrepreneurs are 
interested in obtaining loans, including green finance, compared to 43% of men. Conversely, among non-
business respondents, only 41% of women are interested in green financing compared to 60% of men. The 
concept of green financing remains relatively unknown, especially among women, indicating a need for 
increased awareness and access to these financial opportunities. 
Female participation in the labour force 
Despite recent advancements, a significant gap persists between women’s educational achievements and 
their participation in the labour market. According to the Global Gender Gap Report 2023, Jordan has 
achieved parity in literacy rates and enrolment in primary, secondary, and tertiary education. However, this 
educational attainment does not translate into labour market participation. Only 14% of women in Jordan are 
part of the labour force, compared to 63% of men. This is a slight increase from the 11-12% participation 
rates seen in the 1990s and early 2000s but still falls far below the MENA region’s average of 19% and the 
global average of 49% for women. 
Several factors contribute to this employment gap. For one, employers often hold preconceptions that women 
lack adequate education and skills, despite women’s higher levels of educational attainment in areas such 
as reading, math, and science. For another, traditional gender roles act as significant barriers, with many 
believing that women should prioritize domestic responsibilities over professional careers. Additionally, 
limited and secure transportation options, along with a lack of affordable childcare facilities, hinder women’s 
access to jobs. Concerns about the cost of childcare and the risk of harassment in public transport further 
discourage women from entering the workforce, particularly those with lower levels of education or expertise. 
Key indicators: Gender gaps in the economy and financial sector

=== PAGE 138 ===
10 
 
4. Georgia 
Georgia adopted in 2010 a law on Gender Equality to support and ensure equal rights for men and women 
in political, economic, social, and cultural life. In addition, UNDP works closely with Government of Georgia 
to increase women’s role in local governance.  
However, traditions and social norms related to role of women and men place burden on women shoulders 
for household and family care which limits her opportunities, hence NGOs and international agencies working 
in a collaborative way to improve the national legislative framework on gender equality, but despite that social 
norms and roles attributed to women and men are still strong.   
The Global Gender Gap Report for 2018 gives Georgia a ranking of 99 out of 149 countries with an index 
of 0.677. The relatively low ranking is mainly determined by the low scoring obtained in the political 
empowerment (0.093). In terms of the Economic Participation and Opportunity Index, Georgia has an overall 
ranking of 85 with the female participation (63.4%) in the professional and technical worker category giving 
it a score of 1.000.  
Barriers to women’s access to entrepreneurship and financial services  
Overall, there are many challenges for women to access finance in Georgia, that could be split into several 
categories31. The GEFF gender baseline assessment identified a major challenge being social norms and 
beliefs that negatively perceive women’s involvement in business and deprive them of their access to an 
inheritance. The burden of house and care works alongside business responsibilities also hinders women 
from fully exploring their potential as professionals. Also, women face operational challenges, in particular 
when starting up or developing a business. Finally, many women lack the social capital and networks that is 
essential in establishing connections within the business community.  
The first group of barriers covers social norms and cultural beliefs, as women are still expected to be 
housewives and take care of household responsibilities. Such cultural barriers prevent women from starting 
a business, growing enterprises and being active in business circles, including associations and policy 
dialogues. In addition, women still lack equal access to property inheritance which is an often-overlooked 
challenge that many women face in Georgia. Hence the lack of access to property derails women’s ability to 
obtain loans, which often require collateral.  
Another challenge is the lack of women-focused funding for start-ups and business development which 
restricts women’s ability to start and develop their own businesses. While a number of government entities 
and international developmental institutions have spread efforts to fund women, such efforts are fragmented. 
As well as larger PFIs such as commercial banks still lag behind in terms of women-focused loan programmes 
and gender-sensitive approaches in their work.  
Additionally, high interest rates on the available funding, lack of information, financial literacy and confidence 
among women is another barrier. These challenges, identified in the EBRD-GCF GEFF gender baseline 
assessment, highlight major obstacles to access finance, such as disadvantaging credit conditions (high 
interest rates, small loan amounts, short loan maturity), lack of collateral that prevent women to obtain loans 
that require them. Lack of business knowledge, business information and network, as well as lack of digital 
and financial literacy are other important obstacles to use digital and other products beyond loans. Use of 
digital knowledge is specifically important for women-entrepreneurs to help them save time and combine 
business with household responsibilities.    
Overall, the financing gap for WSMEs in Georgia is estimated of over 836 million Euro (899 million USD). 
71% of both women and men have bank accounts, but only 23% of women compared to 25% of men use 
the banking system for borrowing money. Women’s access to finance is negatively impacted by their lower 
likelihood of owning property, particularly in rural areas where 70% of agricultural holders are men.23% of 
women and 42% of men are self-employed with no employees. 1.1% of women and 1.4% of men are 
employers32. 
 
31 As per National Assessment of women’s entrepreneurship development prepared by UN Women, May 2023 
32 These figures comes from the work that has been undertaken to develop the gender assessments that are part of our internal 
gender-smart tagging process. The detailed references can be provided if needed.

=== PAGE 139 ===
11 
 
Female participation in the labour force 
Women’s participation in the labour force in Georgia is significantly lower than men. Close to 55% of women, 
compared to 73% of men, participate in the labour force. The gender gap is even more pronounced among 
15 to 24 year olds, with 29% of young women and 46% of young men participating. In the financial and 
insurance activities, this gap reaches extreme levels at 64% 
The age-related gender gap in employment is driven by pregnancy, child-rearing, and unpaid domestic work 
at home. In fact, the time spent by women on unpaid domestic work is three times higher (45 hours) than 
time spent by men (15 hours). The leading sectors for women entrepreneurs are agriculture (40.6%), 
education (16.2%) and health (7.1%).  
In 2017, the gender pay gap was 34.5% in Georgia, which indicates significant inequality among employed 
women and men. Women constitute the minority of state grant recipients, and larger grants are less likely to 
benefit women. Equal pay, women’s political participation, and credit history for women are considered to be 
the most alarming issues in Georgia.  
In terms of the Economic Participation and Opportunity Index, Georgia has an overall ranking of 85, with the 
female participation (63.4%) in the professional and technical worker category giving it a score of 1.000.  
Economic participation for women is reflected in the national statistics. According to the National Statistical 
Services of Georgia, 58% of women and 78% men were in the labour force in 201633. Moreover, childcare 
responsibilities are the largest barrier to women’s labour force participation. Indeed, women are most likely 
to join the labour force after raising children, from age 35 onwards.   
The highest level of economic activity among women was observed in the 45-54 age group (81%). The 
employment rate was highest (73%) in the same age group, and lowest (18%) in the 15-24 age group. 
Economic activity was highest among men aged 25-34 (94%), while the employment rate was highest in the 
35-44 age group (80%). Similar to women, highest unemployment was observed in the 15-24 age group 
(31%). In terms of women’s representation in management and leadership roles, only 36% of the 
managers in Georgia are women. Among large companies with more than 100 employees, however, only 
8% are managed by a woman. 
Key indicators: Gender gaps in the economy and financial sector 
 
 
5. Kazakhstan 
In terms of gender policy, there are certain regulations in place, which protect and prevent domestic violence 
and promote equal opportunities for men and women as well as gender equality in the social and political 
sectors, seeking to promote gender equality in the economy. 
The Government Developed and approved a National Gender Strategy (2006-2016) that has laid the 
foundations for the improvements of women’s participation in public life of Kazakhstan. In 2009, the 
parliament enacted the Law of State Guarantees of Equal Rights and Equal Opportunities for Men and 
Women and the Law on the Prevention of Domestic Violence.  In December 2016 the new Concept of Gender 
 
33 Economically active population (labour force) is total employed and unemployed population of 15 years and older, as defined 
in the 2017 publication” Women and Men of Georgia”, pg. 82

=== PAGE 140 ===
12 
 
and Family Policy in the Republic of Kazakhstan was approved until 2030 on the country level. The Concept 
was developed in close cooperation with UNWomen in Kazakhstan and highlighted all the main 
recommendations contained in the Sustainable Development Goals. Kazakhstan was the first Central Asian 
country with which the EU signed a next generation Enhanced Partnership and Cooperation Agreement 
(EPCA) in 20151. The Agreement came into force in 2020 after ratification by the EU and all Member States. 
Gender equality index in Kazakhstan is approaching East European level (0.2562). Kazakhstan was in 2022 
ranked 65 out of 146 countries in the Global Gender Gap Index Rank, moving up 15 positions due to 
successful reforms in the field of gender development. 
Barriers to women’s access to entrepreneurship and financial services  
The GEFF Gender Baseline Assessment on the country level aimed to better understand awareness of 
potential sub-borrowers about climate change risks, as well as needs and obstacles related to access to 
finance in order to adopt climate technologies. It consisted of the survey and interviews of about 160 
respondents with 63% female and 37% male participants. The results of the Baseline assessment showed 
that women indicated access to finance as main existing barrier, due to their lack of collateral, the refusal by 
banks to extend loans to them, in addition to complicated banking procedures, women’s fear of taking on 
debt and women’s weak skills and knowledge related to business management, among others. Where men 
highlighted access to markets and adaptation of innovative technologies as a main obstacle for businesses 
due to low awareness and understanding of various technologies and its benefits, meaning that there is a 
significant room for awareness raising and explanations of various aspects of sustainable development, 
including climate change challenges, alternative energy sources, resource efficiency. 
Female participation in the labour force  
Due to the recent efforts undertaken by the Government of Kazakhstan, gender gaps in women’s labour 
force participation are relatively low in Kazakhstan. In 2017, the rate was 73.40% for women and 82.83% for 
men, and their level of unemployment rate was 5.7% and 4.3% respectively. While an increasing number of 
women are working in SMEs, women are mainly self-employed, and may lack decent working conditions and 
social security benefits such as pensions. Women represent 70% of all employees in sectors that are 
traditionally female, where the prevalence of low-paying wages is high. On average women’s salaries are 
67% of average salaries for men. Kazakhstan is close to gender parity in access to primary and secondary 
education and ranks among the top countries in enrolment in primary and secondary education. Women, 
nevertheless, continue to be overrepresented in traditional areas of study, and are less likely to participate in 
science and technology related studies.  
On a local level, the share of women delegates in regional parliaments is on average 18.8%, with variations 
in certain regions exceeding the 30% threshold. While important advances have been made over the last 
decade, the share of women in national parliament remains below the 30% gender equality threshold – 
considered to be the point at which they can bring about real change in policy agendas – and slightly below 
the OECD average, at 27.1% (29 out of 107 seats) in the House of Representatives and 6.48% (3 out of 47 
seats) in the Senate. In the executive office, women comprise 55% of administrative civil servants, but only 
8.4% of the political-level civil servants. In 2016, of the 13 ministerial posts and 17 seats in the Executive 
Cabinet, one was held by a female. In the judiciary, 55% of all judges are women, while only 36.4% of judges 
in the Supreme Court are women.  
In March 2023, women’ participation in the Labour Force in Kazakhstan dropped to 68.3%, compared with 
68.8% in the previous quarter, according to the Bureau of National Statistics of the Agency for Strategic 
Planning and Reforms of Kazakhstan. Women’s unemployment rate remained the same at 4.8% in April 
2023.

=== PAGE 141 ===
13 
 
Key indicators: Gender gaps in the economy and financial sector 
 
 
6. Kyrgyz Republic 
As per Global Gender Gap Report 2023, which measures disparities between men and women across 
countries, Kyrgyz Republic ranked 84 out of 146 countries, with a score of 0.7. There is relatively low parity 
in economic participation and opportunity (0.694) as well as political empowerment (0.128) in Kyrgyz 
Republic. However, there is high parity in educational attainment (1.000) and health and survival (0.980).34  
According to the 8th World Bank’s Women, Business, and the Law 2024 report, which measures the laws 
and regulations affecting women’s economic opportunities in 190 economies, Kyrgyz Republic scored 76.9% 
in 2024. Kyrgyz Republic is undertaking measures to promote women’s access to entrepreneurship and 
empowerment. In 2021, the Cabinet of Ministers of the Kyrgyz Republic approved a State Women 
Entrepreneurship Programme spanning from 2022 to 2026. This programme aims to empower women in 
business by supporting their projects, fostering the development of their start-ups in small and medium 
enterprises, and ensuring access to information, finance, and marketing. In addition, in the Kyrgyz Republic, 
the Coalition for the Development of Women’s Entrepreneurship “Demilgeluu Ayimdar” was created in 2023, 
which developed the National Agenda  for Women’s Entrepreneurship in Kyrgyzstan35. 
However, there are still gender gaps prevalent in the economy. The GEFF Baseline Assessment highlighted 
that women constitute a large share of the rural population, with the majority involved in food production and 
household caring responsibilities. However, in most cases, due to women’s limited access to productive 
resources, services, and employment opportunities, they tend to be among the poorest and most vulnerable 
groups in the population, especially in rural areas. Furthermore, since very limited agricultural businesses 
(including farms) are registered under a woman's name, women's entrepreneurial activity is typically limited 
to small businesses with a few employees, low start-up capital requirements, and fewer opportunities to 
expand the business.36 
Barriers to women’s access to entrepreneurship and financial services 
Women face multiple restrictions and inequalities in entrepreneurship. Due to the influence of traditional 
norms, assets and property are more often registered in the name of men, thereby limiting women’s access 
to credit. The GEFF Baseline Assessment showed that due to gender norms and cultural practises, women 
have limited access and control over resources, lower political representation, limited access to education 
and training, and uneven unpaid care responsibilities, thereby leading to unbalanced division of labour, lower 
incomes, and fewer livelihood opportunities.  
 
34 World Economic Forum, 2023, Global Gender Gap Report 
35 KyrSEFF III Baseline Assessment Report 
36  UNDP. A note on including gender issues in projects across sectors. A case of ‘Pasture management’ project: 
Kyrgyzstan\\http://undpgendermadeeasy.org .

=== PAGE 142 ===
14 
 
In terms of access to finance, the GEFF Baseline Assessment also highlighted that women may have limited 
access to formal financial services, including banking and lending facilities, due to various socio-economic 
factors such as lack of collateral, lack of credit history, lower levels of financial literacy, and cultural barriers. 
Furthermore, many women may lack adequate financial literacy skills, which could inhibit their ability to 
understand and effectively utilize financial products and services offered by financial institutions. Additionally, 
financial institutions with predominantly male leadership may struggle to understand and address the unique 
financial needs and preferences of female clients, leading to a lack of trust and engagement among women. 
Therefore, the main source of lending for women entrepreneurs is microfinance organizations, where it is 
easier to apply for and receive a loan. However, in microfinance organisation, the amount of loan is smaller 
and interest rates are higher. 
Female participation in the labour force 
There are large gaps in the levels of male and female labour force participation, employment rate, and 
unemployment rate, which are further exacerbated based on the region. In 2022, the labour force participating 
rate stood at 46% for women vs 74.8% for men37. The highest level of labour force participation among 
women was observed in Talas (58.8 percent), Osh (53.2 percent) regions and Bishkek city (58.1 percent), 
and the lowest was observed in Batken region and the city of Osh (33.3 percent each). At the same time, in 
Osh and Chui regions, the decline of women’s participation in the labour force in 2022 compared to 2021 
amounted to a decrease of 0.7 and 0.3, respectively38. The decline in these regions may be attributed to a 
societal shift away from secularism towards more traditional patriarchal beliefs.  
 
Figure 1: Employment by gender and age groups, 2022 (GEFF baseline assessment) 
 
Additionally, the employment rate of women is 28.7% lower than that of men. The female unemployment rate 
in 2022 decreased by 0.2% from 2021 and amounted to 6.1%, which is 2.1% higher than male 
unemployment39. As per the data of the integrated sample survey in Figure 1, the excess level of employment 
of men in relation to the level of employment of women was observed in all age groups, but the most 
significant was in the age groups of 25–34 years, which is when women most often leave work due to 
childbirth. In the age group of 45–54 years, there is a convergence in the employment levels of men and 
women. This is because during this age, women have grown-up children and return to work. Furthermore, 
due to the dominance of gender stereotypes and socio-cultural norms, women choose educational 
 
37 Women and men of the Kyrgyz Republic: 2018–2022. Bishkek. 2023 (see KyrSEFF III Baseline Assessment) 
38 Ibid. 
39 Ibid.

=== PAGE 143 ===
15 
 
institutions, and professions that are traditionally considered female appropriate and low-paid. Women's 
employment is highest in the services sector, where their share in the total number of employees dominate 
in activities such as real estate transactions (100 percent), education, health care and social services (77 
percent each)40. 
Key indicators: Gender gaps in the economy and financial sector 
 
 
7. Moldova 
Gender equality has been enshrined into the Moldovan Constitution 1994 and embedded in a wide-ranging 
legal framework to protect gender equality in Moldovan family, political and economic life. The legislative 
framework guaranteeing gender equality in Moldova includes the Family Code, the Law on Ensuring Equal 
Opportunities for Women and Men, and the Law on Preventing and Combating Family Violence. Additionally, 
amendments to various laws have introduced gender quotas and criminalized domestic violence. Moldova’s 
commitment to gender equality is further reinforced by its ratification of international treaties such as CEDAW 
and the European Convention on Human Rights. National strategies like the 2017-2021 National Gender 
Equality Strategy and the National Strategy for Preventing and Combating Violence Against Women and 
Domestic Violence (2018-2023) provide frameworks for action.41  
However, despite these robust legal and policy frameworks, women in Moldova still face significant barriers 
to economic participation and leadership positions. 
Barriers to Women’s Access to Entrepreneurship and Financial Services 
The GEFF baseline assessment showed that, while women constitute about 52% of the total resident 
population of the Republic of Moldova and 49.2% of the total economically active population, the number of 
women entrepreneurs is only of 33.9%. The assessment furthermore confirmed that inadequate availability 
of funding is a key issue that is especially pronounced among women-led businesses. Social and cultural 
norms play a significant role. Women are often perceived as ineligible by banks or themselves discouraged 
by fears of high costs and complex application processes. The pertinent requirement for collateral remains a 
major barrier, especially for securing larger loans necessary for significant business investments. 
Furthermore, women typically start smaller-scale businesses compared to men, limiting their eligibility for 
larger loans and reducing competitiveness. Women-owned SMEs and women in agriculture primarily rely on 
personal resources, such as savings or loans from family and friends, due to fears of not being able to repay 
formal loans and the associated risk of losing collateral. 
According to the Moldovan National Bureau of Statistics (NBS), 71.3% of women entrepreneurs identify 
insufficient financial resources as a significant barrier. Most enterprises rely on their own resources, with over 
70% doing so. Men’s businesses, however, use bank loans and loans from non-bank financial institutions 
more frequently (9.4% compared to 6.8%). Additionally, in 2017, almost every eighth enterprise applied for 
credit or a loan (14.8% for men compared to 9.4% for women, with a national average of 13%). Of the 
enterprises that did not apply for a loan (87%), more than half stated they did not need credit (55.5%), while 
high interest rates (25.3%) and high collateral requirements (5.4%) were also significant deterrents, with no 
 
40 Ibid. 
41 See Baseline Assessment – H-009 Green Economy Financing Facility (GEFF) in Moldova – Gender Component

=== PAGE 144 ===
16 
 
major gender differences noted. Women entrepreneurs more frequently use personal goods as guarantees 
for accessing loans. Among companies that received loans, 84.4% provided guarantees, typically in the form 
of cars, equipment, and goods (50.7%), land and buildings (44.7%), and personal property (36.0%). 
Companies managed by men are more likely to offer machinery and goods as collateral (52.9% compared 
to 44.1%), whereas women-run enterprises offer more personal property (43.2% compared to 33.7%). High 
interest rates are particularly problematic for micro-enterprises with 0-9 employees (25.8%) compared to 
larger enterprises with 250 or more employees (9.8%), and the need for credit is higher among micro-
enterprises. 
Female Participation in the Labour Force 
Despite the fact that a significantly higher percentage of women than men are enrolled in tertiary education 
(76 percent vs. 53 percent in 2022), female labor force participation (LFP) and employment rates remain 
consistently lower than those of men. While women’s LFP was nearly equal to men’s in 2005, it has since 
fallen to below 40 percent, resulting in a gender gap of 10 percentage points. Additionally, Moldova has the 
highest female unemployment rate in Eastern Europe.  
  
Figure 2: Employment to poulation rate for women (GEFF baseline assessment) 
 
Female participation in Moldova’s labour force is significantly influenced by family obligations and inadequate 
childcare services. The primary reason for inactivity among women aged 25-44 is family obligations and the 
lack of appropriate care facilities, a situation exacerbated by the Covid-19 pandemic, which caused many 
preschools to close.42 
Key indicators: Gender gaps in the economy and financial sector 
 
 
8. Mongolia 
The Global Gender Gap Report ranked Mongolia ranked 69 out of 156 countries in 2021, with an index of 
0.71643. While Mongolia’s overall Gender Gap Index has not changed a lot in the past 10 years, the country’s 
 
42 Investing in Moldova’s future: Increasing women’s economic inclusion through a care economy (worldbank.org) 
43 World Economic Forum, 2021, Global Gender Gap Report

=== PAGE 145 ===
17 
 
ranking has fallen as compared to other countries. In 2013, its rank was 33 out of 136 while its score was 
0.72044, which is not much higher than what it is now. This indicates that Mongolia maintained its status with 
regard to gender issues. 
Furthermore, as per WEF’s global gender gap report, Mongolia’s sub-index of Educational Attainment is 
0.998, which is very close to parity of “1”. Female school enrolment rates, particularly in tertiary education, 
are higher than those of males. Mongolia’s Health and Survival sub-index is also very high at 0.957. However, 
Mongolia has a low score for Political Empowerment (0.212) with surprisingly few women in parliament and 
ministerial positions and not having had a female head of state. The country’s extremely low score in Political 
Empowerment brings down Mongolia’s overall Gender Gap index.  
In terms of the national legal framework, comprehensive national-level data on businesses is not gender-
disaggregated and there is no definition of women-owned MSMEs in the law45. Information on women-owned 
MSMEs in Mongolia is therefore disjointed and difficult to find, which underlines the need for gender-
disaggregated data. Also, The Ministry of Justice and Home Affairs showed in a study that women are not 
aware about the existence of the Gender Equality Law. If women are discriminated against, they can take 
the offender to the court of law; in the Criminal Code, discrimination is a criminal offence. Nevertheless, 
NHRCM studies also show that people have very little knowledge on who to address in case of rights 
violations and discrimination, for example about workplace harassment. 
Barriers to women’s access to entrepreneurship and financial services 
As per the GEFF baseline assessment findings in Mongolia, access to finance is identified as the most 
important obstacle to doing business for women and a clear constraint in building their business’ resilience 
against climate change.  Since property and land are typically registered under the husband’s name, lack of 
collateral is the biggest obstacle for women who wish to expand their businesses and invest in new 
technologies. Moreover, there is a need for a co-borrower for a single or divorced woman, creating additional 
barriers to access finance. Females of reproductive age who wish to start a business are often not considered 
as suitable borrowers, despite their often bankable projects and robust business plans. Additionally, bank 
staff, particularly male staff, seem to have an unconscious bias towards women’s capability to be effective 
and successful business-owners and managers. Also, networks often play a significant role in securing a 
loan or learning about opportunities creating an uneven playing field that often disadvantages women. 
In the survey of the gender baseline assessment, the Mongolian businesswomen raised concerns about the 
consequences of the changing climate they have encountered: higher temperatures, extreme weather 
events, desertification, and the resulting effect on their livelihoods such as lack of fodder for livestock. They 
confirmed having themselves experienced the impacts of climate change in different types of businesses. 
Gender inequality can be found at all levels of decision-making, be it a herder family, an urban household, a 
company’s executive level, or within policy-making roles. According to the FGDs, women are often better 
informed about the consequences of climate change but have little decision-making power, thereby creating 
inefficiencies. 
Given the challenges mentioned above, there is an opportunity to implement programmes which will offer 
targeted support to female entrepreneurs and individuals to improve access to green loans and address 
gender-blind banking practices, including: issuance of collateral in the husband’s name, discriminatory 
requirement of a co-borrower for single women, issues of stereotypes and discrimination, gender based 
biases, etc. Furthermore, there could be trainings for bank employees in gender sensitive responsive 
approaches to overcome stereotypes and tap the market of female borrowers. Implementation of 
programmes and initiatives can support expansion and growth of women-led businesses by helping them to 
overcome the barriers to access loans and technologies. 
As a part of the GEFF Mongolia baseline assessment, the analysis was carried out based on answers to a 
questionnaire by 190 participants representing households and businesses and the results of 4 focus group 
discussions (FGDs), each with a total of 32 participants. 
 
44 World Economic Forum, 2013, Global Gender Gap Report 
45 “COVID-19 Impact on Women and Girls in Mongolia” by UNDP, Mongolia’s National Committee on Gender Equality, and ADB

=== PAGE 146 ===
18 
 
Female participation in the labour force  
When looking at economic participation, in 2020, the male labour force participation rate stood at 66.8% 
as compared to 51.8% for females46. Women are less likely to participate in the labour force for different 
reasons, such as, more women are students and many more women than men are retired (their retirement 
age is 5 years earlier). The largest difference, however, is in their task as caregiver: 96% of the persons 
caring for children as reason for not being in the labour force are women. Similarly, 75% of those caring for 
the sick or elderly are women47. 
Key indicators: Gender gaps in the economy and financial sector 
 
 
9. Morocco 
In terms of the legal context, gender equality in Morocco is reflected in the country’s main legal framework 
(the Constitution), national strategies for equality (ICRAM2 and ATTAMKINE), and tools for implementation 
in public policies (e.g. gender-responsive budgeting). Many donors and international finance institutions also 
support Morocco’s gender equality initiatives.  
Over the past two decades, Morocco has developed numerous programs and initiatives to reduce 
disparities related to access to education, health, decent housing and infrastructure. However, these efforts 
have not been sufficient to increase women’s economic participation. In the World Economic Forum’s overall 
gender gap rankings, Morocco ranks 143 out of 153 countries in 2020, with a gender gap of 0.605, a decrease 
from 0.627 from 2006.48  
Large disparities persist between women and men, in both rural and the urban areas. Economic factors, 
discriminatory traditional practices and stereotypical attitudes on appropriate gender roles and behaviours 
continue to limit girls and women’s education, economic and political opportunities and the ability to grant 
them their equal rights, particularly in rural areas. The needs and priorities of women and men are highly 
gendered and linked to their gender roles, with regards to use of climate change adaptation technologies. 
Although women have showed to be more sensitive to issues related to climate change, they are hardly 
represented in leadership positions, their needs and their capacities related to the mitigation of climate 
change are less likely to be taken into account. 
Barriers to women’s access to entrepreneurship and financial services 
Women face multiple barriers to accessing financial resources and facilities including collateral 
requirements, physical distance from banking services, and administrative hurdles. In a survey of 200 
Moroccan female entrepreneurs conducted by the International Labour Organisation (ILO) in 2016, just 23% 
had tried in the previous year to access credit in any way (banks, microloans, friends, family, savings groups, 
etc.). Most of those who did not seek financing said they were afraid to take the risk and then not be able to 
repay the loan49. In the same study, lack of financing was highlighted as the biggest barrier for both launching 
 
46 Mongolian Statistical Information Service (www.1212.mn) 
47 Ibid 
48 World Economic Forum, 2020, Global Gender Gap Report 
49 Évaluation nationale du développement de l’entrepreneuriat féminin au Maroc situation et recommandations, ILO, 2016

=== PAGE 147 ===
19 
 
a company (62%) and growing a company (77%)50. In this study, respondents identified the top five barriers 
to accessing credit as high interest rate, high collateral requirements, the requirement to have a collateral, 
perceived low loan amounts, and perceived short repayment terms.  
Women entrepreneurs’ access to bank financing is challenged by several factors, both on the supply side 
and on the demand side of financial services. In rural areas, women encounter even more pronounced 
difficulties in accessing bank loans, resulting in them turning to informal credit sources. Socio-cultural and 
legal barriers exacerbate these divides even further.  
Morocco is ranked as a leader in the SEMED region in terms of access to bank loans for SMEs because 
of many public and private programs and initiatives. However, little distinction has been made between 
the practical needs and strategic interests of women and men entrepreneurs, and there are not many 
specific financing products and instruments (EBRD’s Women in Business program being a notable exception) 
to respond to gender barriers and promote women’s access to guarantees, venture capital, financial training 
and education, and financial mentoring and coaching51. In the above-mentioned ILO study, only 28% said 
they perceived financing/credit to be easy to obtain and that their needs were well-understood by lenders52. 
Only 37% said information about sources and types of funding was widely available to female 
entrepreneurs53.  
Currently, banking practices relating to SMEs in Morocco considerably hamper the more active use of 
financing. The banking model in place for SMEs is quite conventional, branch-based, loan-centric, and 
passive while requiring collateral.54 It does not reflect the needs or priorities of the potential market it is 
intended to serve. As a result, recourse to banks in Morocco remains well below its possibilities – for both 
men and women entrepreneurs. Banks do not know how to actively communicate with their customers. The 
assessment also found that most women entrepreneurs did not understand how banks and their services 
could help them (formal businesses: 55%, informal: 84%).55  
The findings of the GEFF gender baseline study highlighted that, overall women, both at household and 
business level, are more aware of the consequences of climate change and are more willing to implement 
means to mitigate its consequences. However, the study also highlighted the practical needs of these women 
and women-led businesses: a lack of knowledge and difficulties in accessing finance. As per the findings, the 
main obstacles to the growth of business activity is access to finance, for both men and women. However, 
women expressed their needs to be coached and mentored on different financing schemes. Raising 
awareness about loans and financing schemes is highly requested by the potential borrowers in all sectors.  
The survey findings highlight that the inclusion of the gender dimension should contribute to strengthening 
the practical needs and strategic interests of women and women-owned enterprises in the green finance 
sector. There is a scope of strengthening the gender dimension in the formulation, implementation and 
monitoring/evaluation of projects and project activities. Additionally, there could be awareness raising for all 
stakeholders and capacity building for PFIs and for women beneficiaries of the projects (direct or indirect 
beneficiaries). Lastly, practical tools can be developed to address the practical needs of women and women-
led companies to reach and benefit from green loans and financial products. Promoting financial services to 
women is therefore an important factor in improving women’s access to entrepreneurship, including 
sustainability-related businesses, which would in turn improve the response to climate challenges.  
Conducted as a part of GEFF Morocco, the baseline analysis relies on a multi-pronged approach combining 
primary sources gathered through a series of in-depth interviews and a survey with 393 respondents, and 
secondary sources. 
 
50 Ibid 
51 Évaluation nationale du développement de l’entrepreneuriat féminin au Maroc situation et recommandations, ILO, 2016 
52 Ibid 
53 Ibid 
54 Services bancaires pour les femmes au Maroc, 2018. 
55 Services bancaires pour les femmes au Maroc, 2018.

=== PAGE 148 ===
20 
 
Female participation in the labour force  
Morocco has one of the lowest female employment rates in the world, ranked 146 out of 153 countries56. 
This rate has generally been decreasing for the past two decades and now stands at just 16.2% in 202057.  
Women are more likely than men to work in vulnerable employment (informal or unpaid), at 64.6% compared 
to 47.3% for men58. Additionally, there is gender based vertical segregation as only 13% of over 46,033 
enterprises59 are led by women, with low representation of women in executive positions. In the private and 
public sectors combined, women represent 22.7% of employees with 4.3% of top managers.60  
Key indicators: Gender gaps in the economy and financial sector 
 
 
10. North Macedonia 
In 2023, North Macedonia ranked 73 out of 146 countries with an index of 0.71161. While North Macedonia’s 
overall Gender Gap Index has not changed since 2020, the country’s ranking has fallen. In 2020, for 
instance, its rank was 70 out of 153 while its score was 0.71162, which is the same as what it is now. This 
indicates that North Macedonia has maintained its status with regard to gender issues. 
Furthermore, as per WEF’s global gender gap report 2023, North Macedonia’s sub-index of educational 
attainment is 0.997. Female school enrolment rates, particularly in tertiary education, are higher than that of 
men. North Macedonia’s Health and Survival sub-index is also very high at 0.960. However, North Macedonia 
has a low score for Political Empowerment (0.283) with a huge gap between men and women in ministerial 
positions.  
Barriers to women’s access to entrepreneurship and financial services 
Women face challenges to access to finance in North Macedonia. While there are near-equal rights in 
access to land assets and equal rights in access to finance63, there is a wide gender gap in different aspects 
of access to finance. For example, in account ownership, only 80% of women have an account at a financial 
institution compared to 91% of men64. Similarly, more men borrow from formal financial institutions than 
women (20% and 24% respectively)65. Moreover, women are less likely to be self-employed than men (21% 
of women compared with 29% of men) and own account workers (7% of women compared with 17% of men).  
 
56 World Economic Forum, 2020, Global Gender Gap Report 
57 World Economic Forum, 2020, Global Gender Gap Report 
58 Women’s Economic Empowerment in Selected MENA countries: The Impact of Legal Frameworks in Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Libya, 
Morocco and Tunisia, Competitiveness and Private Sector Development, 2017 
59 Ministry of Solidarity, Equality Bulletin: The reality of equality between women and men in figures, 1 edition of 2020 
60 Ministry of Solidarity, Equality Bulletin: The reality of equality between women and men in figures, 1 edition of 2020 
61 World Economic Forum, 2023, Global Gender Gap Report 
62 World Economic Forum, 2020, Global Gender Gap Report 
63 World Economic Forum, 2023, Global Gender Gap Report 
64 Gender SMART diagnostic tool 
65 Ibid

=== PAGE 149 ===
21 
 
Female participation in the labour force 
When looking at economic participation, in 2023, North Macedonia has low parity in economic 
participation and opportunity, and ranks 108 out of 146 in this parameter66. The gap specially widens when 
looking at economic participation and opportunity in legislators, senior officers and managers. Only 21% of 
firms in North Macedonia have female top managers, and only 20% of firms have female majority 
ownership 67. This shows that there are not many women in leadership positons in North Macedonia. 
Furthermore, sharing of responsibilities within the household in North Macedonia is unbalanced. Women 
spend on average three times more time (3.7 hours) per day than men (1.3 hours) on unpaid domestic and 
care work68. 
Key indicators: Gender gaps in the economy and financial sector 
 
 
11. Serbia 
As per World Economic Forum’s overall gender gap rankings, Serbia ranks 39 out of 153 countries69. 
However, gender inequality remains high in access to employment and resources, including property, land, 
financial markets, transport, jobs, and in other areas. Women have constantly and consistently lower activity 
and employment rates than men and higher inactivity rates70. Gender inequalities in real estate ownership 
are very pronounced – women are much less likely than men to own or co-own property. Although the 
legislation was amended in 2018 to facilitate women’s access to land and real estate property, 71 there are 
still significant gender gaps in property ownership. According to the data of the Republic Geodetic Institute, 
women own just 25.6% of real estate. Disaggregated by the type of the property, women are exclusive owners 
of 24.2% of all land parcels and 25.6% of all buildings. The gap in real estate ownership is a consequence of 
several factors, such as insufficiently harmonized normative solutions and gender patterns and customs, 
especially in rural areas, due to which women renounce their share of inheritance in favour of male heirs.72  
 
Looking at the political context, the political system in Serbia faces many challenges. The ruling Serbian 
Progressive Party dominates the political scene with a strong majority in the Parliament and Government. 
Various global indicators for democracy, freedom and good governance indicate an unfavourable situation 
regarding the democratic performance and rule of law. Despite the deficiencies in democracy, there are 
positive trends regarding the political participation of women. Due to legal quotas, which were increased to 
 
66 World Economic Forum, 2023, Global Gender Gap Report 
67 Ibid 
68 Gender SMART diagnostic tool 
69 World Economic Forum, 2020, Global Gender Gap Report 
70 SORS, Labour Force Survey 2020, p 16-17 
71 The Law on the Procedure of Registration in the Real Estate and Utility Cadastre (Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia, No 
41/18, 95/18 and 31/2019) states that any property acquired during marriage shall automatically be registered by the public 
notary as shared property, unless “a statement is submitted by both spouses to the effect that a particular property is not shared, 
i.e., that it is the separate property of one of the spouses, or if the spouses acquire co-ownership based on a supporting document 
on the basis of which their respective shares are registered” (Article 7).  
72 Independent report of Network SOS Vojvodina on implementation of priority recommendations from the CEDAW Committee 
to the Republic of Serbia, for period 2019-2021.

=== PAGE 150 ===
22 
 
40% in 2020, women presently represent 39.2% of members in the National Assembly.73 The increased 
participation is also evident in the Government of the Republic of Serbia, with 10 women among 23 ministers 
(43.5%).74 However, various studies and reports indicate that women’s participation in political decision-
making is still below satisfactory and women are still reluctant to enter politics because of constraints 
associated with corruption, gender-based discrimination, harassment, and violence in the public sphere.  
There are structural gender inequalities manifested in all areas of public and private life such as: lower 
participation in political power and decision-making, lower labour market participation and less favourable 
characteristics of employment, disproportionate responsibilities in household and family care, which consume 
a lot of women’s time and resources. These structural inequalities are rooted in unequal power, underpinned 
by the patriarchal culture, and often maintained through gender-based discrimination and violence against 
women. 
Barriers to women’s access to entrepreneurship and financial services 
Access to finance is lower for women as compared to men. According to the most recent Global Findex 
Database (2017), the percentage of adults with a bank account in Serbia is 71.0%. Out of those without a 
bank account, 16% are women75.  
 
According to the results of the GEFF gender baseline assessment, there are no statistically significant 
differences between women-led and other businesses in perception of obstacles to business sustainability 
and development, except in two aspects: shortage of labour force and lack of adequate skills in the workforce. 
Women-led businesses much less frequently point to these two obstacles than other businesses.  
 
Furthermore, there are certain differences between women-led and other businesses in attributing the 
importance of different criteria. Respondents from women-led businesses give more importance to two 
criteria: (i) absence of requirement for immovable property as collateral and (ii) convenient location of the 
financial institution offices. Other criteria are less important for them than for other business entities. This 
highlights the challenges faced by women in terms of weaker property of assets among women and gender 
specific patterns of mobility, which includes more reliance on public transport. These structural factors 
influence the assessment of financial institutions by women entrepreneurs. There is also a difference between 
women-led and other enterprises regarding the source of the most recent loan. While other enterprises used 
loans from banks in 78% of cases, women-led enterprises used banks as the source of the loan in 62% of 
cases. A significant difference appears in using other sources of financing – as this was reported by 31% of 
women-led enterprises but only in 4% of other businesses. Among other sources, respondents indicated 
mainly their own personal capital and support from the state. In the survey, a woman indicated that the 
business ecosystem lacks adequate support, not only in terms of finance, but also in terms of knowledge and 
technical expertise regarding areas of innovative technologies. 
 
The findings Indicate the relatively unfavourable position of women’s businesses in general and in 
regards to the transition to green businesses specifically. Women on average assess their knowledge 
about climate change and its consequences somewhat lower than men; women attribute more importance 
to the absence of requirements for immovable property as collateral and to convenience of location of the 
financial institution. Both aspects are closely related to structural position of women manifested in lower 
ownership of assets and less autonomy in mobility, with higher reliance on public transport, women-led 
enterprises used more financing from other financial institutions than banks, etc. 
 
As per the previous assessments, it shows that women score lower on knowledge related to climate change, 
implying that there is a need to increase knowledge on climate change among women managing businesses. 
Some areas of opportunities include incorporating a gender sensitive approach, integrating gender-specific 
reporting requirements for PFIs as part of the Policy Statement, develop gender-based criteria for fund 
allocation (for example certain minimum percentage of the GEFF Facility for the purpose of financing women-
led/owned businesses), promote women’s investment in green technologies through dedicated technical 
 
73  National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia, http://www.parlament.gov.rs/national-assembly/national-assembly-in-
numbers/gender-structure.1745.html  
74 Government of the Republic of Serbia, https://www.srbija.gov.rs/sastav/en/10/members-of-government.php  
75 https://globalfindex.worldbank.org/

=== PAGE 151 ===
23 
 
assistance for women-led/owned businesses. For example, by offering free of charge energy audits for 
women-led/owned businesses in order for them to better understand resource savings and pay back periods 
of eligible GEFF technologies, work on awareness raising on gender aspects and gender specific impacts of 
financial instruments among all sub-borrowers, increasing their capacities to use new technologies in gender 
responsive ways, etc. 
GEFF Serbia was launched in 2019 to integrate GET objectives through leasing companies in Serbia. 
Recognizing the importance of gender-inclusive programming, in 2021, gender mainstreaming and gender 
activities were introduced in the GEFF Serbia Leasing Facility. Conducted as a part of GEFF Morocco, the 
insights of the baseline analysis relies on secondary research, assessment of 80 sub-borrowers / vendors 
who filled an online survey and qualitative research was implemented through individual interviews with 
representatives of successful women-owned/led businesses who were GEFF beneficiaries.  
Female participation in the labour force 
In terms of employment, while women make up the majority (66%) of employees in the financial sector,76 
they occupy a small proportion of leadership and management positions. Among members of executive 
boards of banks, women make up 34% of executive board members, and among bank CEOs–- 29%. Their 
participation in the top management positions of leasing companies is even lower – their representation 
among executive board members is 24% and among CEOs is 25%.77 Looking at entrepreneurship, a 
baseline study in Serbia78 revealed that women make up 26% of the total number of entrepreneurs (persons 
who are (co)owners and key managers of businesses in all legal forms). 
 
Moreover, gender differences are also very pronounced in access to transport and mobility patterns, creating 
different opportunities for women and men to access jobs and other important institutions and services.  
 
Key indicators: Gender gaps in the economy and financial sector 
 
 
12.  Tajikistan 
As per World Economic Forum’s overall gender gap rankings, Tajikistan ranks 111 out of 146 countries79, 
with a score of 0.672 ranking the lowest among the Central Asian countries surveyed. Furthermore, Tajikistan 
demonstrates low parity in terms of economic participation and opportunity as well as political empowerment. 
In Parliament, only 19 per cent (12 of 63) legislators are women and only two parliamentary committees and 
only one ministry are headed by women80. When looking at leadership in the workplace, only 6.6% of firms 
 
76 SORS, Labour Force Survey 2020: 32. 
77 Source: National Bank of the Republic of Serbia, September 2021, list of banks available at https://nbs.rs/en/finansijske-
institucije/banke/spisak-banaka/index.html, 
list 
of 
leasing 
companies 
available 
at 
https://nbs.rs/en/finansijske-
institucije/lizing/davaoci-fl/ 
78 https://www.secons.net/publications.php?p=87 
79 World Economic Forum, 2023, Global Gender Gap Report 
80 UN Women, https://eca.unwomen.org/en/where-we-
are/tajikistan#:~:text=Tajik%20parents%20often%20put%20more,by%20a%20culture%20of%20silence.

=== PAGE 152 ===
24 
 
in Tajikistan have female top managers and 6.2% of firms have female majority ownership81. Women are 
usually underrepresented across business categories and women-led businesses have fewer employees and 
lower turnover82. 
As per the World Bank’s Women, Business, and Law index, Tajikistan has improved its laws and 
regulations affecting women’s economic opportunities. With the introduction of the new Labour Code in 2016, 
women and men could work the same night hours. Furthermore, unlike in Uzbekistan or Kazakhstan, women 
are a protected category under the law when it comes to access to credit, which provides more flexibility for 
those women who want to start and operate their own business. In addition, unlike other countries in the 
region, government in Tajikistan is fully responsible for administration of maternity leave benefits in the private 
sector, which allows to remove the financial burden from employers and reduce their disincentive to hire 
women of childbearing age. However, there is no paid paternity leave or paid parental leave available for 
fathers, which could allow men to share some of the childcaring responsibilities releasing women’s ability to 
return to the labour market sooner, and there is a lower retirement age for women, which exacerbates gender 
gap in pension benefits.83 While there have been improvements with regards to access to credit in Tajikistan, 
women entrepreneurs and farmers still face constraints and challenges when applying for loans. Prevailing 
social and cultural norms combined with lack of ownership of assets and property and high costs of borrowing 
constitute the main barriers assessing loans, particular for rural women84.Therefore, there are still remaining 
challenges and regulatory barriers for women in Tajikistan.  
Barriers to women’s access to entrepreneurship and financial services 
There are many challenges associated with women’s access to finance and entrepreneurship. Being a 
traditional society, societal norms and values play an important role in women’s access to economic 
opportunities but also in their ability to make financial decisions, particularly in the rural areas. Women also 
carry disproportionate household responsibilities and unpaid care work, thereby limiting their access to 
opportunities.  
According to the findings of the GEFF Baseline Assessment, in terms of access to financial services, 
collateral requirements do not take women’s challenges in accessing real estate, providing other assets as 
collateral or personal guarantees into account. Furthermore, most financial institutions do not have a specific 
marketing approach in place to attract women clients. Therefore, women are at a disadvantage when 
accessing finance due to lack of sufficient guarantees or collateral and limited access to land and assets as 
well as to information and non-financial services.  
Female participation in the labour force 
In terms of labour force participation, 38.4% of the total labour force in Tajikistan is female (2023) 85, 
representing a 20% gender gap in the labour force participation86. One contributing factor could be the 
country’s Labour Code, prohibiting women’s employment in underground jobs, difficult jobs, jobs in harmful 
conditions, or jobs linked to manual lifting and moving of heavy loads87. Another factor could be increased 
male labour migration: with their husbands abroad and sending remittances payments, women have been 
increasingly called upon to become full-time homemakers and not look for employment, given cultural 
preferences for mothers with children to not seek work for income outside of their homes88. Additionally, 
women have lower earnings than men, primarily because of disproportionate representation of women in low-
paid sectors, such as agriculture. 
 
81 World Economic Forum, 2023, Global Gender Gap Report 
82 EBRD Women in Business assessment, 2016 
83 World Bank, Tajikistan country gender assessment 
84 Gender Baseline Assessment under GEFF Tajikistan 
85 World Bank indicators database, 2023 
86 ILO Stat 2023 
87 World Bank, Tajikistan country gender assessment 
88 Ibid.

=== PAGE 153 ===
25 
 
Key indicators: Gender gaps in the economy and financial sector 
 
13. Uzbekistan 
Gender equality has become a priority direction of the new administration in Uzbekistan. This is 
evidenced by recent resolutions adopted by the state expanding and strengthening the rights and 
opportunities of women, increasing their role in all processes of public administration, economy and society 
as a whole. An example of this can be the Strategy for achieving gender equality in Uzbekistan until 
2030, the Law on Guarantees of Equal Rights and Opportunities for Women and Men, and the ratification of 
the ILO Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. 
Commercial banks need to have a better understanding of the existing market potential as well as 
constraints being faced by women-owned or women-led SMEs at a country and regional level. This 
understanding is crucial to design strategies and offerings that will allow them to better cater to the unmet 
financing needs of women entrepreneurs, and thus profit from the commercial opportunities this demographic 
presents.  
Banks in the country need guidance and support to develop their gender agenda, including the development 
of gender adjusted products taking into consideration the specific role of women assigned to them traditionally 
and culturally. It would be beneficial for all PFIs in Uzbekistan to align their gender agenda, HR policy and 
sex disaggregated data collection capacities.   
Barriers to women’s access to entrepreneurship and financial services 
There are many challenges related to access to finance and entrepreneurship. While Uzbek SMEs 
struggle with the access to finance overall, the access to finance by women-led businesses are even more 
challenging. One of the biggest barriers for increased access to finance for women-led businesses is the lack 
of reliable data disaggregated by gender. This further hinders the opportunity to make the business case to 
financial institutions on supporting women-owned or women-led enterprises.   
Gender inequalities influence women’s ability to access finance and their financial inclusion outcomes. 
Women-led businesses tend to be smaller than those led by men. This is due to multiple reasons, such as, 
the legislation that limits women’s ability to accumulate assets and mobilise collateral, social perceptions 
about female entrepreneurship, as well as care and other responsibilities.  
There is a major financing gap of USD 547 million for women-led SMEs in Uzbekistan89. Most female 
entrepreneurs are involved in small-scale production of consumer goods, retail trade, and professional 
services such as education and healthcare. There is also a gap in terms of female ownership. Only 18% of 
women own land in Uzbekistan, and only 15% of the SME owners are women90. Additionally, in 2019, only 
11% of firms in Uzbekistan has majority female ownership91.  
Furthermore, women face challenges with respect to access to bank accounts. There is a 10% gender gap 
in accessing to bank accounts with female access especially low at 39%. There is also a 6% gender gap in 
borrowing rates with rates far below regional averages for both women and men92.  
 
89 Gender SMART diagnostic tool 
90 Ibid 
91 Ibid 
92 Ibid

=== PAGE 154 ===
26 
 
Female participation in the labour force 
In terms of employment, around half of Uzbek women participate in the labour force, and there is a significant 
gender gap of 33% in labour force participation in 202393. Women employment is concentrated in certain 
industries, for instance women make up 76.6% of total health care sector employees94. Additionally, the 
prevalence of women is higher in information employment as opposed to men. While there is a declining 
gender gap in employment, the rates are significantly higher than the regional average. The lower share of 
economic activity of women is because even if they are fully employed, they remain responsible for 
housekeeping and childcare. Uzbek women spend 22% of their time doing housework and childcare, which 
is unpaid; men, on the other hand, spend 9% of their time on household chores95. The heavy burden of 
housework hinders career development for Uzbek women. According to an ILO study, 80% of the population 
of Uzbekistan prefers that the man in the family earns money, and the woman takes care of household chores 
and children. This indicates gender inequality both in society and in the country’s labour market. Despite 
these difficulties, ambitious women start their own business with the support of their families, although the 
share of women-led businesses remain low in overall number of SMEs.   
Key indicators: Gender gaps in the economy and financial sector 
 
 
93 ILO Stat, 2023 
94 Gender SMART diagnostic tool 
95 Ibid

=== PAGE 155 ===
27 
 
II. 
Gender Action Plan  
 
Climate change risks are projected to disproportionately affect women due to entrenched gender inequalities 
in asset ownership and in access to information, jobs, finance, and markets. To tackle these pertinent gender 
inequalities, EBRD proposes to integrate gender activities in the Programme. 
The proposed gender activities described below, are informed by EBRD’s unique private-sector approach 
and experience working with the GCF on previous GCF-EBRD programmes such as the Green Cities Facility 
(Funded Activity FP086) and the Green Economic Financing Facilities programme (“GEFF Programme”, 
Funded Activity FP025).  
In line with EBRD’s Gender SMART methodology96, gender activities will be integrated into investments 
through concessional loans and capacity building of end beneficiaries to increase demand for participating 
financial institutions’ (“PFIs”) green finance portfolio. The main objective is to promote equitable access to 
climate financing for commercial and residential use by both women and men final beneficiaries, ensuring 
that potential women and men borrowers are aware and knowledgeable about the benefits of investing in 
climate technologies. The purpose is to make the financial sector and business environment more conducive 
for women’s entrepreneurship and women’s role in the green economy, by tackling the demand and supply 
side challenges. 
Taken together, gender activities will promote gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls, 
hence contributing to the achievement of SDG 5. 
 
• 
Activities enabling climate-compatible financial systems and benefitting end beneficiaries 
Among the main demand side barriers for women to access climate finance is limited awareness of the 
benefits of adaptation and mitigation measures for their homes and businesses, limited ability to present 
bankable projects, and the perception that financial products do not meet their specific needs. Under this 
Programme, building on the experience under the GEFF Programme, EBRD will support PFIs in the 
development of green finance portfolio, including gender considerations by providing capacity building to end 
beneficiaries. This is aimed at closing the gender green skills and information gap to enhance the female end 
beneficiaries resilience to specific impacts of climate change.  
• 
Investment mechanisms for unlocking climate capital 
EBRD aims to create climate responsive PFIs that are also gender responsive, and thereby deliver sustained 
transformation of the financial sector. Under this Programme, the EBRD will support women’s increased 
access to green finance by incentivizing PFIs through concessional financing, to ensure women are well 
represented among the sub-borrowers.  
 
The EBRD’s approach to promoting gender equality into the programme is aligned with the strategic goals of 
the Green Climate Fund’s updated Gender Policy and Action Plan and with the EBRD’s Strategy for the 
Promotion of Gender Equality (2021-2025), by focusing on “gender-responsive climate action programmes 
and projects that benefit women and men.” The gender activities specified under this programme will be 
overseen and led by the EBRD’s dedicated expert team working on Gender & Economic Inclusion. The EBRD 
has plenty of experience in mainstreaming gender considerations into its investment programmes, including 
in mainstreaming gender into the GEFF and other climate focused programmes over the past 5 years. 
Building on the institutional knowledge, specialised EBRD Gender expert(s) will be leading the 
implementation and monitoring of the GAP across the 13 GFS programme countries. Gaps may arise due to 
the limited availability of resources to fund gender expert(s). The aim is to address these by applying for 
additional donor funds from other resources. 
 
96 EBRD’s Gender SMART process represents a standardised approach to systematically address gender gaps in 
investments.  As outlined in its Strategy for the Promotion of Gender Equality (SPGE) (p.41), it is supports banking 
teams to: (1) Introduce gender considerations early in the project design stages; (2) Creates a standardised and 
systematic approach to addressing gender in projects; and (3)Reflects appropriate incentives attached to gender 
mainstreaming into investments.

=== PAGE 156 ===
28 
 
The following indicative Gender Action Plan summarises gender focused activities, under both Component 1 
and Component 2 of the Programme, covering all the countries of the Programme, based on an indicative 
budget allocation of 5% of Output 1.1 budget (approx. USD 50K GCF funds of ca. total USD 1 million), subject 
to the availability of GCF funding and additional donor co-financing. Gender activities will be developed and 
will be monitored at the project level.

=== PAGE 157 ===
29 
 
 
Component 
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities 
Costs 
Impact Statement:  Enhance equality of opportunity in the green economy by narrowing the green skills and green finance gap. 
Outcome 1: Activities enabling climate-compatible financial systems and benefitting end beneficiaries. Train end beneficiaries to ensure that they are aware 
of the benefits of investing in green technologies. 
Output 1.1: Increased capacities 
of financial institutions to develop 
and monitor portfolios of 
investments for climate mitigation 
and adaptation projects, including 
gender considerations 
Activity 1.1.1: Supporting financial 
institutions in the development of 
portfolios of investments for 
climate mitigation and adaptation 
projects, including gender 
considerations 
• 
Sub-activity: Train end 
beneficiaries to close 
green skills gaps and 
increase demand for 
PFI’s green finance 
portfolio, including 
gender considerations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Train end beneficiaries (including 
women) to increase their skills 
and knowledge about the benefits 
of climate finance, investments, 
and technologies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of people (share of 
women) enhancing their green 
skills as a result of trainings: 
minimum 400 (of which 50% 
women) across 13 countries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2030 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PFI and 
Consultant 
reporting to 
EBRD 
 
 
 
 
 
financed 
through 
the 
allocation 
of 5% of 
the budget 
under 
Output 1.1

=== PAGE 158 ===
30 
 
Component 
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities 
Costs 
Outcome 2: Investment mechanisms for unlocking climate capital. Promoting equitable access to climate financing for commercial and residential use to 
both women end beneficiaries. 
Output 2.1 Increased investments 
in climate mitigation technologies 
and approaches through 
concessional finance  
• 
Activity 2.1.2 Promoting 
women’s access to 
climate mitigation 
finance   
Output 2.2: Increased 
investments in climate adaptation 
technologies and approaches 
through concessional finance  
• 
Activity 2.2.2 Promoting 
women’s access to 
climate adaptation 
finance  
 
Channelling partial use of 
proceeds to women beneficiaries 
as actors of change both as users 
and solution providers through 
concessional loans to promote 
their access to climate mitigation 
and adaptation finance 
 
2.1.2 Volume of green loans 
(focused on climate mitigation) 
provided under Component 2 
disbursed to women to represent 
at least x% on Programme level 
(% to vary based on estimated 
baseline at PFI level) 
2.2.2 Volume of green loans 
(focused on climate adaptation) 
provided under Component 2 
disbursed to women to represent 
at least x% on Programme level  
(% to vary based on estimated 
baseline at PFI level) 
2030 
PFI and 
Consultant 
reporting to 
EBRD 
Subject to 
the 
availability 
of GCF 
funding 
and 
additional 
donor co-
financing

=== PAGE 159 ===
OFFICIAL USE
OFFICIAL USE
Implementation arrangements 
The GAP will be implemented through externally sourced gender experts, within Facility 
Consultant teams of technical country experts, hired and supervised by EBRD Gender 
expert(s). GFS Programme Consultants and PFIs will provide regular reporting on GFS 
programme indicators to the EBRD. On the basis of the reported data, the EBRD is 
responsible to monitor the overall progress of the GAP. 
Indicative budget for the Gender Action Plan 
The activities under the Gender Action Plan, over the course of the entire programme across 
all 13 target countries, are based on an indicative budget allocation of 5% of Output 1.1 budget 
More precisely, sub-activity 1.1.1.4 will cost approx. USD 1 million and be financed through 
USD 50K GCF funds, subject to the availability of GCF funding and additional donor co-
financing. Budget for Activity 2.1.2 and 2.2.2 is fully subject to availability of additional donor 
co-financing. 
__________
