=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: Sunny Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
creationDate: D:20161124143703+09'00'
modDate: D:20161124175355+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum IX 
Funding proposal package for FP030 
GCF/B.15/13/Add.03 
24 November 2016 
Meeting of the Board 
13 – 15 December 2016 
Apia, Samoa 
Provisional agenda item 16(e) 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three parts: 
a) A funding proposal summary titled “Catalyzing private investment in sustainable
energy in Argentina – Part 1” submitted by Inter-American Development Bank;
b) No-objection letters issued by the national designated authorities or focal points; and
c)
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national 
designated authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive 
Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled “Catalyzing private 
investment in sustainable energy in Argentina – Part 1” submitted by Inter-American 
Development Bank is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board 
Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, 
legally privileged or commercially sensitive information of the entity.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.15/13/Add.03 
Page b 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal summary submitted by the accredited entity       
 1 
No-objection letters issued by the national designated authorities or focal points 
   46 
 Environmental and social report(s) disclosure       
 48

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme Title: Catalyzing private investment in sustainable energy in 
Argentina – Part 1  
Country/Region: Argentina 
Accredited Entity: Inter-American Development Bank 
Date of Submission: September 26th, 2016

=== PAGE 4 ===
Contents 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
Section C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
Section F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
Section G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
Section H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template 

Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to other project documents
such as project appraisal document.

The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50.
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“[FP]-[Agency Short Name]-[Date]-[Serial Number]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 45 A 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / programme title 
Catalyzing private investment in sustainable energy in 
Argentina – Part 1 
A.1.2. Project or programme 
Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region    
Argentina 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies) 
National Directorate of Programs with International Credit 
Organizations (DNPOIC) 
A.1.5. Accredited entity 
Inter-American Development Bank 
A.1.5.a. Access modality 
☐  Direct 
☒  International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary 
Executing Entity: Inter-American Development Bank and 
Inter-American Investment Corporation 
Beneficiary: various renewable energy projects 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD) 
☐  Micro (≤10) 
☐  Medium (50<x≤250) 
☐  Small (10<x≤50) 
x Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus 
☒  Mitigation 
☐  Adaptation ☐  Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission 
September 26th, 2016 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details 
Contact person, position 
Gian Franco Carassale – Lead Investment Officer 
Alfredo Idiarte - Advisory Services Team 
Gloria Visconti – Climate Change Lead Specialist 
Organization 
Inter-American Development Bank 
Email address 
gianfrancoc@iadb.org 
aidiarte@iadb.org 
gloriav@iadb.org 
Telephone number 
+1 202 623 3360 
Mailing address 
1300 New York Ave NW, Washington DC 20577 
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply) 
Reduced emissions from: 
☒ 
Energy access and power generation 
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.) 
☐ 
Low emission transport 
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.) 
☐ 
Buildings, cities and industries and appliances 
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.) 
☐ 
Forestry and land use 
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.) 
Increased resilience of: 
☐ 
Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.) 
☐ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.)

=== PAGE 6 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 2 OF 45 A 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.) 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
☐ 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words) 
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objectives and primary measurable 
benefits (see investment criteria in section E). The detailed description can be elaborated in section C. 
Argentina has embarked on an ambitious transformation process. Enhancing the efficiency and sustainability of its energy 
sector, which has struggled in the last few years as a result of previous policies, is key to help restore energy security, 
competitiveness, fiscal balances, and mitigate its environmental impact (as 43% of Argentina’s GHG emissions in 2012 
came from this sector, and emissions from the power sector increased by 64% in the last decade). One of the pillars of 
Argentina’s new strategy for the sector lays on aggressively supporting and promoting development of renewable 
energies, to both tap on their economic benefits and diversify away from its increasing reliance on fossil fuels. The 
objective of the hereby proposed program (the “Program”) is to help the Government of Argentina achieve the ambitious 
renewable energy penetration goals established by the recent Renewable Energy Law 27.191, by contributing to i) the 
successful financial close of the first few projects to be built as part of the new regulatory regime, and ii) the development 
of capacities of relevant public and private entities. Cognizant of the difficulties that securing long-term project debt posed 
in previous renewable energy public tenders, the Inter-American Development Bank Group (IDBG) is taking an active 
role in helping mobilize this type of financing so that projects can access adequately termed debt, with sufficiently long 
tenors, to ensure financial viability and allow them to go forward. With this, IDBG, which includes the Inter-American 
Development Bank (IDB), the Inter-American Investment Corporation (IIC), and the Multilateral Investment Fund (MIF), 
expects to contribute to the long-term development of renewables in various ways. First, by supporting early movers, 
helping demonstrate financial and technical viability of these projects under the rapidly evolving regulatory and investment 
conditions in Argentina, and that non/limited recourse financing can be properly structured for these projects. Second, by 
helping develop local capacities and resources (e.g. knowledge, strategies) to carry these projects and the broader 
renewable energy program forward. There has been little experience in Argentina with renewables and, more broadly, 
with project finance in the last fifteen years, so the first few projects will provide significant learning value for locals working 
in this sector (e.g. engineers, construction workers, lawyers, financial industry, regulators, policy planners). The Program 
will indirectly support the early stage development of some supply chains associated to the renewable energy industry, 
and enhance the basis for further replication and scale up. Projects developed under this Program will test the new 
regulatory environment, and help generate lessons for adjustments that may be required in the future. Finally, through 
the expected demonstration effect IDBG expects to help develop the insight and confidence required to crowd in other 
investors and lenders in subsequent tenders. 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone 
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) 
The Program is expected to be approved within 120 days from the 
IDB signature of the AMA.  
Expected financial close (if applicable) 
Most projects are expected to close by Q1 2018, based on timeline 
requirements of the first RenovAr1 tenders. 
Estimated implementation start and end date 
Start: 01/01/2017 
End:  31/12/2020 
Project/programme lifespan 
22 years 
1 RenovAr is the name of the new Argentine national public tendering program for renewable energy launched to help 
achieve the objectives of Law 27.191.

=== PAGE 7 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 45 B 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme 
Please provide a description of how the choice of financial instrument(s) will overcome barriers and achieve project 
objectives, and leverage public and/or private finance 
The use of GCF investment resources will be aimed at helping structure and complete the long-term debt packages 
required for projects to be financially viable at competitive prices. For this, GCF resources will be made available in 
two modalities: 
1) long-term project debt, matching the tenor that the IDBG will provide.
2) refinancing guarantees, which would help commercial lenders and commercial debt investors extend the tenor
they can offer to those required by projects, otherwise generally restricted to 5-7 years. The guarantees would allow 
sponsors to accept financing that give these lenders the possibility to exercise early repayment options, by 
guaranteeing the refinancing of such loans. This instrument thus has the potential to crowd in commercial lenders 
and investors that would otherwise not be able to extend suitable terms and participate in the financing to deliver the 
volumes needed by the ambitious targets of the RenovAr public tendering program. 
Through these two GCF instruments, IDBG expects to help leverage additional, adequately termed debt and timely 
close projects, to reduce the incidence of drop outs (awarded projects that are never built) that has been so high in 
previous tenders (just about 15% of the awarded capacity built in the previous renewable energy tender, in 2010). 
The proposed USD 130M from the GCF would help mobilize investment for a total of about USD 650M, and support 
about 400 MW, which is equivalent to about 40%2 of the capacity originally targeted by the first tender under 
RenovAr. If achieved, the GCF Program will have helped provide a meaningful contribution to the success of this 
government initiative with long-term demonstration and capacity building effects. This would help pave the way for 
the significant replication and scale-up required in the mid and long term to achieve Law 27.191’s ambitious 
renewable penetration goals.  
Component 
Sub-
component (if 
applicable) 
Amount 
(for entire 
project) 
Currency 
Amount 
(for entire 
project) 
Local 
currency 
GCF 
funding 
amount 
Currency of 
disbursement 
to recipient 
Component 
1. 
Financing 
of 
renewable 
energy 
power 
projects 
Sub-
component 
1.1. Financing 
of renewable 
energy power 
projects 
650 
million 
USD ($) 
130 million 
USD 
USD 
Component 
2. 
Enhancing 
policy, 
planning, 
regulation 
and project 
financing 
capacity 
Sub-
component 2.1 
Support for 
sustainable 
development, 
operation and 
financing of  
renewable 
energy 
projects 
1.0 
million 
USD ($) 
1.0 million 
USD 
USD 
2 While this % is referred to the capacity tendered under the first RenovAr tender, GCF’s support will likely me spread 
throughout the first few tenders, to optimize its value add.

=== PAGE 8 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 45 B 
Sub-
component 2.2 
Support for 
Renewable 
Energy Center 
0.5 
million 
USD ($) 
0.5 million 
USD 
USD 
Sub-
component 2.3 
Support for 
Solar Energy 
Development 
0.9 
million 
USD ($) 
0.9 million 
USD 
USD 
Sub-
component 2.4 
Support for 
Development 
of other 
Renewable 
Energy 
Technologies 
0.6 
million 
USD ($) 
0.6 million 
USD 
USD 
Total project financing 
653 
million 
USD ($) 
133 million 
USD 
B.2. Project Financing Information 
Financial Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor3 
Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing 
(a) = (b) + (c) 
653 
million USD 
($) 
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient 
(i) Senior Loans 
(ii) Guarantees 
(iii) Grants 
130 (combined 
total for loans 
and guarantees) 
3 
million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) 
Loans: as defined in 
the term sheet. 
Guarantees: as 
defined in the term 
sheet. 
N/A 
As defined in the 
term sheet. 
As defined in the 
term sheet. 
N/A 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi) 
133 
million USD 
($) 
(c) Co-
financing to 
recipient 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Name of 
Institution 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Seni
ority 
3 Given the duration of the investment period and the maximum loan tenor to the Underlying Projects, the program 
duration will be 22 years.

=== PAGE 9 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 45 B 
Senior 
Loans 
Senior 
Loans 
Equity 
1684 
325 
125 
195 
million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) 
IDB 
IIC 
B-lenders and 
co-lenders to 
be mobilized 
by IDBG and 
project 
sponsors 
Project 
sponsors 
TBD 
based on 
market 
and 
project 
condition
s 
Likely 
similar or 
shorter 
than 
IDBG’s 
tenor. 
N/A 
TBD based on market 
and project conditions 
TBD based on market 
conditions. Will vary by 
project and lender.  
Pari 
passu 
with 
GCF 
senio
r 
junior 
Lead financing institution: IDB and IIC 
How market price or expected commercial rate return was (non-concessional) determined? 
Project sponsors define required rates of return based on multiple factors, including their business strategy in a 
particular market, their perception of the risk associated with the project and the investment environment, and the 
risk/reward parameters they manage (based on alternative investment opportunities in similar projects in other 
countries, for example). In terms of energy prices, for projects participating in the RenovAr public tender, such tender 
acts as a reverse auction with PPAs being awarded to the most competitive offers, with price being the most determinant 
factor for such competitiveness among technically acceptable proposals.  
In the case of projects agreed and developed between private parties (i.e. without a public tendering process), the 
contractual price is determined through negotiation, based on aspects such as project cost structures, the cost of 
alternative sources of power, and the additional benefits and disadvantages associated to the project. 
Please provide an overview of the size of total banking assets, debt capital markets and equity capital markets which 
could be tapped to finance the proposed project/programme. 
Access to international financial markets has greatly hampered the growth of Argentine companies, which face 
extremely high costs. The National Government’s international debt had been in selective default from 2012-2015, when 
currency restrictions were in place. Today, many financial institutions continue to put limitations on investment in 
Argentina. Based on IDBG’s consultations with other lenders during the months leading to submission of this proposal, 
multilateral agencies looked likely to only be able to provide under USD 500 million total co-financing for the first 
RenovAr tender, with another USD 100-150 million coming from the European DFIs (in comparison with about USD 1-
1.2 Billion of long-term debt financing required). Export credit agencies have shown very limited appetite as well. 
Commercial banks and vendors are likely to be only available for small tickets (up to 30 million) and at very short tenors 
of 5-7 years. 
4 Intended target at time of proposal submission. This value could change depending on final selection of projects or 
evolution of macroeconomic conditions in Argentina. 
5 IDEM previous footnote.

=== PAGE 10 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 45 B 
Please provide an overview of market rates (i.e. 1-year T-Bill, 5-year government bond, 5-year corporate bond (specify 
credit rating) and 5-year syndicate loan. 
As discussed above, Argentina has only recently returned to the international capital markets. In April, it placed USD 
16.5 billion in debt: USD 2.75 billion worth of 3-year notes at 6.25 percent, USD 4.5 billion of 5-year bills at 6.87 percent, 
USD 6.5 billion of 10-year bonds at 7.5 percent and USD 2.75 billion of 30-year bonds at 7.62 percent. The five-year 
bonds are currently yielding 5.02% or the equivalent of L+381. In July, Argentina returned to the bond market, placing a 
USD 1 billion 12-year bond yielding 6.625% and a USD 1.75 billion 20-year bond yielding 7.125%. To date, only top tier 
Argentine corporates have had access to international markets. YPF, Argentina’s main oil company, issued USD 1.0 
billion in 5 year bonds in March 2016, yielding 8.5% (B-). The company is currently in the market with a CHF 200 million 
issuance in the Swiss market. All of the syndicated loans recently issued in Argentina have been issued under a 
multilateral umbrella and have all been corporate obligations. The IFC issued a 5-year A/B loan to Axion Energy in May 
2016, priced at L+500.

=== PAGE 11 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 45 
Please fill out applicable sub-sections and provide additional information if necessary, as these requirements may vary 
depending on the nature of the project / programme. 
C.1. Strategic Context 
Please describe relevant national, sub-national, regional, global, political, and/or economic factors that help to 
contextualize the proposal, including existing national and sector policies and strategies. 
In spite of various efforts during the last decade to promote renewable energy development in Argentina, renewables 
penetration remains very limited at 1.9% of total electricity supplied (or only 0.6% if small hydro is not considered) and 
2.6% of installed capacity (or only 1% without small hydro) at the end of 2014. This is the result of inadequate design of 
previous initiatives and the complex investment environment in Argentina since the 2001-2002 financial crisis, particularly 
in the energy sector and for long-term investments intensive in upfront CAPEX, as is the case for renewable energy 
projects. 
Over the last fifteen years, generation capacity in Argentina has grown steadily and mostly based on fossil fuel-based 
thermal generation. Such source has increased its participation from 42% in 2001 to 63% in 2015. The graph below 
shows how the increase in energy supplied in that period has almost been completely covered with thermal energy, with 
the aggregate of other sources remaining relatively stable at virtually the same level6. 
Source: CAMMESA 
The grid has therefore experienced a significant “carbonization” process, with GHG emissions from the national 
interconnected power system (SADI) increasing by 64% in the last decade, from about 28.4 Mton CO2e in 2006 to 46.5 
Mton CO2e in 2015, as shown in the graph below. This is an average annual growth rate of over 7% of GHG emissions, 
which more than doubles the 3.4% average increase in energy consumption. 
6 Hydro energy did not almost change: it was 41,507 GWh in 2001 and 41,464 GWh in 2015.

=== PAGE 12 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 45 
 
 
 
Increase in GHG emissions from the power system. Source: Comisión Nacional de Energía Atómica 
 
More generally, the Argentine power market is characterized by the unbundling and significant level of privatization of 
generation, transmission and distribution services that took place in the 1990s. While this model achieved certain 
efficiencies at the beginning, its initial operational model has changed over the years, following a series of measures 
implemented in the aftermath of the 2001-2002 crisis. Since then, policies implemented have resulted in a significant 
incidence of subsidies and reliance on transfers from the national government to sustain the operation of the sector. The 
combined effect of delinking power prices from costs and the significant escalation of generation costs over the last few 
years7 as a result of -among other factors- the increasing incidence in the generation mix of expensive imported fossil 
fuels8, has hindered the sustainability of the sector and has been putting a burden on fiscal accounts as government 
subsidies and transfers increased to unprecedented levels. The graph below shows the continued increase over the last 
decade in generation cost (as reflected by monomial spot prices blue line) and their increasing gap relative with monomial 
prices for distributors, resulting in a significant tariff deficit in the system. 
 
 
 
Source: Ministry of Energy and Mining 
 
In turn, a growing reliance on imported fossil fuels to overcome growing demand and the domestic production deficit have 
resulted from insufficient investment in oil and gas upstream development caused by some of the policies (distorting 
prices and incentives for investment) introduced in the aftermath of the 2001-2002 crisis. The increase in the government 
                                                     
7 Average power cost increased 19% from 2014 to 2015. 
8 From 2014 to 2015, fuel oil and diesel consumption increased by 14% and 24% respectively.

=== PAGE 13 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 45 
 
 
subsidies required has resulted in GoA spending over USD 8 Billion9 in subsidies to sustain the power sector in 2014 (or 
approximately 1.5% of GDP10). In addition, fossil fuel imports have been significantly hurting the trade balance in the last 
few years, with a trade deficit in the energy sector of the same order of magnitude as the power sector fiscal deficit. The 
graph below shows how Argentina has changed from being a net energy exporter to a new importer over the last five 
years. 
 
 
Source: Ministry of Energy and Mining 
 
Renewable energy technologies can help address several of these economic and environmental challenges 
simultaneously. On the economic side, renewables have the potential to reduce the cost of power supply as they displace 
thermal–based generation currently relying on imported fuel (which would also help mitigate the recurring impact on the 
trade balance). The marked decreases in CAPEX costs for wind and –especially- solar PV technology in recent years, 
combined with the outstanding resource quality in vast areas of Argentina, has the potential to result in very competitive 
generation costs for renewable energy. At the global level, renewables have in recent years been continuously setting 
new price records, with some of the most recent public auctions in Latin America reaching prices as low as USD 35/MWh 
(Mexico, 2016). This is lower than the average cost of thermal generation in Argentina, with the cost of some imported 
fossil fuels reaching levels many times higher in the recent past (e.g. USD 154/MWh for imported gasoil in 201411).  
 
Access to adequate and efficient long-term financing is, however, the critical piece required to overcome the barriers 
faced in the past by renewable energy projects, to ensure they can be built timely and at competitive costs. As the new 
government administration in Argentina implements a series of reforms to improve investment conditions, the framework 
provided by the new Renewable Energy Law 27.191 and the 1,000 MW renewable energy tender underway at the time 
of submission of this proposal intend to outperform previous attempts by improving the economic support structure (e.g. 
fiscal benefits) and the legal and contractual framework. A key feature of the new government support mechanism is the 
“Trust Fund for Renewable Energy” (FODER) that has been provided by Law 27.191 to offer payment guarantees for all 
tendered power purchase agreements as well as project financing assistance. The graph below 12  illustrates the 
                                                     
9 Informe de la Asociación Argentina de Presupuesto y Administración Financiera Pública (ASAP) Diciembre de 2014   
10 Based on a GDP estimate of USD 548 Billion, from World Bank data. 
11 Argentine Renewable Energy Chamber, 2015. http://www.energiaestrategica.com/wp-
content/uploads/2015/10/Reporte-Ejecutivo.pdf 
 
12 This graph, developed by GoA in mid 2016, illustrates the expected FODER functionality and contractual structure 
as conceived at the time the first RenovAr tender was being launched. There may be adjustments over time, as the 
RenovAr program is further developed (e.g. as subsequent tenders are launched).

=== PAGE 14 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 45 
 
 
contractual framework for the first RenovAr tender at the time of preparation of this proposal, including the roles 
envisioned for FODER. 
 
 
 
Another element of the new support mechanism put in place based on Law 27.191 provisions is a robust package of 
fiscal incentives, described in section C.6. This new framework under implementation by GoA is expected to enhance 
economic viability and investor confidence to help overcome the barriers to access long-term project finance that have 
hindered renewable energy development so far. A positive signal has been given by the market through the overwhelming 
response to the first tender (with offers for more than six times the capacity targeted).  
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
Describe the baseline scenario (i.e. emissions baseline, climate vulnerability baseline, key barriers, challenges and/or 
policies) and the outcomes and the impact that the project/programme will aim to achieve in improving the baseline 
scenario. 
 
As previously explained, GoA has recently passed Renewable Energy Law 27.191, setting the basis for a new promotional 
regime and government effort to allow renewable energy generation to take-off at scale. Renewable energy development 
in Argentina has lagged behind relative to what regional peer countries (most notably Brazil, Uruguay, Chile, Mexico) 
have been able to achieve, in spite of Argentina’s outstanding resource potential and dire need to diversify away from 
fossil fuels (currently 87% of its energy matrix), reducing energy costs and greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) while 
enhancing energy security. 
The new government program (RenovAr) contemplates a series of fiscal incentives and financial support mechanisms, 
along with regulatory and contractual enhancements13 aimed at overcoming some of the investment barriers that resulted 
in the failure of previous government attempts. 
                                                     
13 Along with the renewable energy targets, penalties, incentives, and other regulatory aspects brought about by Law 
27.191 and its subsequent implementation resolutions, GoA has been working on enhancing the bankability of the 
power purchase agreements offered under the tenders underway, through the consideration and inclusion –as

=== PAGE 15 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 45 
 
 
The Law has defined ambitious renewable energy participation targets for the short, mid and long term, which the current 
administration now needs to deliver on. With that objective, GoA recently launched a first tender under the new regime 
to award PPAs for the construction of at least 1,000 MW of renewable capacity, with proposals due in September 2016. 
The graph below shows the targets set by the Law in terms of renewable energy penetration. The 20% target for 2025 
implies reaching 10,000 MW in less than ten years, with only 800 currently installed (or just about 200MW without small 
hydro). 
 
While the new program has generated significant interest among local and international project developers, availability of 
long term project finance to support these projects is likely to encounter some initial limitations due to the combination of 
risks involved: Argentina’s still low –albeit improving- sovereign credit rating, the untested new regulatory environment, 
and the long term nature of the required investments, besides the other risks typically associated with projects financing 
of renewable energy projects (resource, technology, etc.). Many investors and lenders interested in this market will likely 
take some cautious initial steps, setting limits on the volume of capital and tenors. In this context, development finance 
institutions (DFIs) and dedicated climate finance sources such as the GCF are expected to play a critical role in supporting 
the first set of projects under the new scheme, providing the leadership and demonstration needed to crowd in other 
investors in this and subsequent tenders.  
In this context, the IDBG is working to support the program with not only its own technical and financial resources, but 
also mobilizing additional resources from other development and commercial partners. The proposal hereby presented 
is an important part of such effort. 
The objective of the program hereby proposed to the GCF is to help catalyze long-term private investment in sustainable 
energy in Argentina, by helping complete –along with other development and commercial partners- adequately termed 
financing packages for a set of first moving projects and demonstrate their technical and financial viability in the new 
policy, regulatory and investment environment. This would provide the insight and confidence required to crowd in other 
investors and lenders as part of the process and for subsequent tenders and projects. 
To this end, IDB is proposing a GCF envelope of USD 130 Million with a primary objective of co-financing or providing 
refinancing guarantees to at least five renewable energy projects. GCF financing would be pari passu with IDBG loans, 
and will leverage a larger amount from the IDBG and an estimate of at least four times as much financing from all equity 
and debt sources combined, reaching a minimum investment level of USD 650 M. For this purpose, the IDBG will also 
seek to mobilize other co-lender and B lenders, through its syndication program, to allow the first set of projects to reach 
financial close and become operational within the aggressive timelines defined in the RenovAr program. 
                                                     
feasible- of clauses that would facilitate access to international project financing. This includes issues related to 
international arbitration and mitigation of convertibility and transferability risks, among other.

=== PAGE 16 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 45 
 
 
C.3. Project / Programme Description 
Describe the main activities and the planned measures of the project/programme according to each of its components.  
 
The objective of the program is to help GoA achieve the ambitious renewable energy penetration goals established by 
Renewable Energy Law 27.191, by contributing to i) the successful financial close of the first few projects to be built under 
the new regulatory regime, and ii) the development of capacities of relevant public and private entities. For this purpose, 
the program will consist of a set of activities under the following two components: 
 
Component 1 – Financing of Renewable Energy Power Projects 
This component will be executed by IIC and will be focused on providing and mobilizing long-term debt financing for at 
least five projects, to cover the gap in availability of this type of financing and help projects timely reach financial close. 
For this purpose IIC will consider projects awarded a PPA as part of the RenovAr tenders (or those contracted between 
private parties that still contribute to Law 27.191’s renewable penetration target) against eligibility and credit criteria 
agreed with the GCF for this Program. 
 
Component 2 - Enhancing Policy, Regulation, Planning, and Project Financing capacities 
This component will be executed by IDB and will be focused on providing targeted technical cooperation to both public 
and private sector entities, to help build the capacities, knowledge, and strategic planning resources needed to achieve 
successful implementation of RenovAr and other government renewable energy development programs aimed at 
delivering on the goals set by Law 27.191. Activities will include: 
 
a. Strategic environmental and social studies and training activities at national level that will help enhance 
regulatory and project implementation capacity in regards to environmental and social aspects for the 
development of renewable energy projects.  
b. Support to develop technical capacity on intermittent renewable energy dispatch. 
c. Capacity building for private contracting and financing of renewable energy projects, including development of 
project contract models, and training on project financing to relevant local entities. 
d. Capacity building activities to enhance gender-equity in supported projects and companies. 
e. Conceptualization and start-up support for the Renewable Energy Center. 
a. Support for development of various renewable energy technologies (e.g. solar, bioenergy, marine, geothermal), 
including development of resource/potential studies, strategic plans, incentive schemes, among other.       
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity) 
Describe the quality of the management team, overall strategy and financial profile of the Sponsor (Executing Entity) and 
how it will support the project/programme in terms of equity investment, management, operations, production and 
marketing. 
 
To mitigate risks for the success of the Program, from both the point of view of its development objectives as well as in 
terms of credit risks, the Program will prioritize projects that have been awarded a PPA through the RenovAr tender 
process, as part of which sponsors will have normally demonstrated and met certain minimum requirements in terms of 
financial strength14, experience with projects with similar technology, and level of development of the project. In addition, 
sponsors and their projects will have to meet the additional credit requirements agreed with the GCF for this Program. 
For example, the IDBG usually requires that the key parties that are part of the project have extensive experience in the 
construction, operation and maintenance of similar projects. This is typically accomplished by working with construction 
companies with experience in the country, commercially proven equipment suppliers that meet the industry standards, 
and operators with solid track records in providing operation and maintenance services to similar projects. This will be 
ensured through IDBG’s due diligence process. In addition, and given that significant sponsor contingent equity support 
will likely be required to mitigate certain project risks (during both the construction and operation phases), the financial 
strength of sponsors will be a critical factor. Furthermore, minimum requirements in terms of debt service coverage ratios 
                                                     
14 A minimum of USD 250,000 of capitalization for each MW offered was required in the first tender of the RenovAr 
program.

=== PAGE 17 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 45 
 
 
and reserve accounts, among other, have been established and will be further elaborated based on each projects’ specific  
conditions. 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
Describe the market for the product(s) or services including the historical data and forecasts. Provide pricing structures, 
price controls, subsidies available and government involvement (if any). 
 
Section C.1 above presents a detailed market description (as part of the strategic context discussion), including the 
historical evolution of the market. As a supplement to that, we hereby present additional information on current and 
incoming market participation. The table below presents the list of existing renewable installed capacity in Argentina, 
breaking it down by technology, capacity and location. This reconfirms the current limited penetration and size of 
renewable energy projects. 
 
PROJECT15 
TECHNOLOGY 
CAPACITY 
[MW] 
PROVINCE 
REGIÓN 
ING.STA.BARBARA 
Biomass 
16 
Tucuman 
Northeast 
TABACAL 
Biomass 
40 
Salta 
Northeast 
S.MARTIN NORTE 
Biogas 
5 
Buenos Aires 
Gran Buenos Aires 
S.MIGUEL Norte 
Biogas 
10 
Buenos Aires 
Gran Buenos Aires 
ARAUCO EOLICO 
Wind 
25.2 
La Rioja 
Northeast 
ARAUCO 2 EÓLICO 
Wind 
25.2 
La Rioja 
Northeast 
DIADEMA EOLICO 
Wind 
6.3 
Chubut 
Patagonia 
L.BLANC 4 ENARS 
Wind 
51 
Chubut 
Patagonia 
NECOCHEA EOLICO 
Wind 
0.25 
Buenos Aires 
Buenos Aires 
RAWSONI  ENARSA 
Wind 
48.6 
Chubut 
Patagonia 
RAWSONII ENARSA 
Wind 
28.8 
Chubut 
Patagonia 
TORDILLO 
Wind 
3 
Chubut 
Patagonia 
CHIMBE 1 FOTOVO 
Solar 
2 
San Juan 
Cuyo 
C.HOND 1 FOTOVO 
Solar 
2 
San Juan 
Cuyo 
C.HOND 2 FOTOVO 
Solar 
3 
San Juan 
Cuyo 
S.JUAN I FOTOVO 
Solar 
1.2 
San Juan 
Cuyo 
 
In terms of potential new market participants, the tender underway has gathered significant interest. By the September 
5th, 2016 closing date of the tender, 123 proposals were received, for a total of 6,336 MW (i.e. over six times the amount 
being tendered). Of them, 49 corresponded to wind projects for a total of 3,468 MW, mostly in the southern and central 
parts of Argentina; and 58 proposals were for solar PV projects, totaling 2,834 MW of capacity, mostly in the northwest 
and center of Argentina, along the Andean corridor. The table below summarizes the main metrics of proposals submitted 
to the first RenovAr tender. 
 
Technology 
# of Bids 
Power bid [MW] 
Average Power per 
bid [MW] 
Power to be 
contracted [MW] 
Wind 
49 
3,468.7 
70.8 
600 
Solar 
58 
2,813.1 
48.5 
300 
Biomass 
5 
44.5 
8.9 
65 
Biogas 
6 
8.6 
1.4 
15 
Mini Hydro 
5 
11.4 
2.3 
20 
                                                     
15 Please note that minihydro projects are not included in this list

=== PAGE 18 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 45 
 
 
TOTAL 
123 
6,346.3 
51.6 
1,000 
 
Combined, wind and solar represented about 99% of the offered capacity. 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable) 
Provide details of government licenses or permits required for implementing and operating the project/programme, the 
issuing authority, and the date of issue or expected date of issue. Describe applicable taxes and foreign exchange 
regulations. Provide details on insurance policies related to project/programme. 
 
Permits and licenses required as part of the first RenovAr tender: 
 
Environmental permit of the project, that authorizes the development and operation of the project, from the 
environmental point of view, and from the date of signing of the PPA without the need to process any further 
environmental authorizations. Issuing authority will normally be the relevant provincial agency of the province where 
each project is located. 
 
License as Generator, Cogenerator or Autogenerator Agent in the Wholesale Energy Market (MEM). Filing authority: 
Ministry of Energy and Mining. Date required: filing needs to be done by the time of presenting the proposal under 
the tender process; license approval needs to be secured by the time of signing the Commercial Operation Date 
(COD). 
 
In terms of the tax regime, projects awarded a PPA under the RenovAr tender underway at the time of preparation of this 
proposal were eligible for consideration for the fiscal benefits established by Renewable Energy Law 27.191 and its 
subsequent regulations, including: 
 
Exemption of Import Duties for equipment, pieces, replacement parts, component parts and raw materials until 
December 31st, 2017. 
 
Accelerated Fiscal Depreciation. 
 
Advance VAT Return. 
 
Exemption of Minimum Presumed Income Tax. 
 
Exemption of Dividend Tax for the re-investment in infrastructure. 
 
Tax deduction of all financial expenses when calculating the Income Tax. 
 
Issuing of Fiscal Certificate subject to the proving of the inclusion of domestic goods. 
 
In regards to foreign exchange regulations, since the new government administration took office in December 2015 it has 
been progressively releasing previously established foreign exchange controls that were limiting convertibility and 
transferability of foreign currency and thus hindering foreign investment. This, combined with the foreign currency 
denomination of the PPAs and some other relevant contractual provisions, enhances conditions for foreign currency 
financing of these projects. In terms of insurance, IDB requirements to projects for insurance policies will be consistent 
with international best practice standards for project financing. Specific policies will be required and reviewed for each 
project during the due diligence process. Such policies will be part of the security package for the project lenders, including 
GCF. 
 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements 
Please describe in detail the governance structure of the project/programme, including but not limited to the organization 
structure, roles and responsibilities of the project/programme management unit, steering committee, executing entities 
and so on, as well as the flow of funds structure.  Also describe which of these structures are already in place and 
which are still pending. For the pending ones, please specify the requirements to establish them. 
 
The IDB, as Accredited Entity, will maintain the responsibilities of the Program to the GCF as per the terms to be agreed 
between IDB and GCF in the AMA and FAA. IDB will also directly execute non-reimbursable technical cooperation

=== PAGE 19 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 45 
 
 
activities outlined as part of component 2. The IIC will execute the reimbursable investment component of the Program, 
i.e. the structuring and deployment of IDB, IIC and GCF capital into the renewable energy Underlying Projects. 
 
 
The Accredited Entity is a public international organization, the purpose of which is to contribute to the acceleration of the 
process of economic and social development of its regional developing member countries in Latin America and the 
Caribbean, individually and collectively. The IIC is a multilateral development bank established to promote the economic 
development of its regional developing member countries by encouraging the establishment, expansion, and 
modernization of private enterprises (including those that are small and medium-scale) and partially and wholly-owned 
state enterprises (excluding operations with sub-sovereign governments) that are aligned with certain priority business 
areas, in such a way as to supplement the activities of the Accredited Entity. On March 30, 2015, the Boards of Governors 
of the Accredited Entity and the IIC authorized the transfer of operational and administrative functions and non-financial 
resources associated with non-sovereign guaranteed activities (i.e. private sector activities or “NSG Operations”) from 
the Accredited Entity to the IIC (the Private Sector Consolidation), and resolved that, as of January 1, 2016, new NSG 
Operations and the administration of existing IIC operations and existing NSG Operations of the Accredited Entity will be 
carried out by the IIC.     
 
The IIC’s role as Executing Entity for GCF Proceeds will be subject to compliance with the Accreditation Master 
Agreement to be entered into between the GCF and the Accredited Entity and/or such other relevant arrangements. 
Supplementing this, at the project level, rights and responsibilities of project sponsors, lenders, and other project parties 
(e.g. Engineering, Procurement and Construction –EPC- and Operations and Maintenance -OM- contractors, equipment 
suppliers) will be defined under the project contracts, completing the governance structure of the program. 
 
In addition, the IDB and IIC have developed over the years vast experience in blended finance through the implementation 
of programs with other climate funds (e.g. GEF, CIF, Canadian Climate Fund for the Private Sector in the Americas), and 
will resort to such expertise to ensure adequate and effective utilization of GCF resources to promote investments with 
climate value. The IDB Climate Change Division and the IIC Advisory Services Team will work along with the IDB Energy 
Division and the IIC Infrastructure and Energy Division to implement technical cooperation activities.

=== PAGE 20 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 45 
 
 
 
 
D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement 
 
 
Please specify why the GCF involvement is critical for the project/programme, in consideration of other alternatives. 
 
Argentina has embarked in an ambitious transformation process, across its economy, and in particular in its energy 
sector. This process is aimed at restoring its operational efficiency, effectiveness, and sustainability. While the reforms 
underway are expected to improve conditions for long-term investment in the energy sector, gaining lenders’ confidence 
to provide long-term project financing for renewable energy projects is a process that will take time and some meaningful 
initial demonstration that the new regulatory framework, policy direction and other relevant conditions are adequate and 
trustworthy. As described in Section B.3, commercial lenders and even development finance institutions (DFIs) have 
limitations in the volumes of financing they can provide in the short-term, particularly while Argentina’s sovereign credit 
rating remains low. In this context, IDBG will need to play a crucial role (as it has already done in other countries when 
they were launching their renewables programs, to help overcome regulatory or off-taker risk perceptions) not only by 
directly financing some initial projects, but also mobilizing funding from climate finance sources such as the GCF and 
facilitating participation of B-/co-lenders considering their financing. Through this Program, GCF will help –as combined 
with IDBG capital- to fund about 50% of the investment cost for the equivalent of about 40% of the capacity initially 
targeted by the first RenovAr tender. This will be a key contribution for the success of the initiative, in helping ensure 
that some critical mass of awardee projects reach financial close and are built. This in turn will contribute to demonstrate 
the viability of renewable energy projects under the new regulatory and contractual framework, while crowding in 
additional lenders. In addition, the Program will provide technical cooperation to help develop the capacities of public 
and private entities as well as knowledge and strategic planning resources to enhance the chances of attainment of the 
goals of Law 27.191 and the broader GoA’s renewable energy program. 
 
In addition, the Program will help introduce –besides long term project debt- a financial product not available in Argentina 
for this type of investments. The proposed refinancing guarantees have the potential of allowing the participation of 
commercial lenders and investors that would otherwise not be able to participate. GCF’s possibility of providing 
concessional pricing along with this instrument is critical for its chances of success, as guarantees always represent an 
additional cost to projects that is normally not fully offset by a proportional reduction in the premium required by 
guarantee beneficiaries. Concessionality is therefore critical in this case for projects to effectively benefit from the 
financial effect of increased leverage that is fundamental for the competitiveness and financial viability of renewable 
energy projects. 
 
 
D.2. Exit Strategy 
 
Please explain how the project/programme sustainability will be ensured in the long run, after the project/programme is 
implemented with support from the GCF and other sources, taking into consideration the long-term financial viability 
demonstrated in E.6.3. This should include a description of strategies for longer term maintenance of physical assets (if 
applicable). 
 
The following elements will be the pillars of the long term sustainability of the program: 
 
 
The proposed program will finance an initial set of projects under GoA’s new renewable energy program and 
regulatory framework, supporting short term objectives with longer term impacts, i.e. to allow the financial close, 
construction and operation of these projects to demonstrate their technical and financial viability under the new 
conditions in Argentina. It will act as a validation for investors and lenders unable to participate in the first rounds 
that the new framework (contractual arrangements, support scheme, etc.) is found to be adequate by the several 
players required to carry these projects forward (sponsors, services companies, lenders) and who take the lead in 
the first rounds, helping pave the way for future participants. 
 
 
One of the reasons why GCF’s participation is required at this stage is the lack of long term financing, to a significant 
extent related to Argentina’s still low sovereign risk rating. This is something GoA expects to change in the short/mid-
term as the new administration addresses the factors behind the low credit rating legacy, and which will be one of

=== PAGE 21 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 45 
 
 
 
 
D 
the pillars of enhanced access to finance from commercial sources in the future that will reduce or fully eliminate the 
need for development and climate finance in subsequent tenders (as has been the case for example for the 
development of wind power in Mexico, now largely financed by commercial lenders). 
 
 
A key element of the program is the signing of long term PPAs for projects selected as part of the tender, providing 
a basis for predictability of the revenue model that is key for its commercial bankability and long term financial 
sustainability. 
 
 
The IDBG program will not be creating economic distortions, from the point of view that the terms of financing and 
key contractual requirements will follow market-based parameters and best practices. Any concessionality 
considered in this program will be targeted at overcoming short term risk or cost barriers. 
 
 
Finally, the capacity building focus of the proposed technical cooperation activities will develop resources whose 
objective and value goes beyond the projects directly financed by the program, and which will be another source of 
long-term sustainability.

=== PAGE 22 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 45 
 
 
 
E 
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance of the 
proposed project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity-specific sub-criteria and 
indicative assessment factors, which can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework, should be addressed where 
relevant and applicable. This section should tie into any request for concessionality made in section B.2. 
 
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas 
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential 
Specify the mitigation and/or adaptation impact, taking into account the relevant and applicable sub-criteria and 
assessment factors in the Fund’s investment framework.  
 
Mitigation impact: assuming a 75:25 split (in terms of generation capacity) in investment between wind and solar PV, 
expected GHG emission reductions are about 614,000 Tons CO2e per year, or about 15.3 Million Tons CO2e during 
the life of the assets. 
 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below. 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only) 
Annual 
614,000 
Lifetime 
15,300,000 
Other 
relevant 
indicators 
Expected increase in the number of small, medium and large low-emission power suppliers, and 
installed effective capacity:  
 
At least 5 suppliers – 400 MW of renewable energy generation capacity 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above. 
 
 
Expected GHG emission reductions: UNFCCC/CDM – AM Tool 07 v5.0 - Methodological tool: Tool to calculate 
the emission factor for an electricity system Version 05.0 
(https://cdm.unfccc.int/methodologies/PAmethodologies/tools/am-tool-07-v5.0.pdf) 
 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale) 
Describe how the proposed project/programme’s expected contributions to global low-carbon and/or climate-resilient 
development pathways could be scaled-up and replicated including a description of the steps necessary to accomplish 
it. 
 
Through the recently passed Law 27.191, GoA has set ambitious short- and long-term targets for renewable energy 
shares in the energy mix, in the form of obligations to be met, along with the required incentives, procedures and 
penalties required to help achieve them. Per such law, the following targets will be the policy and regulatory basis of 
the minimum expected level of scale up and replication: 8% by 2017 (measured at the end of 2018); 12% by 2019; 
16% by 2021; 18% by 2023; 20% by 2025.

=== PAGE 23 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 45 
 
 
 
E 
The current program aims to directly support at least 13% of the capacity needed to reach the 8% 2018 target. Based 
on this and Law 27.191 targets, replication would be a minimum of 6.6 times in the short term. The replication target 
is, however, many times larger as the Law’s mid and long term targets are considered; the 10 GW aimed for 2025 
would represent a 25x replication factor relative to the ~400MW targeted for support under this program. 
 
GCF’s contribution to materialize such intended replication will be two-fold. First, through the financing of an initial set 
of projects, GCF will contribute to future replication by: 
i) supporting the success of the first tenders, which will demonstrate and build confidence that development of this 
type of projects under the new regulatory regime is feasible; 
ii) generating lessons and feed them back to public authorities, to support learning and continued improvement of the 
RenovAr program (e.g. regulation, tender/PPA design); and 
iii) helping develop capacities of local private companies across the supply chain of wind and solar PV projects, which 
would result in efficiencies and enhance viability for future projects. 
 
Second, the technical cooperation products (studies and consultant services) and activities (training) will provide 
supplemental capacity building support to the Ministry of Energy, other public entities at national and local level, and 
private sector actors including sponsors, financing institutions, academic institutions. These technical cooperation 
products will fill a significant gap in the country, especially those related to the development of strategic plans, pilot 
projects on some renewable energy applications, the Center for Renewable Energy, and practical skills for the 
development and financing of sustainable renewable energy projects. 
 
As mentioned, the ambitious transformation process that Argentina has embarked on, with development of renewables 
being one of its cornerstones, is a process that will require time and a phased approach. This first program proposal 
to the GCF is targeted at helping address some of the most immediate financial and non-financial barriers around the 
launching of the RenovAr public tender program, as a key driver of the first phase of the transformation process. Given 
the vast needs and challenges ahead to complete the desired transformation towards more sustainable energy path 
(in terms of both generation and use) in Argentina, IDBG foresees that GCF support will likely become important in 
subsequent phases of the process and other areas facing investment and/or knowledge barriers, including other 
renewable technologies, transmission/distribution, distributed generation, energy efficiency, among other. As support 
needs and related strategies are further defined, supplemental interventions may be analyzed, discussed with GoA, 
and presented for GCF’s consideration to further contribute to the implementation of a comprehensive transformation 
strategy. 
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning 
Describe how the project/programme contributes to the creation or strengthening of knowledge, collective learning 
processes, or institutions.  
 
As a result of failed past policies and the challenging environment for long-term investment that prevailed in previous 
years, Argentina lags significantly behind other reference countries in Latin America (Brazil, Uruguay, Chile, Mexico) 
in terms of development and penetration of renewable energy technologies. As of the end of 2015 there were only 
about 200MW (out of over 32GW of installed capacity) of wind and solar generation capacity, with very little financed 
by private capital in the form of long-term project financing, which has elsewhere normally been the prevailing financing 
modality used to developed these projects. As a result, Argentina has a significant learning curve to undergo in terms 
of local capacity development, including project design, financing, construction, operation and maintenance, as well 
as regulation and grid management for adequate integration of renewables, among other. The support this program 
will provide will allow to close financing, construct and operate the projects, thus providing an opportunity to transfer 
such knowledge to local actors. The technical cooperation activities will help further develop additional capacity and 
skills for successful implementation and replication of investments and of the government program. 
 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment

=== PAGE 24 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 45 
 
 
 
E 
Describe how proposed measures will create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained participation of 
private and public sector actors in low-carbon and/or resilient development that go beyond the program. 
The Program, in enabling the construction and commercial operation of an initial set of projects, will contribute to testing 
and validating the suitability of the new regulatory framework (adequacy of tender/PPA models and parameters, 
sufficiency of fiscal incentives, adequacy of risk mitigation support scheme developed –e.g. FODER-, interconnection 
and dispatching arrangements, etc.) while also providing lessons for their improvement in the continued implementation 
of the government program. In addition, the first few projects will help establish links with international investors, 
lenders, specialized consultants (engineering, legal, etc.), equipment suppliers, and further develop the capacities of 
local partners across the supply chains of the technologies involved in the program. Moreover, the IDBG will continue 
sharing technical expertise with the government and private entities (e.g. local sponsors, banks, private off-takers) on 
various aspects of project financing, including on key contract design aspects that enhance bankability of off-take 
arrangements, thus contributing to the development of an enabling environment. 
 
The technical cooperation products will normally be public information that will be shared with all public and private 
sector parties interested in the development of renewable energy projects in the country. 
 
Describe how the proposal contributes to innovation, market development and transformation. Examples include: 
 
Introducing and demonstrating a new market or a new technology in a country or a region 
 
Using innovative funding scheme such as initial public offerings and/or bond markets for projects/programme 
 
Beyond what has been described already in previous sections in regards to the program’s contribution to market 
development and transformation, another important contribution will be to help –through both its financial and technical 
cooperation support- bring project financing back to Argentina as a financing modality to develop infrastructure projects. 
This is something that was mostly absent during the last fifteen years, which results in many local financing institutions 
having missed (or never developed) much of their related expertise. Another potential innovation contribution of the 
program is the eventual demonstration of the usefulness of refinancing guarantees as a tool to help commercial lenders 
extend the tenors of the financing they can offer for this type of projects. 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
Describe how the project/programme strengthens the national / local regulatory or legal frameworks to systematically 
drive investment in low-emission technologies or activities, promote development of additional low-emission policies, 
and/or improve climate-responsive planning and development. 
 
The program’s main contributions to strengthening the regulatory framework will be: 
a) In providing financing and supporting the debt structuring process, it will provide –through the detailed technical 
and legal due diligence process- valuable insight into potential weaknesses of the regulatory framework, including 
on the potential impact of some contractual parameters on the bankability or financial cost of the projects. Such 
insight will be fed back to the Ministry of Energy to help improve regulation and future tender and PPA models. 
b) IDB plans to conduct technical cooperation support, through the development of (i) a strategic study on bird and 
bat biodiversity and migration and (ii) a workshop on environmental and social impacts and risks of renewable 
energy projects in Argentina offered to i) local authorities responsible for permitting, ii) local consultants 
responsible for preparing the impact assessments of projects, and iii) project sponsors responsible for the 
development and implementation of projects and their mitigation and management measures. This will help 
enhance regulatory and project implementation capacity in regards to environmental and social aspects for the 
development of renewable energy projects. 
 
Other technical cooperation products will provide valuable information for policy makers, including the Ministry of 
Energy and other authorities at national and local level; the studies will provide reliable and updated information, with 
long-term and strategic view, currently not available in the country.

=== PAGE 25 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 45 
 
 
 
E 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential 
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive development impact 
 
Economic co-benefits  
 
Job creation: The program is estimated 16  to help create between 4,480 and 6,300 jobs, between 
manufacturing, construction and installation (MCI) jobs, and operation and maintenance (O&M) jobs. 
 
Environmental co-benefits  
 
Improved air quality. To overcome power supply gaps, over the last few years the system has increasingly 
resorted to diesel-based distributed generation solutions, some of which were placed in urban areas, creating 
direct exposure to air and noise pollution. As renewable energy projects to be developed under this program 
follow adequate environmental and social safeguards and take root in Argentina, the need for these diesel-
based solutions will be reduced, resulting in associated local environmental benefits.  
 
Social co-benefits 
 
Gender-sensitive development impact. While we do not have a sound basis to estimate ex ante impact 
possible on gender-equity, the program will offer support for implementation of various type of activities aimed 
at improving job opportunities for women in the emerging renewable energy sector in Argentina. Such activities 
are described in the Annex, and related results will be tracked accordingly. 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient 
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only) 
N/A 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
 
Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
 
As previously explained, the challenges associated to policies and investment conditions in Argentina in the last fifteen 
years (particularly in the energy sector) have resulted in insufficient and inadequate investment in the energy sector. 
This has compromised both the security and the sustainability of the system, with significant negative impacts on 
businesses and fiscal accounts, through the public transfers needed to subsidize the costs of suboptimal solutions 
such as the increased incidence of costly imported fossil-based solutions. The increase in the required government 
subsidies has resulted in GoA spending in 2014 over USD 8 Billion (or approximately 1.5% of GDP) in subsidies to 
sustain the power sector. In addition, fossil fuel imports have been significantly hurting the trade balance in the last few 
years, with a trade deficit in the energy sector of the same order of magnitude as the power sector fiscal deficit. The 
increased participation of renewables in the energy mix will contribute to not only reduce the cost of energy but also 
the reliance on expensive fossil fuel imports, reducing their impact on the trade and fiscal balance. 
 
 
Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payment gap that prevents from 
addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market) 
 
• 
Does the country have a fiscal or balance of payment gap that prevents from addressing the needs? 
 
As explained above, the management of the power sector in Argentina over the last decade has resulted in a net 
sectorial deficit at the fiscal and trade balance level. Success of the proposed program has the potential to help alleviate 
                                                     
16 Estimate based on global statistics collected by IRENA (http://www.irena.org/rejobs.pdf)

=== PAGE 26 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 45 
 
 
 
E 
both (although it will depend on the details of the projects that are awarded the tender and built). This program may 
help reduce the cost of supply of energy, with renewable energy displacing expensive alternatives such as power 
generated based on costly fossil fuels; this could result in a reduction of the subsidies required from the government, 
and thus reduce the fiscal deficit. In addition, to the extent that the projects displace imports of fossil fuels, there could 
also be a trade and balance of payments benefit.  
 
• 
Does the local capital market lack depth or history? 
 
Argentina has traditionally had –for regional standards- a sophisticated capital market. However, it has not been able 
to significantly support development of renewable energy projects so far given the long term financing -15-20 years- 
required by these projects and the weaknesses of the investment framework (particularly for the energy sector) and 
contractual conditions in previous tenders, which made these projects not bankable under traditional project financing 
standards. The financing of the projects under this new tender (and the regulatory and contractual measures being 
adopted to address previous bankability problems) has the potential to demonstrate the viability of long-term project 
financing of renewable energy projects and crowd in financing from the local capital markets in the mid-term. 
 
 
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity. 
 
As explained in point E.2.4 above, the process leading to financial closing of the first few projects under the new 
regulatory and contractual regime, as well as their subsequent operation and supervision, will provide insights into 
aspects in need of adjustment or capacity building (at the regulatory, planning, and project financing levels). Some of 
the technical cooperation activities included as part of this program will help address those needs. 
 
 
E.5.  Country Ownership 
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs 
Please describe how the project/programme contributes to country’s identified priorities for low-emission and climate-
resilient development, and the degree to which the activity is supported by a country’s enabling policy and institutional 
framework, or includes policy or institutional changes. 
 
This program is fully consistent with Argentina’s climate change priorities, as defined in the INDC submitted to COP 
21, and where the scale-up of renewable energy generation is listed as a key contributor to its unconditional target of 
reducing emissions by 15% by 2030 relative to its Business as Usual (BAU) scenario. This is consistent with the high 
contribution of the energy sector in the country’s GHG emission profile (43% share).       
 
Further, Argentina indicated a conditional target of up to 30% by 2030 if it received support in the areas of adequate 
and predictable international financing, capacity building, and technology development, innovation and transfer. The 
proposed GCF program is consistent with these conditions (capacity building support and adequately termed financial 
support that will also contribute to technology transfer and crowding in investment from world-class international 
developers), so the program should also contribute to achieve the more ambitious conditional target. 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
Please describe experience and track record of the accredited entity and executing entities with respect to the activities 
that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme. 
 
IDBG is one of the lead lenders in the renewable energy field in Latin America and the Caribbean. IDBG has the goal 
of directing 30% of its lending activities to support projects to prevent or address the effects of climate change. As part

=== PAGE 27 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 45 
 
 
 
E 
of that mandate, the IDBG has spearheaded the financing of private sector renewable energy across the whole 
continent, starting with the first private hydropower facility in Brazil in the early 90’s to then support renewable energy 
projects across the whole continent. This experience has allowed IDBG to operate with multiple clients under different 
regulatory schemes and to support the financing of 18 projects totaling more than 1.5GW of installed capacity.  
 
The IDBG has led the introduction of wind and solar power projects in the region. In 2009 it provided financing for the 
first commercial scale wind power plant in Mexico. The Project sells its output to a private offtaker and its successful 
implementation not only crowded in other lenders but also showed the way to other investors to replicate the model 
and introduce non-conventional renewable energy in the country.  
 
In 2012 IDBG financed the first commercial scale solar PV power project in Chile, a 25MWp solar plant located in the 
Atacama region which is selling energy to a large mining operation. The Project was the first renewable energy project 
that provided energy to a mining company, a model later replicated by other mining operators. Later on, IDBG financed 
some of the first merchant solar PV power projects in Chile, which was then followed by massive investments in the 
region.  
 
In 2013 and 2014, the IDBG financed in Uruguay the first wind and solar power projects, respectively, under a recently 
established regulatory framework and which was largely developed over the years with the support of IDBG. More 
recently, in May of 2016, the IDBG provided financing for the first solar PV power plant in El Salvador, an 80 MW facility 
that will sell energy to distribution companies under long term PPAs. Before completing the financing, the IDB Group 
worked extensively with the distribution companies to enhance the contractual framework to facilitate international long 
term financing in the country. The enhanced contractual framework is currently being used by distribution companies 
to launch a second tender for an additional 150MW.  
 
The experience developed over the years has allowed the IDBG to build a cohesive team of investments and credit 
officers, environmental and social specialists and a network of experienced external consultants with substantial 
experience in the structuring of the financing for wind and solar power projects. This comprehensive team has the 
ability to deploy its knowledge in new jurisdictions and apply lessons learned across the whole continent in the 
structuring of new transactions. Furthermore, this experience has allowed the IDBG to develop internal best practice 
standards for the financing of wind and solar power projects, which will be applied for the financing of projects in 
Argentina under this program. 
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
Please provide a full description of the steps taken to ensure country ownership, including the engagement with NDAs 
on the funding proposal and the no-objection letter. Please also specify the multi-stakeholder engagement plan and 
the consultations that were conducted when this proposal was developed.  
 
A description of the multi-stakeholder engagement process required from each beneficiary project is provided in section 
F.3 below. 
 
In regard to consultations conducted to confirm the alignment of this program with government objectives, as well as 
the relevance of mobilizing GCF financing as part of the financial packages needed to close these projects, IDBG has 
had the following instances of consultation:  
 
Government of Argentina: as part of IDBG’s collaboration with the Ministry of Energy and Mining in the preparation 
of the first RenovAr tender, IDBG proposed to that ministry and the Ministry of Finance the preparation and 
development of this program with the GCF. The Ministry of Energy also presented to IDBG some of the ideas for 
technical cooperation support, included in the Program proposal upon discussion with them. Both ministries 
(including the National Directorate of Programs with International Credit Organizations –DNPOIC- within the 
Ministry of Finance, which is GCF’s NDA) have expressed their interest and support for it. A Letter of No Objection 
from the NDA has been properly secured and submitted to the GCF.

=== PAGE 28 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 45 
 
 
 
E 
 
Potential co-lenders: the IDBG carried various rounds of consultation with other development finance institutions 
and a number of commercial lenders to assess appetite of financing renewable energy projects under new 
conditions. This helped confirmed the limitations some of these actors will have (amounts, tenors, number of 
projects, etc.) and thus the relevance of mobilizing additional financial support from the GCF to help close financing 
packages. 
 
Other industry stakeholders: in addition, the IDBG has actively participated in recent workshops and conferences 
organized in Argentina to discuss with government officials and private companies possibilities of support and 
provide feedback/recommendations on the new tender and contractual framework. 
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, including 
addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers; providing the least concessionality; and without crowding out private 
and other public investment. 
 
The adequacy of the instruments proposed to the GCF (long term project debt and refinancing guarantees to help 
secure sufficient adequately termed financing and allow financial close) is based on the following elements: 
1) Given the large size and upfront nature of the CAPEX investment required by renewable energy technologies 
(relative to other fossil-based alternatives with lower CAPEX demands and higher ongoing fuel costs) access 
to long term debt, with tenors of at least 12-15 years, has demonstrated globally to be critical for renewable 
energy projects to be cost competitive. 
2) The market sounding conducted by IDBG with other lenders indicates that there will likely be limitations, vis-
à-vis the USD 1-1.2 Billion long term debt financing needed to support the 1,000 MW initially targeted by the 
first RenovAr tender (and even more considering any additional capacity that may be awarded as part of such 
tender or subsequent ones), in the volume and tenors that commercial banks and development finance 
institutions will be able to provide. This is the combined result of i) the ambitious size of this first RenovAr 
tender (if successful, it will result in a five-fold increase in installed wind and solar PV generation capacity in 
just two years) and ii) the still low –albeit improving- credit rating of Argentina. 
3) Lack of sufficient and adequate long-term debt financing has been the main reason behind the failure of 
previous government tenders, such as GENREN in 2010, where just about 15% of awarded projects and 
capacity got built. 
 
The proposed two instruments are meant to provide (directly or indirectly) long-term project finance in line with project 
needs and thus helping overcome this financial barrier.  
 
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness, taking into account the total project financing and the mitigation/ 
adaptation impact that the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate 
benchmark. For mitigation, please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the cost per tCO2eq). 
 
Cost-efficiency of the proposed GCF program is high, at just 8.5 USD per ton of CO2 abated. This is in the same order 
of magnitude as other similarly oriented programs proposed by IDBG in the past to other climate funds. For example, 
for the CTF Mexico Renewable Energy Program (IDBG’s Private Sector component) cost-effectiveness at the program 
level was estimated at USD 8.33-11.11 of CTF investment per Ton of CO2 abated.  
 
Some of the pillars of the high efficiency of this program are: 
 
high expected leverage of the GCF contribution (1:4 ratio), based on which it will help finance about 40% of the 
total generation capacity initially targeted by the first RenovAr tender with less than 10% of the investment needed. 
 
high estimated capacity factor (40-45%) for supported wind projects, based on outstanding resources conditions 
in vast areas of Argentina.

=== PAGE 29 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 45 
 
 
 
E 
Effectiveness is also expected to be high, based on the combination with IDBG capital and IDBG origination and 
structuring capacity. Between IDBG and GCF about 50% of the financing package will be provided, leaving just about 
20% of additional debt required to get to financial close (assuming an average 30% of equity required). This should 
help projects timely meet the aggressive timelines required by the tender, and avoid the incidence of the very costly 
penalties thereby established. 
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only) 
Please provide the co-financing ratio (total amount of co-financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the 
project/programme) and/or the potential to catalyze indirect/long-term low emission investment. 
 
Cofinancing/leverage ratio: 1:4 (i.e. GCF provides 20% of total investment cost) 
E.6.3. Financial viability  
Please specify the expected economic and financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support, based on the 
analysis conducted in F.1. 
 
The economic and financial analysis in section F.1 compares rates of return and societal economic benefits in the case 
of projects securing –based on GCF support and IDBG’s additional mobilization capacity- the type of tenors typically 
required for renewable energy projects to be viable in scenarios of cost competition. The analysis compares the results 
of projects financed with debt at 7-year tenors (as it appears to be the maximum tenor feasible for most commercial 
lenders interviewed during IDBG’s market analysis) and the 15-year tenors more typically seen as required in other 
markets, and which IDBG aims to provide based on demand from project proponents. 
 
For a sample 100 MW wind project financed at 70% of debt with 15-year tenor, a 11.1% equity return required a tariff 
of USD 60/MWh. Under this scenario, financial rate of return was 9.8% and economic rate of return ranged between 
20% and 33% (depending on whether the low –USD 90/MWh- or high –USD 154/MWh- alternative cost of energy was 
used). The significant increase of the economic rate of return relative to the financial one results from the combination 
of the social/economic value of the GHG emission reductions and the savings on energy costs, with the latter being 
the dominant factor in the scenario of the higher alternative cost of energy (where cost reductions are as high as 61%). 
 
A similar level of debt leverage at a 7-year tenor would require a tariff of USD 68.6/MWh to yield the same return for 
the sponsors. This represents a 14.3% increase in the tariff, making the benefits related to the tariff reductions decrease 
at a rate of USD 8.6/MWh, for a total of USD 81M during the life of the plant. 
 
From a different angle, the impact of the reduced tenor (if similar tariffs were aimed for) would be a reduction on equity 
returns of over 280 bps (from 11.1% to 8.3%). This type of reduction could lead sponsors from awardee projects to 
refrain from taking the project forward (thus not materializing neither the environmental nor the energy cost reduction 
benefits). 
 
Similar results were found in the case of the solar project sample. A 10.5% equity return required a tariff of USD 
65/MWh if financed at 15-year tenors. The financial rate of return in the base case (15 years) is 9.3% and economic 
rate of return ranges from 18% and 30%. Debt at 7 years in turn required a tariff increase of almost USD 9/MWh (for a 
total rate of USD 74/MWh) to maintain a similar return; this represents a 14% increase in tariffs, which would result in 
a reduction of the energy cost savings of about USD 47M throughout the life of the plant.  
 
In summary, the most notable results from the analysis in terms of the impact of projects securing (with GCF and IDBG 
support) long-term, 15-year debt, versus financing projects based on the 7-year or shorter tenors that most commercial 
lenders appear to be limited to offer are: 
i) equity returns are reduced by about 280 basis points if projects can only secure the relatively short tenors they are 
likely to obtain without the support of the Program. 
ii) required energy prices to deliver the same equity return are about 14% higher if only 7-year tenors are available. 
The price reductions that the longer tenors IDBG and GCF participation would allow could therefore result in energy 
cost savings to consumers and/or tax payers of about USD 290M during the life of the plants.

=== PAGE 30 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 45 
 
 
 
E 
Please describe financial viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention. Please describe the GCF’s financial 
exit strategy in case of private sector operations (e.g. IPOs, trade sales, etc.). 
 
The GCF support is required at this stage given the challenges associated to long-term investment in Argentina today 
(among other, still low –albeit improving- sovereign credit rating), in particular given the financial status of the energy 
sector. As the government continues to advance on various macroeconomic and sector reforms, these hurdles are 
expected to be overcome in the mid-term, resulting in a sector that can be financed on a fully commercial basis. 
Outstanding renewable energy resource conditions in Argentina, adequate availability of other required resources, and 
the continued decrease in technology cost should ensure financial viability of these investments once the sectorial and 
general investment challenges are overcome. A more detailed analysis on the pillars for long-term sustainability of 
GCF target investment and its exit strategy is provided in section D.2. 
 
E.6.4. Application of best practices 
Please explain how best available technologies and practices are considered and applied. If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices. 
 
Based on IDBG’s vast track-record financing wind and solar PV projects in Latin America, a number of best practices 
have been identified and consolidated by the IDBG credit team. These practices are considered by project teams and 
credit officers during due diligence and structuring of these transactions, and implemented as/when projects’ specific 
conditions may allow. A number of them are already included in the credit and structuring requirements established for 
the Program, including those related to financial structuring (ratios, etc.), due diligence review, project contracts, 
warranties, etc.  
The other driver and incentive for use of best technologies (beyond any credit requirements IDBG will set as a lender) 
is the competitive nature of the process, where most efficient, cost effective and reliable technologies (considering the 
life cycle of plants) will have an advantage over competing options, first during the evaluation of technical proposals 
(where some may be discarded if not found to be compliant with minimum technical requirements), and secondly, and 
most importantly, during the evaluation and ranking of economic offers, as price will be the most determinant 
competitiveness factor of eligible offers and is closely linked with the levelized cost of energy of each project, which 
captures life cycle costs and performance. 
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only) 
 
(a) Total project financing 
US$ 650 Million   
(b) Requested GCF amount  
US$ 130 Million (investment 
component) 
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  
15.3 Million tCO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO2eq (d = a / c) 
US$ 42.4 / tCO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq removed (e = b / c) 
US$ 8.5 / tCO2eq 
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators (d) and (e) above. 
GHG emission reductions were calculated based on:

=== PAGE 31 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 45 
 
 
 
E 
i) 
Grid emission factor of 0.49 tons CO2/MWh calculated based on GoA data17 and UNFCCC/CDM AM 
Tool 07 v5.0 : Methodological tool to calculate the emission factor for an electricity system Version 
05.0 
ii) 
Values for indicators (d) and (e) were calculated based on other Program targets (e.g. minimum of 5 
projects and 400 MW of capacity) and assumptions on factors such as expected capacity factors, 
expected life of the assets, CAPEX costs, among other. 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only) 
Expected total leverage: USD 520 M, of which: 
 
IDBG: USD 200M 
 
Other B-/co-lenders (commercial banks and other DFIs): USD 125M 
 
Project sponsors/equity investors: USD 195M 
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above. 
 
IDBG volume of financing based on preliminary internal target, subject to potential changes based on 
evolution of macroeconomic conditions or other relevant factors.  
 
Equity: based on an estimated 30% average across the portfolio. 
 
Other lenders: based on market sounding conducted by IDBG for appetite from other lenders. 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme) 
Job creation: 4,480-6,300 jobs 
GCF investment/job created = USD 20,600-29.000/job 
                                                     
17 http://energia3.mecon.gov.ar/contenidos/verpagina.php?idpagina=2311

=== PAGE 32 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 45 
 
 
 
F 
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis 
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the detailed economic and financial analysis (including the financial 
model, taking into consideration the information provided in section E.6.3). 
I. Introduction  
As described in previous sections, the proposed GCF program is aimed at helping renewable energy awardee projects 
secure long-term debt financing, to allow them to timely reach financial close and advance to construction and 
operation, overcoming the access-to-finance hurdles based on which previous tenders failed 18. Long-term debt 
financing is key for the cost competitiveness of renewables, so projects aiming to prevail in the tender have built high 
debt leverage assumptions into their bids. As contracts are awarded, projects will need to secure consistent types and 
volumes of debt financing to successfully carry projects forward. Per IDBG’s market sounding, limitations in the 
availability of long-term debt financing (i.e. with tenors of at least 12-15 years) may be encountered relative to the 
investment needs associated to the 1,000 MW initially targeted by the first RenovAr tender and any additional capacity 
that may be awarded as part of such tender or subsequent ones. This type of tenors seem to be available only from a 
limited number of DFIs. Appetite from the range of commercial banks consulted by IDBG seems to be for much shorter 
tenors (5-7 years). These type of tenors will be inadequate for the projects offering the lowest prices and therefore likely 
to succeed in the tenders. The economic and financial analysis hereby assesses the effect on tariffs and projects 
economics (equity, financial and economic rates of returns) of projects financed under these different tenor scenarios, 
to evaluate the impact that the proposed GCF’s financial support and IDBG’s additional mobilization efforts to secure 
sufficient long-term project debt could have.  
 
II. Methodology  
The approach used in this economic analysis is the stakeholder framework, in which the ERR (Economic Rate of 
Return) is calculated on the basis of two sample 19 project's FRR (Financial Rate of Return) flow, by performing 
adjustments to reflect differences between private returns (i.e. benefits and costs) to the project itself (which are 
reflected in the FRR), vs. benefits and costs to other stakeholders and society as a whole. Since not all of the economic 
costs and benefits are quantifiable in a cost-effective way, or data on them available, quantitative adjustments of 
impacts on some stakeholders is complemented by qualitative discussion of the possible impacts on other stakeholders.  
 
Both the FRR and ERR reflect the project’s financial and economic costs and benefits flow’s Internal Rate of Return 
over the project lifetime, which is the hypothetical discount factor which would have to be applied for the project costs 
to equal the project benefits over time. The higher this rate, the higher the project benefits are when compared to the 
cost.  
 
While estimating some stakeholder benefits is readily possible based on sample project's financial projections and other 
relevant data, the limited immediate evaluability especially of more indirect and generally hard-to-attribute effects (such 
as longer-term indirect project impacts, or impacts on competition, business conditions, etc.) puts natural constraints 
on the quantitative analysis that can be performed. Nevertheless, this economic analysis intends to capture some of 
the most important of these impacts, with the resulting ERR believed to be a representative lower-bound measure for 
the project's economic impact.  
 
The ERR calculation quantitatively captures:  
 
Project costs to the sponsors and financiers  
 
Project revenues (benefits) to the sponsors and financiers  
 
Differences between the price of energy paid to the projects and estimates of the energy sources (and their 
prices) displaced by these projects 
                                                     
18 In the 2010 GENREN tender program, 895 MW of renewable energy were awarded across 32 projects. As of 2015, 
only 7 of those projects, totalling 139 MW had been built. This represents just 15% of the capacity awarded. 
19 One 100 MW wind project, and one 100 MW solar PV project, with cost assumptions based on references from 
similar projects financed by IDB in other countries, and resource, grid emission factors and alternative costs of energy 
based on local conditions.

=== PAGE 33 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 45 
 
 
 
F 
 
The estimated value to society of the avoidance of negative externalities (in the form of CO2 emissions) due to 
energy generated by the GCF program’s wind and solar PV power projects being used instead of energy 
produced by other, more emission-intense power plants.  
 
III. Assumptions  
Some of the mains assumptions to derive the additional economic value –beyond the financial returns- of the projects 
were the following: 
 
 
Alternative cost of energy: one of the main drivers of this renewed GoA’s effort to promote and develop renewable 
energy generation is the significant impact that the increasing reliance on fossil fuel-based generation has had on 
fiscal and trade balances. According to a report from the Argentine Renewable Energy Association, the average 
cost of fossil solutions put in place to overcome energy supply deficits in the last few years was USD 390/MWh in 
2014. This resulted from the combination of the fuel cost (an average of USD 154/MWh for gasoil) and other costs 
associated with such contracts. Given GoA’s goal of displacing such expensive generation with the new renewable 
generation, and given the absence of projections of power costs in the market, we take the cost of the displaced 
fuel (just the USD 154 for the fuel, not the cost of the full contracts, to be conservative) as a reference for the 
counterfactual cost of energy. We also run the analysis using a more conservative (i.e. lower) alternative cost 
assumption of USD 90/MWh, which was indicated by some sources as a more  representative average cost across 
various thermal generation technologies and fuels (including prices from imported and domestic sources), and 
which could be displaced by a higher penetration of renewables. 
 
Grid emission factor: 0.49 Ton CO2/MWh of renewable energy supplied (per the methodology indicated in previous 
sections). 
 
Value of carbon: while there is intense ongoing debate about the incidence and the social costs of the greenhouse 
gas effect, as well as on the methodologies employed, there have been recent efforts to summarize and validate 
academic findings by testing across a wide set of climate change models and approaches used in this field. In 
2010, an inter-agency working group 20  involving a wide array of U.S. government agencies and specialist 
institutions produced a report on official estimates for the (global) social costs of greenhouse gases, which was 
widely referenced21, with its estimates being consistently used in the analysis of U.S. regulatory impact analyses 
across agencies. This economic analysis uses the above-mentioned report’s most recent central estimate for the 
social cost of carbon (USD per ton of carbon dioxide), being USD 33 for 2013 (in 2007 US dollars) and rising 
thereafter. In particular, the current estimate of USD 38/Ton CO2 was used for this analysis.  
 
IV. Results 
For the sample 100 MW wind project, if financed at 70% of debt with 15-year tenor, a 11.1% equity return required a 
tariff of USD 60/MWh. Under this scenario, financial rate of return was 9.8% and economic rate of return ranged 
between 20% and 33% (depending on whether the low –USD 90/MWh- or high –USD 154/MWh- alternative cost of 
energy was used). The significant increase of the economic rate of return relative to the financial one results from the 
combination of the social/economic value of the GHG emission reductions and the savings on energy costs, with the 
latter being the dominant factor in the scenario of the higher alternative cost of energy (where cost reductions are as 
high as 61%). 
 
A similar level of debt leverage at a 7-year tenor would require a tariff of USD 68.6/MWh to yield the same return for 
the sponsors. This represents a 14.3% increase in the tariff, making the benefits related to the tariff reductions decrease 
at a rate of USD 8.6/MWh, for a total of USD 81M during the life of the plant. 
 
From a different angle, the impact of the reduced tenor (if similar tariffs were aimed for) would be a reduction on equity 
returns of over 280 bps (from 11.1% to 8.3%). This type of reduction could lead sponsors from awardee projects to 
refrain from taking the project forward. 
 
                                                     
20 Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon, United States Government   
21 E.g. in Greenstone, M. and Looney, A. “A Strategy for America’s Energy Future: Illuminating Energy’s Full Costs”, 
Hamilton Project Strategy Paper May 2011, Brookings

=== PAGE 34 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 45 
 
 
 
F 
Similar results were found in the case of the solar project sample. A 10.5% equity return required a tariff of USD 65/MWh 
if financed at 15-year tenors. The financial rate of return in the base case (15 years) is 9.3% and economic rate of return 
ranges from 18% and 30% (still high, even when lower than in the wind sample). Debt at 7 years in turn required a tariff 
increase of almost USD 9/MWh (for a total rate of USD 74/MWh) to maintain a similar return; this represents a 14% 
increase in tariffs, which would result in a reduction of the energy cost savings of about USD 47M throughout the life of 
the plant.  
 
Further economic benefits have been qualitatively identified, but not quantified in the economic rate of return, given the 
difficulties assessing them for an unknown portfolio of projects. Among the main potential benefits to local communities 
and local environment, we find:  
 
Benefits stemming from the avoidance of more local (air, soil and water) pollution other than CO2 emissions, since 
no estimate for their economic cost is available for this analysis.  
 
Potential direct and indirect benefits of project-caused job creation in the form of higher work income than the next-
best alternative for all project employees. Given the typically low local income levels in many of the remote wind 
sites, this benefit can potentially be quite important, especially for local stakeholders. A lack of estimates on the 
applicable wage of income differential prevented an inclusion of all such expected benefits.  
 
Benefits stemming from more energy price stability that shall occur with a more diversified energy matrix in the long 
run. 
 
Benefits associated with the potential reduction in fiscal and trade deficits.  
 
 
NOTE: A supplemental economic analysis, focusing on the specifics of the projects to be supported by the program, 
once they are confirmed, will normally be conducted during the project preparation stage, and will allow assessing 
economic benefits and impacts more precisely. Some aspects of these analysis will be shared through the periodic 
reporting required based on the program’s performance framework. 
 
 
Based on the above analysis, please provide economic and financial justification (both qualitative and quantitative) for 
the concessionality that GCF provides, with a reference to the financial structure proposed in section B.2. 
 
The analysis shows that the tenor of the debt financing that projects can access has significant impact on the tariff that 
is required to deliver a certain level of equity return. Based on the assumptions hereby made, projects financed with 7-
year tenors require tariffs about 14% higher than those financed at 15 years (which is the tenor intended by IDBG for 
projects in the first RenovAr tender, and a level representative of those normally assumed across tenders in Latin 
America by sponsors behind the lowest bids and who get the contract awards). 
 
In addition, the impact of the debt tenor on equity returns is significant. As seen in the previous section, for the sample 
wind project, the shorter debt tenor results in a reduction of equity returns of 280 basis points, which could result in a 
decision by an investor not to take the project forward (as has been the case in previous renewable energy tenders 
where the failure to secure adequately termed debt –among other things- resulted in only about 15% of the awarded 
capacity being built). 
 
The GCF would therefore have strong additionality in this program by help securing –through its 15-year co-financing22 
or the refinancing guarantees that would allow commercial lenders to extend their tenors- the long term debt required 
by these projects to reach financial close at competitive prices and help deliver the various economics benefits of these 
alternative and more sustainable sources of energy. Failure to secure properly termed debt risks repeating the results 
of previous tenders.  
 
                                                     
22 Or potentially longer tenors in subsequent tender rounds or in the financing of renewable energy generation 
contracted between private parties.

=== PAGE 35 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 45 
 
 
 
F 
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
Please provide an assessment from the technical perspective. If a particular technological solution has been chosen, 
describe why it is the most appropriate for this project/programme. 
While the first RenovAr tender has been open to various renewable technologies (wind, solar PV, biomass, biogas and 
small hydro), pre-defined quotas favored wind (60% of the capacity allocation) and solar PV (30%). This is likely 
attributable to the better prospects for these technologies to quickly deliver scale, one of the main objectives of this 
tender (1,000 MW target). The market validated this assessment, with 99% of all capacity offered concentrating in wind 
and solar PV. Offers for wind and solar power capacity have exceeded the quota allocation by factors of 5.8 and 9.4 
respectively. In turn, the other technologies did not initially reach the smaller quotas reserved for them.23   
The high level of offer for these technologies relates –among other- to the outstanding wind and solar resource 
conditions in vast areas of Argentina. Wind capacity factors exceed 40% in various regions. Global Horizontal Irradiation 
(GHI) in the northwest of Argentina reaches levels above 2,500 KWh/m2, similar to northern Chile (e.g. Atacama desert) 
where there is more than 1.2 GW of solar PV in operation. The resource for both wind and solar PV in Argentina are 
therefore among the best of the world. The land required for these type of projects is normally vastly available where 
these resources are strong, given the low density of population and remoteness from population centers. Finally, the 
significant reductions in capex cost for these technologies (in particular for solar PV) have increased their cost 
competitiveness significantly relative to other renewable and fossil-based alternatives. 
All these factors create the conditions for wind and solar PV power to become quite cost competitive in Argentina 
(assuming adequate financing can be obtained and cost of capital comes down), but also quite replicable and scalable.  
For these reasons, and given the main objective of this Program of helping achieve in the short term the ambitious 
scale of renewable energy penetration targets (8% by 2018), the investment component of this Program is initially 
focusing on the two technologies that are better positioned to help reach such scale in the short term. IDBG will seek 
to support additional technologies through the technical cooperation component, as well as through potential 
subsequent programs. 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations 
Describe the main outcome of the environment and social impact assessment. Specify the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan, and how the project/programme will avoid or mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g. 
preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with the Fund’s Environmental and Social Safeguard (ESS) 
standard. Also describe how the gender aspect is considered in accordance with the Fund’s Gender Policy and Action 
Plan.  
Environmental and Social Impacts and Risks  
The potential key environmental, social, health and safety, and labor issues and risks associated with this Program are 
those related to the wind and solar PV generation sub-projects to be financed under the GCF Program.  Key impacts 
and risks expected from the wind and solar projects are: 
Wind projects (land-based):  
Wind energy projects can result in adverse environmental or social impacts, which will vary in nature, intensity and 
duration based on the specific characteristics, location and size of the wind farm, as well as the specific environmental 
and social context. Depending on the area, the construction of access roads and transmission lines to connect the wind 
farms to the grid could intensify the adverse impact of these projects. The general risks and impacts during construction 
can include: (i) habitat disturbance; (ii) soil erosion; (iii) soil and water pollution; (iv) air emissions and dust generation; 
                                                     
23 This may have also been due to aspects in the contractual framework that may have required further tailoring to be 
more conducive to the development of these technologies.

=== PAGE 36 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 45 
 
 
 
F 
(v) increased heavy traffic; (vi) noise and vibrations; (vii) loss of vegetation; (viii) occupational health and safety hazards 
for the workforce; (ix) community health and safety issues; (x) changes in local economy; (xi) changes in local societal 
structure/ dynamics; (xii) community expectations and conflicts; and (xiii) access to land/ land use changes. During 
operation, the risks and impacts can include: (i) bird and bat mortality due to collision with turbines and electrocution 
with transmission lines; (ii) habitat fragmentation from access roads and transmission lines; (iii) visual and landscape 
impacts, including shadow flicker effect; (iv) noise from mechanical and aerodynamic movement; (v) lighting and shade 
from blades; (vi) community health and safety hazards; and (vii) land use changes. In some specific cases, it may 
involve use of indigenous land/ territories; community/ stakeholder opposition and/or heightened expectations for local 
benefits.  
Solar PV Projects:  
Solar PV projects have more limited environmental and social impacts; however, the intensity of the impacts can vary 
depending on the location. The general risks and impacts during construction can include: (i) habitat disturbance; (ii) 
soil erosion; (iii) soil and water pollution; (iv) air emissions and dust generation; (v) increased heavy traffic; (vi) noise 
and vibrations; (vii) loss of vegetation; (viii) occupational health and safety hazards for the workforce; (ix) community 
health and safety issues; (x) changes in local economy; (xi) changes in local societal structure/ dynamics; (xii) 
community expectations and conflicts; and (xiii) access to land/ land use changes. During operations, impacts are 
primarily associated with (i) land use conversion and habitat loss; (ii) habitat fragmentation from access roads and 
transmission lines; and (iii) waste management associated with the disposal of solar panels. In some specific cases, 
access to water and water availability; use of indigenous land/ territories and community/ stakeholder perception and 
expectations for local benefits can be an issue.  
 
Environmental and Social Due Diligence Process 
Projects under this Program will undergo the environmental and social review process required for all direct investments 
(e.g., project finance). Projects will be reviewed against the standards of the IDB Environmental and Safeguards 
Compliance Policy and other IDB Policies as well as international best practices such as the IFC Performance 
Standards and World Bank Group Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines, including the General 
Guidelines and Industry-Specific Guidelines. 
Eligibility: At the Eligibility stage, a preliminary category is provided to the project, based on the impacts and risks 
described in the EIA and other relevant documentation, including publicly available information. Only projects that are 
preliminarily Category B or C will be eligible. At this stage, an Environmental and Social Screening and Strategy (ESS) 
will be prepared, which indicates the most relevant environmental and social aspects or terms of reference for the due 
diligence.  
Projects eligible under the Program will be projects Category B or C, defined as:  
-Category B: projects have potential environmental and/or social impacts and risks that are less adverse than those of 
a Category A and which are generally limited to the project site, largely reversible and can be mitigated via measures 
that are readily available and feasible to implement in the context of the operation.  
-Category C: projects are likely to result in very limited or no adverse environmental or social impacts or risks.  
Category A projects will not be eligible for financing under this Program. 
Appraisal: During appraisal, an environmental and social due diligence will be conducted by experienced 
Environmental and Social Specialists. Depending on the complexity of the project or the need for local expertise, an 
Independent Environmental and Social Consultant (IESC) may be hired to support the review. The due diligence will 
consist of a thorough review of relevant environmental, social, and labor and health and safety documentation, 
complemented with interviews with the project sponsor staff, consultants and contractors.  During the site visit, the

=== PAGE 37 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 45 
 
 
 
F 
proposed project’s area of influence will be visited and meetings with relevant stakeholders will be held. The ESDD will 
typically address the following aspects: 
 
Confirmation that the project has been designed following good international industry practice; 
 
Review of the site selection and analysis of alternatives for the project and its associated facilities; 
 
An assessment of the project’s Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and supporting studies, in 
compliance with international standards;  
 
An assessment of the project's Environmental, Health and Safety Management System, including plans and 
procedures, to assess their adequacy in terms of responsibilities, training, auditing, reporting, and resources to be 
made available to ensure adequate implementation; 
 
Organizational capacity, including at the corporate level as well as at the project level; 
 
Completeness and adequacy of the environmental and social baseline studies, including but not limited to: 
biodiversity (with emphasis on birds and bats and their migratory paths for wind projects), noise, traffic, land use, 
natural disaster risk and cultural heritage; 
 
Assessment of environmental and social impacts and risks, including where possible, quantitative analyses 
through modeling and other methods;  
 
Assessment of potential adverse socio-economic impacts of land acquisition/ easement, construction activities, 
temporary loss of access to agricultural land required for the installation of the transmission line; evaluation of 
mitigation and compensation framework and measures for the current land owners along planned transmission 
lines; 
 
Cumulative impacts; 
 
Adequacy of the mitigation measures, management and monitoring plans and programs; 
 
Human resources and labor policies, including compliance with local regulations; 
 
Completeness and adequacy of public consultation, disclosure and stakeholder engagement, including vulnerable 
groups;  
 
Environmental, social, labor and health and safety requirements passed on to contractors; 
 
Assess health and safety practices for workers and if the Project is meeting good international industry standards; 
 
Evaluation of risks of natural disasters and emergency response. 
The project’s environmental and social aspects will be reviewed against the applicable safeguards, policies, standards 
and guidelines. 
The results of the meetings with stakeholders will be documented and input received from stakeholders will be taken 
into consideration in the overall assessment of the project’s compliance and opportunities for improved environmental 
and social performance. Typical stakeholder to interview will include local authorities, local leaders, project-affected 
communities, other groups or entities with an interest in or an influence on the project. 
As a result of the due diligence, an Environmental and Social Review Summary (ESRS) will be prepared and disclosed 
at least 30 days prior to approval on the website. The ESRS will include a link to the ESIA and other relevant project 
documents prepared by the project sponsor. The ESRS will include the main conclusions of the project’s alignment with 
the applicable requirements. Any gaps or enhancements that need to be completed to align the project to the applicable 
requirements will be summarized in an Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP) and will specify the dates required 
for completion of each action. The ESAP will also be disclosed on the website as part of the ESRS.  
Closing and Disbursement: The ESAP will be included as a condition to the loan agreement, together with other 
general environmental and social requirements in the legal documents. The conditions precedent (CP) to closing will 
be reviewed by the Environmental and Social Specialist for adequacy and completeness vis-à-vis the applicable 
requirements. Prior to each disbursement, the Environmental and Social Specialist will review the documentation 
provided by the project sponsor and verify if it satisfies the CPs for a given disbursement.

=== PAGE 38 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 45 
 
 
 
F 
Supervision: During construction, projects will be supervised at least every six months to review compliance with the 
environmental and social covenants in the loan agreement, including compliance with standards of IDB’s safeguards 
and policies as well as the ESAP requirements. During operations, projects will be supervised at least annually, with a 
more frequent review during the first years of operation. An annual report will be prepared for projects based on 
information provided by the project and the supervision visits. Some projects may also have an IESC that will support 
the review.  
Multi-Stakeholder Engagement and Consultation 
Projects will be reviewed against relevant IDB environmental and social safeguards standards that will be applied in 
accordance with the AMA and/or such other arrangements to be entered into by the parties. This includes requiring the 
client’s engagement with affected communities and stakeholders through the disclosure of relevant project information, 
consultation, and informed, effective participation, consistent with the principles of good international industry practice 
(GIIP) such as the IFC Performance Standards. Stakeholder engagement must be commensurate to project risks and 
impacts and enable them to express their concerns in a timely manner as to the scope and effectiveness of 
environmental and social assessments, management plans and compensation schemes. Certain impacts related to 
resettlement, livelihood losses and indigenous peoples may require agreements with stakeholders. Projects must also 
include a grievance management mechanism commensurate with the complexity and level of conflict associated with 
the project. Special attention is paid to participation by vulnerable groups (such as women, indigenous peoples, and 
other ethnic minorities, low income and illiterate groups, youth, the elderly, and persons with disabilities). 
During appraisal, projects require a site visit, which includes interviews with clients’ staff, contractors, consultants and 
relevant stakeholders. These stakeholders commonly include: project-affected communities; local and State authorities; 
local leaders; local workers; organized groups with an interest in the project; NGOs/associations; academics/ scientific 
groups; and vulnerable groups. A preliminary list of stakeholders will be requested from the project sponsor and will 
complement it with research gathered during the due diligence review. The results of meetings and interviews with 
stakeholders are taken into consideration for the appraisal and supervision requirements.  
Information will be disclosed in accordance with disclosure standards consistent with the AMA. In summary, disclosure 
requirements for projects that are Category B and C include:  
 
Category B: sub-project EIA and other relevant environmental analyses and disclosure template including ESRS 
30 days prior to Board Approval, and 
 
Category C: Disclosure template including ESRS 30 days prior to Board Approval. 
 
The operations under the GCF Program will be subject to an Independent Consultation and Investigation Mechanism 
(ICIM), which may apply in cases of complaints that the applicable policies have failed to be followed and, when as a 
result of such failure material adverse effects have occurred or might reasonably be expected to occur. 
 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan. Please see detailed gender assessment and action plan in the Annex. 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement 
Describe the project/programme’s financial management and procurement, including financial accounting, 
disbursement methods and auditing. 
Financial resources from the GCF will be managed according to the general provisions of the AMA between the GCF 
and the IDB. For this program in particular, GCF resources will be transferred to the GCF account at IDB based on the 
forecast of expected approval and disbursement requests of underlying projects, with sufficient anticipation to ensure 
disbursement obligations under the respective loan and guarantee agreements can be properly met. Based on such

=== PAGE 39 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 45 
 
 
 
F 
project disbursement requests, IIC will request disbursement of GCF resources held in trust by the IDB to an IIC 
payment account, and subsequently from there to the projects. Disbursements into individual projects will be made 
according to pre-approved criteria to include the size of the loan, tenor, and certain debt-to-equity criteria, among other. 
Reflows (in the form payments of principal, interest or fees) will be made from projects to the IIC payment account, and 
from there to the GCF account held by IDB, and subsequently, following any AMA and FAA provisions, to the GCF.  
GCF Proceeds will co-finance with the same level of seniority as IDB and IIC funding (pari-passu), as the case may be, 
and therefore a single IIC project team, with participation of IDB when required, will represent the interests of both IDB 
and IIC and the GCF in negotiating their participation in the financing, as well as in the execution, project supervision 
and portfolio management of the financing, including the exercise of any remedies in connection with any defaults or 
workouts. At the project level, relevant IDB environmental and social safeguards standards will be applied in accordance 
with the AMA and/or such other arrangements to be entered into by the parties. 
The diagram below illustrates the expected flow of funds. 
 
 
The technical cooperation will be executed by the IDB, following IDB procurement rules and procedures.

=== PAGE 40 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 45 
 
 
G 
 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures 
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Creditworthiness of the off-taker. Potential delay in 
payments by the off-taker for the energy delivered by 
the Borrowers may impact the Borrower’s ability to 
serve debt.  
Financial 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
High 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
Until the reforms underway in Argentina’s electricity sector (competitive processes to reduce cost of supply, 
adjustments to subsidy regime to enhance the cost recovery capacity of tariffs, etc.) are fully implemented, 
enhancing its sustainability, the off-taker’s ability to pay the energy contracted under the RenovAr public tender 
program will depend to some extent on the monetary transfers it continues to receive from GoA. 
 
In order to mitigate this risk, GoA has established a Renewable Energy Trust Fund (FODER) in which it will deposit 
financial resources with a face value equivalent to the obligations of one year of PPA payments that the off-taker 
needs to make under the RenovAr program. In case the off-taker fails to pay, the FODER has the obligation to pay 
on behalf of the off-taker, effectively mitigating the risk of occurring a delay in payment. In addition to the support of 
the FODER, the financing plan will include a Debt Service Reserve Account of no less than 6 months of Project debt 
service, which will be used to pay debt in the event of any cash short fall of the Borrower.  
 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary 
Please provide a summary of main risk factors. Detailed description of risk factors and mitigation measures can be 
elaborated in G.2. 
 
Project to be supported by this program will be exposed to two main types of risks: 
i) 
typical risk factors affecting renewable energy projects (resource, technology, etc.) which will be mitigated trough 
the structuring process of each transaction in accordance with IDB’s best practices for lending to wind and solar 
power projects. 
ii) risks associated with the more idiosyncratic economic and investments conditions in the energy sector in 
Argentina. These risks are mitigated through a combination of government action (policy/regulatory improvements 
underway, specific risk mitigation structures developed for this program, such as the FODER guarantee scheme), 
and additional structural credit enhancements (debt reserve accounts, sponsor support, etc.) that IIC will require 
at the project level. 
 
Details of such risks and mitigation strategies are listed below.

=== PAGE 41 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 45 
 
 
G 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Resource Risk. Lower-than-expected wind or solar 
irradiation could reduce the ability of the Project to 
generate enough revenues to service debt.  
Other 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Lower wind availability or solar irradiation presents a risk for the Project due to its uncertainty and potential impact on 
the capacity of the Project to generate revenues. This risk will be mitigated through the use of conservative base-case 
assumptions for debt sizing that incorporates levels of energy production that will have a high probability of being 
exceeded. The IDB will size the debt following its best practice standards, which require that the cash available for 
debt service meets a minimum debt service coverage ratio agreed for the Program.  
In order to estimate the availability of the resources, the IDB will retain an external technical consultant (the 
“Independent Engineer” or the “IE”) to independently analyze the wind measurements or solar irradiation using the 
best performing solar database presently available. For wind projects, the IDB will only finance projects that have a 
certain minimum time of on-site wind measurements with certified equipment acceptable to the IE. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Loss of revenues caused by delays in construction and 
cost overruns. 
 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Potential construction cost overruns or delays could lead to the need to have additional resources to complete the 
Project or impact the capacity of the Project to generate revenues to service debt at the beginning of the amortization 
of the loans. These risks will be mitigated through a set of minimum requirements for the EPC Contract, which will 
effectively transfer construction risk to the EPC Contractor. The EPC Contract will have a package of market-standard 
liquidated damages (the “LDs”), to be sized on a case-by-case basis taking into the account the opinion of the IE and 
considering the characteristics of project site and construction program. The LDs to be provided by the EPC 
Contractors or the Sponsor will be credit enhanced with a letter of credit posted by a financial institution acceptable to 
the IDB.  
If needed the IDB will also request additional support from Sponsor to cover risks that may be excluded by EPC 
Contractors.  
Selected Risk Factor 4 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Technology Risk. Underperformance of the technology 
leading to lower production of energy and revenues.  
Technical and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low

=== PAGE 42 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 45 
 
 
G 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Projects to be financed by the program will be exposed to risks related to the potential underperformance of its 
different components; in particular the solar panels and inverters and the wind turbines which could lower the 
capacity of the Project to generate revenues. This risk will be mitigated through i) the selection of commercially 
proven, independently certified wind turbines, solar panels and inverters, ii) O&M contracts that include a minimum 
plant availability guarantee, iii) solar panel degradation guarantee and defects guarantee provided by manufacturers 
of solar panels and wind turbines, iv) when appropriate, a major maintenance reserve accounts to perform 
scheduled maintenance and replacement of components.  
In addition, the risk will be mitigated by contracting an experienced operation and maintenance company, which will 
ensure proper maintenance of all equipment in accordance with best industry practices.  
Selected Risk Factor 5 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Convertibility and Transferability Risk. Ability of the 
Borrower to convert Argentinean Pesos into US 
Dollars may affect its capacity to service debt. 
Financial 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The PPA is denominated in US Dollars, but payments will be made by the off-taker in Argentinean Pesos at the 
exchange rate of the invoice date. In the event that Argentina faces serious restrictions on hard currency, the 
Borrower may face difficulties converting Argentinean Pesos into US Dollars and to transfer them abroad to service 
debt.  
 
This risk is mitigated given that the FODER gives the right to the Borrower to terminate the PPA and sell the project 
to FODER upon occurrence of a convertibility and transferability event.  
Selected Risk Factor 6 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Relatively new regulatory framework 
Other 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Projects to be financed by the Facility will be among the first commercial scale wind and solar power projects to 
be financed in the country under the recently established RenovAr Program. Given the low penetration of renewable 
energy in the country it is expected that the Argentinean regulatory framework will need to evolve over time to adapt 
and modernize the regulation as more renewable energy enters the market and the electricity sector is normalized.  
As an example, the PPA allows the off-taker to assign the obligation of the off-taker to large consumers or 
distribution companies, provided that the guarantee scheme provided by FODER remains in place. This expose 
projects to an additional off-taker risk which may create revenue volatility.  
This risk is mitigated by GoA’s strong commitment, established through Law 27.191, to increase the country’s 
energy generation capacity from clean sources, which can only be achieved through a sustained level of investment.

=== PAGE 43 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 45 
 
 
G 
Sustainability of these investments over time will only be possible by a balanced regulatory framework that does not 
negatively affect the early entrants in the sector.  
Selected Risk Factor 7 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Environmental and Social risks. 
Social and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Renewable energy power projects to be financed by the program (in particular wind) will be exposed to 
environmental and social risks. In particular, wind power projects may be affected by lower production resulting from 
mandatory shutdowns due to the presence of bats and/or migratory birds.  
This risk will be mitigated by the application of the environmental and social safeguards, which require a 
comprehensive assessment of environmental and social risks and its corresponding action plan to mitigate such 
risks. Among them, Borrowers are required to conduct a flora and fauna survey, including birds during the migratory 
seasons, before the execution of any works. In addition, all Projects will be subject to a public consultation process 
to identify and address, as needed, the concerns of the affected communities (if any). This risk will be further 
mitigated through the exclusion of Category A projects from this Program. 
 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon 
Please describe other potential issues which will be monitored as “emerging risks” during the life of the projects (i.e., 
issues that have not yet raised to the level of “risk factor” but which will need monitoring). This could include issues 
related to external stakeholders such as project beneficiaries or the pool of potential contractors. 
 
GoA intends to increase the installed capacity of wind and solar power projects by approximately 50 times in the 
next 9 years. However further expansion in installed capacity will necessarily require additional investments in 
transmission capacity. Without it, curtailment may occur in the most congested nodes of the transmission system, 
potentially affecting the ability of projects to dispatch energy into the grid. The IDBG will monitor the evolution of new 
installed capacity and node congestion and collaborate with GoA to analyze the possibilities to expand the 
transmission capacity in the country.

=== PAGE 44 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 45 
 
 
 
H 
H.1. Logic Framework.  
 
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework 
under the Results Management Framework. 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level24 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Shift to low-emission 
sustainable development 
pathways 
Please elaborate on the paradigm shift objectives to which the project/programme 
contributes. 
 
The program intends to help GoA change the pattern of investment in expansion of 
generation capacity, from the fossil-based solutions that have prevailed in the last 
decade to the ambitious renewable energy penetration targets (8% by 2017-2018; 
20% by 2025) established by Law 27.191 for the next decade. To achieve this, the 
proposed program is the first of various support interventions that will be designed 
over the next few years to achieve such transformation. This program will support the 
first stage of such transformation process by helping GoA and private sector clients 
successfully close and build the first few renewable energy projects under Law 
27.191’s new regulatory regime. GCF’s financial support to secure long-term project 
debt will help, in the context of limited availability of such type of financing, overcome 
the main barrier behind the failure of previous attempts. In the process of evaluating 
and closing such financing, the program will generate valuable insights that will be 
shared with relevant public authorities to continue to improve  regulation, design of 
tenders and off-taking agreements, and government support instruments, in order to 
enhance delivery of GoA’s long-term renewable energy penetration goals. In addition, 
program’s dedicated technical cooperation activities will help enhance policy, 
regulatory, planning and project financing capacities of both relevant public and 
private sector entities, to support achievement of GoA’s short- and long-term goals for 
a sustainable energy path.  
 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Basel
ine 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term  
(if applicable) 
Final 
Fund-level impacts 
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low-emission 
energy access and 
power generation 
Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced or 
avoided as a result 
of Fund-funded 
projects/programme
s  
 
Aggregated 
results of 
projects’ 
annual 
supervision 
report  
verified by an 
independent 
engineer and 
IIC Social & 
0 
 
15.3 
million 
of 
tonne
s of 
CO2eq 
The program’s 
final target is 
based on the 
assumptions 
indicated in 
section E.6.5, 
which are 
expected to be 
representative 
of the 
program’s 
                                                     
24 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement 
Frameworks available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement): 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf

=== PAGE 45 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 45 
 
 
 
H 
Environmenta
l specialist  
portfolio 
composition.  
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low-emission 
energy access and 
power generation 
Volume of finance 
leveraged by Fund 
funding (funding 
leverage factor) 
 
 
 
Aggregated 
amount 
allocated to 
finance low-
emission 
energy 
projects 
reported by 
IDBG 
N/A 
 
Volume: 
Total: 
USD 
520 M 
GCF 
leverag
e 
ratio:1:4 
IDBG will aim 
for at least this 
leverage level 
through its 
additional 
mobilization 
efforts with B- 
and co-
lenders. 
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low-emission 
energy access and 
power generation 
 
Cost per t CO2eq 
decreased for all 
Fund-funded 
mitigation projects/ 
programmes  
 
 
 
 
IDBG will 
calculate this 
value for each 
project in the 
GCF portfolio 
at the time of 
financial 
closing, 
based on total 
project cost 
and GCF 
financing to 
each project. 
IDBG will 
aggregate 
results and 
report to GCF 
for the whole 
portfolio. 
 
 
USD 
8.5 / 
ton 
CO2 
avoide
d 
As indicated 
in section 
E.6.5.

=== PAGE 46 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 45 
 
 
 
H 
                                                     
25 Percentage relative to national demand in the wholesale power market. Per Law 27.191’s definition, this includes 
power generated from all non-conventional renewable energy sources, including hydro up to 50 MW. 
26 Relative to 2016 energy consumption and renewable penetration goal. 
27 Target in Law 27.191 to be measured in 2018, given that Program will be prioritizing support for scale up in the first 
couple of years (2017-2018) towards meeting that target. 
28 “P” refers to indicators defined for this Program. 
29 Some reference values for women participation in related industries identified in the gender assessment are 17% in 
the “Energy, Gas and Water” sector, and 5.4% in the “Construction” sector, in 2012. These values however cannot be 
directly taken as the baseline for this program, or be used as a basis to meaningfully set a gender-disaggregated 
target for the Program. The Program will track employment by gender, however, and aim to do a comparison as 
meaningful as possible with these reference values. 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
(if applicable)  
Final 
Project/program
me 
outcomes 
Outcomes that contribute to Fund-level impacts 
M6.0 Increased 
number of small, 
medium and 
large low-
emission power 
suppliers 
6.1 Proportion of 
low-emission 
power supply in 
the national 
market  
 
Ministry of 
Energy and 
CAMMESA 
annual 
statistics  
 
1.9%25 
(2015) 
 
 
Increase 
directly  
supported 
by financing 
component 
of program: 
0.8%26 
Law 
27.191’s 
national 
target: 8%27 
Average 3-4% 
annual power 
demand increase 
during 2016-2019 
period 
Financial closing and 
construction for first 
few projects occur 
within timelines 
established under 
RenovAr first tender. 
M6.0 Increased 
number of small, 
medium and 
large low-
emission power 
suppliers 
6.3 MWs of low 
emission energy 
capacity installed, 
generated and/or 
rehabilitated as a 
result of GCF 
support 
IDBG’s 
project 
supervision 
2015:  
~300MW 
(without 
hydro) 
~800MW 
(includin
g hydro < 
50MW) 
 
 
2019: 
Directly 
supported 
by GCF 
program: 
400 MW 
GCF + 
previously 
existing: 
700 / 1200 
(without and 
with hydro, 
respectively) 
There is a sufficient 
amount of projects of  
50-100MW awarded 
contracts  
P2810.0 Jobs 
created by 
projects 
10.1 Women and 
men employed in 
manufacturing, 
IDBG’s 
project 
supervision 
0 
 
4,48029

=== PAGE 47 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 45 
 
 
 
H 
                                                     
30 Based on set of topics covered by Component 2 where support to the Ministry of Energy is provided: environmental 
& social, contract models, renewable energy center, solar map, solar energy pilots, thermo-solar, concentrated solar, 
biomass, marine, geothermal.  
supported by 
program 
construction and 
installation (MCI), 
and operation and 
maintenance 
(O&M) in the 
projects 
MCI: 4,430 
O&M: 50 
P11.0 Improved 
policy, planning 
and regulatory 
capacity of the 
Ministry of 
Energy 
11.1 Number of 
areas/topics 
where the 
program has 
provided support  
IDBG’s 
project 
supervision 
0 
 
930 
 
P12.0 Increased 
institutional 
capacity for 
renewable 
energy 
12.1 Renewable 
Energy Center 
created 
IDBG’s 
project 
supervision 
 
 
Center 
created 
 
P13.0 Improved 
conditions and 
opportunities for 
women in the 
renewable 
energy industry 
13.1 Companies 
implementing 
gender activities 
promoted by the 
Program 
IDBG’s 
project 
supervision 
0 
 
40% of 
beneficiary 
companies 
At least 40% of 
beneficiary 
companies are 
interested in 
implementing 
proposed gender 
activities 
Project/program
me outputs 
Outputs that contribute to outcomes 
P20.0 MWs of 
wind and solar 
PV generation 
capacity financed 
and installed with 
GCF financing 
support 
20.1 MWs of wind 
and solar PV 
generation 
capacity installed 
with program’s 
support 
 
IDBG’s 
project 
supervision 
0 
 
400 MW 
 
P21.0 Number of 
wind and solar 
PV projects  
financed and 
installed with 
GCF financing 
support 
21.1 Number of 
wind and solar PV 
projects financed 
by GCF 
IDBG’s 
project 
supervision 
0 
 
5 
 
P22.0 Number of 
targeted studies, 
strategic plans 
and knowledge-
22.1 Number of 
studies completed 
Ministry of 
Energy 
0 
 
 
 
8

=== PAGE 48 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 45 
 
 
 
H 
 
sharing activities 
completed with 
GCF support  
22.2 Number of 
training sessions 
completed 
22.3 Number of 
pilot projects 
completed 
Annual 
Reports 
0 
 
0 
3 
 
1 
P23.0 Projects 
implementing 
gender-equity 
activities 
23.1 % of 
companies 
considered for 
GCF financing that 
receive 
information about 
the three gender 
activities (internshi
p, 
training, and 
certification) 
 
 
23.2 % of 
companies 
receiving GCF 
financial support 
that contractually 
agree and plan 
for 
implementation of 
at least one 
gender activity. 
 
23.3 % of 
companies that 
initiate 
implementation of 
agreed activities 
 
IDBG’s 
project 
supervision 
0 
 
100% of 
companies 
being 
considered 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
At least 
40% of 
supported 
companies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
At least 
40% of 
supported 
companies 
 
 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
Besides the arrangements (e.g. semi-annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please provide project/programme 
specific institutional setting and implementation arrangements for monitoring and reporting and evaluation. Please 
indicate how the interim/mid-term and final evaluations will be organized, including the timing. 
 
Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements will comply with requirements established between GCF and IDB in 
the AMA. 
 
Every project supported by the program will undergo the full IIC project cycle, including identification, eligibility review, 
due diligence evaluation, credit review, approval, pre-closing review, financial closing, disbursement, supervision, project 
closing (i.e. once debt has been fully repaid) and evaluation. As part of the approval process, every project supported by

=== PAGE 49 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 45 
 
 
 
H 
 
the GCF will be subject to an ex-ante assessment on the rationale for the project, its expected development impact and 
the additionality of IDBG and the GCF’s support. Such assessment will normally include an economic analysis of the 
main benefits associated with each specific project (in particular those identified in this program proposal).  
 
The supervision of the projects financed by the GCF will be based on a detailed Monitoring and Evaluation plan that will 
be implemented to track project performance and achievement of results. Each project will count with a Results Matrix 
(that will at minimum include the indicators required to feed the GCF program performance framework presented above) 
stating the project’s development objective and expected outcomes and outputs, following a vertical logic that explains 
how the development objective is expected to be achieved (clear definition of the relationships of cause and effect of how 
outputs and outcomes contribute to reaching the objective). Each outcome and output will be monitored through SMART 
indicators (Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic and Time-Bound) and will include a baseline value and a target to 
be achieved, as well as a defined source of data or a clear data collection plan. 
 
Each project will also have an ex-post evaluation plan in accordance with the Evaluation Cooperation Group-Good 
Practice Standards (ECG-GPS) guidelines that will assess the relevance, effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability of 
the projects in achieving their development goals. The ex-ante economic analysis prepared for the transaction will be 
updated at evaluation, including an assessment of the actual results of the main expected outcomes of the project, such 
as greenhouse gas emissions avoided as a result of increased supply of renewable energy, as well as other benefits 
steaming from the project. 
 
Every year, the Portfolio Management Division of the IIC will prepare an Annual Supervision Report to monitor the 
progress of the project and update the indicators included in the Results Matrix of the project and any additional indicators 
included in the loan agreement. Project level results will be aggregated to assess the impact of the GCF’s program in 
addition to the GCF’s project-specific indicators.

=== PAGE 50 ===
Page 46

=== PAGE 51 ===
Page 47

=== PAGE 52 ===
Page 48 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Basic project/programme information 
Project/programme title 
Catalyzing private investment in sustainable energy in Argentina – 
Part 1 
Accredited entity 
Inter-American Development Bank 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
2016-11-12 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Spanish 
Link to disclosure 
English: http://www.iadb.org/en/topics/climate-change/climate-
change,19086.html 
Spanish: http://www.iadb.org/es/temas/cambio-climatico/cambio-
climatico,19086.html  
The ESMF contains a limited impact assessment (ESIA) consistent 
with the requirements of PS1.  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
2016-11-12 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Spanish 
Link to disclosure 
English: http://www.iadb.org/en/topics/climate-change/climate-
change,19086.html 
Spanish: http://www.iadb.org/es/temas/cambio-climatico/cambio-
climatico,19086.html  
The ESMF contains a management plan equivalent of ESMP 
consistent with the requirements of PS1. 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Not Applicable 
Language(s) of disclosure 
Link to disclosure 
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
2016-11-12 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Spanish 
Link to disclosure 
English: http://www.iadb.org/en/topics/climate-change/climate-
change,19086.html 
Spanish: http://www.iadb.org/es/temas/cambio-climatico/cambio-
climatico,19086.html  
Other link(s) 
Not Applicable
