=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: Sunny Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
creationDate: D:20161201134155+09'00'
modDate: D:20161201165849+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum II 
Funding proposal package for FP029 
GCF/B.15/13/Add.02/Rev.01 
1 December 2016 
Meeting of the Board 
13 – 15 December 2016 
Apia, Samoa 
Provisional agenda item 16(e) 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three parts: 
a) A funding proposal summary titled “SCF Capital Solutions” submitted by
Development Bank of Southern Africa;
b) No-objection letters issued by the national designated authorities or focal points; and
c)
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national 
designated authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive 
Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled “SCF Capital 
Solutions” submitted by Development Bank of Southern Africa is being circulated on a 
limited distribution basis only to Board Members and Alternate Board Members to 
ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged or commercially sensitive 
information of the entity.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.15/13/Add.02/Rev.01 
Page b 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal summary submitted by the accredited entity       
 1 
No-objection letters issued by the national designated authorities or focal points 
 61 
  Environmental and social report(s) disclosure       
 63

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme Title: 
SCF Capital Solutions 
Country/Region: 
South Africa_ 
Accredited Entity: 
Development Bank of Southern Africa  
Date of Submission: 
04 November 2016

=== PAGE 4 ===
Contents 
 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
 
Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 
 
Section C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
Section F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
Section G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
Section I 
ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
 
 
 
 
Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document. 
 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“[FP]-[Agency Short Name]-[Date]-[Serial Number]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / programme title 
SCF Capital Solutions 
A.1.2. Project or programme 
Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region                     
South Africa 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies) 
Department of Environmental Affairs  
A.1.5. Accredited entity 
Development Bank of Southern Africa 
A.1.5.a. Access modality 
☐  Direct 
☐  International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary 
Executing Entity: SCF Capital Solutions 
Beneficiary: Green MSMEs 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD) 
☐  Micro (≤10) 
☐  Medium (50<x≤250)  
☒ Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus 
☐ Mitigation 
☐  Adaptation ☒  Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission 
04 November 2016 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details 
Contact person, position 
Olympus Manthata, Investment Manager 
Organization 
Development Bank of Southern Africa 
Email address 
OlympusM@DBSA.org 
Telephone number 
+27 11 3135238  
Mailing address 
OlympusM@dbsa.org 
 
 
 
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply) All 
Reduced emissions from: 
☒ 
Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ 
 Low emission transport  
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)   
☒ 
 Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ 
 Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.) 
 
Increased resilience of: 
☒ 
Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.) 
☒ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.) 
☐ 
 Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.) 
 Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
 
☐

=== PAGE 6 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 2 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words) 
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objectives and primary measurable 
benefits (see investment criteria in section E). The detailed description can be elaborated in section C. 
 
The SA Government is seeking to achieve a 34 percent reduction in domestic Greenhouse Gas Emissions by 2020 and 
42 percent by 2025. In addition, the growth foreseen in the Green Economy is expected to create almost 255 000 jobs in 
South Africa in the medium term. These targets can only be fully realised if the current problem of lack of access to 
finance for SMMEs in the green economy can be adequately addressed. Like those in other industries, SMMEs in the 
green economy suffer from chronic lack of access to finance. This is mostly due to lack of track record and collateral, 
thus traditional banking is unable to access risk and approve a credit facility for such companies. With vast, renewable 
resources and biodiversity positions, the green economy sector is seen as strategic to solving the problem. Renewable 
energy is the leading source of Foreign Direct Investment, with over R200bn ($15bn) invested into the renewable energy 
independent producer program. The latter was established to offer opportunities for small-scale renewable energy 
producers that will stimulate participation by Small Medium Enterprises.  The Industrial Policy Action Plan (IPAP) identifies 
“green and energy-saving industries” as a priority sector, targeting areas such as solar water heating and buildings energy 
efficiency. MSMEs therefore play an instrumental role in these value chains and help achieve climate policy goals, if only 
their access to finance challenges can be improved.  
 
This application is for the GCF to contribute 36 percent (US$12.2 million) of the required funding of US$ 34.15 million 
(R461 million at the exchange rate of 13.5 per USD) Fund that will be setup to finance MSMEs. The fund will deploy 
Equity capital committed by its Partners to support the most promising working capital prospects in the MSME space on 
purchase order or invoice discounting basis to MSMEs in the green economyThe objective of this programme is to 
improve access to finance for MSMEs in the green economy. This will result in more green activities being implemented. 
MSMEs are dynamic and highly innovative, however they are hampered by lack of access to finance. Many of them are 
at early stages of the business lifecycle and cannot access commercial bank financing, mainly due to lack of financial 
history and collateral.  
 
We will solve this problem by using supply chain financing techniques to provide working capital to MSMEs. Supply chain 
finance is applicable where MSMEs supplies goods or services to large credit worthy buyers. In supply chain finance, 
credit approval decisions are made based on the credit worthiness of the buyer (not the MSMEs) and the overall strength 
of the supply chain.  
 
We will target MSMEs which supply green services to strong off-takers for lower risk. 
 
We will focus on recurring supply chains to optimize operational efficiency and cost of operation for stable annuity 
income. 
 
Risk per transaction is minimised because individual transactional values are small, volumes are high and 
financing tenures are short, typically less than 90 days. 
 
SCF has already developed specific eligibility criteria for a pilot programme that is currently being used to extend 
credit, this criteria is in-line with the South Africa’s National Green fund. The current qualifying criteria is also 
aligned to the strategic imperatives of the GCF as well. The DBSA will ensure this criteria in enhanced for 
complete alignment with GCF. 
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone 
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) 
20/12/2016 
Expected financial close (if applicable) 
15/01/2017 
Estimated implementation start and end date 
Start: 01/04/2017 
End:  31/03/2027 
Project/programme lifespan 
10 years

=== PAGE 7 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 60 
 
 
 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme 
Please provide: 
 
an integrated financial model in Section I (Annexes) that includes a projection covering the period from financial 
closing through final maturity of the proposed GCF financing with detailed assumptions and rationale; and a 
sensitivity analysis of critical elements of the project/programme 
 
 
a description of how the choice of financial instrument(s) will overcome barriers and achieve project objectives, 
and leverage public and/or private finance 
 
a breakdown of cost estimates for total project costs and GCF financing by sub-component in local and foreign 
currency and a currency hedging mechanism: 
For example, under the component of drilling activity for a geothermal exploration project, sub-components would 
include civil engineering works, drilling services, drilling equipment and inspection test. 
 
Amount (for 
entire project) 
Currency  
GCF funding 
amount 
Currency Currency of disbursement 
to recipient 
34.148 
million USD ($) 12.222 
million USD ($) 
ZAR 
 
a breakdown of cost/budget by expenditure type (project staff and consultants, travel, goods, works, services, 
etc.) and disbursement schedule in project/programme confirmation (term sheet) as included in section I, 
Annexes. 
 
 
 
 
Financial Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
(a) 
Total 
project 
financing 
(a) = (b) + (c) 
34.148 
million USD 
($) 
10 years 
(b) 
GCF 
financing 
to 
recipient 
 
(i) Senior Loans 
(ii) 
Subordinated 
Loans 
(iii) Equity 
(iv) Guarantees 
(v) 
Reimbursable 
grants * 
(vi) Grants * 
 
………………… 
………………… 
12.222  
………………… 
………………… 
 
………………… 
Options 
Options 
million USD 
($) 
Options 
Options 
Options 
(  )  years 
( 10 )  years 
 
 
 
 
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
( 16 ) % IRR 
 
 
 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1 for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E.

=== PAGE 8 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 60 
 
 
 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi) 
12,222 
million USD 
($) 
 
(c) 
Co-
financing 
to 
recipient 
 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Name 
of 
Institution 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Equity 
Equity 
Equity 
Equity 
12.222 
7.407 
2.222 
0.074 
million 
USD 
($) 
million 
USD 
($) 
million 
USD 
($) 
million 
USD 
($) 
 
Private 
investor 
SEFA……… 
DBSA……… 
SCF 
Capital
Solution 
 
 
 
 
(10)  
(10 )  
(10) 
(10) 
Year 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Lead financing institution: ……………………… 
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co-financing institution. 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between GCF 
and 
AE 
(if 
applicable) 
In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deploys the GCF financing directly to the recipient, (i.e. the GCF financing 
passes directly from the GCF to the recipient through the AE) or if the AE is the recipient itself, in the proposed 
financial instrument and terms as described in part (b), this subsection can be skipped. 
 
If there is a financial arrangement between the GCF and the AE, which entails a financial instrument and/or financial 
terms separate from the ones described in part (b), please fill out the table below to specify the proposed instrument 
and terms between the GCF and the AE. 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Choose an item. 
…………………. 
Options 
(  )  years 
(   ) %  
 
Please provide a justification for the difference in the financial instrument and/or terms between what is provided by 
the AE to the recipient and what is requested from the GCF to the AE. 
 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable) 
How market price or expected commercial rate return was (non-concessional) determined? 
Existing factoring and contract financing firms tend to charge much higher monthly fees for this funding, between 4-8% 
per month, which is unsustainable for most SMMEs, whose margins are typically not that high. One of the main objectives 
of SCF Capital Solutions is to utilize developmental funding to provide affordable financing to SMMEs. Another objective 
is to catalyse private sector investment, who need to price higher in order to obtain good returns. Thus we will be seeking 
a cost of funds rate from DBSA, SEFA and GCF that will enable SCF to lower the client’s rate whilst also crowding-in 
private sector investors.

=== PAGE 9 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 60 
 
 
 
Private sector investors in South Africa typically look for IRR above 20,7% for their investment. At envisaged pricing of 
1,5-2% per month, it would not be possible to attract private investment. The GCF funding enables a build-up of the book 
by reinvesting returns until the desired rate of return can be achieved. 
Please provide an overview of the size of total banking assets, debt capital markets and equity capital markets which 
could be tapped to finance the proposed project/programme. 
According to the South African Reserve Bank’s credit exposure figures, captured on the BA200 form submitted to the 
bank supervision department, as of December 2015 South African bank loans of less than R7,5M to MSMEs was R180bn 
(USD 13bn). During the program we aim to attract USD11M of private investment. This is enable us to build a track 
record of performance and loss data that will enable us to attract commercials and tap into the USD13bn market. 
Activity in the equity markets for MSMEs is negligible, according to a recent SAVCA surveys, private equity firms in South 
Africa invest only 11% in early stage businesses. If Business Partners ( a specialist MSME investor)’s investments are 
excluded, the total average deal size during 2013 was R72.6 million (2012: R48.9 million). 
Please provide an overview of market rates (i.e. 1-year T-Bill, 5-year government bond, 5-year corporate bond (specify 
credit rating) and 5-year syndicate loan. 
Indicator 
Value 
Last Period 
Money Market Rates 
 i 
 
Repo rate 
7.00 
16/11/07 
Sabor 
6.988 
16/11/04 
Overnight FX rate 
6.960 
16/11/04 
Treasury bills - 91 day (tender rates) 
7.39 
16/11/04 
Treasury bills - 182 day (tender rates) 
7.44 
16/11/04 
Treasury bills - 273 day (tender rates) 
7.36 
16/11/04 
Treasury bills - 364 day (tender rates) 
7.25 
16/11/04 
NCD's - 3 months (closing rates) 
7.34 
16/11/04 
NCD's - 6 months (closing rates) 
7.96 
16/11/04 
NCD's - 12 months (closing rates) 
8.39 
16/11/04 
Jibar - 3 months 
7.36 
16/11/04 
Prime lending rate (predominant rate) 
10.50 
16/11/07 
Capital Market Rates 
  
 
6.75% 2021 (R208) (closing yields) 
8.14 
16/11/04 
10,5% 2026 (R186) (closing yields) 
8.69 
16/11/04 
3-5 years (daily average bond yields) 
7.92 
16/11/04 
5-10 years (daily average bond yields) 
8.36 
16/11/04 
10 years and longer (daily average bond yields) 
8.66 
16/11/04 
Exchange rates 
  
 
Nominal effective exchange rate 
62.18 
16/11/07 
Rand per US Dollar 
13.5353 
16/11/07 
Rand per British Pound 
16.7871 
16/11/07 
Rand per Euro 
14.9700 
16/11/07 
Rand per Japanese Yen 
0.1295 
16/11/07 
 
Source: JSE Limited.

=== PAGE 10 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 60 
 
 
 
The weighted average exchange rate of the rand is based on trade between South Africa and its twenty most  
important trading partners.  
Index: 2010=100.(See Article in June 2014 Quarterly Bulletin for various weights). 
Weighted average of the banks' daily rates at approximately 10:30am.  
As from 1 April 2004, the rate reflected related to negotiable certificates of deposit (NCD's) (instead of promissory  
notes).  
Replacing the Saonia+, Saonia, Forex Forwards and carry rate from 27 March 2007.  
Bankers Acceptances are no longer issued or traded.  
The last BA matured on 13 September 2013 and as a consequence publication of the BA rate has been discontinued. 
The R157 government bond matured on 15 September 2014 and is therefore no longer published.  
The rate on the R208 bond is published in its place. 
 
Provide examples or information on comparable transactions.  
Pricing comparison with comparable transactions 
Lending Type 
Pricing 
Secured bank lending 
Average Prime + 6% for SMEs (prime is 10,5%) 
Current SCF Capital Solutions 
2% per month (24% annualized) 
Envisaged SCF Capital Solutions 
1,5%-2% per month (18-24% annualized) 
Unsecured lending 
Up to 32% pa 
Invoice discounting and factoring firms 
Fee of 4-8% per month (36%-96% annualized)

=== PAGE 11 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 60  
 
 
Please fill out applicable sub-sections and provide additional information if necessary, as these requirements may vary 
depending on the nature of the project / programme. 
C.1. Strategic Context 
Please describe relevant national, sub-national, regional, global, political, and/or economic factors that help to contextualize 
the proposal, including existing national and sector policies and strategies. 
Climate change is already a measurable reality and along with other developing countries, South Africa is especially 
vulnerable to its impacts. The overall strategic approach for South Africa’s climate change response is needs driven and 
customised; developmental; transformational, empowering and participatory; dynamic and evidence-based; balanced and 
cost effective; and integrated and aligned. 
 
In terms of adaptation, the National Climate Change Response includes a risk-based process to identify and prioritise short- 
and medium-term adaptation interventions to be addressed in sector plans. The process will also identify the adaptation 
responses that require coordination between sectors and departments and it will be reviewed every five years. For the 
immediate future, sectors that need particular attention are water, agriculture and forestry, health, biodiversity and human 
settlements. Resilience to climate variability and climate change-related extreme weather events will be the basis for South 
Africa’s future approach to disaster management and we will use region wide approaches where appropriate. 
 
South Africa’s approach to mitigation, which is addressed by section 6 of the response policy, balances the country’s 
contribution as a responsible global citizen to the international effort to curb global emissions with the economic and social 
opportunities presented by the transition to a lower-carbon economy as well as with the requirement that the country 
successfully tackles the development challenges facing it.  
 
The key elements in the overall approach to mitigation are: 
 
• Using a National GHG Emissions Trajectory Range, against which the collective outcome of all mitigation actions will be 
measured; 
• Defining desired emission reduction outcomes for each significant sector and sub-sector of the economy based on an in-
depth assessment of the mitigation potential, best available mitigation options, science, evidence and a full assessment of 
the costs 
and benefits; 
• Adopting a carbon budget approach to provide for flexibility and least-cost mechanisms for companies in relevant sectors 
and/or sub-sectors and, where appropriate, translating carbon budgets into company level desired emission reduction 
outcomes. 
• Requiring companies and economic sectors or sub-sectors for which desired emission reduction outcomes have been 
established to prepare and submit mitigation plans that set out how they intend to achieve the desired emission reduction 
outcomes. 
• Developing and implementing a wide range and mix of different types of mitigation approaches, policies, measures and 
actions that optimise the mitigation outcomes as well as job creation and other sustainable developmental benefits. This 
optimal mix 
of mitigation actions will be developed to achieve the defined desired emission reduction outcomes for each sector and sub-
sector of the economy by ensuring that actions are specifically tailored to the potential, best available solutions and other 
relevant conditions related to the specific sector, sub-sector or organisation concerned; 
• The deployment of a range of economic instruments to support the system of desired emissions reduction outcomes, 
including the appropriate pricing of carbon and economic incentives, as well as the possible use of emissions offset or 
emission reduction trading mechanisms for those relevant sectors, sub-sectors, companies or entities where a carbon budget 
approach has been selected. 
• A national system of data collection to provide detailed, complete, accurate and up-to-date emissions data in the form of a 
Greenhouse Gas Inventory and a Monitoring and Evaluation System to support the analysis of the impact of mitigation 
measures. 
 
This business case is based on the premise that MSMEs can make a significant contribution to the country’s climate 
change objectives in line with National Climate Change Response, whilst also contributing to economic growth and 
development. As noted by the OECD (Issue Paper 33, 2010), this will involve greening traditional sectors and 
favouring the transition of all economic actors, both producers and consumers, towards a low carbon development. 
It is well known fact that many MSMEs participate actively in the sectors that are the focus of recent green oriented

=== PAGE 12 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 60  
 
 
policies, such as renewable energy production, smart metering, building refurbishment, cleaner cars, wind and 
solar installations, and battery development etc. (IEA, 2009). However, for MSMEs and entrepreneurs to fully 
participate in the transition towards sustainable economic patterns and seize the opportunities arising, it is 
essential that the main barriers to green growth are identified such as access to finance. We are of the strong view 
that Supply Chain Finance offers an innovative mechanism of ensuring that MSMEs fully participate in the efforts 
towards low carbon growth in South Africa and benefit from policy changes to support climate mitigation and 
adaption measures. The rationale for this approach and the need for such funding must be understood in the 
broader context of the Green economy in South Africa and the role of MSMEs in this regard especially its potential 
impact on CO2 reductions which is unpacked is section E.    
 
Thus the below sections are structured in the following way: 
 
 
firstly the South African environmental challenges are presented  in the context of economic growth  
 
the government intent, through policies, to use promote the green economy is presented 
 
key drivers of MSMEs participation in the green economy 
 
lack of access to finance for MSMEs is presented 
 
 
The South African environmental challenges in the context of economic growth 
 
The Europe 2020 Strategy recognises the central role of the transition towards a green, low carbon and resource efficient 
economy in achieving smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. The inefficient use of resources, the unsustainable pressure 
on the environment, and climate change, as well as social exclusion and inequalities pose challenges to long-term economic 
growth and an alternative growth model going "beyond GDP" has been on the agenda for many years. South Africa is no 
exception in this regard. In fact, the country’s current economic growth model is heavily resource and energy-intensive, 
aggravating pressures on the environment and the threat of climate change. South Africa is the world’s 13th largest 
greenhouse gases emitter while only ranking 29th and 70th in terms of gross domestic product (GDP) and GDP per capita.  
 
On the other hand South Africa is in a unique position to exploit the emergence of green economic development in the world. 
The country’s renewable resources abundance (solar and wind predominantly) and biodiversity positions it to play a leading 
role in the Southern African region and in Africa. In addition, if supported by an enabling environment, green sectors have 
the potential to foster South African shift to low carbon and sustainable development, which would also contribute to 
employment creation. 
 
 
South African government green economy policy framework 
 
Since 1994, South Africa has achieved far-reaching political, economic and social changes, and has shown an increasing 
commitment to sustainable development. Along with its involvement in international negotiations, it has developed its own 
national framework for a shift to a green economy. South Africa recognises sustainable development as a human right in 
the Bill of Rights of its 1996 Constitution (Republic of South Africa, 1996) and also committed to achieving the Millennium 
Development Goals, which include environmental sustainability as a target (United Nations, 2000). The country is a Party to 
both the Kyoto Protocol and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and has made 
commitments under the Cancun Agreement for its greenhouse gas emissions to “peak, plateau and decline”, with reductions 
in emissions compared to a “business as usual” scenario of 34% in 2020 and 42% in 2025. South Africa is also Party to 
many international conventions and agreements on biodiversity (such as the Convention on International Trade in 
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, the Convention on Biological Diversity, the International Convention for the 
Regulation of Whaling and the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands of International Importance) and pollution issues (such as 
the Basel Convention on the Control of Trans-boundary Movement of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal, the Stockholm 
Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants and the Montreal Protocol for the Protection of the Ozone Layer). 
 
The South African framework which guides the development of a green economy and, as a result, contributing significantly 
to climate change initiatives in the country essentially consists in nine key texts. Table 1 provides a chronological overview 
of these policies and measures, summarising their relevant goals, current (mid-2012) progress and the nature and level of 
civil society involvement in their establishment.

=== PAGE 13 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 60  
 
 
Table 2: Review of some of the key climate change-related policy and legal measures in South Africa 
 
Policies 
and 
measures  
Main goals  
Progress (mid-2012)  
Civil society involvement  
Framework 
for 
Environmental Fiscal 
Reform (NT, 2006)  
Provides 
principles 
and guidelines for fair 
and 
effective 
environmental taxes  
Taxes and levies have been 
implemented on plastic bags, 
incandescent 
light 
bulbs, 
ecosystem 
restoration 
costs 
related to water use, liquid fuel, 
non-renewable electricity and 
new vehicle carbon dioxide 
emissions performance  
A paper on carbon tax was 
published in 2010 for public 
consultation  
Innovation 
Plan 
(DST, 2008)  
Includes “safe, clean, 
affordable 
and 
reliable 
energy 
supply” and climate 
change as priorities 
Support for innovation in electric 
vehicles, fuel cells and carbon 
capture 
and 
storage, 
but 
cancellation of the country’s 
largest 
clean 
energy 
R&D 
programme (the Pebble Bed 
Modular Reactor) and delay in 
the implementation of renewable 
energy demonstration projects 
(e.g. solar tower) 
Limited  
Medium-Term 
Strategic Framework 
2009-2014 
(NPC, 
2009)  
Notes the need for 
sustainable 
livelihoods 
and 
sustainable resource 
management 
and 
relates 
these 
to 
various other policy 
areas 
including 
energy, 
water, 
housing, technology 
and competitiveness  
Numerous 
policy 
responses 
implemented in line with the 
Medium-Term 
Strategic 
Framework, 
particularly 
the 
NSSD, 
the 
creation 
of 
an 
enabling 
environment 
for 
renewable energy, several water 
management projects and the 
National 
Climate 
Change 
Response.  
Limited  
Industrial 
Policy 
Action Plan (the dti, 
2010, 2011 and 2012)  
Specifically 
targets 
growth 
in 
green 
industries, 
focusing 
on 
solar 
water 
heaters (SWHs), but 
also includes other 
solar 
and 
wind 
energy, 
biofuels, 
electric vehicles and 
organic farming  
Around 200 000 SWHs installed 
by mid-2012 and a procurement 
process started for around ZAR 
120 billion worth of large-scale 
renewable electricity generation  
Some 
consultation 
via 
NEDLAC  
New 
Growth 
Path 
(EDD, 2010)  
Targets the growth of 
a green economy, 
resulting in 400 000 
new and additional 
jobs  
Enabling regulation passed in 
other departments  
Government, business and 
civil society signed the Green 
Economy Accord in 2011, 
which details (mostly already-
existing) support measures  
Integrated Resource 
Plan 2010-2030 (DoE, 
2011)  
Limits emissions from 
electricity generation 
to 275 Mt per year  
Expects 
renewable 
energy to make up 
42% 
of 
all 
new 
electricity generation 
over 
the 
next 
20 
years  
Procurement 
of 
renewable 
energy under the plan is on 
track, 
but 
procurement 
of 
nuclear 
energy 
has 
been 
delayed by at least a year  
Large 
public 
participation, 
including inputs on modelling 
parameters and a first draft of 
the plan

=== PAGE 14 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 60  
 
 
National 
Climate 
Change 
Response 
(Republic of South 
Africa, 2011)  
Endorses 
and 
quantifies 
South 
Africa’s greenhouse 
gas 
emissions 
limits/commitments.  
Aims to grow green 
jobs while limiting job 
loss in unsustainable 
industries  
South Africa had already made a 
(voluntary) 
emissions 
commitment and approved an 
emissions-limited energy plan 
(Integrated 
Resource 
Plan 
2010-2030) 
prior 
to 
the 
publication of the policy  
Significant 
public 
consultation, starting with the 
multi-stakeholder Long-Term 
Mitigation Scenarios process 
in 2007  
National Strategy for 
Sustainable 
Development 
(DEA, 
2011)  
A large variety of 
indicators and goals 
spanning 
social, 
economic 
and 
environmental 
issues, 
but 
no 
budgets, timelines or 
responsibilities  
Strategy published and annual 
publication 
of 
sustainability 
indicators (different from the 
ones in the strategy)  
Public consultation on a draft 
NSSD since 2009.  
National 
Development 
Plan 
(NPC, 2011b)  
The NDP is very 
specific about goals 
and 
focuses 
on 
energy and carbon:  
 
greenhouse 
emissions to peak in 
2025 and introduce 
carbon budgeting  
 an economy-wide 
price for carbon and 
incentives for energy 
efficiency 
and 
managing 
waste 
better.  
 5 million SWHs by 
2030 
 vehicle emission 
standards, 
zero-
emission building by 
2030  
 
simplify 
the 
regulatory regime for 
contracting about 20 
000 MW of renewable 
energy by 2030  
 
Greenhouse gas emissions may 
already be higher than levels 
committed to for stabilization in 
2025.  
A carbon tax with exemptions is 
expected in 2013.  
SWH installations stand at just 
over 200 000 in 2012 (compared 
to the targeted 1 million by 
2014/2015)  
Tax 
on 
carbon 
dioxide 
emissions of motor vehicles and 
new building energy efficiency 
regulations implemented  
Procurement has started on the 
first 3.7 GW of electricity supply 
from renewable energy out of a 
plan for 17.8 GW by 2030.  
The 
NPC 
is 
guided 
by 
nominated 
Commissioners 
from outside of government 
(and business for the most 
part) and consulted publicly 
on the Development Plan 
based on an initial publication 
of a Diagnostic document.  
 
Overall it is clear that South Africa has a very large number of policies and strategies in place with respect to the green 
economy, many of which originated before the concept even came into widespread use (around 2009/2010). It is notable 
that the policies were often developed from the bottom up, i.e. a more holistic document was informed by one (or several) 
dealing with a more specialized aspect, for example, the NSSD and the National Development Plan (NDP) were both 
developed after the electricity, industrial policy and economic development plans which would be informed by it.  
 
Sector- and time-specific policies complement the South African framework. Policies related to waste management, 
biodiversity, energy efficiency (standards in particular), solar water heating, water conservation and demand management, 
and public transport have been implemented in the recent years to support the shift to a green economy. Various government 
initiatives also exist at the provincial and local levels (for example provincial green economy or green industry strategies in 
Gauteng, Western Cape and KwaZulu-Natal). In addition, the Framework for South Africa’s Response to the International 
Economic Crisis, published in February 2009 as a result of the combined effort of government, business and labour 
(facilitated by NEDLAC), was the first economic policy document to directly mention green jobs (Republic of South Africa,

=== PAGE 15 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 60  
 
 
2009). It has triggered substantial green investment, particularly in renewable energy (to the value of ZAR 120 billion) and 
transport (including rail in the order of ZAR 100 billion).  
 
Last but not least, the South African government has implemented a comprehensive monitoring system, the 12 Outcomes 
Framework, developed by the Department of Performance Monitoring and Evaluation, a dedicated department created in 
2010 in the Presidency. This framework, which identifies the goals to reach, the means to achieve them, and the tools to 
assess progress, determines 12 outcomes (system-wide results) covering all spheres of sustainable development 
(education, health, safety and security, employment, skills, infrastructure, rural development, human settlement, local 
government, environment, international relations, and public service) and reflecting the desired development impacts that 
the government seeks to achieve. Each outcome is clearly articulated with key activities and measurable outputs and sub-
outputs. A large set of specific indicators (overlapping the development indicators published annually by the Presidency), 
associated with targets for 2014/2015, is used to measure the progress. The green economy is reflected throughout the 
framework, in addition to specific mentions in the employment and environment outcomes (DPME, 2010). 
 
As a result, possibly the major challenge for green economy initiatives – as with many others in government – lies in 
coherence among multiple policies and coordination among the various departments and other government actors (like 
Eskom, the South African electricity public utility) responsible for its implementation. The policies implemented generally 
involved public consultation during the formulation, with significant levels of public involvement particularly with respect to 
climate change policy. In terms of implementation, while there has been an initial lag in the meeting of clean energy (energy 
efficiency and renewable energy) targets, these have started to be addressed since 2011. Procurement of renewable energy 
in particular is expected to result in investment worth ZAR 120 billion in the first round alone, rising in time to over ZAR 500 
billion. Ecosystem-related public employment programmes have been successful for some years and are widely cited as 
best practice, even though their scale remains small compared to the economic and unemployment challenge. 
 
Drivers of MSMEs participation in the green economy 
 
- 
The sector is relatively new, thus by definition many of the players are new. Thus MSMES do not have to fight off 
incumbents 
- 
There is significant drive for government to reduce emission, leading to carbon credits etc. 
- 
Large companies and government entities are incentivized to go green, they need SMMEs to do installations, 
projects too small for large companies 
- 
In case of renewable energy, large companies mostly focus on large REIPPP projects 
- 
The renewable energy production comes in any size type, from a small production for a single house to large plans. 
This means the scope for SMMEs is huge. 
- 
Traditional energy costs increasing, whilst renewable energy costs coming down 
- 
Access to energy, especially in the rest of Africa 
- 
Security of supply of energy 
 
   
Lack of access to finance for MSMEs 
 
Despite the opportunities in the low-carbon sector and the various steps taken by government to promote the Green 
Economy over the years, a number of key challenges have been identified that negatively affect the growth of MSMEs in 
this sector such as the regulatory environment and shortage of skills. However, Limited Access to Finance still remains a 
major challenge facing MSMEs in the South African market especially the Green sector as noted in the section below. There 
seems to be a mismatch of what is currently being offered by the Government and traditional Finance Institutions and what 
the Green MSME needs are. The majority of small and medium enterprises are anyway discouraged in applying due to the 
stringent qualifying criteria’s compared to the scale at which small manufacturers operate. The trade-off between the time 
spent in trying to access the finance market and the time actually needed to run the business does not leave much space 
for bureaucratic (even if needed) procedures.  
The market size of SME lending is very big. The African Development Bank’s "Financial Inclusion in Africa” report estimates 
the SME funding gap in Sub-Saharan Africa at between USD100bn and USD120bn (i.e. over a one trillion rand) per annum. 
The report finds that the funding gap in Africa is "particularly acute" for small firms with typically fewer than nine employees, 
small and medium firms with one or more women owners and firms operating in the informal sector. These firms are

=== PAGE 16 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 60  
 
 
constrained in getting finance from formal institutions by their limited ability to offer collateral, and lack of information about 
their financial situation and solvency. 
The World Bank Enterprise Surveys data shows that about 80% of SMEs in Africa finance investments themselves, around 
3% through supplier credit and only 8% through banks. A similar 2010 study of small businesses by Finscope found that 
75% of applications for credit by new businesses were rejected. Only 2% of SMEs were able to access loans and just 2% of 
businesses seeking private equity succeeded. 
The below picture shows MSMES financing gap across the world by region 
 
 
 
 
It is estimated that SMEs contribute 50% to GDP  and almost 40% of jobs in South Africa 
Government’s focus is on providing support to SMEs to enable job creation and economic development: 
National Development Plan (NDP) 
• 
Target of 11 million jobs by 2030 is based on creation of SME* jobs 
• 
The NDP makes the proposal that 90% of the jobs will be created in SMEs.  
• 
NDP expectation therefore that 9,9 million jobs will come from SME’s 
Ministry of Small Business Development 
• 
Recently established ministry 
• 
To promote small business development

=== PAGE 17 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 60  
 
 
Despite the recognized importance of the SME sector, evidence indicates that SMEs continue to be undersupplied with the 
financial products and services that are critical to their growth. In global surveys, including the World Bank’s Enterprise 
Surveys and Investment Climate Assessments, SMEs report that the cost of finance is their greatest obstacle to growth and 
rank access to finance as another key obstacle. 
 
While these constraints are more acute in developing countries, SMEs in any environment are nearly one-third more likely 
than large firms to rate financing constraints as a “major” growth obstacle. In low-income countries, this means that nearly 
half of small firms report being severely constrained by financing difficulties. 
 
In South Africa, the number of SMEs estimated to be between 1 and 3 million in South Africa. Excluding micro-enterprises, 
it is estimated that there are 250 000 to 650 000 enterprises. Depending upon age of business, significant portion of those 
rely on own finance to finance from friends to get by. As they become more developed they rely on VC and Angel Investors. 
Once fully established and with history of operational performance they rely more heavily on PE investors and the banking 
sector. The Problem Is Further Compounded In That Many SMEs Are Being Formed By Previously Disadvantaged 
Individuals Who Find It Difficult Accessing Any Of These Markets Especially Due To Lack Of Business Skills And Collateral. 
 
While large businesses can access the growing market for debt financing, small businesses are reliant on banks and 
specialist finance and leasing businesses, which have become conservative in their lending practices since the 2008 crash. 
Small firms have consistently reported that credit is either refused or is offered at high prices by the major lenders. When 
traditional banks downscale their operations to serve the SME market, higher transaction costs and undefined risk 
management strategies are seen to be a major obstacle. In fact research reports indicate that poor business skills and 
financial management contribute significantly to small business failure in addition to a lack of access to finance. This makes 
the market too risky for traditional banks to service adequately 
 
For start-ups, micro-enterprises, entrepreneurs from previously disadvantaged communities or any other group with limited 
collateral or weak (or limited) credit histories, access is more limited 
World Bank research covering 91 banks in 45 countries found that: 
1. The financial assessment of the business is the  
most important consideration across all types of firms 
2. Overall, a firm’s credit history with the bank is the second most important criterion, with the owner’s characteristics and 
the purpose of the loan being next in importance 
3. At least three-quarters of banks require collateral to make business loans  
 
According to recent SAVCA surveys, private equity firms in South Africa invest only 11% in early stage businesses 
If Business Partners’ investments are excluded, the total average deal size during 2013 was R72.6 million (2012: R48.9 
million). The average deal size is indicative that most private equity firms focus on higher value, larger type deals with little 
focus on small business or the SME sector

=== PAGE 18 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 60  
 
 
 
 
 
Excluding Business Partners, most private equity firms conclude less than 5 deals per annum. This is clearly too few deals 
to address the need to fund small businesses – private equity funds thus don’t have capacity to address the small business 
funding market even if they wished to Venture capital (VC) is financial capital provided to early-stage, high-potential, growth 
startup companies.  
While venture capital can provide a means for small business to access finance, the venture capital market in South Africa 
has seen a long period of declining activity.  In addition venture capital firms usually focus on technology type businesses, 
which excludes the majority of the population of small businesses. A SAVCA venture capital survey indicated that in 2012, 
transactions were concluded in each of the main sectors of the economy with the largest recipient being Information and 
Communication Technologies (35%), followed by Life Sciences (health, pharma and medical devices; 25%).  
 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
Describe the baseline scenario (i.e. emissions baseline, climate vulnerability baseline, key barriers, challenges and/or 
policies) and the outcomes and the impact that the project/programme will aim to achieve in improving the baseline scenario. 
 
The following sectors have been identified as potential key priority sectors for supply chain finance in the green economy 
landscape in South Africa, where the programme will play an important catalytic role in supporting MSME in these sectors.  
 
Rural energy including mini-grid and off-grid (Low Carbon Economy) 
  
Given the robust and favourable policy environment surrounding renewable energy, the programme can catalyse more 
investment from the private sector in renewable energy through supporting MSMEs who provide services to municipalities 
in Public Private Partnerships (PPPs). Furthermore, support for municipal leadership in renewable energy can help increase 
local participation through encouraging local innovation and entrepreneurship and soliciting local manufacturing.  
 
Support will also be directed towards other renewable energy projects that require less catalytic funding but can have a large 
impact e.g. rural off grid and mini grid energy and the development of biogas and biofuels. Energy access is an issue of 
major concern in South Africa, where most of the rural population still remains very vulnerable, with very low level of access 
to basic services such as water and sanitation, employment opportunities and food security. It is on this basis that the various 
government policies have made pronouncements on the need to build inclusive societies (NDP) and build sustainable 
communities (NSSD). The Medium Term Strategic Framework (MTSF) specifically states that there is a need to build 
“vibrant, equitable, sustainable rural communities contributing towards food security for all.  
 
Sustainable energy solutions for rural communities is at the nexus of building inclusive societies, and considering that 
extending the grid to rural communities may not be cost effective in the short- to medium-term, promoting energy solutions 
such as solar PV, wind power and bio-digesters may help to improve energy access in rural communities in the interim.  
Early stage , 
11%
Expansion , 
42%
Replacement, 
12%
Buyout, 35%
Investments made

=== PAGE 19 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 60  
 
 
 
This sub-theme is also directly linked to the development of rural adaptation plans that is critical for building rural community 
resilience and for harnessing ecosystems services. The rural adaptation plans sub-theme also received very few 
applications, despite it being critical for activating local economies and testing models that help to promote grassroots 
interventions and solutions.  
 
Biogas and biofuels (Low Carbon Economy)  
 
The significance of the biofuels and biogas sector is that it is closely linked to building resilience in rural communities, as it 
will encourage smallholder agriculture. For example biogas generation could utilize manure from animals such as cows, 
pigs, goats and poultry, which is linked directly to agricultural production. Considering the need for sustainable farming 
practices, generating energy from biogas could contribute to cutting emissions from the agricultural sector in South Africa.  
 
By the time the pricing regulations were published, only 4 biofuels and biodiesel companies were licensed. It was difficult to 
ascertain from current available information, how many companies are active in the bio-energy sector in South Africa, and 
the amount of financial resources invested. The Southern Africa Bio-energy Association (SABA), which purports to promote 
the establishment of a biofuels industry in South Africa, has a membership of close to 50 companies, which is a good 
indication of interest in the sector.  
 
Despite the impetus provided by the Final Biofuels Strategy and great energy and investment from the private sector, the 
South African biofuels industry has remained nascent - possibly due to the persistence of the view that biofuels projects are 
unattractive due to the relatively low cost of crude oil. However the introduction of mandatory blending of biofuels with 
petroleum product in October has created the needed impetus. The Final Biofuels Strategy provides for a 2% (or 400 million 
liters per annum) penetration level of biofuels in the national liquid fuels supply - revised down from the 4.5% blending target 
that was proposed in the draft Biofuels Strategy. For the stated purposes of food security and environmental concern, the 
Final Biofuels Strategy proposes the following crops for the production of biofuels in South Africa: 6 
• sugar cane and sugar beet in order to produce bioethanol; and 
• sunflower, canola and soya beans for purposes of producing biodiesel. 
 
It should be noted that the pilot phase of the SCF programme has already started financing 2 MSMEs in biofuels and with 
GCF funding we will be looking at expanding involvement in this important sector. 
 
 
Sustainable water management (Green Cities and Towns)  
 
South Africa is a water-stressed country, with many of its economic hubs located in water stressed regions that are projected 
to suffer from severe water shortages with major implications on the economy. Effective implementation of water 
conservation and demand management measures will be critical in ensuring that cities adapt to the potential risks posed by 
lack of water availability and poor quality. At present a significant amount of water is lost as a result of poor water 
infrastructure, and opportunities exist for innovative partnerships between the private and public sector to address this 
challenge. The push for water demand management by local authorities may also stipulate the installation of water saving 
devices, which could potentially stimulate a potential manufacturing of such devices, which however requires incentives for 
such initiatives to take off.  
 
Based on the water challenges that the country faces, and potential risk water scarcity poses to various sectors including 
the private sector, there is an opportunity for the programme to catalyze projects that promote green innovations in the water 
sector in South Africa. Such innovations should not only be limited to technologies, but also include green business model 
innovations (GBMI), that help companies to manage their water-related risks but with significant impacts at the landscape 
level.  
 
Sustainable human settlements, the built environment and green buildings (Green Cities and Towns)  
 
Current projections show that by 2050 close to 80% of South Africa’s population will be living in cities and towns, which 
presents a major challenge for service delivery. Cities are already burdened by the large informal sector, and the need to 
provide basic services including housing, water and sanitation. Most of these responsibilities lie with local government 
authorities that are poorly capacitated to deal with these challenges.  
 
Sustainable human settlements and the built environment and green buildings is therefore a key sector within the green

=== PAGE 20 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 60  
 
 
economy landscape, that is key for addressing the triple challenge of environmental sustainability, social equity and 
economic development. The programme will play a key role in stimulating this sector by promoting private sector 
participation, testing new models for sustainable housing and building local government capacity.  
 
Industrial cleaner production and consumption (Low Carbon Economy)  
 
The manufacturing sector is important for South Africa’s economy, because of its role in sustainable job creation. However 
the sector is also responsible for significant CO2 emissions and pollution. As a result there is need for the manufacturing 
sector to adopt cleaner production measures that are more resource efficient and reduce waste discharge into the system.  
 
The South African government recognized the importance of this sector and established the National Cleaner Production 
Centre (NCPC). The goal of NCPC is to enhance the competitiveness of the manufacturing sector by promoting energy 
efficiency and waste minimization. The NCPC is playing a critical role in promoting sustainable practices within the 
manufacturing sector, but unfortunately this effort is not adequate.  Industrial energy audits done by the Private Sector 
Energy Efficiency, a program sponsored by the Department of Energy and the Carbon Trust, identified more than 2 000 
possible savings interventions or opportunities in some 360 of the medium and large companies audited to date. 
Implementation of these opportunities would save an estimated 115 MW of grid capacity and result in lifetime carbon savings 
of 3.7 million tonnes of CO2 equivalent (MtCO2e). These numbers excludes opportunities in government owned facilities, 
however the government’s strategic goal is to reduce energy consumption in their facilities by 12%. The average payback 
period for the interventions is marginally over two years, with more than two-thirds of the interventions having paybacks of 
less than two years. Less than 5% of the opportunities have been intervened. 
 
SCF Capital Solutions has already started with the NCPC to implement industrial energy efficiency and waste management 
programmes.  
 
Ecosystem services  
 
A significant amount of research on ecosystem services has been conducted in South Africa, including ecosystems valuation 
and ecological infrastructure mapping techniques. However, very limited actual ecosystem services that promote actual 
investments have been conducted in South Africa. The DBSA Green Fund has provided funding for two such projects during 
the research window (RFP2). However, there is a need to support more of such projects, but under project finance instead 
of the research window, since significant research work has already been carried out on ecosystem services research in the 
country. The programme will look at actual payment for ecosystem services, preferably linked to water. In this case this 
theme would be linked to that of sustainable water management. 
 
Solar water heating 
Water-heating accounts for a third to half of the energy consumption in the average household (www.energy.gov.za; 
Department of Mineral Resources, 2007). In South Africa, water heating is derived mainly from electricity, being the most 
common energy-carrier employed. The equivalent of a large coal-fired power station (2 000 MW+) is used to provide hot 
water within the domestic sector alone (www.energy.gov.za; Department of Mineral Resources, 2007). Government’s target 
is to install 5 million SWHs by 2030. SWH installations stood at just over 200 000 in 2012 (compared to the targeted 1 million 
by 2014/2015). In December 2015 the Department of Energy relaunched the project, MSMEs have be contracted to 
manufacture and install the heaters. The program will look to providing working capital to many of these MSMEs 
 
Sustainable Agriculture and Agro processing 
 
The agricultural sector has a key role to play in a green economy. The sheer size of the sector (in terms of land area and 
use of resources such as water), its impacts on the environment, and its direct role in the well-being of people, places it at 
the centre of the green economy globally and in South Africa. Agriculture currently uses 12% of the world’s land surface for 
crop production (arable land and land under permanent crops), and accounts for 70% of all freshwater withdrawn from 
aquifers, streams and lakes (FAO, 2012b). About 80% (100 million hectares) of the land area of South Africa is used for 
agriculture, but only approximately 11% of the total area of South Africa is arable (suitable for cropping) (DEAT, 2006; World 
Bank, 2013). Agriculture is a key water user in South Africa, with about 62% of the country’s surface water being used for 
irrigation (Statistics South Africa, 2010). Globally, the agriculture sector as a whole provides livelihoods for 40% of the world’s 
population (CGIAR, 2012). In South Africa, the primary agricultural sector contributes about 3% to the country’s gross 
domestic product (GDP) and provides about 7% of formal employment (DAFF, 2010).

=== PAGE 21 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 60  
 
 
The relationship between agriculture and the green economy has been summarised by the United Nations Food and 
Agriculture Organisation (FAO) (FAO, 2012a) in a concept note prepared for the Rio+20 conference as; “The single largest 
sector using 60% of the world’s ecosystems and providing livelihoods for 40% of today’s global population, the food and 
agriculture sector is critical to greening the economy. There will be no green economy without agriculture”.  
 
To improve efficiency, the agricultural sector has to investigate how best to meet demands for increased outputs in a way 
that is more efficient in its use of resources, and less damaging to the environment (i.e., to decouple agricultural production 
from resource use and environmental degradation). In addition, agriculture should also create sustainable livelihoods4 for 
farmers and others along the supply chain (Farming First, 2013). According to Africa post-harvest loss index, losses for 
tubers and roots were at 10-40%, fruit and vegetables at 15-44%, and fish and seafood at 10-40%. 
 
The pilot phase of the SCF programme has started financing an MSMEs in sustainable agriculture and with GCF funding we 
will be looking at expanding involvement in this important sector 
 
C.3. Project / Programme Description 
Describe the main activities and the planned measures of the project/programme according to each of its components.  
 
Funding mechanism 
 
We will leverage on Supply Chain Finance techniques, i.e. risk assessment based on strength of the ecosystem (operational 
risk), instead of the balance sheet (credit risk), to finance SMEs. According to International chamber of Commerce surveys; 
- 
Default Rate on short term trade finance loans does not exceed 0.06% 
- 
“Whilst the default rate for MLT transactions is already relatively low (less than 50% of Moody’s published corporate 
default rates), the ECA coverage further contributes to the overall low risk of these products” - ICC Trade Register 
Report 2015 
 
 
 
5 Pillars of the Credit Programme Model: 
1. Assessing the bankability of the transaction: Ensuring that the transaction makes sense from a business and 
economic perspective. 
2. Assessing the buyer’s credit risk: Ensuring that the buyer will be willing and able to pay.

=== PAGE 22 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 60  
 
 
3. Assessing the SME’s ability to perform: Ensuring that the SME has the credibility, skills and experience to perform 
on the contract, as well as due diligence on the manufacturer, buyer, and logistics of the corresponding contracts. 
4. Transaction risk and cash flow structuring: Putting together a financing structure based on the specific transaction 
details. 
5. Credit administration: Administering the financing conditions via the Credit Administration. 
 
 
 
Provide information on how the activities are linked to objectives, outputs and outcomes that the project/programme intends 
to achieve. The objectives, outputs and outcomes should be consistent with the information reported in the logic framework 
in section H. 
 
The detailed activities for the programme with the respective outcomes are outlined in section H.    
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity) 
Describe the quality of the management team, overall strategy and financial profile of the Sponsor (Executing Entity) and 
how it will support the project/programme in terms of equity investment, management, operations, production and marketing. 
 
 SCF Capital Solutions will be the Fund Manager and the SCF Fund will be the executing entity. 
 
How SCF Capital Solutions was selected for the Fund Manager role: 
 
The National Green Fund in its normal course of business received a proposal from SCF Capital to provide supply chain 
finance for MSMEs in the green space. This proposal from SCF Capital was seen by the National Green Fund as a useful 
tool to address the challenges MSMEs graduating out of Green Fund funded incubators where experiencing, with regard to 
access to financing. The SCF capital proposal was taken through the normal due diligence, appraisal and approval 
processes of the National Green Fund. It was then approved by the Management Committee on the condition that SEFA will 
co-fund on an equal basis. 
 
The proposal was then successfully taken through the SEFA approval process. The essence of the approval was that the 
facility will be run on a pilot basis with the understanding that if successful it would then be launched for full implementation

=== PAGE 23 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 60  
 
 
and that other funders would be roped in. The strength of the SCF Capital proposal to the National Green Fund and SEFA 
was the innovation and the individual track record of the two key members of the SCF Capital team. 
 
 Find attached submission to National Green Fund management committee and record of decision. 
 
 Brief Overview of SCF Capital: 
 
SCF capital Solutions is relatively new, it was established in 2015. It was capitalized by the founder for approximately 
R1mil as part of the pilot project which was funded by the DBSA and SEFA. SCF experience is mainly the work done with 
regard to the supply chain finance pilot programme (the strength is in the expertise and experience of the key team 
members). 
 
 
The business currently has 6 staff members 
 
o 
Senior staff 
 
Bob Blower – Chairman 
 
Vonani Mabunda – CEO 
 
Nomvula Mabunda – COO 
 
Mfundo Nesi – Head of Sales 
o 
Junior Staff 
 
Khumo Motsisi – Operations officer 
 
Athenkosi Mtirara – junior sales manager 
 Post-launch the size of team will progressively be increased  
 
 
Role of SCF Capital Solutions: Fund Manager 
 
The principals of SCF Capital Solutions  
 
Bob Blower 
            Non-Executive Chairman 
 
Bob is the co-founder and Non-Executive Chairman of SCF Capital Solutions. Bob is also a Network Relationship Director 
for Transpay, a leading US Fintech company covering P2P and B2B payments.  Prior to his current roles, Bob was Head of 
Trade Channels for National Bank of Abu Dhabi, where he delivered supply chain finance products including insured 
receivables, payables and receivables as part of the trade working capital vision of the National Bank of Abu Dhabi. Bob 
also previously served as Global Head of Trade Finance and Financial Institutions at Standard Bank, Global Head of Trade 
and Supply Chain IT at HSBC, Director at Logica, Director at Gresham and the British Banker Association. Bob is an 
experienced business and technology specialist with more than 20 years of banking and corporate experience in new product 
development and implementation covering all areas. Bob has written papers, spoken at seminars across the globe, covering 
a wide range of subjects and has been interviewed by BBC on LIBOR. 
 
Vonani Mabunda        Co-Founder and CEO 
Vonani is the co-founder and CEO of SCF Capital Solutions. Prior to founding SCF Capital Solutions Vonani was The 
Principal and Head of Lending Products at Barclays Africa Business Banking, responsible for all the bank’s lending activities 
to small businesses. Prior to joining Barclays Vonani was with Standard Bank Corporate and Investment Bank where we 
held the various roles: Head of Supply Chain Finance for the group, Head of Risk for Transactional Banking, Head of 
Operational Risk for International Trade Services division. Prior to joining Standard Bank he served 6 years at Citibank where 
notably he was involved in starting a fiduciary unit at Citibank Frankfurt in Germany, Head of Trade Operations and Head of 
Trade Sales at Citibank South Africa. Vonani has a BSc Engineering Degree from Wits University and an MBA from the 
Gordon Institute of Business Science (GIBS).

=== PAGE 24 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 60  
 
 
N Mabunda is the Chief Operations Officer. She is responsible for the back-office, financial and business administration 
Nomvula Mabunda, Operations Head 
Nomvula is responsible for planning, directing and managing the performance of all internal operations and ensuring that 
strategic business objectives are put into practice. Prior to SCF, Nomvula was with Citibank in South Africa for 8 years, 
where she held various roles: Client Service Manager and Citi Service Head for South Africa for Global Transaction Services, 
Relationship Associate and Relationship Manager to multinationals in Client Coverage. She is an experienced banker with 
top tier corporate customers and has a solid knowledge of the local and international banking environment. Nomvula holds 
a BSc Mathematical Sciences degree from the University of Johannesburg and a Higher Diploma in Banking from Milpark 
Business School 
Mfundo Nesi: Head of Sales 
Mfundo is responsible for developing and delivering the sales strategy, representing the company in client and industry 
engagements and achieving targeted growth. Before joining SCF Capital Solutions Mfundo was Area Manager - Inland 
Regions for Gidani (lottery operator) where he was responsible for the optimal performance of the four inland regions 
(Gauteng, North West, Limpopo & Mpumalanga, Free State & Northern Cape), and had 45 people working under him. Prior 
to that he held various business development and relationship management roles at British American Tobacco. Mfundo has 
a BCom in Information Systems and a Certificate in Basic Financial Management from the University of Cape Town.   
 
SCF is currently looking at enhancing the team capacity by identifying and recruiting high caliber business development 
executives and managers. Bob and Vonani‘s networks have been quite instrumental in this regard. 
 
Future operating model of SCF Fund 
Our team ethos is to take young professionals with financial acumen and to grow them and guide them to be operations staff 
and then in the future customer facing staff. This level of training assures experience of processing, attention to detail and 
understanding of the operational risks inherent in these on processing is where the major risk sits in this type of financing.  
These operational processes are reinforced and systematised with an industry leading cloud-based platform using a platform 
provided by China Systems – a leading provider of trade finance operational processing tools. This platform manages 
operational processes such as disbursements and collections, limits and concentration management and diary events and 
past due events.   The platform also provides reporting and audit at various levels of management.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Our Operating Model is designed to provide an origination to distribution capability, with potential for securitisation.   The 
origination of assets through various channels is productized for risk management purposes via common technical and 
operational processes.  The resulting instruments become part of the trade assets pool that can be used to distribute, and 
insure the pool.   This opens the possibility to bring in new funders, reduce in certain areas.  The operating model underpins 
sound risk management and can be used to drive forward our client engagement.  
 
World Class 
Operational 
Processes 
Efficient Resource 
Allocation  
And Origination 
World 
Class 
Technology

=== PAGE 25 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 60  
 
 
 
Our pilot model for business development and origination currently embraces direct sales only, due to low volumes. Given 
the limited number of clients, it is relatively simple for a relationship manager to engage with potential clients directly.   The 
Relationship Manager then works with Operations to KYC a client, structure the initial deal and then liaise with operations to 
operationalize the process flow.  The pilot has been on “word of mouth” basis and consequently has not seen a fast ramp 
up in number clients, however, as we ramp up and cover more areas geographically we will need higher levels of automation 
to cover the market effectively and to ensure an efficient client service model.  
The focus on marketing, will be accompanied by an increase direct business development resource to provide support to 
new clients and to engage with, for example, corporate enterprise development schemes that cover many hundreds or 
thousands of SMEs.  In 2017 we shall also introduce an “app” lined to our processing system that enables our clients to 
directly upload documents to us electronically, to request financing and receive status updates and marketing/service 
messages.   This app will supplement our direct sales team while digitizing the conversation to reduce fraud risk and the 
amount of paper processed by the operations team.  The app will also enable more remote working by our own staff and a 
streamlining of processes such KYC (Know Your Customer).   
Of course, to cope with the increased flow of business we plan to proportionately increase the operations team numbers.  
This will be needed to risk mitigate and fraud and other risks will increase as we become well known and as the scale of the 
operation increases.  While digitization and automated back office processes while streamline some checks, experienced 
staff will be needed to ensure that concentration, over trading and documentary fraud are prevented and to maintain losses 
within acceptable limits. 
SCF Capital Solutions operates from its own offices separate from the accredited entity and will continue to do so.  We shall 
invest regional representatives and remote working to provide greater coverage. South Africa is a huge and sparsely 
populated country and a limited number of large urban conurbations. Regional representatives will be needed to cover the 
remote areas, but will also require a commitment to fraud prevention given that team members will be working with significant 
monetary values and we have are to safeguard such monies as are entrusted to us.

=== PAGE 26 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 60  
 
 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
Describe the market for the product(s) or services including the historical data and forecasts. 
 
Addressable market 
 
• 
The addressable market is not easy to quantify, but we know there are 2.26 million MSME businesses in South 
Africa and that "green" enterprises, and supporting green enterprises represents one of the fastest going sectors.   
• 
Our market is limited not by the size of the addressable market therefore, but is related to the amount of funding 
available and the number of companies that can be financed.   
• 
Based on our current average facility we can finance around 350 businesses under the new facility, which is a 
fraction of the number of companies engaged in greening the South African economy.  
• 
Over time we would like to further increase the number of businesses we finance and to do this we would use data 
from the expansion to encourage new investors into this short term revolving asset class. 
• 
We are involved in sectors with high developmental impact; an example is the sustainable agriculture value chain 
(see the showcased study), where through our financing we are looking to connect small holder farmers (which are 
mostly run by women) to large retail off takers such as Pick and Pay, Woolworths, Shoprite and Massmart. This is 
a high volumes area which will expose us to high number of recurring clients. 
 
Competition 
 
In South Africa, the number of SMEs estimated to be between 1 and 3 million in South Africa. Excluding micro-enterprises, 
it is estimated that there are 250 000 to 650 000 enterprises. Depending upon age of business, significant portion of those 
rely on own finance to finance from friends to get by. As they become more developed they rely on VC and Angel Investors. 
Once fully established and with history of operational performance they rely more heavily on PE investors and the banking 
sector. The problem Is further compounded in that many MSMEs are being formed by previously disadvantaged individuals 
who find it difficult accessing Any of these markets especially due to lack of business skills and collateral. 
 
While large businesses can access the growing market for debt financing, small businesses are reliant on banks and 
specialist finance and leasing businesses, which have become conservative in their lending practices since the 2008 crash. 
Small firms have consistently reported that credit is either refused or is offered at high prices by the major lenders 
When traditional banks downscale their operations to serve the SME market, higher transaction costs and undefined risk 
management strategies are seen to be a major obstacle. In fact research reports indicate that poor business skills and 
financial management contribute significantly to small business failure in addition to a lack of access to finance. This makes 
the market too risky for traditional banks to service adequately 
 
For start-ups, micro-enterprises, entrepreneurs from previously disadvantaged communities or any other group with limited 
collateral or weak (or limited) credit histories, access is more limited. 
World Bank research covering 91 banks in 45 countries found that: 
 
 
The financial assessment of the business is the most important consideration across all types of firms 
 
Overall, a firm’s credit history with the bank is the second most important criterion, with the owner’s characteristics 
and the purpose of the loan being next in importance 
 
At least three-quarters of banks require collateral to make business loans  
 
According to recent SAVCA surveys, private equity firms in South Africa invest only 11% in early stage businesses 
If Business Partners’ investments are excluded, the total average deal size during 2013 was R72.6 million (2012: R48.9 
million).

=== PAGE 27 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 60  
 
 
Market Drivers 
 
South Africa has unique strong drivers for large business to procure from small businesses. The procurement/supply chain 
market size in South Africa is over R1 trillion in size. Preferential procurement and localization requirements in these 
programs requires that 30% of inputs must be procured from local MSMEs. Some examples of the key areas sectors are: 
 
Renewable energy continues being the country’s growth driver with over R200bn spent in the REIPPP program to 
date, an attracting 85% of the foreign direct investment into the country. Government requires that 30% of inputs 
must be procured from small businesses 
 
In 2013/14, the South African public sector spent R500 billion on goods and services and on construction works  
 
In 2010/11, State Owned Enterprises spent R212bn on procurement 
 
In mining for example; Anglo American reported that in 2013, their total Black Economic Empowerment procurement 
spend by managed and independently managed businesses was R32,4bn 
 
In financial services, Standard Bank’s socioeconomic report stated that in 2013 their procurement/supply chain 
spend was R35,1bn, (R19bn on BEE suppliers)  
 
With total annual sales of over R800bn, the retail sector represent are large opportunity for SME procurement  
 
In manufacturing, the automotive industry is the largest manufacturing sector in South Africa, contributing 7,5% of 
GDP and over R350bn in annual sales local and export sales. 
The above examples illustrate the scope of opportunities and strong legislative drivers for MSME participation. Even a market 
share of just 1% of procurement spend in three years, we can build a business that will finance over R10bn of transactions 
by 2019/2020 
 
 
Describe the competitive environment including the list of competitors with market shares and customer base and key 
differentiating factors (if applicable). 
 
In the SMME financing space, reports from the World Economic Forum (2015) titled “The Future of FinTech: a Paradigm 
Shift in Small Business Finance” note that the use of supply chain finance for SMME financing has the least amount of 
competitors available yet high potential for sustainably meeting the SMME financing gap. Those competitors range from 
Taulia, Apex Peak (Singapore), Umati Capital (Small-scale SCF in East Africa) and Propell (Prime Revenue). All of these 
competitors, except for Propell (platform provider) are still in start-up phase.  
 
Provide pricing structures, price controls, subsidies available and government involvement (if any). 
 
SCF enables SMMEs to obtain financing that is not backed by their credit score or balance sheet. Existing factoring and 
contract financing firms tend to charge much higher monthly fees for this funding, between 4-8% per month, which is 
unsustainable for most SMMEs, whose margins are typically not that high. One of the main objectives of SCF Capital 
Solutions is to utilize developmental funding to provide affordable financing to SMMEs.  
 
 
Lending Type 
Pricing 
Secured bank lending 
Average Prime + 6% for SMEs (prime is 10,5%) 
Current SCF Capital Solutions 
2% per month (24% annualized) 
Envisaged SCF Capital Solutions 
1,5%-2% per month (18-24% annualized) 
Unsecured lending 
Up to 32% pa 
Invoice discounting and factoring firms 
Fee of 4-8% per month (36%-96% annualized)

=== PAGE 28 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 60  
 
 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable) 
Provide details of government licenses, or permits required for implementing and operating the project/programme, the 
issuing authority, and the date of issue or expected date of issue.  
 
The relevant government institutions that SCF considered for license applications given the nature of the business are the 
Financial Services Board and the National Credit Regulator.  The facility is exempt from applying for licenses from the 
Financial Services Board as the SCF does not provide financial advice.  The National Credit Act requires a creditor provider 
to register with the National Creditor Regulator if the credit agreement entered into with a consumer falls within the ambit of 
the Act.  SCF initially approached the National Credit Regulator (“NCR”) to ascertain whether it was required to register with 
the NCR. Given the fact that the credit provided is developmental in nature the facility was deemed to be exempted from 
registration. However during the course of the provision of credit it has become apparent that the Facility may need to provide 
credit amounts that notwithstanding the exemption fall within the ambit of the Act, in this regard an application has to been 
submitted to the NCR for registration. The application was submitted on the second week of September. The NCR does not 
have specific timeframes for the approval of applications but we do envisage that the registration should be finalized before 
the approval of the funding.  
 
Describe applicable taxes and foreign exchange regulations.  
 
The fund is set up as an En Commandite structure in which tax “flow-through” at the partnership level is assumed. 
 
The fund set up as a fiscally transparent structure under South African law in accordance with the tax provisions 
contained in section 25BA of the Income Tax Act, ensuring that the liability for taxes is not on the fund vehicle itself but on 
the investors/Partners in the fund. Income and capital gains of the fund would be taxed in the hands of investors 
according to the tax profile of each investor. Therefore, individual partners are taxed separately from the partnership, 
each on their share of partnership profits or losses 
 
SCF Capital complies with all South African government tax laws, we have been issued with tax clearance certificate by the 
South African Revenue Services to evidence this. Currently the Facility is capitalised using the South African Rand and as 
such foreign exchange regulations do not apply. In future however in the event that the Fund receives foreign denominated 
capital, it would have to adhere to the exchange control regulations imposed on such transactions by the South African 
Reserve Bank.  
 
Provide details on insurance policies related to project/programme. 
 
Financial institutions, specialty lenders and investors use trade credit insurance to protect international trade payment 
instruments, trade finance facilities, general corporate loans, and other financial assets against default on scheduled 
payments. Credit Insurance is a product designed to protect a business’s accounts receivable, generally the largest asset 
on a company’s balance sheet, against losses due to its customer’s financial inability to pay. Bankruptcy and slow payments 
are risks that can be covered with this product. Political risk insurance can also be provided to cover international accounts 
receivable Financial institutions that use credit insurance are ones that would be adversely affected by an unforeseen 
catastrophic loss, are looking for sales expansion, have a concentration risk in the a certain portfolio, exporting or using their 
accounts receivable as collateral for financing. 
 
The goal of credit insurance is to assist in the growth of a business by making informed credit decisions, by using the right 
information to help companies avoid catastrophic losses and maintain sustained profitability.  Doing this requires an 
understanding of a business trade sector, normal business practices and the internal credit management policies. A credit 
insurance policy does not replace managements credit practices but supplements them.

=== PAGE 29 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement 
 
 
Please specify why the GCF involvement is critical for the project/programme, in consideration of other alternatives. 
 
The financial structure allows us to use GCF support to “crowd in” private sector funders whilst at the same time allowing 
the GCF to claw back economic benefit when the returns exceed private sector expected returns. This makes it possible 
for the GCF to benefit from the upside when the business outperforms expectations. 
 
The GCF funding will enable SCF Capital Solutions to overcome the following key barriers:  
 
Increase number SMEs financed: currently the R60ml facility financed an average of 3 SMEs per month, the 
GCF funding will enable us to increase that to 133 SMEs per month, based on current average transaction value 
of R1,5mil per SME  
 
Better rate: After access to finance, the cost of finance is the biggest obstacles to SMEs in capital formation. 
We want to use the GCF funding to help reduce cost of borrowing for SMEs  
 
Private funding: By blending The GCF funding with private investor funding, we will enable private funder to 
lower their risk exposure per transaction. Increased participation of private sector would over time lead to 
sustainable private sector support without GCF participation.  
 
The above would lead to increased climate change and socio economic impact as more SMMEs are encouraged 
to participate in the green industry.  
 
 
 
 
D.2. Exit Strategy 
 
Please explain how the project/programme sustainability will be ensured in the long run, after the project/programme is 
implemented with support from the GCF and other sources, taking into consideration the long-term financial viability 
demonstrated in E.6.3. This should include a description of strategies for longer term maintenance of physical assets (if 
applicable). 
 
 
 
The GCF funding enables the Funds to build a substantial asset base that makes the long-term returns attractive to 
private sector investor.  LPs are expected to be locked in with redemption restrictions for a period of 5 years. The fund 
anticipates a life of 10 years with an option to extend for a further 5 years. LPs are allowed to sell their interest or redeem 
after 5 years. 
 
There will be multiple channels from recapitalizations to private investors and commercial banks. Returns can be 
withdrawn in a 5-year term. Principal investment can be withdrawn by buyout from 5 year term or at the end of the 
10 year term

=== PAGE 30 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance of the proposed 
project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity-specific sub-criteria and indicative 
assessment factors, which can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework, should be addressed where relevant and 
applicable. This section should tie into any request for concessionality made in section B.2. 
 
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas 
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential 
Specify the mitigation and/or adaptation impact, taking into account the relevant and applicable sub-criteria and 
assessment factors in the Fund’s investment framework.  
Climate impact potential  
 
This project will demonstrate that businesses and public sector can implement various green initiatives in many 
aspects of their everyday activities, ranging from Sustainable transport, Sustainable Waste management & 
recycling, Renewable energy, including off grid and mini grid, Sustainable water management, Energy Efficiency & 
Demand Side Management, Sustainable human settlements, the built environment and green buildings, Ecosystem 
services, Energy efficiency, Renewable energy, Rural energy including off grid and mini grid, Biogas and biofuels, 
Sustainable transport, Industrial cleaner production and consumption projects, Biodiversity Benefiting businesses, 
including sustainable farming, Land use management and models, Rural adaptation projects and plans 
 
Reduction of CO2 emissions through displacement of fossil-fueled electricity use at the business level by 
implementing energy efficiencies technology, installation of clean and renewable energy sources such as solar pv 
and biofuels. As illustrated below, the current portfolio is 62% Clean, energy, 21% sustainable agriculture and 15% 
Energy Efficiency. We project that the future portfolio will be 40% clean energy, 25% sustainable agriculture, 25% 
energy efficiency and 10% other interventions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agri
21%
EE
15%
Other
2%
Clean 
Energy
62%
Pilot phase portfolio
Agri
25%
EE
25%
Other
10%
Clean 
Energy
40%
Future portfolio

=== PAGE 31 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
The projected CO2 emission reduction are calculated in following section. 
   
When applicable, specify the degree to which the project/programme avoids lock-in of long-lived, high emission or 
climate-vulnerable infrastructure. 
 
One of the main energy challenges in South Africa is due to historical environmentally unfriendly structural design. Utility 
scale electricity infrastructure require large cost on distribution lines. Compounding the problem is the fact that the 
infrastructure is ageing. Embedded generation and micro-grids can solve this problem whilst also bringing the following 
additional benefits: 
- 
Due to the small size of these individual projects, they are perfect for MSMEs to do as large business wouldn’t 
be interested. Thus whilst providing electricity, there will be added benefits of MSME development, job creation 
and skills building 
- 
There are no distribution costs   
- 
They are quick to install, thereby bringing delivery of basic services to the poor 
 
SCF Capital Solutions has started financing such projects.  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below 
GCF core indicators 
Expected 
tonnes 
of 
carbon 
dioxide 
equivalent (t CO2 eq) to be reduced or 
avoided (Mitigation only) 
Annual 
132 920 tons CO2 per year 
Lifetime 
33 001 833 tons CO2 
 
Expected total number of direct 
and 
indirect 
beneficiaries, 
disaggregated by gender (reduced 
vulnerability 
or 
increased 
resilience);  
 
Number of beneficiaries relative to 
total population, disaggregated by 
gender (adaptation only) 
Total 
307 MSME beneficiaries, of which 
138 will be women 
Percentage 
(%) 
N/A 
Other 
relevant 
indicators 
  
Per year 
Amount of Facility (Rand) 
 460 000 000  
Average value per investment (Rand) 
 1 500 000  
Number of deals 
 307  
% women (target) 
45% 
Number of women companies 
 138  
Number of agriculture jobs 
15660 
Number of energy jobs 
15000 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above. 
Main assumptions 
 
The impact calculation is based on the projected total investments that will be made 
 
Whilst the Fund amount is USD34mil, the amount of investments is based on the number of times the facility is 
churned. Since the average tenor of transactions is 90 days, the facility will be churned four times a year to 
make USD120M investments per annum

=== PAGE 32 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
 
  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Total amount of 
funding 
disbursement in 
10 years 
120M 
144M 
173M 
207M 
249M 
299M 
358M 
430M 
516M 
619M 
 
Clean Energy 
 
 
The total installed cost of solar PV in South Africa is R19/W or USD1,35/W. 
 
Daylight hours of 2500 per year, as per department of energy 
 
Average number of days of energy usage is 5 days per week 
 
CO2 / kWh of 0,0000957 as per Spalding Fletcher, 2011 
 
Based on the project future portfolio where Clean energy is 40% of the total investment, the CO2 savings will be as 
follows 
Solar PV 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Lifetime (25 
years) 
Allocated investment 
40% 
40% 
40% 
40% 
40% 
  
Investment Amount ZAR 
 
 48 000 000  
 57 600 000  
 69 120 000  
 82 944 000  
 99 532 800  
 
1 246 016 741  
USD/kw 
 1 300  
 1 300  
 1 300  
 1 300  
 1 300  
 1 300  
KW installed 
 36 923  
 44 308  
 53 169  
 63 803  
 76 564  
 958 474  
daylight hours per year 
 2 500  
 2 500  
 2 500  
 2 500  
 2 500  
 2 500  
Average number of days of 
use per year 
 261  
 261  
 261  
 261  
 261  
 261  
KWh per year 
 65 934 066  
 79 120 879  
 94 945 055  
 
113 934 06
6  
 136 720 879  
 
1 711 561 458  
Emissions factor (CO2/KWh) 
 0,000957  
 0,000957  
 0,000957  
 0,000957  
 0,000957  
 0,000957  
Co2 saving (tonnes) 
 63 099  
 75 719  
 90 862  
 109 035  
 130 842  
 24 569 465  
 
Benchmarks 
 
 
 
 
CO2 saving 
KWh 
CO2/KWh 
SCF 
63 099 
65 934 066 
0,000957 
Exquisine-thornbury 
139,7 
107000 
0,001305607 
Monash university 
220 
170000 
0,001294118

=== PAGE 33 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
Energy efficiency 
 
For energy efficiency the CO2 calculation the main assumption were based on results of the project we financed  
Energy Efficiency 
Year1 
Year 2 
Year3 
Year4 
Year5 
Lifetime ( 5 
years) 
Allocated investment 
25% 
25% 
25% 
25% 
25% 
  
Amount of investments 
USD 
 30 000 000  
 36 000 000  
 43 200 000  
 51 840 000  
 62 208 000  
 778 760 463  
Amount of investments 
ZAR 
 450 000 000  
 540 000 000  
 648 000 000  
 777 600 000  
 933 120 000  
 
11 681 406 950  
Rand investment per 
KW saving 
 6,70  
 6,70  
 6,70  
 6,70  
 6,70  
 6,70  
KW savings from total 
investment per year 
 
67 211 100,00  
80653320 
96783984 
116140780,8 
139368937 
1744711579 
Emissions factor 
(CO2/KWh) 
 0,000957  
 0,000957  
 0,000957  
 0,000957  
 0,000957  
 0,000957  
Co2 saving (tonnes) 
 64 321  
 77 185  
 92 622  
 111 147  
 133 376  
 8 348 445  
 
Sustainable farming 
 
According to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, agriculture is the major economic sector of 
many developing countries and most Least Developed Countries (LDCs). It is the main livelihood of 75 percent of the 
poor in developing countries. Farmers constitute the largest group of natural resource managers on earth (land, water, 
domesticated genetic resources). Agriculture is expected to feed a population that will number 9.1 billion in 2050, while 
providing income, employment and environmental services. Responding to more rapid and intense climate changes is 
additional to these other demands on the sector and follows decades of declining investment in the sector and a global 
financial crisis. At the same time, agriculture is an important source of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, representing 
14 percent of the global total. Developing countries are the source of 74 percent of these emissions (Smith et al. 2008). 
If related land-use change, including deforestation (for which agriculture is a key driver) and emissions beyond the farm 
gate are considered, the sector’s share would be higher. However, the technical mitigation potential of agriculture is high 
and 70 percent of this potential could be realized in developing countries. However, while the profile of agriculture within 
the climate change negotiations has improved, it is still considered to be a difficult sector, the options involve difficult 
trade-offs, with benefits for mitigation but negative consequences for food security and/or development. 
 
The global and regional potential of the four most important sources of land-based mitigation are: 
 
Cropland management: High global potential, spread over the regions. In terms of food insecure regions, 
potential mitigation is particularly high in South America, Eastern Africa, South Asia and Southeast Asia. 
 
Pasture and grazing land management: Despite the low C density of grazing land, practices in this category 
have a high potential for C sequestration because of the large amount of land used as pastures. Data from 
FAOSTAT indicate that global pasture area accounted for 3 488 Mha in 2002 (69 percent of global agricultural 
land). On the other hand, conversion of pasture accounted for 65 percent of the increase in arable land from the 
1960s to 2005. Improving pasture efficiency, therefore, will avoid further land conversion and concomitant C 
loss. According to IPCC (2007), potential gains are particularly high in almost all regions of Africa and Asia, as 
well as South America. 
 
Restoration of degraded land: Oldeman (1994) estimated that over 2 billion hectares of land were degraded. 
Degraded land due mainly to erosion was calculated to affect 250 Mha, including 112 Mha in Africa, 88 Mha in 
Asia, and 37 Mha in Latin America (Oldeman 1994). Thus, there is a large potential to increase carbon 
sequestration in South America, East and West Africa and South and Southeast Asia through mitigation options 
falling within this category. 
 
Restoration of organic soils: These carbon dense soils are often important in developing countries; for example, 
Andriesse (1988) estimated that the South East Asian region contains the largest expanse of peat deposits. The 
second most important area is the Amazon basin and the basins bordering the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean. 
These soils are also found in the wet equatorial belt of Africa.

=== PAGE 34 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
Our analysis focuses only on cropland management, this is because our target clients produce primarily vegetables. We 
are therefore looking to provide financing to these farmers to encourage them to undertake sustainable farming.  Given 
that many large retailers are focused on sustainable farming, we will be able to support supply chains between small 
farmers who supply the large retailers. 
 
Assumptions 
 
In quantifying the mitigation potential: 
 
We assumed that 25% of the investments will be in sustainable farming 
 
We started by looking at the cost per hectare of vegetable farmers. Research done by the University of 
Cape Town in this regard looked at costs for small farmers and determine an average cost per hectare of 
R109 639 for typical 90 day crops. This translates into R 438554 per ha per year 
 
A 10% annual escalation of the cost was assumed 
 
We then computed how may hectares our funding will be able to support 
 
In 2007 the IPCC determined that the mitigation potential of cropland management in developing countries 
is 0,62-5,36 tonnes of CO2/ha/year. We used this number of calculate the CO2 mitigations from the ha of 
land that we will have supported 
 
 
  
Year1 
Year 2 
Year3 
Year4 
Year5 
Total (10 years) 
Allocated investment 
25% 
25% 
25% 
25% 
25% 
  
Amount of investments USD 
 30 000 000  
 36 000 000  
 43 200 000  
 51 840 000  
 62 208 000  
 778 760 463  
Amount of investments ZAR 
 450 000 000  
 540 000 000  
 648 000 000  
 777 600 000  
 933 120 000  
 11 681 406 950  
Investment per ha/year 
 438 554  
 482 410  
 530 651  
 583 716  
 642 088  
 6 989 429  
Ha invested in 
 1 026  
 1 119  
 1 221  
 1 332  
 1 453  
  
improved cropland 
management (Mt CO2/ha/yr) 
 5,36  
5,36  
5,36  
5,36  
5,36  
  
CO2 savings (tons) 
 5 500  
 6 000  
 6 545  
 7 140  
 7 789  
 83 923  
Jobs 
 103                  112 
 122  
 133  
 145  
 1566  
*** South African farming employs 1 jobs per ha.  
51.1 percent employment of a permanent nature, 25.2 per cent had employment of limited duration, and 23.6 per cent 
had employment of unspecified duration  
Total 
 
Total CO2 savings in one year = 132 920 tons CO2 per year 
 
Total lifetime CO2 savings = 33 001 833 tons CO2  
 
Other benefits 
 
To compute the beneficiary impact, we used the average investment size from the pilot phase, which is R1,5M. 
The facility of R460M (USD30M) will be churned four times, we assume it will be churned on the same clients.  
The target investment on women business is 45% (In the pilot phase, 7 out of 21 investments made by end of October 
were on women, i.e. 33%) 
  
Per year 
Amount of Facility (Rand) 
 460 000 000  
Average value per investment (Rand) 
 1 500 000  
Number of deals 
 307  
% women (target) 
45% 
Number of women companies 
 138  
Number of agriculture jobs 
15660 
Number of energy jobs 
15000

=== PAGE 35 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale) 
Describe how the proposed project/programme’s expected contributions to global low-carbon and/or climate-
resilient development pathways could be scaled-up and replicated including a description of the steps 
necessary to accomplish it. 
 
According to a research done by the University of Cape Town on barriers to investing in clean energy in South Africa, 
TimeLine et al. (2012) state that despite recent market growth, the solar PV industry remains inhibited by a range of 
financial, technical, regulatory and institutional barriers, and they argue, “The continuation of policy supports might be 
necessary for several decades to maintain and enhance the growth of solar energy in both developed and developing 
countries”. Pegels (2010) states that the main barriers to renewable energy in South Africa are the country’s “energy 
innovation system” (which includes the historical and present reliance on coal), and the economics of renewable energy. 
Financial Barriers 
The primary economic barrier to investment in solar PV is the large upfront capital requirement, which applies regardless 
of the extent to which grid parity has been achieved. Timilsina et al. (2012) also highlight the fact that financing options 
are expensive as solar PV is still considered a high-risk technology with a short history, a long payback period and with 
limited cash inflow. Wamukonya (2007) lists the various options for overcoming the high up-front costs of rooftop solar, 
such as micro credit facilities, loan schemes and revolving funds, removal of taxes and levies, and subsidies. 
Drury et al., (2012) describe how third-party ownership is transforming the PV market in California. In this case, the PV 
equipment is not purchased by the consumer but is leased from the supplier, thereby eliminating the need for a large 
amount of upfront capital. Drury et al (2012) show that this has the potential to increase the size of the market through 
making the technology available to a different demographic, thereby increasing market penetration. Jelle et al. (2012) 
show that building-integrated PV modules could result in additional savings through the dual-purpose functionality of a 
PV installation, which negates the need for additional investment in traditional roof materials. They highlight the potential 
use of various technologies such as photovoltaic foils and photovoltaic tiles, which could serve this dual function. 
Regulatory Barriers 
Unlike many other countries, South African policy does not yet include any strong incentives to invest in PV for small-
scale generation, and given the high cost of the investment required and the long payback period, the market penetration 
remains small. Net Metering (credit given for surplus electricity returned to the grid) has been used in other countries 
and this has been an efficient justification for private investment in residential solar PV systems. Ndanga and Gorn 
(2012) highlight the lack of formal incentives for small-scale generators, such as net metering, as a major barrier in 
South Africa. 
Institutional Barriers 
Sebitosi (2010) summarises the approach to the determination of tariffs in South Africa: Eskom (a traditional monopoly) 
presents its projected costs and sales to the National Regulator of South Africa (NERSA). NERSA then approves a tariff 
structure, which is deemed to allow ESKOM a fair return. Sebitosi (2010) also highlights the “dilemma of energy 
conservation and utility revenue” which results from ESKOM being best place (as a monopoly) to manage energy 
conservation programmes. Sebitosi and Pillay (2008b) argue that the political climate in South Africa has not promoted 
the implementation of renewable energy. Ndanga and Gorn (2012) also identify city council and municipal bureaucracy 
and resistance as a barrier to initiatives such as Net Metering.

=== PAGE 36 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
Technical Barriers 
Wamukonya (2007) highlights a lack of technical support for installation and maintenance, which can be overcome by 
training of technicians and disseminating of user-friendly manuals. Wamukonya (2007) also highlights the quality of PV 
technology being produced as a barrier; and suggests that this can be mitigated through labelling, adherence to 
standards, and regulation. Technical barriers include the low conversion efficiencies of PV modules (Timilsina et al., 
2012). However, a series of recent and on-going technical innovations may result in improvements in PV efficiency, 
including the application of nanotechnology in the design of new PV modules. 
This programme responds to the financial barrier. Despite the recognized importance of the SME sector, evidence 
indicates that SMEs continue to be undersupplied with the financial products and services that are critical to their growth. 
In global surveys, including the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys and Investment Climate Assessments, SMEs report 
that the cost of finance is their greatest obstacle to growth and rank access to finance as another key obstacle. While 
these constraints are more acute in developing countries, SMEs in any environment are nearly one-third more likely 
than large firms to rate financing constraints as a “major” growth obstacle. In low-income countries, this means that 
nearly half of small firms report being severely constrained by financing difficulties. 
 
In South Africa, the number of SMEs estimated to be between 1 and 3 million in South Africa. Excluding micro-
enterprises, it is estimated that there are 250 000 to 650 000 enterprises. Depending upon age of business, significant 
portion of those rely on own finance to finance from friends to get by. As they become more developed they rely on VC 
and Angel Investors. Once fully established and with history of operational performance they rely more heavily on PE 
investors and the banking sector. The Problem Is Further Compounded In That Many SMEs Are Being Formed By 
Previously Disadvantaged Individuals Who Find It Difficult Accessing Any Of These Markets Especially Due To Lack Of 
Business Skills And Collateral.  
 
While large businesses can access the growing market for debt financing, small businesses are reliant on banks and 
specialist finance and leasing businesses, which have become conservative in their lending practices since the 2008 
crash. Small firms have consistently reported that credit is either refused or is offered at high prices by the major lenders 
 
When traditional banks downscale their operations to serve the SME market, higher transaction costs and undefined 
risk management strategies are seen to be a major obstacle. In fact research reports indicate that poor business skills 
and financial management contribute significantly to small business failure in addition to a lack of access to finance. This 
makes the market too risky for traditional banks to service adequately 
 
For start-ups, micro-enterprises, entrepreneurs from previously disadvantaged communities or any other group with 
limited collateral or weak (or limited) credit histories, access is more limited. 
 
World Bank research covering 91 banks in 45 countries found that: 
 
 
The financial assessment of the business is the most important consideration across all types of firms 
 
Overall, a firm’s credit history with the bank is the second most important criterion, with the owner’s 
characteristics and the purpose of the loan being next in importance 
 
At least three-quarters of banks require collateral to make business loans  
 
According to recent SAVCA surveys, private equity firms in South Africa invest only 11% in early stage businesses. If 
Business Partners’ investments are excluded, the total average deal size during 2013 was R72.6 million (2012: R48.9 
million). The average deal size is indicative that most private equity firms focus on higher value, larger type deals with 
little focus on small business or the SME sector

=== PAGE 37 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
 
This programme aims to both build the capacity and coverage of MSMEs through financial support while integrating this 
support with the national system of incubators and learning regarding business management and project delivery. In 
doing so it is aimed at encouraging other financial institutions to address this critical sector by:  
 
engaging MSMEs  
 
building competence 
 
scaling up significantly as additional resources applied and thus  
 
addressing the shortfall for funding in green sector  
 
The program will create the paradigm shift in the following ways 
 
1. Acceleration of installations: By applying supply chain finance, we finance companies who wouldn't be 
financeable by traditional credit. We finance commercially-proven technology such as solar pv, therefore it 
enables acceleration of rollout of green technology 
2. Crowd-in banking sector: Commercial banking needs data in sufficient data in order to adopt a product. It is 
for this reason that whilst adoption of supply chain finance is rising rapidly in Europe, Asia and America, it is still 
nascent in South Africa and many other parts of the developing world. Therefore the GCF funding will enable 
us to build on the work that has been done highly encouraging results from the pilot phase to demonstrate that 
with appropriate risk management, supply chain finance can be used to provide access to finance to MSMEs in 
the green economy. We will be able to build a substantial data and track record to demonstrate this. With 
sufficient track record, we will be able to attract funding from commercial banks, thereby improve access to 
finance for MSMEs. 
3. Scaling up regionally: Access to finance for MSMEs is a global problem, and more so in Africa. The African 
region also has a severe under-electrification problem. This model can be rolled applied in the region to solve 
the two problems and generate socio-economic development. The mandate of the DBSA extend into the rest of 
the African continent, therefore learnings and capacity developed by the programme can be applied elsewhere 
in the rest of Africa.  
4. Cost of fund for MSMEs: The GCF funding will enable the program to reduce to cost of funding for MSMEs to 
levels that are comparable with commercial bank funding. Supply chain finance does not take physical collateral 
from the MSMEs, other lending products that do not take physical collateral are priced much higher. The 
statutory financing limit in South Africa is 33%, however this does not apply to trade finance type lending, where 
financiers can charge as high as 7,5% per month.  During the pilot phase the recommend pricing from sefa (a 
government agency that fiancés small businesses) for this program was 3-4% per month, the GCF funding will 
enable the pricing to be managed at around 2% per month. 
5. Link to incubation and Enterprise and Supplier Development programs: One of the weaknesses of 
incubation and Enterprise and Supplier Development programs is that incubates who graduate out of the 
programs cannot access funding to commercialize their products. During the pilot phase, SCF Capital Solutions 
started working with incubation centres such as Innovation Hub, GreenCape and Impact Amplifier to provide 
financial support to their incubatees. With more funding, we will be able to partner with large private and public 
businesses who to provide funding to MSMEs in their programs. We have already started discussions with 
companies such as Sasol, Clover and the Estate Agency Affairs Board to help them increase number of MSME 
suppliers 
Early stage 
, 11%
Expansion 
, 42%
Replaceme
nt, 12%
Buyout, 
35%
Investments made

=== PAGE 38 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning 
Describe how the project/programme contributes to the creation or strengthening of knowledge, collective learning 
processes, or institutions. 
 
Commercial banking relies on long track record of data in order to make credit decisions. It is for this reason that whilst 
adoption of supply chain finance is rising rapidly in Europe, Asia and America, it is still nascent in South Africa and many 
other parts of the developing world due to lack of information. The GCF funding will enable us to build on work done 
during the pilot phase to demonstrate that with appropriate risk management, supply chain finance can be used to 
provide access to finance to MSMEs in the green economy. We will be able to build a substantial data and track record 
to demonstrate this.  
 
Commercial banks that finance MSMEs generally offer the overdraft product, which exposes banks to high risk due to 
lack of control on the usage, and it is costly for the banks as they need to hold capital even for unutilized portions of the 
facility. With sufficient track record of supply chain finance, we will be able to attract funding from commercial banks into 
this low-risk financing product. More funding from the banks will mean more green developments will be done. Ability to 
access to finance for green developments will result in MSMEs switching to green.   
 
Supporting MSMEs is an imperative of different stakeholders such as government, large corporations and financiers, 
however there is still lack of information on the correct parameters for MSME financing. Supply chain financing is a 
collaborative framework between the various partners in the supply chain, and government and large corporations are 
part of the chain. Supply chain finance is primarily process-based, instead of credit parameter based. Thus the 
programme will naturally enable us as the financier to work with government and private sector to build on the knowledge 
gained during the pilot and optimize the various parameters of the supply chain to enable low risk financing of the MSME 
within the supply chain financing.  
 
We will collect the following information 
 
Intra-organizational frameworks for public and private sector buyers that that are conducive for MSMEs, support 
such as relationships between finance, operations and procurement; 
 
Inter-organizational frameworks that are conducive for MSME support such as contract parameters 
 
MSME-side factors such as financial and technical competency 
 
Regulatory factors  
 
MSMEs can be educated on key aspects to look out for in contracts and financial terms 
 
We will build a database of MSMEs and their track records of performance, thereby lowering progressively 
performance risk of the entire supply chain. MSMEs with higher performance will be teamed with incubation 
programs for support.

=== PAGE 39 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
Describe how proposed measures will create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained participation of 
private and public sector actors in low-carbon and/or resilient development that go beyond the program. 
A supply chain, by definition, is a movement of goods and services from suppliers to buyers. It is made up of Suppliers, 
Intermediaries and Buyers;  
 
The private sectors are suppliers,  
 
The MSME are the service providers who buys goods from Suppliers and provide a service to Buyers.  
 
Public sector are the Buyers  
 
Supply chain finance enables the supply chain to function. An efficient network of suppliers, MSMEs and buyers will 
then enable more green developments to be executed. 
 
Our supply chain finance program creates a win-win-win situation between the three parties in the supply chain. By tying 
the financing of the supply to MSME performance we create; 
 
an incentive on the MSME to collaborate as better performance increases chances of obtaining future contracts 
and financing 
 
an incentive on the large private and public sector buyers to collaborate as it enables them build a network of 
competent MSME suppliers which reduces their supply chain risk and also enables them to meet the social 
responsibilities 
 
an incentive on manufactures who supply goods to MSMEs to collaborate as it enables them to sell more goods 
 
Describe how the proposal contributes to innovation, market development and transformation. Examples include: 
 
Introducing and demonstrating a new market or a new technology in a country or a region 
 
Using innovative funding scheme such as initial public offerings and/or bond markets for projects/programme 
 
The proposal contributes to innovation through the provision of an innovative financing solution and technology to deliver 
the solution. Since financing is one of the main obstacles to green developments, the innovative financing solution will 
result in more green developments being implemented.  
 
Innovative financing model 
 
SCF Capital Solutions solves this problem by applying supply chain finance. Supply chain finance is a set of technology-
based business and financing processes that link the various parties in a transaction – the buyer, seller and financing 
institution – to lower financing costs, improve access to finance for SMMEs who supply large institutions and improve 
business efficiency. In supply chain finance the financial institution avails credit to the supplier, based on the credit 
strength of the buyer, who would normally be a large entity. Thus is supply chain finance the credit risk is on the buyer 
and performance risk is on the supplier. The supplier performance risk can be broken down further by looking at how 
early in the supply chain the transaction is financed. Supply chain finance (SCF) provides short-term credit that optimizes 
working capital for both the buyer and the seller. Supply chain finance generally involves the use of a technology platform 
in order to automate transactions and track the invoice approval and settlement process from initiation to completion. 
The growing popularity of SCF has been largely driven by the increasing globalization and complexity of the supply 
chain, especially in industries such as automotive, manufacturing and the retail sector. The innovative aspects of the 
model are discussed in more detail in section E 6.4.

=== PAGE 40 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
Describe how the project/programme strengthens the national / local regulatory or legal frameworks to systematically 
drive investment in low-emission technologies or activities, promote development of additional low-emission policies, 
and/or improve climate-responsive planning and development. 
 
The development and increased participation of MSME in the radical transformation, including the shift to a low carbon 
and climate resilience developmental trajectory, of the South African economy is a national strategic priority. As such, 
several regulatory and policy instruments have been put in place and institutional arrangements reconfigured to 
ensure optimal participation of small scale players in the economy. National strategies such as the National 
Development Plan, Industrial Policy Action Plan, and Green Economy Accord, the New Growth Path as well as 
defined guides including the Shared Economic Infrastructure Facility Guidelines and Guidelines for Reducing 
Municipal Red Tape, all have the common goal of ensuring that SMMEs play a part in growing the economy of South 
Africa. 
 
Strategic Plans and activities recommended in the implementation of some of the above-mentioned policies include the 
piloting and testing of a range of low-emission technologies, promotion of development of additional low-emission 
policies, and improvement climate-responsive planning and development. Lessons learned from this project will form 
part of the baseline data and knowledge bank that will assist South Africa towards making further decision and scaling-
up of low-carbon and climate resilient initiatives in which MSMEs are particularly involved. This programme will also 
serve as a flagship mechanism for the newly established Department of Small Business Development. MSMEs that 
could have participated in this project will have improved technical and institutional capacity and financial reputation to 
graduate to participate larger projects including the recently launched Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer 
(REIPP) programme for small scale projects.  The identified barriers preventing the participation of MSME low-carbon 
and climate resilient developmental initiatives and the overall economy will be addressed through this project thus 
positively influencing players such financial institutions and other private and public stakeholders towards inclusion in 
sustainable development initiatives that are on-going within the country. 
 
The South African government has legislated that 30% of private and public sectors procurement to be from MSMEs. 
To achieve socioeconomic development MSMEs need to be involved in the economy as they are the biggest jobs 
creator. At the moment Public and private sector entities are not able to achieve this target to due lack of skills and 
financially viable MSMES. Our programme will enable them to achieve these goals. The collaborative nature of our 
program will enable the development of MSMEs and development of a pool of MSMEs who can execute green projects, 
which can strengthen the regulator’s hand to enforce the 30% procurement of services from MSMEs.  
 
 
 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential 
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive development impact 
 
Economic co-benefits  
- 
Job creation: During the pilot phase, we supported more than 3000 jobs with R40mil investments. 20% of the 
financing went to start-up businesses and therefore creating new jobs. It is important to note without our 
financing the rest of the jobs could have been lost. Therefore with R460mil (USD30mil) investment we can 
support over 30 000 jobs. 20% of which will be new jobs. 
- 
Cost savings: through financing of energy efficiency and renewable energy, we will help private and public 
sector to save between 2- and 50% on their energy costs. 
 
Social co-benefits  
- 
Improved access to education (working with incubators) – We currently provide financial readiness training 
to incubatees. We are working with green incubators to provide a complete ecosystem where the SMME is 
provided with technical, financial and access to market support. This will result in more better prepared MSMEs

=== PAGE 41 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
to implement green developments, creating jobs and reducing poverty 
- 
Provision of basic service: Through financing of installations such as mini-grids, we will enable quick provision 
of electricity to low income communities  
 
Environmental co-benefits – We have financed projects in municipal water management, industrial liquid waste 
management, sustainable farming, conversion of waste cooking oil to biodiesel, etc. These are excellent opportunities 
for MSMEs to be involved, especially given the relative low technical expertise required. These projects Improved air 
quality, soil quality (potential) and biodiversity. More than 90% of the businesses we finance are owned and operated 
by previously politically excluded people and women  
 
 
Gender-sensitive development impact – By end of October, 33% of the projects we financed were for women owned 
businesses, our target is for 45% of the financing to go to women owned businesses. Examples of women owned 
business that we financed are: 
 
 
 
 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient 
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only) 
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups, and elaborate how the 
project/programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and groups, 
overall income level, etc.) 
 
South Africa is characterized by high levels of unemployment. The official unemployment rate stood at 25%, while only 
41% of the active population was actually employed (Statistics South Africa, 2012). Nearly one million jobs were lost in 
2009 owing to the economic recession across all major sectors (both formal and informal) of the economy (Statistics 
South Africa, 2010). In addition, within the employed population, significant divergences in income and welfare between 
highly paid and skilled workers (of all races) and low-skill low-wage workers (mostly black/African) exist. The country’s 
current economic growth model is heavily resource and energy-intensive, aggravating pressures on the environment and 
the threat of climate change. South Africa is thus the world’s 13th largest greenhouse gases emitter while only ranking 
29th and 70th in terms of gross domestic product (GDP) and GDP per capita.  
 
South Africa is in a unique position to exploit the emergence of green economic development in the world. The country’s 
renewable resources abundance (solar and wind predominantly) and biodiversity positions it to play a leading role in the 
Southern African region and in Africa. In addition, if supported by an enabling environment, green sectors have the 
potential to foster South African growth and employment, as well as the shift to sustainable development.  
 
MSMEs are key drivers in implementing green developments. By proving a financing solutions that supports MSMEs, we 
will enable the country to implement more green development 
 
Delivery of basic services such as electricity is also a key government priority. Programmes to uplift economic and social 
development, such as provision of electricity, fuel for cooking, etc., can be rollout quicker using small scale localized 
sources that utility sources. For example, a small 90W rooftop solar pv system can be installed on a roof of a shack within 
a few hours and immediately start providing much need to shack dwellers, enabling the kids to study and other benefits. 
Another major developmental advantage is that such projects are perfect for MSMSs to undertake the installations since 
they are too small for bigger companies. Thus there is a double benefit of providing services whist also employing MSMEs 
and developing skills

=== PAGE 42 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
The target market of the fund is: 
 
70% previously disadvantaged people 
 
45% women 
 
35% youth 
 
These are the most vulnerable and disadvantage groups in South Africa in terms of unemployment and poverty. The 
below table shows unemployment statistics by demographic. Source: AfricaCheck 
 
Race & gender 
Total population (15-34) 
Unemployed* 
% 
Black male 
8,187,887 
2,892,127 
35% 
Black female 
8,057,561 
3,677,561 
46% 
White male 
603,917 
82,605 
14% 
White female 
593,795 
132,395 
22% 
Indian male 
234,022 
51,365 
22% 
Indian female 
219,281 
74,199 
34% 
Coloured male 
810,492 
260,793 
32% 
Coloured female 
822,535 
321,577 
39% 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
 
Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
 
Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payment gap that prevents from addressing 
the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market) 
 
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity.  
 
Economic development is a priority for South Africa and a shift to high-value, knowledge-intensive products is a national 
objective. It is intended that investment in Research Development Initiatives will lead to the commercialisation of the 
resulting technology, leading to increased employment, exports and national wealth (DST, 2007). South Africa for the 
green development is part of the strategy of paving a path for the economy as a whole to benefit from country’s natural 
resources. For economic benefits to reach the poor and marginalised part of the population, more employment 
opportunities would have to be created (Mange, 2010). 
 
The Fund targets MSMEs, who traditionally are excluded from the commercial banking system due to lack of collateral 
and financial history We are therefore solving two problems with one solutions; sustainable development and access to 
finance for MSMEs.  
 
Skills transfer: the Fund will invest in MSMEs with commercially-tested technology which require artisanal skills. The 
increased rollout out of these technologies will result in skills transfer to the artisans who will do the installations. The goal 
is to accelerate green developments by providing the necessary working capital required to undertake the developments. 
Access to finance to MSMEs in South Africa is less than 25%. According to the South African Reserve Bank’s credit 
exposure figures, captured on the BA200 form submitted to the bank supervision department, as of December 2015 
South African bank loans of less than R7,5M to MSMEs was flat at R180bn, compared to R387,5bn for larger SMEs, 
which grew by 80%. According to www.smallbusinessinsight.org, The banks’ reluctance to increase lending to small firms 
is sending many of them the way of small business financier Business Partners. The financier, which has an average 
loan size of R2.5m, financed R773mil in MSME transaction in 2013/14. Their large competitor Sasfin financed R2,7bn.  
This program will add R1,8bn financing for MSMEs in the first year, and growing at 20% per year for 10 years.

=== PAGE 43 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
E.5.  Country Ownership 
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, NAPAs 
and NAPs 
Please describe how the project/programme contributes to country’s identified priorities for low-emission and climate-
resilient development, and the degree to which the activity is supported by a country’s enabling policy and institutional 
framework, or includes policy or institutional changes. 
 
Since 1994, South Africa has achieved far-reaching political, economic and social changes, and has shown an increasing 
commitment to sustainable development. Along with its involvement in international negotiations, it has developed its own 
national framework for a shift to a green economy. South Africa recognises sustainable development as a human right in 
the Bill of Rights of its 1996 Constitution (Republic of South Africa, 1996) and also committed to achieving the Millennium 
Development Goals, which include environmental sustainability as a target (United Nations, 2000). The country is a Party 
to both the Kyoto Protocol and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and has made 
commitments under the Cancun Agreement for its greenhouse gas emissions to “peak, plateau and decline”, with 
reductions in emissions compared to a “business as usual” scenario of 34% in 2020 and 42% in 2025. South Africa is 
also Party to many international conventions and agreements on biodiversity (such as the Convention on International 
Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, the Convention on Biological Diversity, the International 
Convention for the Regulation of Whaling and the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands of International Importance) and 
pollution issues (such as the Basel Convention on the Control of Trans-boundary Movement of Hazardous Wastes and 
their Disposal, the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants and the Montreal Protocol for the Protection 
of the Ozone Layer). 
 
The South African framework which guides the development of a green economy and, as a result, green jobs in the 
country essentially consists in nine key texts. The Table below provides a chronological overview of these policies and 
measures, summarising their relevant goals, current (mid-2012) progress and the nature and level of civil society 
involvement in their establishment.  
 
Policies and 
measures  
Main goals  
Progress (mid-2012)  
Civil society 
involvement  
Framework for 
Environmental Fiscal 
Reform (NT, 2006)  
Provides principles and guidelines 
for fair and effective environmental 
taxes  
Taxes and levies have been implemented on plastic 
bags, incandescent light bulbs, ecosystem restoration 
costs related to water use, liquid fuel, non-renewable 
electricity and new vehicle carbon dioxide emissions 
performance  
A paper on carbon tax 
was published in 2010 
for public consultation  
Innovation Plan 
(DST, 2008)  
Includes “safe, clean, affordable 
and reliable energy supply” and 
climate change as priorities 
Support for innovation in electric vehicles, fuel cells 
and carbon capture and storage, but cancellation of the 
country’s largest clean energy R&D programme (the 
Pebble Bed Modular Reactor) and delay in the 
implementation of renewable energy demonstration 
projects (e.g. solar tower) 
Limited  
Medium-Term 
Strategic Framework 
2009-2014 (NPC, 
2009)  
Notes the need for sustainable 
livelihoods and sustainable 
resource management and relates 
these to various other policy areas 
including energy, water, housing, 
technology and competitiveness  
Numerous policy responses implemented in line with 
the Medium-Term Strategic Framework, particularly the 
NSSD, the creation of an enabling environment for 
renewable energy, several water management projects 
and the National Climate Change Response.  
Limited  
Industrial Policy 
Action Plan (the dti, 
2010, 2011 and 2012)  
Specifically targets growth in green 
industries, focusing on solar water 
heaters (SWHs), but also includes 
other solar and wind energy, 
biofuels, electric vehicles and 
organic farming  
Around 200 000 SWHs installed by mid-2012 and a 
procurement process started for around ZAR 120 
billion worth of large-scale renewable electricity 
generation  
Some consultation via 
NEDLAC

=== PAGE 44 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
New Growth Path 
(EDD, 2010)  
Targets the growth of a green 
economy, resulting in 400 000 new 
and additional jobs  
Enabling regulation passed in other departments  
Government, 
business and civil 
society signed the 
Green Economy 
Accord in 2011, which 
details (mostly 
already-existing) 
support measures  
Integrated Resource 
Plan 2010-2030 (DoE, 
2011)  
Limits emissions from electricity 
generation to 275 Mt per year  
Expects renewable energy to 
make up 42% of all new electricity 
generation over the next 20 years  
Procurement of renewable energy under the plan is on 
track, but procurement of nuclear energy has been 
delayed by at least a year  
Large public 
participation, including 
inputs on modelling 
parameters and a first 
draft of the plan  
National Climate 
Change Response 
(Republic of South 
Africa, 2011)  
Endorses and quantifies South 
Africa’s greenhouse gas emissions 
limits/commitments.  
Aims to grow green jobs while 
limiting job loss in unsustainable 
industries  
South Africa had already made a (voluntary) emissions 
commitment and approved an emissions-limited energy 
plan (Integrated Resource Plan 2010-2030) prior to the 
publication of the policy  
Significant public 
consultation, starting 
with the multi-
stakeholder Long-
Term Mitigation 
Scenarios process in 
2007  
National Strategy for 
Sustainable 
Development (DEA, 
2011)  
A large variety of indicators and 
goals spanning social, economic 
and environmental issues, but no 
budgets, timelines or 
responsibilities  
Strategy published and annual publication of 
sustainability indicators (different from the ones in the 
strategy)  
Public consultation on 
a draft NSSD since 
2009.  
National 
Development Plan 
(NPC, 2011b)  
The NDP is very specific about 
goals and focuses on energy and 
carbon:  
 greenhouse emissions to peak 
in 2025 and introduce carbon 
budgeting  
 an economy-wide price for 
carbon and incentives for energy 
efficiency and managing waste 
better.  
 5 million SWHs by 2030 
 vehicle emission standards, 
zero-emission building by 2030  
 simplify the regulatory regime 
for contracting about 20 000 MW 
of renewable energy by 2030  
 
Greenhouse gas emissions may already be higher than 
levels committed to for stabilization in 2025.  
A carbon tax with exemptions is expected in 2013.  
SWH installations stand at just over 200 000 in 2012 
(compared to the targeted 1 million by 2014/2015)  
Tax on carbon dioxide emissions of motor vehicles and 
new building energy efficiency regulations implemented  
Procurement has started on the first 3.7 GW of 
electricity supply from renewable energy out of a plan 
for 17.8 GW by 2030.  
The NPC is guided by 
nominated 
Commissioners from 
outside of government 
(and business for the 
most part) and 
consulted publicly on 
the Development Plan 
based on an initial 
publication of a 
Diagnostic document.  
 
The country has already shown ownership by funding the pilot phase of the program. The GCF funds will enable the 
country to leverage their funding in achieve a lot more.  
 
 
The government entities DBSA and SEFA wholly funded the pilot phase of the programme, thereby 
demonstrating the country’s commitment  
 
SCF Capital Solutions launched the SCF Capital Solutions is committed to local country operations and expertise. 
The management and operations team is made up of local employees who understand consumer needs and 
cultural context.  
 
All of the Fund’s investments will have significant, if not all, operations within the country. Such investments serve to 
create employment opportunities, local institutional knowledge that can be shared within public and private sectors, 
strengthen local supply and distribution channels required for scaling sustainable businesses.

=== PAGE 45 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
Please describe experience and track record of the accredited entity and executing entities with respect to the activities 
that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme. 
 
The DBSA (Accredited Entity) 
 
The Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA) based in South Africa, is a national entity, specifically a development 
finance institution, with a mandate to finance both private and public sector activities at national and regional levels in 
Africa. DBSA provides sustainable infrastructure project preparation, finance and implementation support in order to 
improve the population’s quality of life, accelerating the sustainable reduction of poverty and inequity, and promoting 
broad-based economic growth and regional economic integration. Climate and environmental finance is embedded in the 
DBSA strategy and the entity has played a key role in implementation of projects on transitioning South Africa to a green 
economy, including acting as the implementing agency for the Green Fund of South Africa noted below and financing of 
the commendable independent power producer programme projects. Since its accreditation to the Global Environment 
Facility, the DBSA has developed and will soon be implementing several projects that fall within different initiatives such 
as the Sustainable Cities Integrated Approach (SC-IAP), U4E, and the small scale national REIPP programme. The 
current GEF-DBSA portfolio is further proof that the Bank has a good track record for implementing projects such as the 
SCF. In terms the DBSA’s recent track record with regards to sustainability measures, the DBSA continues to work 
towards embedding sustainability in its core business.   
The DBSA’s sustainability highlights for 2016 include: 
- 
R17.1 billion (2015: R13.0 billion) infrastructure investment into core sectors of energy, water, transportation 
and telecommunication. Of this, R8.1 billion (2015: R5.4 billion) was invested with municipalities, a key provider 
of social infrastructure in South Africa  
- 
638 000 households are estimated to benefit from new or upgraded infrastructure through funding committed to 
municipalities 
- 
Accelerated support for the implementation of social infrastructure 
- 
Completion of 35 schools as part of the Accelerated School Infrastructure Delivery Initiative Programme, 
benefiting 17 900 learners in 2016. More than 36 000 learners have benefited since the inception of the 
programme 
- 
1 382 affordable houses completed 
- 
2 250 water and 203 electricity meters installed 
- 
500 municipal officials trained on water and equipment repairs and 269 traditional leaders and councilors 
trained in visionary leadership and integrated development planning 
- 
During 2016, the DBSA committed no funding (2015: R4.2 billion) but disbursed R1.5 billion (2015: R2.4 billion) 
to the REIPPP and Peakers programmes. R209 million was disbursed in favour of B-BBEE enterprises. 
The DBSA (As implementer of the National Green Fund ) 
 
DBSA also serves as the implementing agency of the Green Fund, a government national fund that aims to transition 
South Africa to a green economy. The fund provides financial resources to small scale initiatives, for example, renewable 
energy projects of a throughput of 1 – 5 MW would be eligible for funding. Projects funded by the fund are categorized 
under 3 funding windows; (i) Green Cities and Towns, (ii) Low Carbon Economy and (iii) Environment and Natural 
Resources. Capacity building and Research and Development initiatives are also eligible for financial assistance through 
the fund. Financial instruments offered include grants (payable and non-payable), debt and equity. Projects that are 
eligible for Green Fund financing under the 3 windows belong to a range of sectors including transport, water, renewable 
energy, ICT, energy efficiency, natural resources, biodiversity and sustainable land management. The project in question, 
the Supply Chain Finance project, is also a beneficiary of the Green Fund. Hence by virtue of implementing the Green 
Fund, DBSA’s track record on implementing projects such as the SCF is clearly proven. As mentioned above, the SCF

=== PAGE 46 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
project is a beneficiary of the Green Fund that is implemented by the DBSA. By virtue of the project being in alignment 
with the funding criteria of the Green Fund, the Fund itself having the ability to handle its current portfolio as described 
above, it is proven that it (the Fund) has a good track record with small scale projects, particularly of this nature.  
With the capacity building component of the National Green Fund for example, two key SMME incubator initiatives were 
supported in addition to the piloting of the supply chain finance facility. The key objectives of both incubator programmes 
is to support innovators, entrepreneurs and SMMEs actively involved in the development of cutting edge green 
technologies through providing finance, facilities and office space, business and technical advices, policy advice, and 
access to relevant networks. These initiatives by the DBSA Green Fund has successfully created an enabling 
environment for entrepreneurs in the Green Economy to achieve higher rates of survival and growth for the businesses.  
 
The Executing entity is SCF Capital Solutions.  
 
The principals of SCF Capital Solutions are Bob Blower and Vonani Mabunda  
 
Bob Blower 
            Non-Executive Chairman 
 
Bob is the co-founder and Non-Executive Chairman of SCF Capital Solutions. Bob is also a Network Relationship Director 
for Transpay, a leading US Fintech company covering P2P and B2B payments.  Prior to his current roles, Bob was Head 
of Trade Channels for National Bank of Abu Dhabi, where he delivered supply chain finance products including insured 
receivables, payables and receivables as part of the trade working capital vision of the National Bank of Abu Dhabi. Bob 
also previously served as Global Head of Trade Finance and Financial Institutions at Standard Bank, Global Head of 
Trade and Supply Chain IT at HSBC, Director at Logica, Director at Gresham and the British Banker Association. Bob is 
an experienced business and technology specialist with more than 20 years of banking and corporate experience in new 
product development and implementation covering all areas. Bob has written papers, spoken at seminars across the 
globe, covering a wide range of subjects and has been interviewed by BBC on LIBOR. 
 
Vonani Mabunda        Co-Founder and CEO 
Vonani is the co-founder and CEO of SCF Capital Solutions. Prior to founding SCF Capital Solutions Vonani was The 
Principal and Head of Lending Products at Barclays Africa Business Banking, responsible for all the bank’s lending 
activities to small businesses. Prior to joining Barclays Vonani was with Standard Bank Corporate and Investment Bank 
where we held the various roles: Head of Supply Chain Finance for the group, Head of Risk for Transactional Banking, 
Head of Operational Risk for International Trade Services division. Prior to joining Standard Bank he served 6 years at 
Citibank where notably he was involved in starting a fiduciary unit at Citibank Frankfurt in Germany, Head of Trade 
Operations and Head of Trade Sales at Citibank South Africa. Vonani has a BSc Engineering Degree from Wits University 
and an MBA from the Gordon Institute of Business Science (GIBS). 
 
The trial period for supply chain finance in the South African business is reaching finality and will be moving to a new 
phase with the envisaged participation of the Global Green Fund.  The increase in facility will provide the team an 
opportunity to scale up current pilot operations and significantly current disbursements. At the heart of our pilot strategy 
has been to build and test operational processes inside and outside the company and integrating those processes to an 
operating platform.  During that time we have been working with SEFA and DBSA to refine operational and credit 
processes procedures to ensure rapid tune around on client applications.  Drawing on the founders’ experience working 
in senior roles at HSBC, Barclays, Standard Bank Group and Citibank, a set of world class Governance processes have 
been put in place with our partners covering credit, operational risk, approvals processes and disbursements.   These 
processes cover issues such as authorization, risk mitigation, client escalation and processing goals.

=== PAGE 47 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
Please provide a full description of the steps taken to ensure country ownership, including the engagement with NDAs 
on the funding proposal and the no-objection letter. 
  
 
 
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, including 
addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers; providing the least concessionality; and without crowding out private and 
other public investment. 
 
Commercial banks that finance MSMEs generally offer the overdraft product, which exposes banks to high risk due to 
lack of control on the usage, and it is costly for the banks as they need to hold capital even for unutilized portions of the 
facility. With sufficient track record of supply chain finance, we will be able to attract funding from commercial banks into 
this low-risk financing product. More funding from the banks will mean more green developments will be done. Ability to 
access to finance for green developments will result in MSMEs switching to green.   
 
There are also structural constraints in the economy due to the country’s history. Many MSMEs from previously 
disadvantaged communities lack financial education and assets to collaterise loans. This program will address both 
challenges though training provided by partners and a financing mechanism that does not require collateral 
 
Commercial banking relies on long track record of data in order to make credit decisions. It is for this reason that whilst 
adoption of supply chain finance is rising rapidly in Europe, Asia and America, it is still nascent in South Africa and many 
other parts of the developing world due to lack of information. The GCF funding will enable us to build on work done 
during the pilot phase to demonstrate that with appropriate risk management, supply chain finance can be used to provide 
access to finance to MSMEs in the green economy. We will be able to build a substantial data and track record to 
demonstrate this.  
 
The financial structure allows us to use GCF support to “crowd in” private sector funders whilst at the same 
time allowing the GCF to claw back economic benefit when the returns exceed private sector expected returns. 
This makes it possible for the GCF to benefit from the upside when the business outperforms expectations. 
  
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness, taking into account the total project financing and the mitigation/ 
adaptation impact that the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate 
benchmark. For mitigation, please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the cost per tCO2eq). 
It is challenging to find appropriate benchmarks to compare with, but the use of Supply Chain Finance with GCF support 
clearly gives us the ability to support large volumes of clients with concomitant mitigation benefits.  
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only) 
Please provide the co-financing ratio (total amount of co-financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the 
project/programme) and/or the potential to catalyze indirect/long-term low emission investment.

=== PAGE 48 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
E.6.3. Financial viability  
Please specify the expected economic and financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support, based on the 
analysis conducted in F.1. 
The fund, wishes to crowd in private sector institutional quality investment. However in order to achieve this, some  
concessionality will be required in the form of reduced profits share  from the GCF as indicated in the funding 
structure above. A concessionality on the profit share ratio of 30 percent (that is a reduction from 34.1 to 23.9 
percent) will incentivize private sector participation with a baseline IRR of 19 percent.  If the IRR of the private sector 
investors exceeds 21 percent, GCF will be able to claw back, the concessionality in profit share that would have been 
advanced.  
 
Without the GCF’s concessionality, returns to the private sector are 17.5 percent in the base case, which may not be 
attractive.  
 
Without the GCF’s capital contribution, the chances of crowding in private sector participation and successfully growing 
the Fund for its intended purposes are significantly diminished   
 
Please describe financial viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention. 
 
The GCF funding enables the Funds to build a substantial asset base that makes the long-term returns attractive to 
private sector investor.  LPs are expected to be locked in with redemption restrictions for a period of 5 years. The fund 
anticipates a life of 10 years with an option to extend for a further 5 years. LPs (excluding AE) are allowed to sell their 
interest or redeem  after 5 years 
 
Please describe the GCF’s financial exit strategy in case of private sector operations (e.g. IPOs, trade sales, etc.). 
Multiple channels from recapitalizations to private investors and commercial banks as mentioned under the 
Investment Horizon section of the term sheet. Returns can be withdrawn in a 5-year term Principal investment can 
be withdrawn by buyout from 5 year term or at the end of the 10 year term. The DBSA will invest for the life of the 
Fund, and will not exit before the GCF 
 
 
E.6.4. Application of best practices 
Please explain how best available technologies and practices are considered and applied. If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices. 
 
The program brings Innovation in terms SCF model and technology 
SCF Capital Solutions solves this problem by applying supply chain finance. Supply chain finance is a set of technology-
based business and financing processes that link the various parties in a transaction – the buyer, seller and financing 
institution – to lower financing costs, improve access to finance for SMMEs who supply large institutions and improve 
business efficiency. In supply chain finance the financial institution avails credit to the supplier, based on the credit 
strength of the buyer, who would normally be a large entity. Thus is supply chain finance the credit risk is on the buyer 
and performance risk is on the supplier. The supplier performance risk can be broken down further by looking at how 
early in the supply chain the transaction is financed. Supply chain finance (SCF) provides short-term credit that optimizes 
working capital for both the buyer and the seller. Supply chain finance generally involves the use of a technology platform 
in order to automate transactions and track the invoice approval and settlement process from initiation to completion. The 
growing popularity of SCF has been largely driven by the increasing globalization and complexity of the supply chain, 
especially in industries such as automotive, manufacturing and the retail sector.  
Typically, small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) transacting global business face the strongest obstacles in 
accessing financing on affordable terms. Around the world, SME business leaders point to the availability of finance as a

=== PAGE 49 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
major barrier to their capacity to trade. This finance gap is of particular concern because SMEs are a leading driver of 
trade, economic development, and employment. According to World Bank estimates, formal SMEs (legally registered 
businesses) contribute up to 45% of total employment and up to 33% of national income (GDP) in emerging economies. 
Those numbers are significantly higher when informal SMEs (businesses that are not legally registered) are included. 
In the US, nearly 6m businesses are considered small. According to the US Census Bureau: “Small- and medium-sized 
companies (those employing fewer than 500 workers, including number of employees unknown) comprised 97.7% of all 
identified exporters and 97.1% of all identified importers.” The finance challenges that these important contributors face 
was the topic of a recent analysis by the World Trade Organisation (WTO). In its May 2016 study, the WTO proposed a 
six-part list of recommendations to address the SME finance gap. 
In its action plan, the WTO report called for action on several fronts – including efforts to increase existing finance 
programmes; maintain open dialogue with trade finance regulators; and improve the capacity of the international 
community to read markets and predict problems. Weaved throughout the report was a discussion of the power of 
innovative supply chain finance (SCF) solutions in helping bridge the finance gap for SMEs. 
Fintech and the democratisation of finance 
In underdeveloped countries …“local access to factoring is almost non-existent and SMEs are largely excluded from 
private supply chain financing systems,” the WTO reported. However, that’s about to change. SCF is no longer only for 
larger importers and the game-changer is financial technology (fintech). Of course, SCF is not new. Supplier financing 
and reverse factoring have long been offered by the big banks to large – or investment-grade – corporations to support 
cross-border trade. However, today SCF techniques are being transformed by technology and that transformation 
maximises opportunities for SMEs and financial institutions alike. 
By cutting through the bureaucracy and operational restrictions inherent in traditional financial solutions, new SCF tools 
extend beyond only the largest importers. New and innovative financial technologies have opened the doors to an entirely 
new set of financial players, giving them a broader reach and allowing SMEs to take advantage of opportunities formerly 
only available to large enterprises. 
As these new online tools become more established and lenders become more comfortable assessing the risks 
associated with making advances or loans to small importers or retailers, businesses that previously had to rely on 
traditional banks for loans or lines of credit are able to take more control of their ability to fund inventory. In some cases 
they can go directly to manufacturers, as opposed to using an importer. Businesses that previously found their growth 
stifled because financing wasn’t available to them are able to thrive. 
Additionally, thanks to advances in technology and the rise of fintech, the number of SCF options available to SMEs is 
diverse and growing. Small businesses selling their goods on platforms such as Amazon, eBay, or Alibaba are now 
offered working capital lines and loans by those very platforms facilitating the sale of cross-border goods. Last year, 
Chinese online marketplace Alibaba and online loans specialist Lending Club formed a partnership to provide small 
financial facilities for manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers in the US for buying products and supplies directly from 
Chinese companies over the Alibaba ecommerce site. 
According to the New York Times’ Dealbook: “Rather than have to rely on banks or other traditional lenders who require 
collateral for their financing, these customers can instead use Lending Club’s systems to procure an unsecured loan with 
near-instant approval.” They can also use the services of business credit specialists, which provide advances to SME 
importers and credit guarantees through the purchase of receivables from suppliers and short term loans to importers of 
all sizes, around the world.

=== PAGE 50 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
Timing and guaranteeing payment obligations 
SCF doesn’t just support working capital; it can also support growth. Because the buyer doesn’t have to pay its supplier 
as quickly, SCF programmes often enable the buyer to pay up to 120 days after the actual receipt of the imported goods, 
so that money can be put to work for growth purposes. In addition, SCF provides assurances to manufacturers and 
suppliers that they will be guaranteed payment upon timely performance. This can help in the negotiation of more 
favourable terms and strengthen international working relationships. For example, a middle market retailer of men’s 
apparel was able to secure funding to go directly to offshore suppliers and disintermediate its traditional 
importer/wholesaler by taking advantage of SCF. While many suppliers were dubious of the company’s ability to pay, the 
SCF facility provided a level of reassurance that satisfied manufacturers while providing the company with an extra 90 
days to pay for the goods that were being produced overseas. 
 
Benefits to SMEs and banks alike 
Although the concept of timing payments is not new, the ability to manage the transactions from a dashboard in your 
office is. Web-based SCF tools mean that cross-border business becomes a viable option for SMEs, importers and 
exporters alike, whether they are in urban areas or remote locations. An International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) global 
survey concluded that supply chain finance is a market with huge potential to be tapped. In an increasingly global 
marketplace with perpetually volatile economies, the ability to time payment obligations can make a huge difference for 
a small or medium- sized business. SCF gives SMEs more control over their ability to free up working capital and manage 
inventory. It changes the cross border relationship from being product-centric – when its goods arrive, the company 
makes a payment – to one of a collaborative partnership. It could even change the traditional role of importers, as small 
retailers will be able to go directly overseas for goods rather than relying on a middleman for its product. 
Indeed, it just might be able to close the SME trade finance gap identified by the WTO and give SMEs the fuel they need 
to trade, expand, and thrive. 
Processing high-volumes of supply chain finance transactions requires a robust technology platform in order to minimise 
human costs and reduce operational risks. Some of the key activities and risks that need to be managed in the transaction 
are: 
 
Agreements with clients and Anchor Buyer 
 
Credit and sub-limits 
 
Payment terms and dates 
 
Payments and collections 
 
Booking of finance transactions and amortization of interest or fees 
 
Maturities 
 
Tracking of transaction milestones 
 
Identity management 
 
Fraud management 
 
Apart from supply chain finance transaction management skills and experience, which SCF Capital Solutions 
management has many years of, an electronic platform in needed to manage the activities and thereby minimise risk and 
human costs. 
SCF Capital Solutions has partnered with China Systems to use their cloud based Eximbills platform as the transaction 
management tool. Some of the functional provided by Eximbills are: 
Advanced integration capabilities 
 
Integrates seamlessly with any Funder’s infrastructure and provides the ability to adapt the user interface

=== PAGE 51 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
according to the Funder's look and feel, design, and navigation requirements 
 
Output can be generated in XML, EDI, CSV, and other commonly used formats, and supported interfaces include 
API calls, File, TCP, MQ, and Tuxedo 
 
A powerful Straight Through Processing (STP) engine 
 
Allows the analysis of incoming data from SWIFT, TSU, and other sources and definition of routing rules 
 
Has ability to trigger automated processing and routing of transactions to reduce manual intervention to an 
absolute minimum 
 
Compliance with industry standards 
 
SWIFT (both FIN and TSU XML standards) 
 
URC, URG, UCP, and eUCP 
 
XML 
 
EDI 
 
Web Services, SOAP, and Federated Identity 
 
Strong system security 
 
Supports third-party security hardware and software that meet stringent industry specifications 
 
Open Java EE design allows for new security technologies to be easily adopted as they become available 
 
Security aspects are managed independently of the underlying operating system, thus improving protection of 
system data and resources 
 
Supports Non-Repudiation, Multi Factor Authentication/ Authorisation, Single Sign On, White List checking, and 
the use of third-party certificates 
 
High-volume processing capabilities 
 
Provides configurable Batch processing and scheduling functions, such as Start and End of Day processes, 
generation of tracers, collection of periodic fees, and incoming payments, reducing overall processing time to a 
minimum 
 
Supports Load Balancing thereby allowing high volumes to be processed in parallel across multiple servers 
 
Strong communication capabilities with other systems 
 
Can communicate with treasury, accounting, risk management, and other systems in online or batch mode 
 
Can interface with most payments systems, SWIFT, telex, fax, and e-mail devices 
 
Provides a built-in online messaging tool that allows checking and updating of data residing in other systems 
during transaction processing 
 
Advanced multi-entity capability 
 
Fully supports global and regional processing across multiple time zones, countries, and languages, allowing 
Funders to use and control a centralised business application and its resources in the most efficient way 
 
Enables a straightforward and controlled rollout of business functionality across the Funder's entire network 
through thin client user access, whereby the geographical location of processing centres and customer service 
centres can be optimised to reduce costs, improve operational efficiency, intensify customer relationships, and 
deliver superior service through closely integrated front and back office processing 
 
Allows for maximum reuse and sharing of business components on an enterprise application level, reducing

=== PAGE 52 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
application maintenance to a minimum 
 
Ensures that the various operating models, such as the Regional Processing or Insourcing Model, can be 
handled, regardless of whether the Funder using the system operates on a domestic, regional, or global level 
 
Multi-channel delivery capabilities 
 
Through an expandable and Funder-definable 'party notification profile,' the system permits the Funder to control 
on a transaction event level how the Funder wishes to communicate with customers and other parties during the 
business process, which could be by mail, fax, e-mail, internet front end, mobile, or other devices. These profile 
settings automatically control the type of output generated after a transaction is confirmed. The Funder is then 
able to define customer-specific communication settings, meeting the level of sophistication of that customer in 
a competitive environment in which the speedy processing of data and decisions is a must. 
 
System flexibility 
 
Its rules-based processing concept and future-proof architecture allow the Funder to withstand the rapid changes 
in the business environment and thus provide a solution to Funders that want to differentiate themselves and 
attract new customers by providing innovative and value-added services along the entire transaction chain. 
 
The enterprise toolkit offers the Funder the option to build new, or enhance existing, functionality in a business 
environment, in which we see e-commerce and open-account trading rapidly growing and creative supply chain 
financing solutions becoming increasingly important. 
 
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
 
GCF core 
indicators 
Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only) 
 
(a) Total project financing 
US$34,15M  
(b) Requested GCF amount  
US$12,22M  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  
33 001 833 tons CO2 tCO2eq 
(solar pv is over 25 years) 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO2eq (d = a / c) 
US$1,03 / tCO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq removed (e = b / c) 
US$0,37 / tCO2eq 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co-benefit generated as 
a result of the project/programme)

=== PAGE 53 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
 
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme appraisal document.  
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis 
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the detailed economic and financial analysis (including the financial 
model, taking into consideration the information provided in section E.6.3). 
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
Please provide an assessment from the technical perspective. If a particular technological solution has been chosen, 
describe why it is the most appropriate for this project/programme. 
Processing high-volumes of supply chain finance transactions requires a robust technology platform in order to 
minimise human errors and reduce operational risks. Some of the key activities and risks that need to be managed in 
the transaction are: 
 
Agreements with clients and Anchor Buyer 
 
Credit and sub-limits 
 
Payment terms and dates 
 
Payments and collections 
 
Booking of finance transactions and amortization of interest or fees 
 
Maturities 
 
Tracking of transaction milestones 
 
Identity management 
 
Fraud management 
 
Apart from supply chain finance transaction management skills and experience, which SCF Capital Solutions 
management has many years of, an electronic platform in needed to manage the activities and thereby minimise risk 
and human costs. SCF Capital Solutions has partnered with China Systems to use their cloud based Eximbills platform 
as the transaction management tool. Some of the functional provided by Eximbills are: 
Advanced integration capabilities 
 
Integrates seamlessly with any Funder’s infrastructure and provides the ability to adapt the user interface 
according to the Funder's look and feel, design, and navigation requirements 
 
Output can be generated in XML, EDI, CSV, and other commonly used formats, and supported interfaces 
include API calls, File, TCP, MQ, and Tuxedo 
 
A powerful Straight Through Processing (STP) engine 
 
Allows the analysis of incoming data from SWIFT, TSU, and other sources and definition of routing rules 
 
Has ability to trigger automated processing and routing of transactions to reduce manual intervention to an 
absolute minimum 
 
Compliance with industry standards 
 
SWIFT (both FIN and TSU XML standards) 
 
URC, URG, UCP, and eUCP 
 
XML 
 
EDI 
 
Web Services, SOAP, and Federated Identity

=== PAGE 54 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
 
Strong system security 
 
Supports third-party security hardware and software that meet stringent industry specifications 
 
Open Java EE design allows for new security technologies to be easily adopted as they become available 
 
Security aspects are managed independently of the underlying operating system, thus improving protection of 
system data and resources 
 
Supports Non-Repudiation, Multi Factor Authentication/ Authorisation, Single Sign On, White List checking, 
and the use of third-party certificates 
 
High-volume processing capabilities 
 
Provides configurable Batch processing and scheduling functions, such as Start and End of Day processes, 
generation of tracers, collection of periodic fees, and incoming payments, reducing overall processing time to 
a minimum 
 
Supports Load Balancing thereby allowing high volumes to be processed in parallel across multiple servers 
 
Strong communication capabilities with other systems 
 
Can communicate with treasury, accounting, risk management, and other systems in online or batch mode 
 
Can interface with most payments systems, SWIFT, telex, fax, and e-mail devices 
 
Provides a built-in online messaging tool that allows checking and updating of data residing in other systems 
during transaction processing 
 
Advanced multi-entity capability 
 
Fully supports global and regional processing across multiple time zones, countries, and languages, allowing 
Funders to use and control a centralised business application and its resources in the most efficient way 
 
Enables a straightforward and controlled rollout of business functionality across the Funder's entire network 
through thin client user access, whereby the geographical location of processing centres and customer service 
centres can be optimised to reduce costs, improve operational efficiency, intensify customer relationships, and 
deliver superior service through closely integrated front and back office processing 
 
Allows for maximum reuse and sharing of business components on an enterprise application level, reducing 
application maintenance to a minimum 
 
Ensures that the various operating models, such as the Regional Processing or Insourcing Model, can be 
handled, regardless of whether the Funder using the system operates on a domestic, regional, or global level 
 
Multi-channel delivery capabilities 
 
Through an expandable and Funder-definable 'party notification profile,' the system permits the Funder to 
control on a transaction event level how the Funder wishes to communicate with customers and other parties 
during the business process, which could be by mail, fax, e-mail, internet front end, mobile, or other devices. 
These profile settings automatically control the type of output generated after a transaction is confirmed. The 
Funder is then able to define customer-specific communication settings, meeting the level of sophistication of 
that customer in a competitive environment in which the speedy processing of data and decisions is a must. 
 
System flexibility 
 
Its rules-based processing concept and future-proof architecture allow the Funder to withstand the rapid 
changes in the business environment and thus provide a solution to Funders that want to differentiate 
themselves and attract new customers by providing innovative and value-added services along the entire

=== PAGE 55 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
transaction chain. 
The enterprise toolkit offers the Funder the option to build new, or enhance existing, functionality in a business 
environment, in which we see e-commerce and open-account trading rapidly growing and creative supply chain 
financing solutions becoming increasingly important. 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations 
Describe the main outcome of the environment and social impact assessment. Specify the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan, and how the project/programme will avoid or mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g. 
preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with the Fund’s Environmental and Social Safeguard (ESS) 
standard. Also describe how the gender aspect is considered in accordance with the Fund’s Gender Policy and Action 
Plan.  
It should noted that projects that will be supported by SCF would be of lower category 
Since the GCF funds for the proposed programme will be administered by the DBSA as the accredited entity and the 
fact that DBSA will be an equity partner with GCF, the programme will be implemented and operated in accordance 
with the DBSA’s Environmental and Social Safeguard Standards which is attached. It should also be noted that the 
current pilot phase of the programme funded by the DBSA Green Fund is being monitored in compliance with these 
standards and safeguards as much as possible. The ESSS also commits DBSA to ensure it has the necessary systems 
in place to implement the ESSS and to periodically update and revise it. It includes a commitment from DBSA to appoint 
appropriately skilled people to appraise projects, ensure they meet the minimum Safeguard requirements and apply 
these fairly. 
The DBSAs Environmental and Social Safeguard Standards (ESSS) is an extension of the DBSA Environmental 
Appraisal Framework and the Social and Institutional Appraisal Guidelines. In creating its ESSS the DBSA has 
harmonized with the work of other Global and African DFI’s and especially the Global Environmental Facility (GEF). 
The DBSA ESSS draws extensively from existing Safeguards which have recently gone through an extensive 
stakeholder engagement process.  The minimum safeguards set out the minimum social and environmental and gender 
mainstreaming standards required of DBSA clients accessing Global Environment Facility (GEF) and GCF financing. 
The DBSA undertakes an integrated approach to project preparation, due diligence, approval and project surveillance, 
monitoring and evaluation. 
The DBSA Environmental and Social Safeguards addresses seven operating safeguards requirements that DBSA 
clients are expected to meet when addressing social and environmental issues. The first Safeguard Standard, the 
Environmental and Social Assessment provides an umbrella framework to assist DBSA and clients to identify potential 
environmental and social risks and benefits associated with the DBSA investment lending operations and partnership 
initiatives such as those with GCF. It is an essential tool for integrating environmental and social concerns into bankable 
investment projects by providing the minimum requirements that all DBSA investment lending operations must meet. 
This standard also covers accountability and grievance systems. The remaining Safeguard Standards are:  
2. Protection of Natural Habitats  
3. Involuntary resettlement  
4. Community stakeholders and vulnerable groups (including Indigenous Peoples)  
5. Pest Management  
6. Physical and cultural resources and  
7. Safety of Dams  
8. Labour Guideline

=== PAGE 56 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
In relation to item 4 above, using a gender mainstreaming approach, the DBSA typically carries out an assessment 
of gender issues for every project and uses the findings as the basis for project design and compensation plans that 
lead to enhanced gender balance. When a project includes environmental and social analysis, the gender assessment 
may be carried out as part of this analysis. In particular, the DBSA assesses the quality and relevance of gender data 
and performance indicators, specific pro-gender measures, and budgetary resources allocated for equality and 
empowerment for any project as key criteria in investment decision-making process. This approach is very much 
applicable to the SCF programme since women and men are involved in climate change responses but in different 
ways. In fact, the Cancun Agreements acknowledge that gender equality and the effective participation of women are 
important for all aspects of climate change.  Climate change hazards increase or heighten existing gender inequalities 
thereby contributing to the greater climate change vulnerability of many women.  This is largely due to persistent gender 
norms and widespread gender discrimination that deny women income, legal rights, access to resources while 
assigning them the primary role in caring for their families and providing for their livelihoods, leading to women’s 
marginalization in many ways. Nevertheless, women are powerful stakeholders in implementing low-carbon pathways 
in development countries.  This makes women important agents of change in the fight against global warming and their 
input needs to be taken cognizance of and incorporated in climate change adaptation and mitigation equation. 
In the context of the socio-economic background outlined above, the action plan below considers the following aspects 
as important and relevant for streamlining gender in the SCF project:  
 
Gender inclusive design features; 
 
Targeted project output-specific strategies 
 
An appropriate institutional structure  
 
Capacity development initiatives for gender responsive MSME finance and development 
 
Ensuring Access to financing instruments by women entrepreneurs 
 
An improved business environment that encourages participation and involvement of women entrepreneurs 
 
Upscaling of project outputs 
Task 
Gender Design Features/activities 
Cross-cutting strategies 
 
A Gender Expert and a Social Anthropologist need to be roped in to be 
involved at the various phases of the project. 
 
Ensuring the enabling legal and regulatory environment 
 
 45% of the persons to access funding/appointed as suppliers to be women 
entrepreneurs. (% to grow beyond 50% after 5years)  
 
45% of entrepreneurs to be capacitated to be women/ owned companies or 
women (% to grow beyond 50% after 5years) 
 
All training materials, technology and methodology of dissemination to be 
women friendly (avoiding gender stereo-types and derogatory language and 
illustrations). 
Project 
Output-specific 
strategies

=== PAGE 57 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
Ensure institutional structure 
and an enabling environment 
supports women MSME 
 
Ensure proper coordination and interagency mechanisms are in place to 
support the promotion and participation of  women entrepreneurs; 
 
Conduct assessments to ensure a clear understanding of where most 
women participate in the value chain and why; 
 
Establish and maintain a sector-specific sex-disaggregated MSME 
database; 
 
Ensure that the participating key stakeholders are adequately trained in 
gender awareness 
Ensure Capacity Building of 
women 
entrepreneurs 
and 
MSMEs  
 
Do a needs assessment and analyses of women skills set and shortage 
thereof 
 
Where possible provide business development services and other identified 
training needs to a specified set target. 
 
Ensure that incubator/mentorship programmes that SCF draws client from, 
promotes women entrepreneurs 
 
45% of entrepreneurs identified for financing to be women (% to grow 
beyond 50% after 5years)  
 
45% of the mentors to be women (% to grow beyond 50% after 5years) 
Ensure 
Women 
Entrepreneurs/MSME 
access 
finance  
 
Ensure 45% of the total loan and other financial products are accessed by 
women entrepreneurs (% to grow beyond 50% after 5years) 
 
Incentivise women to participate in the project/programme 
Ensure 
improved 
business 
environment in support of 
women MSME prevails 
Remove bottlenecks in the registration process 
Draw in relevant organisation to partner with SCF to conduct counselling 
especially to women on taxation and other perceived technical hurdles in 
conducting business; 
Simplify any financial and reporting requirements  
Establish a one-stop shop for the MSME Women entrepreneurs. 
Establish a disaggregated database for ease of monitoring and results based 
reporting; 
Make the programme holistic by breaking the financing product into small 
chunks and for various financing mechanisms to allow more women access the 
financing instrument 
Upscaling 
 
Selection of projects for investment pipeline to be based on gender equity 
in ownership, operation and beneficiaries.

=== PAGE 58 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures 
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability 
of 
risk 
occurring 
 
Non-performing loans well over the budgeted 3 percent, 
resulting in serious financial Losses.  
 
 
Financial 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
 
Credit due diligence is done on the buyer. Only transactions with buyers who have satisfactory credit and payment 
records are approved.  
 
Most of the portfolio is with top tier corporate buyers. 
 
Funds are not paid to MSMEs directly. They are paid to MSME’s suppliers 
 
Proceed are received into an account controlled by SCF Capital Solutions 
 
The control reduces the risk to Low 
 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary 
Please provide a summary of main risk factors. Detailed description of risk factors and mitigation measures can be 
elaborated in G.2. 
The current operational model is documented and integrated into a system that provides support and oversight to the 
use of funding. Moreover, regular reporting an audits provide a view on the operational integrity of the platform and 
the service. The 0% loss rate of the pilot indicates the current controls are both appropriate and robust. However, 
these controls and processes are re-evaluated on a periodic basis to ensure that they continue to be applied and are 
appropriate.  
 
Due to the relative small scale nature of the project beneficiaries businesses, the associated environmental risks 
associated therewith will predominantly also be relatively low. The fact that the SCF project only provides working 
capital to project beneficiaries also lowers the environmental risk to SCF. This however does not exempt the project 
from any environmental risks. The general environmental risks associated with the project beneficiaries’ day to day 
business may include among others, compliance with environmental legislation, norms and standards, environmental 
incidents, etc. These risks needs to be mitigated by the project beneficiaries themselves, but the DBSA (AE) monitoring 
should assist in making sure there is compliance. 
 
From a social risk perspective the project may encounter risks associated with human relations that forms part of the 
project beneficiaries’ business. Opposite to the environmental risk, the relative small scale nature may pose a 
significant risk to the business of project beneficiaries due to the impact thereof being substantive and it may have a 
high impact on business operations. This may result in a knock-on effect to SCF and repayments of finance provided. 
This risk can be mitigated by ensuring proper human relations structures and policies within the project beneficiaries’ 
businesses structure.

=== PAGE 59 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability 
of 
risk 
occurring 
 
Technical performance - MSME non-performance 
resulting incomplete work or dissatisfactory work that 
clients are not prepared to pay for 
 
 
Technical and 
operational 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
Due diligence is done on the track record of the MSME form technical performance point of view. Where the track 
record is unsatisfactory, the MSME is required to have a technical partner. 
 
The control will reduce the risk to Low 
 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability 
of 
risk 
occurring 
 
Operational – risk of processing errors 
 
Technical and 
operational 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
Maker-checker processes are in place for all material operational processes, this ensures that a senior operations 
manager reviews and approved work initiated by junior operations staff. 
 
DBSA (AE) quarterly monitoring of the Fund performance will be able to identify errors in time and recommend 
corrective measures before significant damage is done. The DBSA has a dedicated unit that monitors performance of 
funds in which the bank invests.  
 
The control will reduce the risk to Low 
 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability 
of 
risk 
occurring 
 
Environmental – risk of financing non-compliant project 
 
 
Social 
and 
environmental 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s)

=== PAGE 60 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
DBSA (AE) has in place mature environmental and social safeguards which is applied for all its projects. An ESS 
framework that is in place for this project will be vigilantly applied to make sure that projects funded by SCF capital 
fully comply. The selection criteria of the fund will be aligned with ESS requirement and monitoring and evaluation 
regime of the DBSA will ensure compliance. 
 
The control will keep the risk at a Low level 
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability 
of 
risk 
occurring 
 
 
Inability to achieve returns that are satisfactory to private 
investors. 
 
Financial 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
Sufficient marketing of the fund offering will be in place 
 
Ensure the fund is sufficiently capacitated to achieve the satisfactory conversion rate 
 
Appropriate pricing to be maintained and evaluated periodically to ensure competitiveness 
 
Constant monitoring by DBSA (AE) of financial performance of the Fund and ensuring measures are put in 
place where there is deviation from expected performance 
 
The control will reduce the risk to Low 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability 
of 
risk 
occurring 
 
Gender targets not met by the fund 
 
 
Social 
and 
environmental 
Medium 
(5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
Fund criteria to be aligned with gender targets 
 
Women based organisations to be prioritized in business development efforts of the Fund 
 
DBSA (AE) monitoring to closely monitor this target and ensure compliance 
The control will reduce the risk to Low 
 
H.1. Logic Framework.

=== PAGE 61 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework 
under the Results Management Framework.  
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level1 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Choose 
appropriate 
expected result 
Reduction of CO2 emissions through displacement of fossil-fueled electricity use at the 
business level by implementing energy efficiencies technology, installation of clean and 
renewable energy sources such as solar pv and biofuels. 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means 
of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
(based 
on pilot 
program
me) 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term  
(if 
applicable) 
Final 
(10 
year 
horizon) 
Fund-level impacts 
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low-emission 
energy access and 
power generation 
Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced as 
a result of Fund-
funded 
projects/programmes 
 
 
Summative 
ex-post 
evaluation 
(5 year) 
 
 
 
 
 
4050 
tonnes 
CO2 per 
year 
 
 
250 000 
 
 
500 000 
Baseline 
estimates based 
on 1350 kw of 
solar pv 2233 
Solar water 
heaters 
Future estimates 
based on 40% 
of annual 
investment 
being invested 
in clean energy 
projects 
M2.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased access to low-
emission transportation 
 
Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced as 
a result of Fund-
funded 
projects/programme
s 
 
 
 
Summative 
ex-post 
evaluation 
(5 year) 
 
 
 
4257 
CO2 per 
year 
 
 
200 000 
 
 
400 000 
Baseline based 
on approved 
facility which will 
finance 
production of 
1664000 liters of 
diesel 
Future based on 
15% of 
investments 
being invested 
in cleaner 
transportation 
                                                             
1 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement 
Frameworks available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement): 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf

=== PAGE 62 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
M3.0 Reduced 
emissions from 
buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances 
 
Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2eq) reduced as 
a result of Fund-
funded 
projects/programme
s 
Summative 
ex-post 
evaluation 
(5 year) 
 
 
 
525 
tonnes 
CO2 per 
year 
 
 
200 000 
 
 
400 000 
Baseline based 
on one energy 
efficiency project 
that produced 
746790 kwh 
savings. 
The future 
based on 
increasing 
percentage of 
investments in 
energy 
efficiency to 
25% of portfolio 
 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means 
of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
(if applicable)  
Final 
Project/programme 
outcomes 
Outcomes that contribute to Fund-level impacts 
Choose 
expected 
outcome 
Please 
select 
relevant 
GCF indicators from the 
Fund’s 
performance 
measurement framework. 
More than one indicator 
may 
be 
selected 
per 
expected impact result. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M6.0 Increased number 
of small, medium and 
large low-emission 
power suppliers 
 
MWs of low-
emission energy 
capacity installed, 
generated and/or 
rehabilitated as a 
result of GCF 
support 
Adherence 
to Perf. 
contract 
 
1,35MW 
77 MW 
190 
MW 
Baseline MW 
savings based on 
actual data. Future 
estimates based 
on 40% of future 
portfolio being on 
clean energy  
Number of jobs 
created (temp and 
perm) 
Monthly 
monitoring 
reports 
(labour 
stats) 
3000 
15300 
30660 
Baseline based on 
actuals, future 
estimates a 
straight-line 
extrapolation of 
current book 
M7.0 Lower energy 
intensity of buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances 
MW savings 
Adherence 
to Perf. 
contract 
0,2MW 
176MW 
352M
W 
Baseline MW 
savings based on 
actual data. Future 
estimates based

=== PAGE 63 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
 
on 25% of future 
portfolio being on 
energy efficiency 
M8.0 Increased use of 
low-carbon transport 
Vehicle fuel 
economy and 
energy source as a 
result of Fund 
support 
Adherence 
to Perf. 
contract 
1,664 ,0
00 liters 
per year 
8,000,00
0 
166 
400,00
0 liters 
Baseline based on 
actuals, future 
estimates are 
based on 40% of 
portfolio being on 
clean energy, of 
which cleaner 
transportation will 
be 15-20%. 
Project/programme 
outputs 
Outputs that contribute to outcomes 
1. Funds disbursed 
Amount of Facility 
(Rands) 
Monthly 
disb. report 
R0 
R2.3bn 
R4.6bn 
 
2. MSMEs benefitting 
Number of MSME 
beneficiaries 
Signed 
contracts 
0 
1535 
3070 
 
3. Women-owned 
MSMEs benefitting 
Number of women 
owned MSME 
Signed 
contracts 
0 
690 
1380 
 
Activities 
Description 
Inputs 
Description 
Due diligence  
Undertaken by SCF fund managers 
using funds investment criteria 
GCF Funding 
Investment to move from 
pilot to expansion phase and 
to attract private investors 
Credit Committee 
approval of deals 
DBSA, SEFA and SCF Capital 
consideration of proposed deals 
Equity partners 
Investment to move from 
pilot to expansion phase  
Finalisation of contracts 
Undertaken by SCF Capital 
DBSA back office 
support 
Programme management 
(monitoring and evaluation) 
Drawdown of facility 
Funds disbursed to MSME 
4.1.1 SCF fund 
management 
Fund management and day-
to-day operations 
Implementation of 
projects 
SCF Capital manages transactions, 
DBSA quarterly monitoring 
5.1.1 Supply chain 
finance platform 
Transaction management 
tool 
Repayment 
MSMEs repay loan with fees

=== PAGE 64 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 60 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents. 
 
 
 
I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal 
☐ 
NDA No-objection Letter 
☐ 
Feasibility Study 
☐ 
Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if applicable)  
☐ 
Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co-financing commitment (If applicable) 
☐ 
Project/Programme Confirmation/Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, 
 
etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement, Annex I 
☐ 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Plan  
 
(If applicable) 
☐ 
Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (If applicable) 
☐ 
Evaluation Report of the baseline project (If applicable) 
☐ 
Map indicating the location of the project/programme 
☐ 
Timetable of project/programme implementation

=== PAGE 65 ===
Page 61

=== PAGE 66 ===
Page 62

=== PAGE 67 ===
Page 63
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Basic project/programme information 
Project/programme title 
SCF Capital Solutions 
Accredited entity 
Development Bank of Southern African 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Intermediation 2 (I2) 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Not Applicable 
Language(s) of disclosure 
Link to disclosure 
Other link(s) 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Not Applicable 
Language(s) of disclosure 
Link to disclosure 
Other link(s) 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Not Applicable 
Language(s) of disclosure 
Link to disclosure 
Other link(s) 
Any other relevant ESS reports and/or disclosures (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
2016-11-11 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English 
Link to disclosure 
http://www.dbsa.org/EN/About-Us/Pages/DBSA-in-Action.aspx 
The ESMF can be found under “Climate Finance Projects” section. 
The ESMF is equivalent to the Environmental and Social Management 
System (ESMS) required under PS1.  
Other link(s) 
Not Applicable
