=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: 
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: PScript5.dll Version 5.2.2
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro 11.0.0
creationDate: D:20160922162329+09'00'
modDate: D:20160927141357+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum VII 
Funding proposal package for FP024
GCF/B.14/07/Add.07 
27 September 2016 
Meeting of the Board 
12 – 14 October 2016 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 11(f) 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled “Empower to Adapt: Creating Climate‐Change Resilient
Livelihoods through Community‐Based Natural Resource Management in Namibia”
submitted by Environment Investment Fund of Namibia (EIF);
b) A no‐objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point; and
c)
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure.
The documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity, and national designated 
authority or focal point, respectively.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.14/07/Add.07 
Page b 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
No‐objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme Title: 
Empower 
to 
Adapt:
Creating Climate-Change Resilient Livelihoods 
through Community-Based Natural Resource 
Management in Namibia 
Country/Region: Namibia, Southern Africa 
Accredited Entity: Environmental Investment Fund of Namibia 
Date of Submission: August 26, 2016

=== PAGE 4 ===
Contents 
 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
 
Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 
 
Section C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
Section F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
Section G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
Section I 
ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
 
 
Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document. 
 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“[FP]-[Agency Short Name]-[Date]-[Serial Number]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 59 
 
B
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / programme title 
Empower to Adapt: Creating Climate-Change Resilient 
Livelihoods through Community-Based Natural Resource 
Management in Namibia 
A.1.2. Project or programme 
Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region                     
Namibia 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies) 
Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MET) 
A.1.5. Accredited entity 
Environment Investment Fund of Namibia (EIF) 
A.1.5.a. Access modality 
  Enhanced Direct Access 
☐  International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary 
Fund Management: Environment Investment Fund of 
Namibia 
Executing Entities: Communal Conservancies, Community 
Forests, MET and support organizations such as the 
Namibian 
Association 
of 
Community-Based 
Natural 
Resource Management (CBNRM) Support Organizations 
(NACSO)1. 
Beneficiaries: Rural communities from registered Communal 
Conservancies and Community Forests in Namibia. 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD) 
  Micro (≤10) 
☐  Medium (50<x≤250)  
☐  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus 
☐ Mitigation 
 Adaptation 
☐ Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission 
August 26, 2016 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details 
Contact person, position 
Mr. Benedict Moore Libanda, Chief Executive Officer (CEO) 
Organization 
Environment Investment Fund of Namibia (EIF) 
Email address 
blibanda@eifnamibia.com 
Telephone number 
+ 264 61 431 7700 (+ 264 811 491 944) 
Mailing address 
PO Box 28157, Auas Valley 
 
 
                                                     
1 An association comprising 8 Non-Government Organizations (NGOs) and the University of Namibia. The purpose of NACSO is to 
provide quality services to rural communities seeking to manage and utilize their natural resources in a sustainable manner.

=== PAGE 6 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 59 
 
B
 
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from: 
 
Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ 
Low emission transport  
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)   
☐ 
Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
 
Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.) 
 
Increased resilience of: 
 
Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.) 
 
Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.) 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.) 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
 
 
 
 
 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words) 
The Community-Based Natural Resource Management (CBNRM) program makes an enormous contribution to both 
ecosystem conservation and rural development in the communal areas of Namibia. Almost one fifth of Namibia´s land 
surface, accommodating more than 200,000 people, is under conservation and improved management through this 
program. Local institutions have developed and have gained skills and capacity, resulting in the diversification of 
livelihoods and the generation of economic benefits for their members. These CBNRM successes are threatened by CC 
impacts. 
 
2. The proposed project is built on the strong institutional foundation of the Namibian CBNRM network, which consists 
of communal conservancies and community forests in the rural communal areas of Namibia. These existing institutions 
are ideally placed to be the conduits for the implementation of local-level climate action as they have been in operation 
for the past 26 years. It is expected the project will increase the resilience towards climate change of at least 15,000 
direct and an estimated 61,000 indirect beneficiaries and improve management on an area of 7,200,000 hectares. The 
project will run over five years and consists of two complementary components that will empower rural CBNRM 
communities to respond to climate change in terms of awareness, adaptive capacity and low-carbon rural development. 
The two components are: 
 
Component 1. Capacity Building and Community Support: This component is essential for the success and 
sustainability of community-based climate action. It comprises awareness raising, capacity building and support 
to development and implementation of climate investment plans at the local level. 
 
Component 2. Resilient Grant Facility for CBNRM Livelihoods in Namibia: This component will empower 
rural CBNRM communities to increase their resilience to climate change through direct access to climate 
finance. It comprises a ring-fenced grant facility that will focus on the development and strengthening resilient 
CBNRM livelihoods through grants in three defined investment areas.

=== PAGE 7 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 59 
 
B
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone 
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) 
31/10/2016 
Expected financial close (if applicable) 
31/12/2022 
Estimated implementation start and end date 
Start: 01/03/2017 
End: 31/03/2022 
Project/programme lifespan 
Five years 
 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme 
A grant-financing instrument is used for this project seeking maximum concessionality to undertake the proposed 
adaptation investments. 
Table 1: Breakdown of cost estimates for total project costs and GCF financing by sub-component in local and foreign 
currency 
Component 
Sub-component (if applicable) 
Amount 
(USD) 
Amount in 
Local 
Currency 
(NAD) 
GCF funding 
amount 
(USD) 
Currency of 
disbursement 
to recipient 
Component 
I: Capacity 
Building and 
Community 
Support 
CC awareness creation 
192,000 
2,803,830 
192,000 
USD 
Support to local climate monitoring 
34,500 
503,813 
34,500 
USD 
Strengthen CBNRM governance 
438,500 
6,403,540 
438,500 
USD 
Capacity building for community-led 
initiatives 
228,500 
3,336,850 
228,500 
USD 
COMPONENT I SUBTOTAL 
893,500
13,048,034
893,500 
USD
Component 
II: Grant 
Facility for 
Resilient 
CBNRM 
Livelihoods 
in Namibia 
Grant Option 2.1: Climate Resilient 
Agriculture 
2,040,000 
29,790,699 
2,040,000 
USD 
Grant Option 2.2: Climate Resilient 
Infrastructure 
1,200,000 
17,523,941 
1,200,000 
USD 
Grant Option 2.3: Ecosystems Based 
Adaptation and Mitigation 
4,740,000 
69,219,565 
4,740,000 
USD 
COMPONENT II SUBTOTAL 
7,980,000 
116,534,205 
7,980,000 
USD 
EDA Project 
Management 
  
813,747 
11,883,374 
813,747 
USD 
EDA Project 
M&E 
  
312,753 
4,567,227 
312,753 
USD 
Total program financing 
10,000,000 
146,032,841
10,000,000 
USD 
A detailed breakdown of cost/budget by 
expenditure type is provided in the Excel 
spreadsheet 
attached 
to 
this 
funding 
proposal. 
An indicative disbursement schedule is 
provided in the term sheet attached to this 
funding proposal. 
USD 893,500 , 
9%
USD 7,980,000 , 
80%
USD 312,753 , 
3%
USD 813,747 , 
8%
Program Budget Distribution
Component I: Capacity
Building
Component II: Grant
Facility
Project M&E
EDA Project
Management

=== PAGE 8 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 59 
 
B
B.2. Project Financing Information 
 
Financial Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
(a) 
Total 
project 
financing 
(a) = (b) + (c) 
10 
million USD 
($) 
 
(b) 
GCF 
financing 
to 
recipient 
(vi) Grants * 
10 
million USD 
($) 
(  )  years 
(  )  years 
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi) 
10 
million USD 
($) 
 
(c) 
Co-
financing 
to 
recipient 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Name of 
Institution 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Seniority 
No co-financing envisaged for the proposed project. However, co-funding is envisaged in line with the 
GCF exit strategy (refer to section D.2.). 
Lead financing institution: N/A 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable) 
In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deploys the GCF financing directly to the recipient, (i.e. the GCF financing
passes directly from the GCF to the recipient through the AE) or if the AE is the recipient itself, in the proposed
financial instrument and terms as described in part (b), this subsection can be skipped. 
For the present funding proposal, the AE is the recipient itself and will administer the grant facility to be 
established with GCF funding. 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable) 
N/A

=== PAGE 9 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 59 
 
C
 
C.1. Strategic Context 
4. About Namibia: Namibia is situated in South-Western Africa and covers a land area of 825,418 km². With a 
population of 2.3 million (2013 figure) and an average population density of less than 3 persons/km² (global average: 49 
persons/km²), Namibia is the second least densely populated sovereign country in the world (after Mongolia). Namibia 
gained independence from South Africa only in 1990. The country is a stable parliamentary democracy, classified by 
the World Bank as an upper-middle income country. Yet, Namibia faces certain unique challenges due to, among other 
things, its arid climate, recent apartheid history and a severe income gap illustrated by a Gini Coefficient of 63.9 – one 
of the highest worldwide (UNDP, 2014).  
 
5. Namibia’s climate: Namibia is the driest country in Sub-Saharan Africa. The median annual rainfall ranges from less 
than 50 mm to 250 mm in Namibia’s hyper-arid southwest and coastline, and peak at 350 to 550 mm in the sub-humid 
northeast. Overall, about 22% of the country is classified as hyper-arid, 70% as arid, and less than 8% as dry sub-
humid (Mendelsohn, Jarvis, Roberts, & Robertson, 2002). Over most of the country, potential evaporation is at least five 
times greater than average rainfall (GRN, 2014). The climate is characterized by high variability in the form of persistent 
droughts, unpredictable and variable rainfall patterns, variability in temperatures and scarcity of water (GRN, 2011). 
Lack of water is regarded as a key limitation to Namibia’s development. Perennial rivers only occur on the country´s 
borders. Of the total rainfall, 83% evaporates shortly after precipitation and 17% is available as surface runoff of which 
1% recharges groundwater sources and 14% is lost through evapo-transpiration (2,600 mm to 3,700 mm per year). 
Hence, only 2% (i.e. 5 mm) remains to be harnessed in surface storage facilities (FAO). Namibia is one of the world’s 
most vulnerable countries with regard to climate change due to its extreme aridity and dependence on primary industry, 
combined with a limited adaptive capacity (Brown, 2009). Approximately 70% of Namibia’s population live in rural 
areas. Farming is the dominant land use in Namibia, but it is characterized by low production and high risk due to arid 
conditions, infertile soils and generally poor land use practices. 
 
6. Conservation in Namibia: In total, almost 44% of Namibia´s land area is under some form of conservation (NACSO, 
2016)2. While state-protected areas cover 16.8% of the land surface, an additional 20%, i.e. one fifth, of Namibia’s land 
area is under conservation through the Community-Based Natural Resource Management (CBNRM) Program (see 
Figure 1). This corresponds to an area of 163, 396 km², which is about 53.4% of all communal land and accommodates 
about 200,000 residents. Of this area, conservancies manage 160,244km², which is about 19.4% of Namibia. Although 
community forests covers an area of 30,827km², 90% of this area is overlapping with conservancies. The program 
currently comprises 82 Communal Conservancies and 32 Community Forests on communal land. CBNRM is a 
conservation and development strategy premised on an incentive-driven philosophy that recognizes how conservation 
of natural resources links with rural development and sustainable livelihoods. It is based on the assumption that 
communities with responsibility and authority over natural resources tend to manage them sustainably in ways that also 
result in reduction in rural poverty when they are in control of those resources and derive direct benefits arising from 
their use. 
 
                                                     
2 Private forms of conservation areas are Freehold Conservancies and Concessions.

=== PAGE 10 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 59 
 
C
 
Figure 1: Conservation areas in Namibia. In total, almost 44% of Namibia’s land surface are under some form of 
conservation. The proposed project targets registered Communal Conservancies and Community Forests, which cover 
roughly 20% of Namibia’s land surface. 
 
7. CBNRM in Namibia: CBNRM is founded on three pillars - institutional development, natural resources management, 
and business, enterprises and livelihoods. Institutional development emphasizes that good governance creates the 
basis for resource management, benefit capture and distribution. Natural resource management is focused on 
innovative management approaches, which enables biodiversity conservation and sustainable use. Business, 
enterprise and livelihoods are based on market-based approaches that enable a wide range of community returns 
(NACSO, 2014; NACSO, 2013). Some of the characteristics of CBNRM are that:

=== PAGE 11 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 59 
 
C
 
It is a rural development program that seeks to devolve rights and responsibilities over wildlife, tourism, forests 
and other natural resources to rural communities  
 
It promotes wise and sustainable management of natural resources 
 
It encourages biodiversity conservation by creating the necessary conditions for sustainable use  
 
It provides incentives to communities to manage and use natural resources in sustainable and productive ways  
 
It creates opportunities for enterprise development and income generation 
 
It is an empowerment and capacity-building project that encourages and assists communities and their local 
institutions to develop skills and experience to manage their natural resources in order to improve their 
livelihoods  
 
More recently, CBNRM is being used as an entry point for community based climate change adaptation 
initiatives at a local level 
 
8. Climate change and CBNRM: The majority of CBNRM income is directly linked to natural resource utilization. 
Already, the impact of climate change is undermining the growing nature-based tourism industry in Namibia directly by 
impacting on the tourism resource base, through changes in habitats, landscape characteristics and vegetation cover, 
biodiversity loss, decreasing water availability, increased frequency and severity of climate hazards, coastal erosion, 
and increased incidence of vector borne diseases (like malaria). Beneficiaries of the CBNRM program in conservancies 
and forest reserves, who are developing sustainable livelihoods based on resource management and tourism, stand to 
be severely affected by any such changes. The impact of climate change undermines the investments and potential 
ecosystem services and goods that CBNRM provides to support livelihoods of more than 200,000 Namibians who 
depend on natural resource use for their survival. The Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment of Namibia (MET, 
2008) identifies CBNRM as an important Program that offers an opportunity for communities to diversify their livelihood 
options. At the same time, these local level institutions provide an opportunity to integrate adaptation to climate while 
responding to other environmental or socio-economic changes. 
 
9. CBNRM Policies: Namibia, to date, has implemented several conservation interventions that combine sustainable 
natural resource management and rural development through CBNRM since 1992. The idea of a national CBNRM 
support structure emerged in the early 1990s through the work of the CBNRM support organizations, the Ministry of 
Environment and Tourism and the national NGOs, and was supported by the USAID funded Living in a Finite 
Environment (LIFE) project. International support was received through USAID, DfID, SIDA, WWF, GEF and World 
Bank, together with domestic support from the Ministry of Environment and Tourism, the Namibia Nature Foundation 
and others. The objective was "to promote activities that demonstrate that sustainably managed natural resources can 
result in social development and economic growth, and in suitable partnership between local communities and 
government." This has certainly been demonstrated and the program has been successfully mainstreamed into national 
development priorities - representing one of CBNRM's major, over-riding achievements. CBNRM activities are now an 
integral part of Rural Poverty Reduction, Rural Development, National Development Plans, Harambee Prosperity Plan 
and Vision 2030. In short, the CBNRM Program provides a win-win livelihoods and conservation/sustainability solution. 
The legal provision enabling the implementation of CBNRM is fragmented and embedded in the legislative frameworks 
of various government ministries. The legislation most relevant to this study is Nature Conservation Amendment Act of 
1996 and the Forestry Act of 2002. The CBNRM legal entities as established by the Ministry of Environment and 
Tourism (MET), and Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry (MAWF) are commonly known as communal 
conservancies and community forests (CFs). The legal declaration of an area as Communal Conservancy or 
Community Forest goes hand in hand with the registration of a corresponding legal institution in form of a Community-
Based Organization (CBO). CBO is the term used throughout this funding proposal when referring to these CBNRM 
legal entities. 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
10. The CBNRM network comprises about 200,000 residents in 82 Communal Conservancies and 32 Community 
Forests on communal land. This corresponds to an area of 163,396 km² (16,339,600 hectares). Communal 
conservancies and community forests operate exclusively in rural settings in Namibia. This renders them particularly 
vulnerable to the effects of a changing climate as they remain highly dependent on variable rainfall patterns and 
associated fluctuating natural resource yields. In addition, CBNRM entities in rural Namibia often have very limited 
access to the financial, technical and human resources required to enhance their resilience to climate change. In

=== PAGE 12 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 59 
 
C
general, CBNRM communities live under high exposure to climate risks such as: 
 
Drought and low rainfall: More than 80% of people living within the CBNRM boundaries depend on natural 
resource use for their livelihoods as subsistence farmers, small-scale emerging farmers and horticultural 
farmers. These communities have been identified as having the highest levels of exposure because drought 
increases the likelihood that crops will fail or animals will die. Drought has affected food production directly 
over the last 15 years in Namibia (Ziervogel and Angula, 2016). This has led farmers to finish their stock of 
millet in granaries before the next rainy season.  
 
Loss of forest cover and species: Deforestation and desertification; frequent forest fires; changes in forest 
types, species composition and distribution; and the disappearance of medicinal plants. Vulnerable species are 
those that have limited geographical ranges, drought/heat intolerance, low germination rates, low survival rate 
of seedlings, and limited seed dispersal/migration capabilities. Unsustainable supply of forest, products and 
services. Decrease in employment and foreign exchange earnings through forest-based industries and trade  
 
Inadequate access to climate information: This is a serious concern for CBNRM communities who depend on 
land and natural resources and for who knowledge on climatic trends and corresponding adaptation is crucial. 
This is especially true as residents incur the direct costs of damage from increased extreme weather events.  
 
High temperatures: Extreme high temperatures over the past 15 years have been associated with the outbreak 
of pests and diseases that impact both crops and animals. Over the years, there has been outbreak of foot and 
mouth disease, anthrax, and rabies. These diseases have profound impact on both livestock production and 
wildlife management resulting in loss of revenues to support livelihoods. Sensitivity for those on social grants, 
such as the elderly and those living with HIV/AIDS was seen to be high, because they will not be able to work 
long hours in their fields if it is too hot. Small-scale traders are less sensitive because they do not directly 
depend on natural resources. However, their products are likely to expire faster due to heat stress.  
 
Biodiversity loss and species movement: There is indication that recent and ongoing climate change is leading 
to rapid changes in the distributions of species in Namibia’s protected area network. Species movements into 
areas where they were not previously found are observed, the disappearance of species from a region where 
they once were, or a shift in the abundance and distribution of individuals within a species range (Midgeley et 
al. 2010). Changes in fire and precipitation regimes continue to drive or accelerate shifts from one ecosystem 
state to another. Declines in charismatic wildlife populations lead nature-watchers, photographers, and hunters 
to seek other habitats that offer more substantial populations and that have an impact on local livelihoods. The 
impacts of these changes includes, loss of income opportunities and jobs, loss of primary production to provide 
ecosystem goods and services, and increased levels of poverty as CBNRM residents depends on natural 
resource for their livelihoods. 
11. While CBNRM communities through the CBNRM program have received substantial support in terms of institutional 
development, biodiversity and ecosystem conservation and business development based on sustainable natural 
resource management and utilization, there has been no dedicated support to date to prepare them for the above risks 
associated with climate change. If the achievements of the Namibian CBNRM program are to be sustained and built 
upon in future, substantial enhancement of the adaptive capacity of the CBNRM communities is crucial. At the same 
time, CBNRM CBOs have been identified as critical institutions for local-level awareness and practical climate change 
adaptation and mitigation activities and are thus crucial to Namibia’s overall climate change strategy. The existing 
Namibian CBNRM program therefore forms a solid basis for widespread community-based climate change responses 
at the local level and bears enormous potential for creating and safeguarding resilient rural livelihoods while contributing 
to Namibia´s mitigation and adaptation targets. 
 
12. The proposed project aims at increasing the climate change resilience of CBNRM communities while taking 
advantage of the strong community-based structures that the CBNRM network provides.

=== PAGE 13 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 59 
 
C
13. The overall objective of the proposed project is therefore to 
Overall Project Objective: 
‘Empower Rural Communities of the Namibian CBNRM Network to Respond to Climate Change in Terms of 
Awareness, Adaptive Capacity and Low-Carbon Development’. 
The project is expected to directly benefit more than 15,000 women and men3 in the CBNRM areas through the support 
to diversified climate-resilient livelihood options. An area of more than 7 million hectares will be under improved and 
effective management, which contributes to both increased climate change resilience and to greenhouse gas emission 
reduction, indirectly benefitting more than 60,000 inhabitants of the CBNRM areas. This will be achieved through two 
complementary project components: 
14. Component I: Capacity Building and Community Support 
 
Component I Objective: 
‘Build and Strengthen the Institutional Foundation for Effective and Sustainable Community-Led Local Climate Action in 
the CBNRM Network’ 
 
Component I of the project will build and strengthen the institutional foundation for effective and sustainable community-
led local climate action in the CBNRM network. Activities under this component do not necessarily relate directly to 
climate change actions but that applies to the entire CBNRM network and need to be addressed to ensure the effective 
implementation of the proposed interventions and to enhance the achievement of the envisaged impacts under project 
component II. Component I activities fall under the following sub-components: 
1. Climate change awareness creation 
 
A minimum of 80 CBNRM CBOs will be targeted through awareness materials and dedicated training in order 
to raise their awareness towards climate change and share information on possible adaptation measures 
2. Local-level climate monitoring 
 
A climate monitoring system tailor-made for CBNRM CBOs will be developed and implemented across the 
CBNRM network. A minimum of 30 CBNRM CBOs is expected to adopt the climate monitoring system. This will 
allow both CBNRM communities as well as external support organizations to strengthen planning and adapt 
their activities and interventions accordingly. 
3. Strengthening CBNRM governance 
 
Good governance creates the basis for effective resource management, benefit capture and distribution and is 
essential for successful implementation of community-based projects as provided under component II. 
Governance in 30 CBNRM CBOs will be strengthened through this sub-component. 
4. Capacity building for community-led initiatives 
 
Community-led initiatives to address climate issues are going to require capacity-building of a new set of skills 
that these CBOs have not yet had the opportunity to develop. Not only will the CBOs be engaging in new 
aspects of environmental management – climate change adaptation measures – but they will also be required 
to identify appropriate interventions and develop and submit corresponding proposals under component II. This 
sub-component will provide training and technical support to CBOs based on a prior assessment of specific 
needs. 
 
15. Component II: Grant Facility for Resilient CBNRM Livelihoods in Namibia 
 
Component II Objective: 
Empower Rural CBNRM Communities through Direct Access to Climate Finance for Increased CBNRM Livelihoods 
                                                     
3 Note that this is lower than the sum of the figures provided in paragraph 15, since some overlap between the beneficiaries of the 
different grant investment areas is expected. See the attached Excel spreadsheet for more detail.

=== PAGE 14 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 59 
 
C
Resilience and Low-Carbon Rural Development. 
Component II comprises a grant facility for resilient CBNRM livelihoods through self-determined local climate change 
adaptation initiatives. It will serve exclusively for direct access by legally recognized CBOs operating within the ambit of 
the national CBNRM program and seeking to implement community-level activities which have a strong climate change 
adaptation impact potential. The grant facility will be fully aligned with GCF investment criteria while allowing for 
maximum responsiveness to national and, particularly, local priorities in the following three grant investment areas: 
1. Climate Resilient Agriculture 
 
A minimum of 6 grants under this investment area will benefit more than 11,000 direct and 26,000 indirect 
beneficiaries by addressing the direct and indirect impacts of climate change on agricultural production. 
Possible grant projects will focus on responses that feature shifts towards innovative resilient farming 
techniques such as conservation/climate-smart agriculture, as well as technological improvements. 
2. Climate Resilient Infrastructure  
A minimum of 15 grants under this investment area will benefit more than 2,000 direct and 3,600 indirect 
beneficiaries by addressing the climate change vulnerability of settlements, the people living in those 
settlements and the infrastructure on which they depend. Possible grant projects will focus on infrastructure 
adaptation, renewable energy technology and water saving measures. 
3. Ecosystem Based Adaptation 
 
A minimum of 12 grants under this investment area will benefit more than 7,000 direct and 60,000 indirect 
beneficiaries by enhancing resilience and maintain ecological functions and services of ecosystems at the 
landscape scale. Examples include improvement of connectivity of CBNRM areas, re-integrated natural 
resource management for wildlife and forest resources, fire management interventions, forest inventories, 
introduction of wildlife in its former range, restoration of degraded wetlands or forests or unproductive 
ecosystems. 
Altogether, a minimum number of 33 grants with an average volume of USD 240,000 will benefit directly more than 
15,000 and indirectly more than 60,000 women and men4. An area of more than 7 million hectares will be under 
improved and effective management. An estimated 2,400 households will enjoy improved food security through the 
adoption of climate resilient agriculture techniques. The climate change resilience of an estimated 90 rural settlements 
will be increased and an estimated 186 sustainable climate-resilient jobs will be created. For more detailed information 
on expected project outcomes and outputs, please refer to the logical framework in section H.1. 
C.3. Project / Programme Description 
16. Target Population: The project targets rural communities on land which is managed by a registered CBNRM CBOs 
in Namibia. This corresponds to a population of roughly 200,000. These communities can submit proposals and apply 
for grant funding from the Grant Facility for Resilient CBNRM Livelihoods through their registered CBO. Project 
component I aims at preparing them for this task by specifically addressing CBO committee members. All CBNRM 
CBOs will be made aware of the grant opportunity for community-based local climate adaptation action. A diagnostic 
screening tool will be applied to all CBNRM CBOs in Namibia in order to establish their specific vulnerability status, 
baseline information and needs for targeted training and support by the project under component I. Selection of grant 
beneficiaries will be made according to alignment of proposals with GCF criteria and climate change vulnerability of 
respective communities/areas. 
17. Target areas: The project targets areas managed by registered CBOs of the CBNRM program. Since these 
operate exclusively on communal land in Namibia, the communal areas constitute the wider potential intervention area. 
Most of the CBNRM CBOs operate in the north-western (Kunene Region) and north-eastern (Kavango East and West, 
Zambezi and Otjozondjupa Region) parts of the country. It is therefore expected that most grant projects will be 
implemented in the communal areas of these regions (see Figure 2), simply due to the comparably high number of 
CBNRM CBOs operating there. However, note that CBNRM CBOs from other regions are by no means excluded from 
the project and that CBNRM CBOs from all regions (except Khomas, since there are no registered CBNRM CBOs in 
                                                     
4 Note that this is lower than the sum of the figures provided separately for the different grant investment areas, since some overlap 
between the beneficiaries of the different grant investment areas is expected. See the attached Excel spreadsheet for more detail.

=== PAGE 15 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 59 
 
C
that region) are targeted by component I and eligible for grant funding under component II. 
 
Figure 2: Wider target area of the proposed project. CBNRM CBOs exclusively operate on 
communal land (orange color), which constitutes the wider target area. The north-western 
and north-eastern regions (blue color) of Namibia accommodate the majority of CBNRM 
CBOs. Most grant projects will therefore probably be implemented in the communal areas of 
these high intensity regions. 
 
Project Activities under Component I: Capacity Building and Community Support 
Output 1: Climate Change Awareness Raised 
This sub-component targets all CBNRM CBOs in Namibia. It is expected that awareness on climate change and related 
issues is enhanced among at least 80 CBOs. 
Activity 1.1: Develop and disseminate CC training and awareness materials 
18. This activity targets all CBNRM CBOs in Namibia. It entails the development and dissemination of materials to raise 
climate change awareness amongst rural Namibians. These materials should aim at creating awareness about climate 
change as well as highlighting examples of how climate change can be mitigated. Included should also be a description 
of the need for adaptation and examples of simple ways in which rural Namibians can start adapting to climate change.

=== PAGE 16 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 59 
 
C
19. Once these materials are developed and produced, they should be disseminated through as many channels as 
possible – distribution of printed copy, social media and radio programs. These materials should be distributed at any 
CBO gathering in all of the regions. Support organizations and regional government offices will also be approached to 
assist. These materials should be available and distributed at any of the planned project events during the first year of 
project implementation. 
Activity 1.2: Regional training workshops on climate change awareness, adaptation and mitigation 
20. The second activity involves climate change training workshops that target the CBOs who potentially will engage to 
a greater extent with this project and aim at exposing training participants to relevant aspects of climate change and 
means of reducing vulnerability to climate change. It entails 17 training workshops in 13 regions to train a minimum of 
40 CBOs with at least 10 reps from each. Selection of the target CBOs will be based on the outcome of the CBO 
assessment under activity 4.2. The delivery of these workshops will target any CBOs interested in applying for a grant 
and the training will be delivered on a regional basis during the first half of year 1 of the program. Suitable candidates 
for this training will include CBO staff or committee as well as representatives from their support organizations. These 
regional training events will provide possible applicants with the basic climate change knowledge needed to be able to 
identify needs and possible interventions appropriate in their areas. 
21. Participation in these training events will be a pre-requisite for each CBO planning on submitting a proposal for 
funding for climate change activities through Resilient CBNRM Livelihoods in Namibia grants. If this is considered 
essential to all grant applicants, then it will be necessary to repeat the training in selected regions at a later stage during 
program implementation to provide the opportunity to CBOs who might not have accessed the information about the 
opportunity of accessing support for climate change activities during year 1. 
Output 2: Local Climate Monitoring Established 
The expected number of CBOs who will have adopted the climate monitoring system and submit corresponding annual 
monitoring reports as a result of the project is 30. 
Activity 2.1: Development and verification of a climate monitoring system with supporting training materials 
22. CBNRM in Namibia has a major focus on improved land and resource management practices with considerable 
emphasis on monitoring the status and use of resources through a structured approach called the Event Book System 
(EBS). The EBS is a grassroots natural resource monitoring program. It differs from traditional monitoring in that the 
CBO decides what needs to be monitored, collects the data and undertakes the analysis. The EBS was created to 
inform management decisions in communal conservancies throughout Namibia and to support the processes of 
adaptive management. More than 60 conservancies in Namibia have adopted the EBS. A sense of ownership, 
confidence, pride and commitment to this monitoring system has developed (Stuart-Hill, Diggle, Munali, Tagg, & Ward, 
2005). 
23. This activity will require the current EBS to be reviewed and opportunities for integrating climate relevant data 
collection identified. This will include participatory processes with clusters of CBOs to determine what their data needs 
are and to explore ways in which this information can be effectively utilized. Once the climate monitoring components 
that need to be added to the EBS system have been identified and developed, CBOs will be provided with training on 
how to implement and use this system in line with activity 3.2. In addition to formal training events, ongoing support 
should be provided to the staff of CBOs responsible for collecting the data. Support should also be provided to CBO 
management to facilitate the synthesis of the data and its application in adaptive management processes. A minimum 
of 30 CBOs is expected to adopt the climate monitoring system. 
24. It should be recognized that the needs of the CBOs are going to vary greatly as a result of geographic differences 
but also due to locally identified needs and the processes for developing and implementing the climate monitoring 
system will need to accommodate these variations. 
Output 3: CBNRM Governance Strengthened

=== PAGE 17 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 59 
 
C
25. The exact content of this sub-component as well as the selection of the CBOs that will receive targeted support will 
be based on the outcome of the CBO assessment under activity 4.2. The minimum number of additional CBNRM CBOs 
for which governance will be strengthened (measured by their compliance with the MET’s standard operating 
procedures (SOP)) as a result of the project is 30. 
Activity 3.1: Development or revision of governance and SOP training materials 
26. Existing training materials will be reviewed and adapted or updated to address the identified needs. This is likely to 
represent several existing training modules being revised with the possible need for the development of new modules. 
Activity 3.2: Targeted training and technical support provided to CBOs by service providers 
27. Based on the outcomes of the diagnostic process under activity 4.2, CBOs and their support organizations will then 
need to develop a training and technical support work plan which demonstrates how the needs for improved 
governance and management capacity are going to be addressed. Based on this, support organizations will be 
contracted by the EIF to provide the required support and capacity building. One of the issues that are likely to be 
identified through this process is the need for CBO management committees to encourage active engagement of the 
members in all of the CBO activities. Also, the need for new mechanisms to be developed that allow for increased 
accountability of CBO management and staff to members. Note that this activity also includes support and training for 
the adoption and implementation of the local climate monitoring system under output 2. 
Output 4: Capacity of CBNRM CBOs for community-led initiatives increased 
28. Community-led initiatives to address climate issues are going to require capacity-building of a new set of skills that 
these CBOs have not yet had the opportunity to develop. Not only will the CBOs be engaging in new aspects of 
environmental management – climate change adaptation measures – but they will also be required to identify 
appropriate interventions, develop and submit corresponding proposals and, if accepted, manage the grant awarded by 
the EDA Project Management Unit within EIF. 
29. Those CBOs with demonstrated requisite capacity (to develop fundable projects, to implement such projects, to 
report as required and account for funds disbursed) can apply directly and implement projects on their own. The 
number of proposal applications submitted to EDA grant facilities from CBOs directly (i.e. without external support by 
implementing partner) that are approved for funding is expected to amount to 10. While this will be the preferred 
modality from the perspective of the NDA and the EIF, the reality is that most CBOs lack this requisite capacity and this 
capacity-building component has been included to change this situation. Therefore, it is anticipated that most funding 
applications will be made in partnership with support organizations (for more detailed information on grant modalities 
and possible support organizations refer to section C.7.). The same is true for project implementation as well as 
monitoring and reporting. Including the support organization as a partner in the grant application is intended to ensure 
that this component of capacity building is provided for. 
Activity 4.1: Information sharing meetings on grant facility 
30. There will be 15 information sharing meetings held in all regions and major centers in order to inform CBOs and 
respective communities about the project and the opportunity to apply for resilient livelihoods grants. All CBNRM CBOs 
will be targeted by this activity. 
Activity 4.2: CBO diagnostic designed and carried out in all 13 regions to identify CBO capacity and support needs 
31. During the first half of year 1, a diagnostic tool needs to be developed that, when applied to CBOs, captures not 
only baseline information about the CBO and its governance structures, but also identifies the specific training needs 
related to CBO governance. The diagnostic report that will be generated should provide the baseline information for the 
program level indicators as well as an assessment of the CBOs’ training and technical support needs. Other factors 
such as potential risks or issues relating to gender or marginalized groups need to be identified and evaluated. Support 
organizations will be contracted to undertake this diagnostic process and will also be able to use this opportunity for 
further sharing the CC awareness materials with the CBOs and providing them with information about the grant

=== PAGE 18 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 59 
 
C
opportunities offered by this program. 
32. The results of this activity will be key in informing the exact scope, content and target CBOs of support activities 
under the project outputs 2 and 3. It therefore constitutes the point of departure for component I. 
Activity 4.3: Training workshops for CBOs accessing grants 
33. All CBNRM CBOs identified through activity 4.2 as having the basic capacity and structures in place on which to be 
built on for development and implementation of grants under component II will be invited to attend grant training 
workshops under this activity. 10 workshops at the regional level (some regions will be combined) are envisaged under 
this activity. Participating CBNRM CBO representatives will be provided with detailed information on grant opportunities, 
the grant application process, their roles and responsibilities in grant project development, implementation and 
monitoring as well as opportunities for technical support and cooperation with support organizations. 
Activity 4.4: Targeted support to potential grantees for proposal development and submission 
In addition to training provided under activity 4.3, there will be ongoing support to grant proposal development and 
submission by the EIF EDA Project Management Unit (see section C.7. for further information). Furthermore, an 
independent service provider will be contracted under this activity to provide targeted information, training and proposal 
development support to selected CBOs as identified through activity 4.2. 
Project Activities under Component II: Grant Facility for Resilient CBNRM Livelihoods in Namibia 
Output 5: Grant facility for Resilient CBNRM Livelihoods implemented 
34. This component aims at empowering rural CBNRM communities to increase their resilience to climate change a 
through access to direct climate finance. The EIF will establish a ring-fenced EDA Livelihood Resilient Grant Facility 
from GCF funding that will focus on grant financing for developing and strengthening resilient livelihoods within CBNRM 
areas. This component will provide grant funding and technical assistance on a demand-driven basis to CBNRM 
institutions for climate investments that will generate lessons and experience for scaled-up climate action in priority 
areas in Namibia and possibly neighboring countries. GCF funding will allow for the provision of resources for climate 
investments on a grant basis, helping reach the poorest and most climate-vulnerable rural communities in priority areas, 
including the poorest populations residing on fringe/risk-prone areas and marginalized groups such as women. 
Female–headed farming households with climate resilient (and gender friendly) agriculture technology, extension 
services, and soil conservation techniques will be targeted and be the main beneficiary of the project. 
 
35. A minimum of 33 grants for community-led climate change adaptation action with an average volume of USD 
240,000 will be awarded, implemented and reported upon. In particular, GCF-financed activities will strengthen the 
climate resilience of those most vulnerable to climate change, by supporting the adoption of climate-smart rural 
production and landscape management investments that aim to achieve multiple benefits (e.g., climate resilience, food 
security, increased well-being of beneficiaries, including gender and social inclusion). In the context of the present 
proposal, 80% of the GCF resources sought under the present proposal will be directed towards three grant investment 
areas for resilient CBNRM livelihoods. 
Activity 5.1: Awarding and implementation of grants under investment window 1: Climate-resilient agriculture 
36. A minimum of 6 grants under this investment area with an average financial volume of USD 340,000 will be 
awarded, implemented and reported upon. Projects that fall within this investment window will address the direct or 
indirect impacts of CC on agricultural production in CBNRM areas, and could target livestock and/or crop production. 
They will focus on responses that feature shifts towards innovative resilient farming techniques such as 
conservation/climate-smart agriculture, as well as technological improvements. The latter could include the use of 
hydroponic garden systems for food security and supply to community owned lodges, bush encroachment management 
measures, tree planting or the construction of shade structures and more drinking troughs for livestock in the face of 
increasing temperatures.

=== PAGE 19 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 59 
 
C
Table 2: Grant Investment Window 1 
Option 1: Climate resilient agriculture 
Purpose: to address direct or indirect impacts of climate change on agricultural production  
Scope 
 
Priorities for biomes: Tree Savanna 
 
Intervention areas: conservation agriculture, grazing management, fire management 
 
Impact spheres: adaption and economic 
 
Grant sizes: USD 100 000 – USD 400 000 
 
Duration: 3 years 
Cost categories 
 
Large and small scale infrastructure and equipment  
 
Services for planning, implementation and management  
 
Training, research and monitoring 
 
Consumables 
 
Operational costs 
Eligibility criteria 
 
Grant should include more than one CBO within a landscape 
 
Grantee must have the capacity to implement the full scope of the grant 
 
Measures must ensure tangible benefits for CBO members 
 
Interventions must comply with local-level land-use plans 
Activity 5.2.: Awarding and implementation of grants under investment window 2: Climate-proof infrastructure 
37. A minimum of 15 grants under this investment area with an average financial volume of USD 80,000 will be 
awarded, implemented and reported upon. This investment window incorporates projects that increase the climate 
change resilience of settlements, the people living in those settlements and the infrastructure on which they depend. 
Concrete examples of infrastructure upgrades would be water harvesting and storage infrastructure, solar water 
heaters, solar retrofitting of diesel pumps, small-scale photovoltaics, dry sanitation, etc. 
38. Development of climate-proof infrastructure also addresses the need for disaster risk reduction, as climate change 
in some areas might mean an increase in the frequency and intensity of climate extremes. Community- led disaster risk 
reduction projects that can safe-guard lives, livelihoods and infrastructure, will thus be included (e.g. erosion 
management). Depending on the climate change projections for the area, such projects could prepare for extremes 
ranging from droughts to floods. Ecological infrastructure can in some cases play a role in buffering extremes, and as 
such be incorporated as part of climate-proof settlement projects. Such interventions need to be linked to projected 
climate change related impacts on settlements being reduced or prevented as a result of healthy and functioning 
ecosystems. This could include the restoration or rehabilitation of a wetland that can be shown to provide flood 
attenuation for a community at risk from flooding due to an increase in the intensity of heavy rainfall events. 
Table 3: Grant Investment Window 2 
Option 2: Climate proof infrastructure 
Purpose: to address the climate change vulnerability of settlements, the people living in those settlements and 
the infrastructure on which they depend.  
Scope 
 
Priority for biomes: all 
 
Intervention areas: infrastructure adaptation, renewable energy technology, improved 
sanitation, water demand management 
 
Impact spheres: mitigation and social 
 
Grant sizes: USD 50 000 – USD 400 000 
 
Duration: 1 to 2 years 
Cost categories 
 
Infrastructure and equipment 
 
Services for procurement and installation 
 
Monitoring of outcomes 
Eligibility criteria 
 
Grant can be limited to one CBO 
 
Infrastructure development must comply with the Environmental Management Act

=== PAGE 20 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 59 
 
C
 
Interventions need to be linked to projected climate change related impacts on 
communities being reduced or prevented 
Activity 5.3.: Awarding and implementation of grants under investment window 3: Ecosystem Based Adaptation 
39. A minimum of 12 grants under this investment area with an average financial volume of USD 395,000 will be 
awarded, implemented and reported upon. Ecosystem based adaptation is a framework that uses an integrated 
ecosystem management approach to enhance resilience and maintain ecological functions and services at the 
landscape scale. It combines multi-functional land uses and conservation of natural capital to enhance multi-scale 
benefits from ecosystems that help socio-ecological systems adapt to changing conditions and multiple pressures, 
including climate change. This framework suggests a new landscape paradigm to maximize the adaptation benefits of 
ecosystem-based pathways that combine strategies over a mosaic of inter-connected ecosystems.  
40. Examples include improvement of connectivity of CBNRM areas, re-integrated natural resource management for 
wildlife and forest resources, fire management interventions, forest inventories, integration of climate change into local 
level monitoring system, introduction of wildlife in its former range, restoration of degraded wetlands or forests or 
unproductive ecosystems. 
Table 4: Grant Investment Window 3 
Option 3: Ecosystem-based adaption  
Purpose: to achieve multiple benefits in the context of sustainable development by linking biodiversity and 
ecosystem conservation to rural development, in order to enhance climate change resilience and maintain 
ecological functions and services   
Scope 
 
Priorities for biomes: Namib Desert, Nama Karoo, Shrub Savanna and Tree Savanna 
 
Intervention areas: Biodiversity management, biotrade, forest restoration 
 
Impact spheres: environmental, adaptation and economic 
 
Grant sizes: USD 100 000 – USD 400 000 
Duration: 3 years 
Cost categories 
 
Small scale infrastructure and equipment 
 
 Services for planning, implementation and management 
 
Training, research and monitoring 
 
Operational costs 
 
Consumables  
Eligibility criteria 
 
Grant should include more than one CBO within a landscape 
 
Interventions must comply with local-level and regional land-use plans 
 
Grantee must have the capacity to implement the full scope of the grant 
 
Measures must ensure tangible benefits for CBO members 
 
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity) 
41. The Environmental Investment Fund of Namibia (EIF) is a fully accredited entity of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) 
and thus has met the fiduciary responsibilities for managing funds. In addition to the domestically-funded programs, the 
EIF has managed micro-scale funding on behalf of the UNDP, UNFCCC, and served as a crucial financial management 
institution for the eleventh Conference of Parties of the UNCCD (that is, COP 11), a large-scale resource envelope that 
was deemed very successful, by international standards for same large-scale undertakings. Furthermore the EIF is 
currently managing three different environmental and climate change related grant programs, namely the Game 
Product Trust Fund, UNDP Small Grants Program and the EIF Grant Program. In total the EIF has handled more than 
US$35 million of combined administration of grants. Moreover, the working relationship with other grant making 
programs provides opportunities for coordination, cost efficiency, and sharing of lessons and experiences.  Therefore

=== PAGE 21 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 59 
 
C
the EIF is able to link emerging organizations with more established ones, thereby facilitating more rapid capacity 
building. These linkages between initiatives also promote collaboration and synergies between projects and 
organizations, resulting in a better product and in a cost-savings. The EIF has experienced personnel in running and 
implementing projects, in supporting and back-stopping grantees, in providing on-the-job training to less experienced 
grantees, etc.  
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
42. Not applicable. Most envisaged grant project activities focus on subsistence activities and only marginally on 
products, which require certain market conditions. 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable) 
43. The Environmental Investment Fund of Namibia is exempted from tax. This project will enjoy full tax exemption on 
all goods and services except for the salaries of the project implementation unit. For purposes of this project, all capital 
equipment will be tax exempt, as is the case for all externally sourced grants. However, project personnel from Namibia 
will pay normal income taxes to meet social security requirements. All capital goods such as cars, equipment will be 
insured against theft, fire damage and accidents. Project staff will also receive medical insurance benefits, as required 
under the Labor Act. All these conditions have applied to large projects that Namibia has run in the recent past through 
the MET. The scale of these ranged from small (for example INC/SNC 5 US$200,000) to medium (for example 
CPP/US$7 000 000).  
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements 
44. National Implementing Entity: The EIF will be the National Implementing Entity (NIE) for the project. The EIF will 
support project implementation by administering the grant facility and recruiting and contracting project personnel and 
implementation, support and consultant services, including subcontracting. The EIF will also monitor project 
implementation by Executing Entities and the achievement of the project outcomes/outputs and ensure the efficient use 
of donor funds. Within the EIF, the proposed project will be managed and monitored by a dedicated EDA Project 
Management Unit (PMU). This EDA PMU will consist of four additional dedicated staff members who will be employed 
on contract for the duration of the EDA agreement. They will be employed with GCF funding and will include the 
following positions: 
 
Project Manager, responsible for overall project coordination and management, preparation of annual work 
plans, project risk monitoring and reporting towards the EIF board and GCF 
 
M&E Officer, responsible for monitoring, evaluation and reporting as well as ensuring compliance with 
environmental and social safeguards (ESS) 
 
Grants Support Officer, responsible for supervision and management of the EDA grant facilities 
 
Accountant, responsible for reconciling financial accounts, produce monthly financial report, assets 
management, and insurance 
The structure of the EDA PMU6 Initial within the EIF is illustrated in Figure 3. 
                                                     
5 Initial National Communication/Second National Communication.  
6 The Project Manager will provide required technical and administrative support to coordinate and implement project activities at 
national level as well as linkages to CBOs and supporting agencies. He/she will ensure effective management of the supported by 
the Project Steering Committee (PSC). The Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Officer will be responsible for monitoring and 
evaluation of the EDA Project including overseeing gender mainstreaming, environmental and social safeguard as well as to 
perform other M&E functions. The Grants Support Officer will be responsible for project development support activities with CBOs 
and NACSO partners including narrative, financial, logical, and all grants content.  The Project Accountant is responsible for 
maintaining the budget, recording and reflecting fully, accurately, clearly and in a timely manner the funds that are allocated and the 
disbursements made to support project implementation, in accordance with the approved documents and the liquidation of 
expenditures on an annual and quarterly basis as well as upon project termination.

=== PAGE 22 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 59 
 
C
 
Figure 3: Organogram of the EIF, including the EDA PMU to be established for management of the 
proposed project (orange boxes). 
Component I Implementation Arrangements 
45. Executing Entities: For practical reasons, the EIF through the PSC will select Executing Entities (EEs) for the 
implementation of Component 1 activities on the open market through a rigorous competitive and transparent public 
process. Given the broad thematic spectrum of component 1 activities and, particularly, the large geographic spread of 
the target groups, it is likely that corresponding tasks will be distributed among several EEs. In addition to the MET, 
possible EEs with long-standing experience in CBNRM support are organized under the umbrella of Namibian 
Association of CBNRM Support Organizations (NACSO7). Examples of these are Integrated Rural Development and 
Nature Conservation (IRDNC), which is the lead NGO in Kunene and Zambezi regions and the Namibia Nature 
Foundation (NNF), which is the lead NGO in Kavango West and Kavango East regions. NACSO comprises eight NGOs 
and the University of Namibia (UNAM). The purpose of NACSO is to provide quality services to rural communities 
seeking to manage and utilize their natural resources in a sustainable manner. The philosophy of forming NACSO was 
to harness the wide range of skills available in GRN, NGOs and UNAM into a complementary nation-wide CBNRM 
support service. The rationale behind this is that it is unlikely that any single institution houses all of the skills, resources 
and capacity to provide community organizations with the multi-disciplinary assistance that is required to develop the 
broad range of CBNRM initiatives taking place in Namibia. The participation of NACSO members in this project brings a 
wealth of experience in natural resources management and skills to support climate change adaptation and mitigation. 
The NACSO members have long-standing experience in CBNRM support and are the natural supporting partners for 
implementation of the proposed program. While these organizations constitute obvious candidates for project 
                                                                                                                                                                           
     
  
 
 
 
7 http://www.nacso.org.na 
Chief Operations Officer 
(Director of Operations)
Portfolio Manager
Business Development 
Officer 
Loan Officer: Green Soft 
Loans
Client support Offcier
Loan Officer Green 
Concessional Loans
Client Support Officer
Credit & Risk Analyst
Credit Officer   
ESS & Gender Specialst
Grants & Environment  
Manager 
Grants Officer
Grants Officer: Projects 
Development
Grants Officer: M&E , 
Reporting 
Climate Change & RE 
Practitioner
CBNRM & Environment 
Practitioner
M&E Specialist 
GCF EDA
Project Manager
Grants Support Officer 
M&E & ESS Officer 
Accountant 
Regionally-based 
Freelance  M&E 
Consultants  x 8

=== PAGE 23 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 59 
 
C
execution, the calls for applications will not be limited to these. A summary of the expected needs for EEs is presented 
in Table 5. 
 
Table 5: Summary of expected needs of EE for implementation of Component I activities 
Number of EE 
Responsibilities 
EE 1 
Development and distribution of CC awareness materials; development of training materials for 
CC workshops 
EE 2 
Organizing and presenting regional workshops on CC – 17 workshops 
EE 3 
Development of a community-based climatic monitoring, system; development of training 
materials; organizing and presenting training workshops 
EE 4 
Development of methodology for CBO diagnostic – include training needs assessment (TNA), CC 
baseline information and M&E baseline; guidelines for implementation. 
EE 5 
Multiple regionally based service providers to facilitate the diagnostic process with CBOs 
EE 6 
Development and/or revision of CBO governance training materials including SOPs. 
EE 7 
Provision of training and technical support to CBOs – governance and SOPs.  
46. Procurement of Component I Services: The existing Fund Management Committee (FMC) of the EIF will assume 
the responsibility of procuring services related to component 1. The role of the FMC under the project is to provide 
administrative functions for the PSC to approve all submissions related to the EDA. The FMC is comprised of the Chief 
Executive Officer, Director of Operations and Director of Finance and Administration. The EIF’s Operations Department 
serves as the Secretariat for the FMC. For the task of selecting the various EEs for Component I, up to two 
representatives of the NDA and the EIF’s Corporate Secretary will be co-opted to the FMC, in order to add more rigor 
and depth to the selection process.  
47.The FMC will develop clear terms of reference, review and evaluate the bids received, select the best bids upon 
PSC approval and negotiate terms of agreement with selected bidders. Successful bidders will then be contracted as 
service providers through existing contracting procedures with legal inputs from the EIF’s corporate lawyers. 
Concomitant agreements will be performance-based service contracts – as opposed to grant agreements - in terms of 
which selected entities will be paid only for agreed services actually provided. This is in line with the results-based 
financing philosophy of the GCF. 
Component II Implementation Arrangements 
48. The grant facility will support the implementation of concrete adaptation and/or mitigation measures in vulnerable 
communities within CBNRM areas through a suite of interventions that are supported through at least 28 small grants 
that will be limited to a maximum of USD 400,000 per grant. The grants should be phased and must be disbursed in 
tranches to ensure a sound implementation process and effective integration of project-level monitoring and evaluation 
processes. 
49. Executing Entities: Executing entities (EE) will be responsible for implementation of the grant projects. They can 
be either the respective CBNRM CBOs themselves (in case they have sufficient capacity for development, 
implementation, monitoring and reporting of grant projects) or supporting organizations which develop, implement, 
monitor and report on grant projects in partnership with the respective CBNRM CBO(s). Given the limited experience 
with and capacity for grant project development and implementation among CBNRM CBOs, the latter constellation is 
expected to be used in the majority of grant projects. 
50. Grant Modalities: CBNRM CBOs will be able to access grant funding in two ways. Those CBOs with demonstrated 
requisite capacity (to develop fundable projects, to implement such projects, to report as required and account for funds 
disbursed) can apply directly and implement projects on their own. While this will be the preferred modality from the 
perspective of the NDA and the EIF, the reality is that most CBOs lack this requisite capacity. Therefore, it is anticipated 
that most funding applications will be made in partnership with support organizations. The same is true for project 
implementation as well as monitoring and reporting. In order to ensure full ownership by the CBOs, such partnership

=== PAGE 24 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 59 
 
C
arrangements with support organizations will need to fulfil the following conditions: 
I. 
The project must target a CBNRM area on communal land in Namibia 
 
Projects are not limited to one certain CBNRM entity (e.g. one single Communal Conservancy or Community 
Forest, but can also target clusters of these at the landscape level). In order to ensure a fair geographical 
distribution of grant funding, a CBNRM CBO cannot be beneficiary of more than one grant under the same 
grant investment window. Multiple grant funding for a given CBNRM CBO through grants under different 
investment windows is possible. 
II. 
The grant application must involve and be endorsed by a registered CBO which forms part of Namibia´s 
CBNRM network. The proposed EDA Project is dedicated exclusively to assist CBNRM communities with direct 
finance for climate action. Ideally, the grant applicant must therefore be a registered conservancy or CF (or a 
group thereof in case of cluster-level project proposals). However, since many CBOs do not yet have the 
internal capacity for project development, implementation and monitoring, assistance from support 
organizations will be required in many cases. However, such support organizations can only propose projects 
in partnership with registered CBOs. Therefore, funding applications must always be accompanied by no-
objection/support letters signed by legally authorized CBO management. 
III. 
If possible, expected project benefits must accrue (directly or indirectly) to the entire population of the targeted 
CBNRM entity/ies. Grant applications must clearly describe how the entire population of the targeted CBOs will 
benefit from the proposed project and how potential economic co-benefits (monetary and in kind) will be 
distributed. If applicable, the proposal must clearly describe a benefit sharing model as agreed upon in advance 
by the respective CBOs. The signed benefit-sharing agreement must be provided. If certain benefits are 
concentrated on a sub-population basis, this needs to be justified in the proposal.  
IV. 
The proposal development processes by the CBOs and their service provider will be facilitated by a member of 
the EDA Project Implementation Unit. 
V. 
Overhead costs of the supporting organization will be limited to 25% of the total budget in order to ensure that 
the majority of funding (75%) is utilized for implementation of agreed community-level activities. 
VI. 
If applicable, the support organization will have the responsibility for ensuring that monitoring and reporting 
according to defined EDA grant facility monitoring and reporting regulations is adhered to (either by the CBO or 
by the support organization). 
VII. 
The support organization (if involved) must make provisions for acceptable skills transfer and capacity 
measures with realistic targets and corresponding objectively verifiable indicators in their respective grant 
applications. 
51. Grant Duration: In line with the GCF results-based financing approach, projects funded under the grant facilities 
shall yield an objectively measurable impact by project end. Eligible projects are thus considered standalone projects, 
as opposed to long-term programs/intervention series. The duration of grant agreements will therefore not exceed 
durations of 36 months. All projects must be proposed and contracted within a time frame that allows full 
implementation within the EDA project lifetime, i.e. by the year 2021. Time extensions (also called no cost extensions) 
of up to 12 months can be requested for, provided: 
 
the contract partner provides a convincing justification for this request 
 
the total duration of an individual grant does not exceed 42 months 
 
time extensions are not requested during the last 12 months of the EDA project implementation 
 
project implementation will be finished at least 6 months before the end of the EDA project lifetime (end of the 
year 2021) 
52. Financial Volume of Grants: The total financial volume of proposed projects must be between the minimum of 
USD 50,000 and the maximum of USD 400,000. However, in special cases, projects with a smaller volume (down to 
USD 10,000) could be considered at the discretion of the EDA Project Steering Committee (see below). 
53. EDA Grant Funding Criteria: In line with the GCF investment criteria, EDA grants will only be awarded to projects 
for which a significant impact in the field of climate change adaptation is expected. This means that the very nature and

=== PAGE 25 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 59 
 
C
overall objective of a project must be aligned with this criterion and further expected co-benefits will add value to a 
project only if this central condition is met. In terms of content, any grant application will then be judged according to the 
following EDA Grant Investment Criteria: 
 
Climate change adaptation impact 
 
o 
Adaptation impact, e.g. 
 
Direct and indirect beneficiaries whose vulnerability is reduced or resilience is increased 
 
Climate change resilient jobs/livelihoods created 
 
Dependency on livelihoods vulnerable to climate change reduced 
 
Increase in generation and use of climate information in local decision-making 
 
 
Transformational/paradigm shift character of the project 
 
o 
Degree to which the proposed project addresses prevailing unsustainable practices/situations towards 
a sustainable (low-carbon/resilient) development pathway 
o 
Degree to which the project is innovative/business unusual 
o 
Potential for cost-effective scaling up and replication elsewhere if the project proves successful 
o 
Potential for knowledge and learning 
o 
Sustainability of outcomes and results beyond completion of the intervention 
 
 
Sustainable CBNRM Community-Level Development Impact 
o 
Environmental Co-Benefits: 
 
Potential for positive environmental externalities (i.e. not directly climate-related), such as conservation, 
biodiversity, soil quality, air quality etc. 
o 
Social Co-Benefits: 
 
Potential for positive externalities in areas such as health and safety, access to education, cultural 
preservation etc. 
o 
Economic Co-Benefits:  
Potential for positive economic externalities in areas such as expanded and enhanced job markets, job 
creation and poverty alleviation, improved sector income-generating capacity, increase in agricultural 
productivity, increase in energy and water supply security, etc. 
o 
Gender-Sensitive Development:  
Degree to which the project addresses prevailing gender inequalities in general and with regards to 
climate change vulnerability and risks in particular 
54. Performance of proposed projects against the specified criteria must be credibly described in the project proposal 
and summarized in the accompanying EDA grant application form. Corresponding targets must be set realistically 
through the definition of target values for appropriate performance indicators. 
 
55. Grant Advertisement: The AE will publicly advertise “calls for proposals” twice a year starting with mid-year of the 
first year of the five-year EDA agreement with GCF. This will be done through print media, the EIF website, EIF social 
media appearances (e.g. Facebook) and the NACSO network and will run for up to 30 days at a time. The adverts will 
be placed six months apart from each other, preferably in January and June. For practical reasons, there will, however, 
be no public invitations for proposals during the four or fifth year. All proposals will need to be reviewed and contracted 
by the start of year 4 to allow sufficient time for implementation and M&E. 
Grant Appraisal Procedure 
56. EDA Project Unit: The EDA project manager and PO will assume the primary responsibility for receiving and 
processing all grants applications. These staff members will process all applications received as follows: 
 
Issue acknowledgments of receipt to applicants and record all applications onto the prescribed register

=== PAGE 26 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 59 
 
C
 
Perform administrative and technical pre-screening of applications (for completeness and eligibility) 
 
Ensure relevant EIF staff members administer the Environmental and Social Safeguards and Gender 
Assessments on screened applications 
 
Communicate with applicants as necessary on queries or shortcomings 
 
Prepare and present applications to EIF approval structures – i.e. FMC, Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) and 
the PSC for decision-making 
 
Implement decisions of the said approval structures (approvals, declines and refer backs) as prescribed in the 
Operations Manual. This will also involve communicating and corresponding with applicant as necessary 
 
Negotiating contracting terms and performance measures with successful applicants 
 
Prepare grant agreements for signature 
57. Fund Management Committee: The EIF Board established the FMC to serve as the first internal evaluation and 
appraisal structure for project proposals submitted to the EIF. The FMC’s detailed terms of reference are outlined in the 
Operations Manual. The FMC consists of the EIF CEO (FMC chairperson), the EIF Director of Operations and the EIF 
Director of Finance, Administration and HR. After reviewing EDA grant applications submitted, the FMC is entitled to 
make one of the following decisions: a) decline, b) refer back for improvement, or c) accept for further processing. 
Applications accepted for further processing will be presented to the TAP.

=== PAGE 27 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 59 
 
C
 
Figure 4: Schematic illustration of the grant appraisal and contracting procedures 
58. Technical Advisory Panel: The TAP is prescribed in Section 11 of the Environmental Investment Act (Act 13 of 
2001) as a subcommittee of the EIF Board. Its composition, areas of expertise to be represented, its mandate and 
functions are all spelled out in detail in the Act. The TAP essentially serves as the external and independent technical 
screening panel. It undertakes thorough technical and financial feasibility evaluation on grant and loan applications and 
provides expert advice to the EIF Board for final decision. TAP is also legally mandated to play a pivotal role in 
monitoring and evaluation. After assessing grant applications presented, TAP will make one of the following decisions: 
a) decline, b) refer back for improvement, or c) recommend for presentation to the Board. Applications recommended 
by TAP will be presented to the EDA Project Steering Committee for final decision.

=== PAGE 28 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 59 
 
C
59. Environmental and social safeguard assessment: All proposals will be subjected environmental and social 
safeguard assessment as there are cornerstones of technical and financial evaluation to achieve sustainable poverty 
reduction and enhanced resilience of CBNRM livelihoods. Therefore, procedures for addressing environmental and 
social issues are included in the project cycle management process. A driving principle of the project is to prevent and 
mitigate any harm to people and thus to incorporate environmental and social concerns as an intrinsic part of project 
cycle management. The project will only approve proposals that are categorized as Category C of the environmental 
and social safeguard policy of the EIF and in line with the GCF accreditation conditions. The objective of these 
safeguards and associated policies and procedures is to prevent and mitigate undue harm to people and their 
environment and strive to develop benefits in the development process. More specifically, safeguard policies and 
procedures are designed to avoid, mitigate, or minimize adverse environmental and social impacts of projects and 
strategies, and to implement projects and strategies that produce positive outcomes for people and the environment. 
The Project Cycle Management Approach describes a project cycle of design, implementation and evaluation. The EIF 
addresses environmental and social issues within this cycle as follows: 
 
Design  
 
Inquire on, and assess, environmental, and social guidelines 
 
Discuss with project designers and study any reports as requested 
 
Prepare comments and requests for additional information  
 
Advise on any specific requirements for compliance 
 
Review and assess for approval and/or any special measures required 
Implementation  
 
Continue to inquire and review environmental and social safeguard issues  
 
Prepare any comments and requests for new information 
 
Review and advise on implementation of any special measures required 
Evaluation  
 
Ensure inclusion and review environmental and social safeguard issues in final project reporting as well as any 
lessons learned  
Sharing of lessons  
 
Provide platform for grant recipients and partners to share lessons  
 
Table 6: Checklist of environmental and social principles 
Access and Equity 
 
Potential impacts and risks – further 
assessment and management required 
for compliance  
Remarks 
Compliance with the Law  
 
 
Access and Equity 
 
 
Marginalised and Vulnerable Groups 
 
 
Human Rights 
 
 
Gender Equity and Women’s Empowerment 
 
 
Core Labour Rights 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples 
 
 
Involuntary Resettlement 
 
 
Protection of Natural Habitats 
 
 
Conservation of Biological Diversity 
 
 
Climate Change 
 
 
Pollution Prevention and Resource Efficiency 
 
 
Public Health 
 
 
Physical and Cultural Heritage 
 
 
Lands and Soil Conservation 
 
 
60. EDA Project Steering Committee: A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established as a sub-committee of 
the project with the NDA as the Chair. The Board will formally delegate powers, functions and authority - outlined below 
- to the PSC for the duration of the EDA project. The PSC shall serve the purposes of approving proposals and 
monitoring and evaluation of the EDA Resilient Livelihood Grants Facility. The primary aim of the PSC is to make

=== PAGE 29 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 59 
 
C
selection and award decisions on grant applications received from eligible CBOs and supporting partners, in line with 
EDA and GCF funding criteria. The PSC may make one of the following decisions on applications under its review as 
part of its review procedures: a) decline, b) refer back for improvement, or c) approve. The PSC will be chaired by the 
NDA and will consist other members with background expertise covering environmental finance, climate change, 
CBNRM, social science, biodiversity conservation and sustainable development. Sectors represented in the PSC will be 
from the national/local governmental institutions, private sector, beneficiary representatives, Civil Society Organization, 
and Academic Institution. Equal gender representation on all structures of the project will be promoted. See more 
detailed information on the PSC in the attached feasibility study. 
61. Risk Management: A number of measures overseen by the EIF Risk and Investment Committee (RIC) are in place 
to manage the financial and project risks. The Risk and Investment Committee (RIC) is a specialized board committee 
also established under section 10 of the Environmental Investment Fund Act. The RIC shall review grant proposals 
cleared by the TAP financially as well as in terms of the Fund Risk Framework and will provide expert advice to the 
Board from these perspectives. More detailed information is available in Annexure IV of the EIF Operations Manual. 
62. Contract Management: Successful grant applicants will be issued with comprehensive grant agreements. 
Contracting procedures are detailed in Chapter 5 of the Operations Manual. Following approval by the Board, 
applicants will be issued with an offer. After receiving legally valid acceptance letters, the EDA Project Implementation 
Unit will prepare draft grant agreements with input from the M&E (ESS Officer). The M&E and ESS Officer’s 
involvement in this process is of cardinal importance, as he/she will assist with developing, negotiating and agreeing on 
realistic, practical and measurable performance indicators. After clearance by the Director of Operations, applicants will 
be provided with copies of the draft grant agreements for their review and comments. Once agreement is reached on 
the content and terms, the EIF will prepare the contracts with all supporting documents for signature with the authorized 
beneficiary representative. In order to ensure full awareness of the agreement from the side of the respective 
beneficiary CBO, the latter must be either the legally authorized member of the CBO (e.g. conservancy chairperson) or 
a proxy person mandated in writing by the CBO. 
 
63. The EIF Company Secretary office will ensure that the GCF fiduciary standards are upheld, and will undertake the 
contractual and administrative functions that are required in relation to overall procurement whilst tracking payments 
and expenditure for the duration of the project. The EIF will undertake due diligence on the applicant using the already 
existing systems by applying check points such as fiduciary assessments, capacity assessment, know you customer 
tools, credit check, financial management assessment, etc. With regards to paying grant recipients and service 
providers, the EIF will follow standard grant management operating procedures whereby: 
 
Pre-authorize payments to grant recipients and service providers based on a schedule of milestones and 
expected payments as entrenched in the agreement. 
 
The EE’s project manager and the EDA Project Implementation Unit personnel work in close collaboration to 
monitor the performance of the grant recipients. 
 
The EI will require written confirmation from the project manager that a grantee has met the standards for a 
milestone before payment is made. This is known as “sign off” and is required for all payments. 
 
Every effort will be made to pay contractors within 14 days of receipt of sign off on a payment. 
 
Bank charges charged by the grant recipients‟ banking institution will be for the grant recipients‟ account. 
64. Redress Mechanism: The EIF has a Grievance and Redress Mechanism in place to ensure that ensures that 
complaints are being promptly reviewed and addressed by the responsible units. An independent committee that is 
comprised of the Company Lawyer, External Auditor (PWC), Representative from a Commercial Bank (Credit Expert), 
Communication Officer (Appeals Administration), UNDP/SGP National Grants Manager, and Board member (Chair) is 
established to address public grievances and complaints. All members of the committee will not be involved in the 
decision making process of the activities implemented by the EDA Resilient Livelihood Project and as such their opinion 
on handling issues is balanced. Please refer to Annex V and Chapter 7 of the EIF Grants Manual.  
 
65. Backup Support: The EIF will provide backstopping support to the EDA Project Implementation Unit by 
establishing a Project Support Team that consists of the Chief Executive Officer, Director of Finance, Director of 
Operations, Monitoring and Evaluation Officer and the Communication Officer. The support team will play an advisory 
role with regards to ensure alignment of activities to the GCF result framework and as per the accreditation conditions

=== PAGE 30 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 59 
 
C
of the EIF.  This will ensure that there is overall good project management throughout the life cycle of the project. 
Specific risks and low delivery will be averted by ensuring stricter adherence to the existing requirements, such as, a) 
legal agreements, which are enforceable as government by Namibian contract law, which the EDA will use with all 
contractors; (b) counterparty risks, which are a core element of all legal agreements in Namibia; and (c) should the 
need really arise, the Namibian justice system, to which the EIF is obligated, is robust with adequate recourse 
mechanisms all the way to the Supreme Courts. For practical reasons, the Programme Steering Committee will select 
Executing Entities (EEs) for the implementation of these crosscutting issues on the open market through a rigorous 
competitive and transparent public process. Given the broad thematic spectrum of the cross-cutting issues and, 
particularly, the large geographic spread of the target groups, it is likely that corresponding tasks will be distributed 
among several EEs.

=== PAGE 31 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 59 
 
C 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation 
Project  Component  I:  Capacity  Building  and
Community Support 
Quarter 
  
Mid‐Term 
ACTIVITY 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
1.1. 
Awareness 
and 
training 
materials
development,  production  and  distribution  to  all
stakeholders 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
4.1.  Regional  information  sharing  meetings  on
grant opportunities ‐ focus on target CBOs  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
4.2. Undertake CBO diagnostic consultations and
report identifying needs 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
1.2.  Regional  CC  training  events  ‐  at  least  one 
event  in  each  region  with  potential  beneficiary 
CBOs 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
2.1.  Climate  monitoring  system  developed  and
tested, training materials developed 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
3.1. 
Governance/SOP 
training 
materials
development/revision and production 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
3.2. Provision of training and technical support to
CBOs by regional service providers 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
4.3. Training Workshops for CBOs accessing grants   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
4.4.  CBO  and  service  providers  supported  with
proposal development 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Project 
Component 
2: 
Resilient 
CBNRM
Livelihoods Grant Facility 
Quarter 
  
Mid‐Term 
ACTIVITY 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
5.1. 
Implementation 
of 
climate 
resilient
agriculture grants: Option 1 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
5.2. 
Implementation 
of 
climate 
proof
infrastructure grants: Option 2 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
5.3. 
Implementation 
of 
Ecosystem 
based
adaptation and mitigation grants: Option 3

=== PAGE 32 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 59 
 
C 
EDA Project Management and M&E 
Quarter 
  
Mid‐Term 
ACTIVITY 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
Inception 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Establish procurement staff and processes 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Establish grant assessment and approval 
processes 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Develop TORs for awareness and training 
materials, advertise and contract consultants  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Develop TORs and contracts for regional service 
providers for CBO diagnostic, training & technical 
support 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Develop TORs for regional CC training events 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Develop TORs for development of approach and 
system for climate monitoring 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Develop TORs for development/revision of 
governance/SOP materials 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Develop TORs for proposal development support 
and contract consultants  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Contract consultants and service providers 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Launch call for proposals 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Receive and evaluate proposals from CBOs, 
develop contracts 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Mid‐term evaluation 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
End of project evaluation 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Project monitoring

=== PAGE 33 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 59 
 
 
 D
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement 
 
66. CBNRM CBOs have been identified as critical institutions for local-level awareness and practical climate change 
adaptation activities and are thus crucial to Namibia’s overall climate change strategy. The existing Namibian CBNRM 
program forms a solid basis for widespread community-based climate change responses at the local level and bears 
enormous potential for creating and safeguarding resilient rural livelihoods. 
67. Communal conservancies and community forests operate exclusively in rural settings in Namibia. This renders 
them particularly vulnerable to the effects of a changing climate as they remain highly dependent on variable rainfall 
patterns and associated fluctuating natural resource yields. In addition, CBNRM entities in rural Namibia often have 
very limited access to the financial, technical and human resources required to enhance their resilience to climate 
change. Rural activities related to land use, land-use changes, and the use of fossil energy sources, have a significant 
impact on the livelihoods of rural communities. Often, because of variable incomes resulting from fluctuating year-to-
year natural resource yields, rural communities’ access to suitable sources of funding is less reliable and more 
constrained than that of their urban counterparts living on regular incomes. 
68. Yet, CBNRM communities live 
in and from unique ecosystems, 
which are important reservoirs of 
biodiversity and crucial habitats of 
numerous 
endemic 
species. 
CBNRM entities in the north-west 
and south of Namibia harbor a 
large number of endemic species, 
while CBNRM entities in the north-
east generally harbor a higher 
number of different plant and 
mammal 
species. 
As 
such, 
CBNRM 
communities 
are 
guardians 
of 
areas 
with 
an 
enormous value not only for the 
national, but also the global public. 
As climate change is threatening 
these 
ecosystems, 
building 
resilient livelihoods based on their 
conservation 
through 
CBNRM 
provides 
an 
adaptation 
venue 
which 
benefits 
both 
these 
ecosystems 
and 
the 
rural 
communities they accommodate. 
The 
proposed 
project 
through 
enhanced direct access puts the 
CBNRM 
communities 
in 
the 
driver’s seat in order for them to 
take full ownership of securing their 
future livelihoods through natural 
resource 
management 
and 
conservation. 
69. The need for investment in 
Figure 5: Endemism and diversity of plants and mammals in Namibia (Mendelsohn, 
et al., 2002).

=== PAGE 34 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 59 
 
 
 D
Communal Conservancies and Community Forests is underpinned by the impact on rural development, job creation 
and the empowerment of communities and increasingly by both the project’s need and potential to encounter and 
adapt to the impact of climate change. However, there is a striking imbalance between investments in communal and 
commercial areas in Namibia. 
70. CBRNM investments are primed in communal areas. Market failure manifests itself as a result of the lack of secure 
tenure rights, from private banks and investors’ perspective. Even the current leasehold regime is not adequate 
enough to reduce the risk perspective involved. As a result, local communities lack the requisite equity/development 
capital to engage into joint ventures to derive benefits from existing opportunities. Moreover, the risk premium of such 
investments is increased further by the long cash flow gestation character of investments in CBNRM. The major 
deterrent towards capital flows to the green industries are mainly very low investment returns as well as the long 
holding period required. This creates major uncertainty for commercial and at development banks, thereby creating a 
financing gap for such opportunities.  
71. Despite the positive CBNRM program outcomes and its huge potential as a platform for local-level climate change 
adaptation and mitigation, NACSO (2012), through the CBRNM Sustainability Task Force, indicated the sustainability 
crisis that is engulfing the program in the presence of declining donor support. The rapid (mainly donor-driven) growth 
in the number of communal conservancies since the first four conservancies were registered in 1998, combined with 
the addition of community forests to the CBNRM network, has outstripped the capacity of government and NGOs to 
respond to increasing demands for assistance. The CBNRM program faces funding gaps that needs to be addressed 
with estimates of around NAD 40 million per annum. There are a number of risks to conservancies and community 
forests if support cannot be sustainably funded in the future. The major risks are that CBNRM entities do not meet 
their full potential for revenue generation, are driven by internal disputes because of mismanagement of revenue, and 
as a result lose the support of their members. Declining support from members could lead to collapse of CBNRM 
CBOs and the collapse of their conservation efforts, their contributions to rural development and their potential for local 
level climate action. The study by Humavindu & Stage (2015) underpins the need to ensure the financial sustainability 
of CBNRM in the face of its high social and economic impacts and argues for a quicker resolve of the overall program 
resourcing requirements. 
72. The proposed project “Empower to Adapt: Creating Resilient Livelihoods through CBNRM in Namibia” constitutes 
a unique opportunity not only to empower rural communities of the Namibian CBNRM network to respond to climate 
change in terms of awareness, adaptive capacity and mitigation action through direct access to climate finance. At the 
same time, GCF support would crucially contribute to the consolidation of the achievements by CBNRM communities 
in terms of their contribution to conservation of wildlife, forest lands and biodiversity as well as rural development. 
73. In addition to maximizing the potential of the CBNRM network as a platform for local-level climate change 
adaptation action, the GCF could therefore make a significant contribution to the long-term sustainability of the entire 
Namibian CBNRM program, whilst efforts are being undertaken to create a sustainable path for the national program 
support mechanisms. 
D.2. Exit Strategy 
 
73. Local Ownership through Enhanced Direct Access: In line with the objectives of the GCF EDA modality, rural 
communities will be enabled through this project to directly access climate finance. The grant facilities will be fully 
aligned with the GCF in terms of their objectives and investment criteria while allowing for maximum responsiveness to 
national and, particularly, local priorities. In contrast to a pre-determined top-down funding approach, the proposed 
approach of self-determined local adaptation through a grant facility is expected to 
 
Respond directly to local needs, vulnerabilities and opportunities, 
 
Create more local awareness towards climate change and ownership of the climate change response, and 
thus 
 
Be sustainable beyond the period of direct financial support.

=== PAGE 35 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 59 
 
 
 D
74. Possibility for Self-Sustainability of Project Elements: Project elements such as the climate monitoring system 
to be developed and introduced by the project are expected to be self-sustained and bear benefits beyond the project 
lifetime. Furthermore, some of the grants awarded could entail self-sustaining elements such as ‘revolving CBNRM 
funds’. While this is not prescribed at the current stage, corresponding activities may emerge from grant proposals. If 
corresponding proposed self-sustained activities appear realistic and feasible and are aligned with the grant criteria, 
these will certainly draw particular interest by the EIF. 
75. Pilot nature of the Proposed Project: The proposed EDA project constitutes a first-of-its-kind, not only in 
Namibia, but also internationally. Enhanced direct access to climate finance is a new strategy unique to the 
GCF and as such still in development. The proposed project therefore constitutes a pilot which has a huge 
potential for learning. Even if not all elements of the proposed EDA project may be self-sustainable after 
project end, corresponding lessons will be learned for the design of a full-scale EDA program with stronger 
elements of self-sustainability. Thorough evaluation of the project impact and sustainability will be key in order 
to maximize the value of the proposed project beyond its lifetime. 
76. Possibility for Domestic Allocation for Continuation of Resilient CBNRM Livelihoods Grant Facility: The 
project establishes a model for enhanced direct access by rural communities to climate finance. In doing so, it provides 
an opportunity for future allocation of domestic resources, both from the public and private sector for continued grant 
funding for CBNRM. This will however depend on the impact and results of the project to influence policy and decision-
making on treasury. The EIF is a dedicated national funding and investment instrument that presents an opportunity to 
absorb much of the activities of the project and scale up funding for CBNRM in Namibia. 
77. From January 2017, the EIF intends to introduce environmental levies on electronic and electrical appliances, 
lubricant oils and batteries. These are expected to generate USD 9 million per annum. The EIF Board of Directors 
approved 20% of this amount (USD 1.8 million per annum) to be dedicated to CBNRM grant funding as part of the exit 
strategy for the proposed project. A corresponding confirmation letter is attached to this proposal.

=== PAGE 36 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 59 
 
 E
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas 
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential 
78. The proposed approach of self-determined local adaptation and mitigation action through two complementary 
grant facilities is expected to respond directly to local needs, vulnerabilities and opportunities. Empowering rural 
communities by enabling them to directly access climate finance will allow for the provision of tailored local-level 
solutions to local-level challenges related to climate change. 
79. By program end, the proposed grant facility will have impacted an estimated 15,500 direct beneficiaries in terms 
of increasing their resilience towards climate change. The estimated number of indirect beneficiaries is 61,000 by 
project end 8. This is critical in a country where large numbers of inhabitants are rural dwellers who will carry a 
significant cost in relation to climate change impacts if they do not have access to adaptive approaches, technologies 
and funding. 
80. The area that will be under improved and effective management that increases ecosystem and livelihoods 
resilience and potentially contributes to CO2 emission reductions is expected at 7,200,000 hectares. The number of 
rural households implementing climate-resilient agriculture techniques is estimated at 2,400. The number of rural 
settlements with reduced climate change vulnerability is estimated at 90. An estimated 450 households will benefit 
from improved water security, improved health and sanitation and at the same time increased resilience to slow 
onset/sudden climate induced disasters. An estimated 186 sustainable climate-resilient jobs will be generated 
through the project. Furthermore, an estimated 30 CBNRM CBOs will include climate monitoring in their existing 
event book system. 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below. 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only) 
Annual 
 
Lifetime 
 
 
Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by 
gender 
(reduced 
vulnerability 
or 
increased resilience);  
 
Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only) 
Total 
Direct: 15,500 (50% female, 50% male) 
Indirect: 61,000 (50% female, 50% 
male) 
Percentage 
(%) 
Direct: 1% of population of CBNRM 
areas (200,000 people) 
Indirect: 30% of population of CBNRM 
areas (200,000 people) 
                                                     
8 In line with the Adaptation Fund Core Indicator Methodology, an indirect beneficiary is defined as a person benefitting from the 
project at medium intensity in a way that is not targeted. In the present case, these are inhabitants of discrete CBNRM areas and 
members of corresponding CBNRM communities which benefit from the project investments. The figures presented were 
established based on beneficiary figures of comparable community-based projects concluded in the past in the Namibian CBNRM 
context.

=== PAGE 37 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 59 
 
 E
Other 
relevant 
indicators 
 
Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate-responsive planning and 
development: 
o 
30 additional CBNRM entities will demonstrate compliance with MET's SOPs as a result 
of the project. 
 
Increased generation and use of climate information in decision-making: 
o 
30 CBOs will have adopted the local climate monitoring system developed and 
introduced by the project. 
 
Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks: 
o 
2,400 rural households expected to climate resilient agriculture actions 
o 
90 settlements expected to have increased climate change resilience 
o 
450 households with improved water security, improved health and sanitation and at the 
same time increased resilience to slow onset/sudden climate induced disasters 
o 
186 sustainable climate-resilient jobs (50% female, 50% male) expected to be 
generated 
 
Strengthened awareness of climate threats and risk-reduction processes 
o 
510 people directly trained in awareness of climate threats and related appropriate 
responses 
o 
Awareness of climate change issues of 80 CBNRM CBOs will be enhanced 
81. Most of the figures presented were established based on beneficiary figures of comparable community-based 
projects concluded in the past in the Namibian CBNRM context. The Excel spreadsheet containing corresponding 
source data and calculations is attached to this funding proposal. 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale) 
82. At its start in the 1980s, the CBNRM concept of promoting nature conservation and rural economic development 
by giving local communities the management and utilization rights over the natural resources constituted an 
innovative and radical shift from the prevailing conservation paradigm. Nowadays, 20% of Namibia’s land surface are 
under conservation through CBNRM, which is now termed a ‘movement’. The CBNRM concept has been replicated 
worldwide. CBNRM is increasingly being adopted as a means of poverty reduction in the national development 
strategies of most southern African countries. 
83. GCF Enhanced Direct Access, meaning granting rural communities direct access to climate finance for locally 
determined climate change adaptation (and potentially mitigation) action, seems like a similarly radical concept and 
has the potential to trigger a similar paradigm shift from top-down to bottom up combating of climate change. 
84. The proposed project propagates this EDA spirit by putting rural CBNRM communities in the driver’s seat for 
climate change adaptation. If successful, the potential for significant up-scaling of this approach in Namibia is given. 
As the proposed project will directly target about one third of CBNRM areas and indirectly target about 30% of 
inhabitants of CBNRM areas, a threefold scaling up in Namibia would be possible, given that corresponding funds 
are available. Furthermore, the concept could be replicated in any other country where CBNRM structures and 
institutions are in place. 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning

=== PAGE 38 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 59 
 
 E
85. As one of the first of its kind, the project will certainly yield extremely valuable lessons on the potential of the 
approach of providing rural communities with direct access to finance for local climate change adaptation action. In 
the sphere of the fund recipients, the project has a huge potential for increasing their awareness and knowledge 
about climate change and increasing their capacity to develop and implement their own adaptive responses to it. In 
the sphere of the global initiative to combat climate change, the approach piloted through the project may yield 
lessons on the effectiveness of direct provision of climate finance to rural communities and the adaptation impact 
resulting from it. 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
86. If successful, the project could not only trigger the sustained support and expansion of the concept by the 
Namibian government (see section D.2.), but also spread this innovative direct funding approach for community-
based adaptation internationally. 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
87. CBNRM in Namibia has proven to influence policy development and led to measures being included in Rural 
Development Programs, National Development Plans and Vision 2030. A great strength of CBNRM is that projects 
actively engage with local farmers and resource users and thus the demonstration effects is visible in the use of the 
same techniques elsewhere on participating communities, even after the projects have ended. For example, CBNRM 
has been instrumental in the introduction of adaptation strategies such as no tillage and cover crops and since 
August 2015, Namibia has adopted a national policy on Comprehensive Conservation Agriculture. CBNRM is yet to 
focus strongly on climate change mainstreaming as such this project unlocks mechanisms for sharing information 
among local decision makers in different sectors, between general purpose local governments and local between 
local and higher level governance arrangements, and across decision making in the process influencing national 
policies that can create incentives for communities to undertake adaptation, or provide resources for community use 
in adaptation initiatives. National government programs will gather ideas from this project as a community-led and 
replicate them through larger initiatives. It is acknowledged that mainstreaming adaptation at all levels require a 
considerable amount of awareness raising and interaction with stakeholders. Component I of the project addresses 
this concern with a view to include public involvement to improve transparency and accountability in adaptation 
planning and share lessons. This is a key benefit to improve understanding of the perspectives of vulnerable 
populations, and increased buy-in from policy makers.  
88. The proposed project therefore has a huge potential to contribute to shaping future CBNRM support policies, 
particularly with regards to climate change interventions that are local determined and thus respond to locally specific 
needs and priorities. By preparing the ground for sustainable investment through the environmental levy system 
currently under preparation (see section D.2.), the proposed program offers great potential to catalyze significant 
long-term financial support by the Namibian government to a climate change responsive CBNRM carried by local 
CBNRM communities. 
 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential 
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive development impact

=== PAGE 39 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 59 
 
 E
89. The project will address ecosystem degradation, water security, food insecurity and hunger resulting from crop 
failures and erratic rainfall patterns (SDG 2). Furthermore, The project aims at poverty eradication amongst the most 
vulnerable society groups and communities in Namibia (SDG1). Another benefit will be supporting actions that have 
a direct bearing on improving rural communities adaptive capacities to adapt (that is, live and adjust their community 
settings and cropping practices) to the negative impacts and risks of climate change, as well as those related to 
agriculture, forestry and land use (AFOLU) that can build up landscape carbon stock on soil and standing biomass, 
through, for instance, reforestation activities or improved fire management (SDG 13). 
90. Environmental Co-Benefits: The proposed project has the significant environmental co-benefit of consolidating 
and safeguarding the tremendous wildlife, habitat and biodiversity conservation benefits of the CBNRM network. 
Conservancies and community forests contribute to the survival of important wildlife species, thereby providing 
tourism benefits for the rest of the country and enormous conservation benefits for the global community as a whole. 
Strengthening the CBNRM network as such therefore yields high environmental co-benefits. The proposed activities 
under the ecosystem-based adaption investment window will support the further development and integration of local 
level institutions to enhance their environmental benefits. The grant facility will achieve the following environmental 
benefits:  
 
Provide on-going incentive to manage indigenous biodiversity as a long-term land use; 
 
Finance interventions against and enhance alternatives to illegal hunting and trade in wildlife products in 
Namibia’s communal areas; 
 
Safeguard essential ecosystems services and functions that sustain the livelihoods of rural people  
 
It is estimated that about 7,200,000 hectares are expected to be under improved management in terms of 
land use and conservation by the end of the proposed project. 
91. Social Co-Benefits: Active participation in CBNRM activities is associated with large social co-benefits. Although 
many of the benefits associated with wildlife and forest management activities are collective, CBO members who 
actively participate in CBO activities are more likely to realize these benefits (Bandyopadhyay, Lendelvo, & Guzman, 
2010). From the Namibian government’s perspective, the conservancies are an important source of employment 
generation in areas where unemployment is high. The social benefits linked to employment generation are important, 
and as a result, the social net benefits are higher than the financial net benefits, to the conservancy itself. Net social 
benefits were generally found to be lower for more recently established conservancies than for those that have been 
established for many years. The project is expected to yield the following social co-benefits: 
 
Unlocking human capital through the creation of new resilient livelihoods. 
 
Natural resource managers will be drawn from local communities and will have appropriate skills, knowledge 
of mainstreaming climate actions into the CBNRM Program. 
 
At least 90 settlements will benefit from the project interventions in terms of climate change resilience. It is 
anticipated that 450 households will have improved water security, improved health and sanitation and at the 
same time increased resilience to slow onset/sudden climate induced disasters. Direct beneficiaries are 
estimated at a minimum of 2,200 people with around 3,700 indirect beneficiaries.  
 
The grant making interventions aims to diversify and improve people’s livelihoods and will also yield social 
co-benefits. For example, monitoring of the use of income generated from bio-trade activities in Kunene 
region indicates that the cash that will be earned is primarily used to access (travel) and pay for healthcare, 
buy school uniforms and pay school fees and to buy food. 
92. Economic Co-Benefits: The expected economic co-benefits from the project are hard to quantify. Since this 
project is essentially a grant mechanism, it is almost not possible to pre-determine the exact nature of the proposals 
that will be developed. However, several studies have confirmed that returns from wildlife, tourism and biotrade 
generated through CBNRM have proven to be substantial. The variety of opportunities and direct benefits being 
created add a new dimension to community empowerment that traditional forms of land use are not able to deliver on 
their own. This is particularly valuable in rural areas where human development needs are high and the chances of 
making a reliable living from traditional land uses are limited by low and erratic rainfall, infertile soils and limited

=== PAGE 40 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 59 
 
 E
access to markets and services. By diversifying land use and livelihood options and choosing a balanced mix of 
activities, communities can optimize the returns from their land and its resources. This reduces susceptibility to the 
impacts of climate change and other threats (NACSO, 2015). The estimated number of direct beneficiaries from the 
grants who will gain economic co-benefits from the project grant investments is 15,500 (7,750 men and 7,750 
women). Furthermore, it is expected that the project will generate 186 sustainable climate-resilient jobs (50% female, 
50% male). 
93. Gender-Sensitive Development: All EDA project activities will aim at ensuring equal participation by gender 
groups. The proposed project will attempt to enhance the trend of increasing participation by women in CBO-level 
decision-making. The project will foster gender equality and are expected to result in an approximate 50/50 split 
between genders in terms of employment and other income-generating opportunities. Improving infrastructure in 
conservancies and community forest areas will provide market opportunities for local craft weavers to sale their 
locally made craft, an enterprise that has a very strong female bias (of 765 people supplying crafts to a range of 
outlets in 2014, 155 were males and 610 females). The development impacts for women will thus be significant. 
The expected number of beneficiaries from the project is expected to consist of an equal share of women and men. 
Since traditionally women are the managers of plant resources, many of the interventions will be targeting women. 
Examples of these are bio-trade and conservation agriculture. Monitoring reports from other similarly targeted 
interventions indicate that while the number of male and female participants might be equal at the start of a new 
development, the female participants are more likely to remain engaged with the related activities throughout the 
program period than the men. Adaptation options include interventions aiming at bio-trade and natural indigenous 
products (INPs). Bio-trade activities in both conservancies and community forests are becoming increasingly 
important as a means of livelihood diversification. The development of bio-trade activities in CBNRM centers round 
women and their traditional knowledge (Nott, 2007). While men are involved in the harvesting and selling of INPs, the 
involvement of women is more consistent and strengthening corresponding livelihoods therefore a means to 
specifically target female beneficiaries. 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient 
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only) 
94. Namibia’s Climate Vulnerability: In Namibia, climate change will create vulnerability in the water balance, 
which is expected to be affected adversely by an increase in evaporation rates due to temperature increases. An 
increase in evaporation of about 5% is expected per degree of warming. With rainfall variability predicted to increase, 
Namibia is likely to face severe water shortages and total lack is projected for the central part as early as later this 
year (2016), unless rain falls soon and in large quantities to enable the major aquifers and underground sources to 
be recharged. The country’s poor rural population, particularly subsistence pastoralists and dryland farmers, will be 
affected most as they are already facing existing vulnerabilities in terms of social, economic and gender imbalances. 
Namibia’s northern and southern parts of the country experience the highest temperatures, with the average 
maximum for the hottest month being over 34°C. High evaporation rates in the country vary between 3 800 mm per 
annum in the south to 2 600 mm per annum in the north. This is attributed to high solar radiation, low humidity and 
high temperatures. It is also estimated that potential evaporation is at least five times greater than average rain 
received over most of the country. Climate change is likely to pose new challenges for various farming systems.  
 
95. The vulnerability and adaptation (V&A) assessment (MET, 2013) reveals that more than half of the Namibian 
population live in rural areas and depends heavily on subsistence farming. Poverty is an important driver in the 
sensitivity of people to climate change and their adaptive capacities. This high vulnerability is further attributed to the 
country’s natural resource-based economy, its arid nature, and variability in climatic patterns, as well as socio-
economic factors, such a high divergence of income levels, which limit the adaptive capacity of its population (GRN, 
2002; Dirkx et al, 2008; MET, 2011). Additionally, natural resources such as forest products and rain-fed agriculture 
on which people depend are vulnerable and sensitive to anthropogenic climate change (Reid et al, 2007; GRN,

=== PAGE 41 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 59 
 
 E
2002). According to the vulnerability assessment report to the impacts of climate (2011), the first vulnerability aspect 
concerns the likelihood that an individual or group will be exposed to and will be adversely affected by new climatic 
circumstances. The second aspect of vulnerability relates to the characteristics of individuals or groups in terms of 
their capacity to anticipate, cope with, resist and recover from the impacts of environmental change. This capacity to 
adapt to climate variability and climate change understandably varies among specific regions and socio-economic 
groups in Namibia, in the sense that those with the least capacity to adapt are generally the most vulnerable to the 
impacts of climate variability and change. In turn, this depends to a great extent on resources available to a given 
group, individual or region. The report points out that livelihood vulnerability to climate change is acute in the 
Zambezi, Kavango East and West, Omusati, Ohangwena, Oshana, Kunene, Otjozondjupa and Omaheke regions. 
The listed regions make up more than 85% of the CBNRM area. In these regions, the regional and household 
livelihood system is based on subsistence production on communal land, that is, on small crop plots that surround 
people’s homesteads, natural products, whilst livestock largely grazed on communal pastures and woodlands 
(Mendelsohn, 2006). 
 
96. Risk exposure of CBNRM communities as a result of climate change:  
 
Drought and low rainfall: More than 80% of peoples living within the CBNRM boundaries depend on natural 
resource use for their livelihoods as subsistence farmers, small-scale emerging farmers and horticultural 
farmers. These communities have been identified as having the highest levels of exposure because drought 
increases the likelihood that crops will fail or animals will die. Drought has affected food production directly 
over the last 15 years in Namibia (Ziervogel and Angula, 2016). This has led farmers to finish their stock of 
millete in granaries before the next rainy season.  
 
Loss of forest cover and species: Deforestation and desertification; frequent forest fires; changes in forest 
types, species composition and distribution; and the disappearance of medicinal plants. Vulnerable species 
are those that have limited geographical ranges, drought/heat intolerance, low germination rates, low survival 
rate of seedlings, and limited seed dispersal/migration capabilities. Unsustainable supply of forest, products 
and services. Decrease in employment and foreign exchange earnings through forest-based industries and 
trade  
 
Inadequate access to climate information: This is a serious concern for CBNRM who depend on land and 
natural resources and need to know what climate to expect. This is especially true as residents incur the 
direct costs of damage from increased extreme weather events.  
 
High temperatures: Extreme high temperatures over the past 15 years have been associated with the 
outbreak of pests and diseases that impact both crops and animals. Over the years, there has been outbreak 
of foot and mouth disease, anthrax, and rabies. These diseases have profound impact on both livestock 
production and wildlife management resulting in loss of revenues to support livelihoods. Sensitivity for those 
on social grants, such as the elderly and those living with HIV/AIDS was seen to be high, because they will 
not be able to work long hours in their fields if it is too hot. Small-scale traders are less sensitive because 
they do not directly depend on natural resources. However, their products are likely to expire faster due to 
heat stress.  
 
Biodiversity loss and species movement: There is indication that recent and ongoing climate change is 
leading to rapid changes in the distributions of species in Namibia’s protected area network. Species 
movements into areas where they were not previously found are observed, the disappearance of species 
from a region where they once were, or a shift in the abundance and distribution of individuals within a 
species range (Midgeley et al. 2010). Changes in fire and precipitation regimes continue to drive or 
accelerate shifts from one ecosystem state to another. Declines in charismatic wildlife populations lead 
nature-watchers, photographers, and hunters to seek other habitats that offer more substantial populations

=== PAGE 42 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 59 
 
 E
and that have an impact on local livelihoods. The impacts of these changes includes, loss of income 
opportunities and jobs, loss of primary production to provide ecosystem goods and services, and increased 
levels of poverty as CBNRM residents depends on natural resource for their livelihoods. 
97. Gender related vulnerabilities: Women in Namibia tend to have unequal access to resources and control over 
resources particularly in rural areas (Iipinge et al., 2000). This makes women more vulnerable to poverty. Climate 
change exacerbates these existing social problems. Gender equality, including fairness, just and equitable access to 
all resources, is an important priority in Namibia‘s National Development Strategy and is one of the Sustainable 
Development principles. The strategy acknowledges that gender issues have not been adequately addressed in most 
of the major government strategies. The specific vulnerability of women in Namibia is notable in a number of areas. 
For example, almost half of the severely food insecure households are headed by women, as well as a third of the 
moderately food insecure. These female-headed households, which represent about a fifth of total households, also 
have a significantly higher overall incidence of extreme poverty. The EDA Project will promote women participation 
and equal voice to air their concerns and challenges, identify barriers that keep them out of the main economic, 
political and social spheres, and find sustainable solutions is best achieved when women are directly engaged. Thus 
most of the women’s vulnerabilities will be addressed by creating platforms that ensure women’s participation, 
involvement and inclusiveness in all stages of the project lifespan. Gender concerns will be central to the design of 
business and economic instruments. The participation of both men and women is a Constitutional mandate and fully 
enshrined in the National Gender Policy and Plan of Action, as well as part of the ruling party philosophy, which was 
fully applied with a zebra action (that is, 50/50) in 2015.  
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
98. To manage the long-standing aggregate colonial impacts while curbing new threats, such as climate-related 
risks, Namibia proactively undertook a long-term development agenda, encapsulated in the country’s Vision 2030 
that is premised on substance of healthy ecosystems for current and future generations9. This is augmented by five-
year medium-term plans (the NDPs), presently at NDP 4 and currently being rolled in the NDP 5. Current patterns of 
poverty, to a larger extent, mirrors (or reflects) the then unequal distribution of natural resources; which led to uneven 
allocation of resources, underdevelopment, and multiple deprivations. The Namibian government is developing tailor-
made policies and strategies to curb the threats at the root source10. This is premised on the realisation that the pace 
and rate of reducing the poverty debt is low despite the country’s middle income country (MIC) status. This then 
needs newer refined and targeted interventions such as the EDA Project. Notwithstanding, some fairly large-scale 
public investments CBNRM, there has been a decline in the proportion of public funding going in recent years, mostly 
in the agriculture, environment, tourism and housing services and sectors 11 . Hence, a de facto ‘poverty - 
environmental degradation’ situation is kept within the rural population groups.  
 
99. The Government of Namibia’s 2015/16 budget has been described as ‘pro-growth and pro-poor’ with a special 
focus on poverty eradication and improved access to social welfare, as the second highest priority after economic 
growth. With 18% of the budget allocated to Education (N$11.32 billion), and N$6.4 billion to Health, there is a strong 
indication of commitment to improving the social sector. This is in addition to the recent increase of Old Age 
Pensions by 60% from N$600 to N$1 000, and with a commitment in the Medium Term Economic Framework 
(MTEF) to increase the pension annually to N$1 200 by the end of the current MTEF in 2017.  While overall inflation 
has been declining since 2013 from 5.6% to 3.6% in 2015, the food inflation has averaged 7.7% indicating food as 
the single most important driver of inflation in Namibia.  The causes of food insecurity in the country, which are 
                                                     
9 Republic of Namibia- National Planning Commission (2004), Namibia Vision 2030. 
10 The skewed economic growth in Namibia is extreme, such that 10% of the Namibian society (mainly whites) 
receives more than 65% of income, leaving 35% for the remaining 90% of the population (predominantly blacks and 
mixed races) (National Development Plans, 2002). Thus, even after 25 years of independence, some of the Namibian 
language groups enjoy quality of life similar to those of developed economies, like Luxembourg and Greece at one 
end of the scale, and groups that suffer poverty similar to that of least developed economies, like Ethiopia and 
Mozambique (United Nations, 1999). 
11 Republic of Namibia –Ministry of Regional and Local Government, Housing and Rural Development (2012), 
National Draft Rural Development Policy.

=== PAGE 43 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 59 
 
 E
exacerbated by high poverty levels, include extreme weather events (drought and flooding), massive environmental 
degradation, livestock diseases, and limited access to agricultural inputs, rising food prices, and the impact of HIV 
and AIDS, among others. 
 
100. Currently, the Namibian Government spends about N$580 million per year to cater for emergency response and 
relief efforts.  This includes all types of emergency such as drought, flood, fire, diseases (for example, foot-and-
mouth (FMD)), and livestock and crop-related failures.  Due to the nature and extent of the climate change risks in 
this effort, the government is not able to invest substantial resources towards CBNRM without the support of the 
GCF, as it covers for all other types. CBNRM has the potential to transform the crop/horticultural sub-sector, maintain 
health ecosystems, and improve national food security. While the government is doing its utmost best to reduce 
vulnerabilitiesby availing domestic resources to education, health and food-for-work programmes in times of 
emergencies, there are still huge financial gaps. Total estimated cost (excluding co-financing) is over 5 years. 
Namibia is applying for a grant, as opposed to loans from the GCF. While Namibia is considered a middle-income 
country, the majority of national wealth is in the hands of a mere 5% of its population, making it one of the most 
unequal economies and societies in the world. This puts a burden on the government to devote its resources to 
Public Investment Programmes for social development and the economic upliftment of the majority. 
 
101. CBNRM Financial Needs: Communal conservancies and community forests operate exclusively in rural 
settings in Namibia. This renders them vulnerable to the effects of a changing climate as they remain highly 
dependent on variable rainfall patterns and associated fluctuating natural resource yields. In addition, CBNRM 
entities in rural Namibia often have very limited access to the financial, technical and human resources required to 
enhance their resilience to climate change. Rural activities related to land use, land-use changes, and the use of 
fossil energy sources, have a significant impact on the livelihoods of rural communities. Often, because of variable 
incomes resulting from fluctuating year-to-year natural resource yields, rural communities’ access to suitable sources 
of funding is less reliable and more constrained than that of their urban counterparts living on regular incomes. 
 
102. The need for investment in Communal Conservancies and Community Forests is underpinned by the impact on 
rural development, job creation and the empowerment of communities and increasingly by both the project’s need 
and potential to encounter and adapt to the impact of climate change. However, there is a striking imbalance 
between investments in communal and commercial areas in Namibia. CBRNM investments are primed in communal 
areas. Market failure manifests itself as a result of the lack of secure tenure rights, from private banks and investors’ 
perspective. Even the current leasehold regime is not adequate enough to reduce the risk perspective involved. As a 
result, local communities lack the requisite equity/development capital to engage into joint ventures to derive benefits 
from existing opportunities. Moreover, the risk premium of such investments is increased further by the long cash 
flow gestation character of investments in CBNRM. The major deterrent towards capital flows to the green industries 
are mainly very low investment returns as well as the long holding period required. This creates major uncertainty for 
commercial and at development banks, thereby creating a financing gap for such opportunities.  
103. Despite the positive CBNRM program outcomes and its huge potential as a platform for local-level climate 
change adaptation and mitigation, NACSO (2012), through the CBRNM Sustainability Task Force, indicated the 
sustainability crisis that is engulfing the program in the presence of declining donor support. The rapid (mainly donor-
driven) growth in the number of communal conservancies since the first four conservancies were registered in 1998, 
combined with the addition of community forests to the CBNRM network, has outstripped the capacity of government 
and NGOs to respond to increasing demands for assistance. The CBNRM program faces funding gaps that need to 
be addressed with estimates of around NAD 40 million per annum. There are a number of risks to conservancies and 
community forests if support cannot be sustainably funded in the future. The major risks are that CBNRM entities do 
not meet their full potential for revenue generation, are driven by internal disputes because of mismanagement of 
revenue, and as a result lose the support of their members. Declining support from members could lead to collapse 
of CBNRM CBOs and the collapse of their conservation efforts, their contributions to rural development and their 
potential for local level climate action. The study by Humavindu & Stage (2015) underpins the need to ensure the 
financial sustainability of CBNRM in the face of its high social and economic impacts and argues for a quicker resolve 
of the overall program resourcing requirements.

=== PAGE 44 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 59 
 
 E
104. CBNRM Institutional Needs: One of the three pillars of CBNRM is institutional development for good 
governance, founded on the understanding that good governance creates the basis for effective resource 
management, benefit capture and distribution (NACSO, 2013). Good governance is essential for successful 
implementation of community-based projects. The conservancy management structures were designed to manage 
the wildlife and tourism resources, therefore CBOs need support for institutional capacity development to be able to 
respond to climate change through adaptation and mitigation. Community-led initiatives to address climate issues are 
going to require capacity-building of a new set of skills that these CBOs have not yet had the opportunity to develop. 
E.5.  Country Ownership 
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs 
105. By signing and ratifying the UNFCCC, Namibia has, respectively, committed to the adoption and implementation 
of policies and measures to adapt to climate change and to manage existing climate risks, including improving 
resilience preparedness and adaptation capacities. The project design is fully informed by the vulnerability 
assessments undertaken as part of Namibia’s preparations of the INC, SNC, BUR1, and TNC. The objectives and 
activities are in line with the strategic aims of the 2011 National Policy on Climate Change (NPCC) and its 
accompanying strategy and action plan (NCCSAP) as approved by Cabinet in 2014. The seven principles provide 
strategic guidance for a response to climate change that is nationally appropriate, effective, efficient, fair, non-
discriminatory, inclusive and timely.  The project reflects the voluntary intentions of Namibia enshrined in the INDC 
(2015), which is setting the supreme adaptation and mitigation options, targets and national focus - in the medium- to 
long-term. The GRN lead coordinating entity for climate change, that is, MET, which is also the NDA for both GCF 
and AF has been part and parcel throughout the entire project formulation stage, thus ensured that there is direct 
and full alignment between this project and INDC, especially AFOLU priority actions. 
106. Namibia’s CBNRM program is a long-standing national program, which was established in 1990 by the 
Government of the newly independent Republic of Namibia under the lead of the Ministry of Environment and 
Tourism. The program is a joint venture between the Government of the Republic of Namibia and NGOs, CBOs, 
communities and other development partners. Since independence in 1990, the entire CBNRM program has 
therefore been supported by a highly enabling policy and institutional framework on which the proposed program will 
be built on and benefit from. 
107. The proposed project enjoys full country ownership in the sense of alignment with national policies and 
priorities. The project directly responds to priorities as outlined in 
 
The Constitution of Namibia, which highlights the need to develop and implement policies to maintain the 
ecosystems, ecological processes and biological diversity for the benefit of the present and future 
generations. 
 
Namibia’s Vision 2030 (GRN, 2004 p. 76 ff.), in which expansion of the CBNRM program beyond wildlife 
and tourism is favored. 
 
Namibia’s National Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (Ministry of Environment and Tourism, 
2015), in which the highest priority theme for adaptation activities is “food security and sustainable biological 
resource base”. The document states that “Namibia’s biodiversity is a fundamental to livelihood generation 
and a national asset of significant value. In addition, it underpins an important nature-based tourism industry. 
Climate change impacts (sea level rise, changes in temperature and rainfall) may affect natural resources: 
temporal and spatial shifts in habitat/habitat loss, loss of biodiversity and ecosystems, species diversity, and 
invasive species among others.”

=== PAGE 45 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 59 
 
 E
 
Namibia’s National Policy on Climate Change (Ministry of Environment and Tourism, 2011a), stressing 
the strong role to be played by local CBOs and NGOs: 
o 
“The policy recognizes the importance of meaningful participation in the planning, development and 
implementation of climate change activities at local, regional and national level. The policy 
recognizes 
the 
need 
to 
ensure 
the 
participation 
of 
women, 
children 
and 
other 
vulnerable/marginalized groups and individuals, as well as, the use of appropriate local knowledge 
for adaptation.” 
o 
“The policy recognizes the important role of the participation of Non-Government Organizations 
(NGOs), Community Based Organizations (CBOs) and Faith Based Organizations and the private 
sector in climate change adaptation and mitigation. In particular NGOs , CBOs and Faith Based 
Organizations should contribute to climate change awareness and advocacy.” 
 
INDCs of Namibia (GRN, 2015), for which the great majority of Namibia’s mitigation contributions is 
projected to result from changes in the agriculture, forestry and land use (AFOLU) sector, which CBNRM is 
closely linked to. 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
108. All the proposed activities are well within the technical scope of Namibian stakeholders. There is strong 
government and NGO technical support that covers natural resource management, business enterprise 
development, and institutional backstopping (including financial management and governance). 
109. Namibia has a well-defined approach to corresponding national development through the AE for the present 
proposal, the Environmental Investment Fund (EIF). The EIF was established by The Environmental Investment Act 
13 of 2001. The Fund is a statutory entity outside the public service with clear and separate roles and functions 
distinct from any government body or entity. The Fund is a state-owned enterprise, whose Board of Directors reports 
directly to the Minister of Environment and Tourism. The EIF invests in and supports projects and activities that 
promote the national development strategy of the Government of the Republic of Namibia but for which it is currently 
unable to provide the required financial investments. There is thus a strong link between the EIF and maximizing 
country ownership. 
110. The Environmental Investment Fund’s (EIF) financial management structures and systems have been 
scrutinized by the GCF and its compliance with GCF Standards is what led to the accreditation of the EIF. Thus as 
an accredited entity, the EIF will be responsible for the management of the finances (procurements, disbursements 
and auditing). Moreover, the Fund was independently assessed and rated by the Association of African Development 
Finance Institutions (AADFI), in collaboration with the African Development Bank (ADB) that applied the Prudential 
Standards, Guidelines and Rating System (PSGRS) assessment tool. This is a rating system that assesses three 
areas of the Fund, namely: governance guidelines, financial prudential standards, and operational guidelines. In 
2014, the Fund was awarded a B rating and in 2015, the Fund was rated B+, an improvement in the financial 
management system. Implementation of the project will be done according to the procedures of the EIF with full 
oversight of its Board. Furthermore, the EIF has an on-going grant making programme with policies, procedures, and 
systems in place and such experience will be beneficial for the EDA Promoting Resilient Livelihood for CBNRM 
Project. 
111. It has been previously demonstrated through Integrated Community-Based Ecosystem Management Project, 
Integrated Sustainable Land Management Programme and the Millennium Challenge Account that some Communal 
Conservancies and Community Forest entities managed to access grant funding and successfully implemented their 
projects. However, to achieve such success more resources should be directed towards capacity building for local 
level institutions before accessing grant funding and component 1 of the project is designed to serve such purpose. 
Furthermore, there is the Namibian Association of Community Based Natural Resource Management (CBNRM) 
Support Organisations (NACSO). An association comprising eight Non-Government Organisations (NGOs) and the 
University of Namibia. The purpose of NACSO is to provide quality services to rural communities seeking to manage

=== PAGE 46 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 59 
 
 E
and utilize their natural resources in a sustainable manner and some of the vehicle for delivering grant financing will 
be channeled through these members. See below the list of the NACSO members.  
Table 7: List of NACSO member organizations. 
NACSO Member 
Role  
Integrated Rural Development and 
Nature Conservation 
Field based NGO providing technical support to registered and 
emerging conservancies. Activities include: training in natural 
resources management; community capacity building; institutional 
development; facilitation of income generating projects; interim 
financial and logistic assistance. 
Legal Assistance Centre 
Legal advice to conservancies on constitutions, contracts, legal 
conflicts and conflict resolution and advocacy on CBNRM issues. 
University 
of 
Namibia 
(Multi-
disciplinary Research Centre and 
Consultancy) 
Research into the social effectiveness of CBNRM and conservancies 
in Namibia. 
Namibia Development Trust 
Advocate and foster development that is community based, gender 
inclusive, sensitive to the environment and sustainable. 
Namibia Nature Foundation 
Provides assistance in grant administration, fundraising, financial 
management and Monitoring and Evaluation 
Nyae Nyae Development Foundation 
of Namibia 
Field based NGO providing technical support to San communities in 
the Otjozondjupa region 
Omba Arts Trust 
Independent non-profit initiative supporting the development, 
marketing and promotion of Namibian craft with emphasis on fair 
trade. 
Save the Rhino Trust 
Save The Rhino Trust focus areas include rhino conservation and 
management, training and capacity building in rhino management 
and responsible rhino tourism ventures. 
World Wide Fund for Nature 
Provides technical support to implementers in the field of natural 
resource management, enterprise and business development and 
institutional development. 
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
112. The Ministry of Environment and Tourism, which is the NDA for the GCF, fully supports the proposed project 
and confirms that the national process for ascertaining no-objection to the project has been duly followed. A 
corresponding NDA no-objection letter is attached to this funding proposal. 
113. The EDA Project was fully developed with direct engagement and inclusive of government ministries 
responsible for climate change, communal conservancies, community forest and NACSO CBNRM partners. The 
MET, in its capacities as NDA for AF and GCF has proved to be crucial, especially in ensuring that there were no 
duplications and overlaps in planned activities to be supported except from strategic points. The accreditation of the 
EIF was publicly announced by the Minister of Environment and Tourism at a press conference on 13 July 2015. The 
initial brainstorming session for this project was held on the 23-24 July 2015, at Gross Barmen, Okahandja, and was 
attended by representatives from the Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry (MAWF), National Planning 
Commission (NPC), Namibia National Farmers Union (NNFU), Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME), Ministry of 
Environment and Tourism (MET), and environmental consultants from civil society. In line with the compilation of the 
feasibility study for this project, about 200 people were consulted with the majority from the CBNRM rural 
communities during field visit and ground proofing. 
114. Namibia having a national policy and strategy on climate change as well as the NAMAS and INDC proved to be 
advantageous and valuable as these documents helped to guide –providing overall national drive towards adaptation 
and mitigation options that are suitable for Namibia. Most of the relevant stakeholders and those with a stake

=== PAGE 47 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 59 
 
 E
contributed greatly through these interactive processes, setting a good baseline and foundation to formulate a well-
targeted and crafted project. The EDA Project has resulted from a broad inclusive process involving all stakeholders, 
that is, national government, regional and local government, traditional authorities, local farmers, representatives of 
on-going project initiatives for example UN supported, GEF supported, EU, GIZ and others implemented via national 
and local NGOs, such as NNF, NCAP, etcetera.  Furthermore, to ensure that there is public, private and civil society 
collaboration, the programmatic concept was presented to Namibia’s Sustainable Development Advisory Council 
(SDAC), which is chaired by the Permanent Secretary of the MET. SDAC primary function is to ensure collaboration 
and coordination between and amongst entities pursuing sustainable development in Namibia. 
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
115. Experience has shown that, although perceived to be administratively costly, small grants are often more 
effective at delivering tangible benefits that respond to direct needs of beneficiary communities, and should thus be 
sustained. Direct community involvement through community-based adaptation activities increases the chance of 
sustainability as community members have a sense of ownership of the projects and thus potentially an incentive for 
sustainability is created. 
116. The Adaptation Fund conducted a comparative analysis of a number of small grants Programmes in order to 
investigate the administrative costs of operating Programmes with multiple levels of execution. For the Programmes 
investigated, it was found that on average 25-30% of the total Programme budget was spent on administrative costs. 
The Global Environment Facility undertook a comparative study in 2009 that focused on evaluating the efficiency of 
the Small Grants Programme in different countries. They looked at the amount of grant resources delivered, the 
number of grants managed, the average size of these grants and their monitoring and evaluation requirements as the 
determinants of cost. 
117. For the proposed project, 80% of the project budget will be spent on grant projects, 9% on capacity building, 8% 
on Project Management and Administration and 3% on dedicated M&E measures 12 . Overhead costs of the 
supporting organization for implementation of grant projects will be limited to 25% of the total grant volume in order to 
ensure that the majority of funding (75%) is utilized for implementation of agreed community-level activities. 
 
118. An independent impact evaluation undertaken for the Namibia/Swedish Environmental Small Grants 
Programme in 2005 concluded that 88% of the grants funded were successful and recommended a policy option for 
the Government of Namibia to appropriate funding for environmental grant making, which latter resulted in the 
                                                     
12 Note that the 8% project management budget also contains significant budget lines for M&E, such as a M&E officer position. 
USD 893,500 , 
9%
USD 7,980,000 , 
80%
USD 312,753 , 
3%
USD 813,747 , 
8%
Program Budget Distribution
Component I: Capacity
Building
Component II: Grant
Facility
Project M&E
EDA Project
Management

=== PAGE 48 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 59 
 
 E
introduction of a grant Programme by the EIF of Namibia in 2012. This experience has shown that small grants can 
be enormously successful in delivering tangible and relevant benefits to local stakeholders and beneficiaries. This 
enhanced direct access approach is in direct response to Namibia stakeholders who called for a mechanism that will 
empower local communities to conceive and drive local adaptation responses directly. A single, large intervention 
would not permit this level of local ownership or design.  
119. The EDA Resilient Livelihoods Project will be implemented through existing structures, and will thus save costs 
in project mobilization and inception. Another factor contributing to efficiency and cost-effectiveness is that potential 
grant recipients and small grant projects will be screened and prioritized against specific pre-determined selection 
criteria. These criteria will be used from the project concept through to project proposal development stage. Further, 
the EDA Resilient Livelihood Project will invest in climate change adaptation interventions that fall into prioritized 
Investment Windows. These filters will ensure that investments are targeted appropriately.  
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only) 
N/A 
E.6.3. Financial viability  
120. It is estimated that CBNRM contribution to the national economy was N$530 million. Since 1990, the CBNRM 
program has had an economic internal rate of 23% and has earned an economic net present value of some N$803 
million. This is a highly positive economic return for a program investment. In addition to the annual contribution of 
CBNRM to the national economy, the capital value of some natural resources has increased. The increased capital 
value of wildlife in northwestern Namibia between 1990 and 2014 is estimated at N$526 million. 
121. The project provides an opportunity for future allocation of domestic resources, both from the public and private 
sector for continued grant funding for CBNRM. This will however depend on the impact and results of the project to 
influence policy and decision-making on treasury. The EIF is a dedicated national funding and investment instrument 
that presents an opportunity to absorb much of the activities of the project and scale up funding for CBNRM in 
Namibia. From January 2017, the EIF intends to introduce environmental levies on electronic and electrical 
appliances, lubricant oils and batteries. These are expected to generate USD 9 million per annum. The EIF Board of 
Directors approved 20% of this amount (USD 1.8 million per annum) to be dedicated to CBNRM grant funding as part 
of the exit strategy for the proposed project. A corresponding confirmation letter is attached to this proposal. 
E.6.4. Application of best practices 
122. With the growing expectations for performance and the complexity of grant making initiatives, the EDA Resilient 
Livelihood Project realized the importance a well designed grant programme that is clearly articulated in terms of 
funding strategy and goals setting from the onset.  Therefore several lessons and best practices available on grant 
making and design that have been integrated by the EDA Resilient Livelihood Project. The best practices adopted by 
the EDA Project include capacity building; collaboration and partnership approach; constituency building and citizen 
engagement; and project management and monitoring. These lessons are extracted from a variety of experience and 
best practices approach from institutions such as the Global Fund, Global Environment Facility, Millennium 
Challenge Account, etc.   
123. Capacity building: Capacity building for prospective grant recipients is critical to achieve the objectives of any 
grant-making programme. The EDA Resilient Livelihood Project will introduce interventions that strengthen local level 
institutions and support agencies to access grant financing and attain the desired results as set by the project. This 
will occur in many aspects of an organization, including programs, management, fund raising, financial management, 
and communications. Capacity building activities will include staff training, peer exchanges, one-on-one consulting,

=== PAGE 49 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 59 
 
 E
new equipment and staff, or even facility purchase or renovation. It is also closely related to the issue of core 
operating funding, which for many organizations is the most critical need in establishing effective capacity.  
124. Collaboration and Partnership: Collaboration among environmental organizations and with other sectors can 
produce significant and lasting benefits. To ensure that this partnership achieves the desired outcomes, the EDA 
Project make the entire process interactive, so that partners in a collaboration are involved in a meaningful way in 
framing its structure and priorities, have enough flexibility to learn and adjust, and help define an evaluation 
framework. This is contained in Component 1 of the project. Furthermore, the project will look for issues with 
overlapping interests and readiness for new approaches, and insist that potential partners in collaboration are having 
initial discussions before applying for funding support.  
125. Constituency Building and Citizen Engagement: Citizen engagement, both in environmental organizations and 
in broader causes, is a crucial element in long-term environmental change and effecting adaptation at local level, but 
the success of grant making in involving citizens is very uneven. Several factors have been identified which help
to make citizen engagement more effective and that could be encouraged by funders: involvement of a range of 
stakeholders; partnerships; enlisting prominent local champions; providing a diversity of opportunities for 
involvement; face- to-face interactions; reasoned arguments; and maintaining a sustained presence and continuity of 
organizational involvement.  
124. Project management and monitoring: Good governance and management structure to assess, approve, 
contract, and monitor implementation of projects are essential for a successful grant-making program. The EDA 
Resilient Livelihood Project has integrated those aspects in the project by designing investment areas of the project, 
criteria, project steering committee, and EDA Project Implementation Unit. 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
N/A

=== PAGE 50 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 59 
 
 F
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme appraisal document.  
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis 
125. By diversifying land uses, the programme is unlocking new industries based on wildlife and tourism, as well as 
other natural resource use.  
 
Wildlife provides the foundation for tourism and sustainable use  
 
Tourism provides employment, income and training, and facilitates other economic activities  
 
Crafts are generally produced from natural resources and capitalise on the markets created through tourism  
 
Veld products provide alternative income opportunities within the health and beauty sectors  
 
Forest products provide income opportunities within the building, woodworking and other sectors  
 
Sustainable hunting can utilize areas unsuitable for tourism and provides important food and significant cash 
income used to cover a high percentage of conservancy running costs  
 
Inland fisheries provide considerable income as well as a direct food supply  
 
Conservation agriculture increases crop yields and minimizes wastage  
 
Holistic range management improves livestock production and the health of ecosystems  
126. By applying the climate change predictions to the current CBNRM scenarios, substantial declines in revenue 
were forecasted for the majority of conservancies in the study undertaken by Brown (2009). Revenue per ha is 
projected to decrease by up to 42% of its current value by 2050, and up to 59% by 2080, with the largest reductions 
occurring in the central region (Brown, 2009). The average predicted change in revenue across the sample of farms 
is a loss of 28% of current revenue by 2050 and a loss of 42% by 2080 (Brown, 2009). The consequences of losses 
in revenue on this scale are alarming. The mean revenue for CBNRM in this analysis is N$218/ha, and the mean area 
is 9,420ha. This amounts to an average loss of about N$575,000 for each highly productive conservancy by 2050 and 
about N$860,000 by 2080 (Brown, 2009). Such large reductions in income will be devastating to CBO members13. 
The above demonstrates the economic, financial need and the return on investment towards CBNRM that goes 
beyond profit making to secure livelihood and enhancing vital ecosystem services. This feasibility study states that an 
expected Economic Rate of Return (ERR) of about 20% could be expected from such climate change interventions 
even though the full impacts of climate may not be felt for many years to come. This assessment (MET, 2013) also 
states that adaptation can be carried out in an economically efficient manner especially in the case of CBNRM 
activities where the benefits are anticipated to be greater than just the offsetting of potential losses due to climate 
change.  
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
127. The practices and technologies to be promoted, adopted and applied through the EDA Project are appropriate, 
gender sensitive and suitable based on the climate risks and effects to be addressed. They will be addressing the 
following adaptive capacity aspects, targeted at the communities and groups that are most vulnerable to climate 
impacts: 
 
Access  (availability, gender sensitive and affordability of) to technology and different farming methods  
 
Access  (availability, gender sensitive and affordability of) to crop varieties and farming inputs 
 
Access  (availability, gender sensitive and affordability of) to water (efficient use, conservation, harvesting, 
storage) 
 
Access  (availability, gender sensitive and affordability of) to land and soil conservation measures 
 
Access (and applicability of) to best practices and skills development 
                                                     
13 This analysis has made a number of simplifying assumptions, one of which is that land use remains 
constant over time, and is based on values for revenue per hectare that are computed using current prices, 
therefore failing to take into account changes in prices of productive output that will inevitably occur over 
time.

=== PAGE 51 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 59 
 
 F
128. From a technical and scientific viewpoint, the pursuance of sustainable natural resource management with good 
practices includes integrating biodiversity management into production landscapes [for example agricultural (agro-
ecosystems)] is an important objective of land sharing as opposing to land sparing assumption of the then green 
revolution. Namibian landscapes (such as conservancies and community forests) are multifunctional (with multiple 
land uses) thus provides examples where agricultural production and for example biodiversity conservation are not 
antagonistic due to their heterogeneity features. Beyond biodiversity (wildlife) itself, the protection function of 
multifunctional landscapes serves a series of ecosystem services, such as, carbon sequestration, water conservation, 
soil erosion control, provision of raw materials and genetic or medicinal resources, sites of cultural value, all 
contributing to improved livelihoods.  
129. Thus the promotion of various technologies including ripper implements (for minimum tillage) instead of disc 
fallowing farming practices; and micro-drip irrigation (for water pumping) instead of sprinklers; and solar water pumps 
instead of diesel or petrol generators are all proven technologies which are best suited for the CBNRM areas in 
Namibia. Furthermore, the adoption of micro-drip irrigation saves water and is most suitable in rain-fed agriculture 
and applicable for dryland crop farming communities where drought and water scarcity are constant occurrences.  
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations 
59. All proposals will be subjected environmental and social safeguard assessment as there are cornerstones of 
technical and financial evaluation to achieve sustainable poverty reduction and enhanced resilience of CBNRM 
livelihoods. Therefore, procedures for addressing environmental and social issues are included in the project cycle 
management process. A driving principle of the project is to prevent and mitigate any harm to people and thus to 
incorporate environmental and social concerns as an intrinsic part of project cycle management. The project will only 
approve proposals that are categorized as Category C of the environmental and social safeguard policy of the EIF 
and in line with the GCF accreditation conditions. The objective of these safeguards and associated policies and 
procedures is to prevent and mitigate undue harm to people and their environment and strive to develop benefits in 
the development process. More specifically, safeguard policies and procedures are designed to avoid, mitigate, or 
minimize adverse environmental and social impacts of projects and strategies, and to implement projects and 
strategies that produce positive outcomes for people and the environment. The Project Cycle Management Approach 
describes a project cycle of design, implementation and evaluation. The EIF addresses environmental and social 
issues within this cycle as follows: 
 
Design  
 
Inquire on, and assess, environmental, and social guidelines 
 
Discuss with project designers and study any reports as requested 
 
Prepare comments and requests for additional information  
 
Advise on any specific requirements for compliance 
 
Review and assess for approval and/or any special measures required 
Implementation  
 
Continue to inquire and review environmental and social safeguard issues  
 
Prepare any comments and requests for new information 
 
Review and advise on implementation of any special measures required 
Evaluation  
 
Ensure inclusion and review environmental and social safeguard issues in final project reporting as well as 
any lessons learned  
Sharing of lessons  
 
Provide platform for grant recipients and partners to share lessons

=== PAGE 52 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 59 
 
 F
Table 8: Checklist of environmental and social principles 
Access and Equity 
 
Potential impacts and risks – further 
assessment and management required 
for compliance  
Remarks 
Compliance with the Law  
 
 
Access and Equity 
 
 
Marginalised and Vulnerable Groups 
 
 
Human Rights 
 
 
Gender Equity and Women’s Empowerment 
 
 
Core Labour Rights 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples 
 
 
Involuntary Resettlement 
 
 
Protection of Natural Habitats 
 
 
Conservation of Biological Diversity 
 
 
Climate Change 
 
 
Pollution Prevention and Resource Efficiency 
 
 
Public Health 
 
 
Physical and Cultural Heritage 
 
 
Lands and Soil Conservation 
 
 
 
130. Following the EIF ESS Policy, the EDA Grant Facility will only finance projects classified as an environmental 
Category C requiring screening of activities and not an ESMP. The proposed scope of activities will largely result in 
positive environmental and social impacts, and the minor social effects will be largely micro site-specific impacts from 
small-scale farming practices. They include small infrastructure such as craft market to facilitate sale of products, 
500-1000 kg granaries that prolong long storage of yields (already tested and to be upscale), household rooftop water 
harvesting activities, greenhouses for cash crops, etc.  From this example of activities to be funded, it is evident that 
they present much lesser or no environmental risk and damage while other indicative soft activities includes value 
addition on indigenous natural products, introduction of drought tolerate breeds and crops, co-management 
approaches to natural resources, rehabilitation of degraded lands and wetlands, etc. Any environmental risk will be 
mitigated with integration of appropriate measures and implementation of common sense good practice measures.  In 
line with the EIF ESIA, a screening is conducted for all Category C type of projects. Implementation monitoring and 
reporting processes will be designed to have explicit focus on the monitoring of the identified minor risks, as well as 
any unintended environmental and social risks. These will apply to the individual grant projects via the six-monthly 
reports that are compiled by the EDA Project Unit and the Environmental and Social Safeguard Expert, for 
submission to the PSC and NIE. Mid-term and Final Evaluations will also have a specific focus on compliance with 
the GCF. 
131. Gender: Gender considerations remain ever present in the project approach. Indeed, this social category is the 
primary and most active and responsive workforce, while it remains strongly marginalized in the access to production 
means and responsibilities. The project gender approach therefore is mainly twofold: (a) equitable access of women 
and men to production means, including land, training, financing, etc., and to collective and community decision-
making centers; and (b) the distribution of roles and responsibilities in production between men and women. It is 
understood that the project has no intention of challenging frontally and immediately the age-old social rules 
governing the life of local communities for fear of rejection and tensions because such a gender process should run 
over time. Still the project will contribute to reducing this barrier by applying participation criteria and procedures 
marked with positive discrimination.  
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement 
132. The Environmental Investment Fund of Namibia has expertise in working with donor funds and has a good track 
record in implementing 36 programs and projects using sound financial management practices. The Directorate of 
Administration and Finance adheres to policies and procedures that meet donor agencies’ requirements. For this 
project, it will be responsible for fiduciary aspects and will be accountable for all financial and investment activities. 
International accounting financial reporting standards will be applied to the project. The standard accounting

=== PAGE 53 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 59 
 
 F
procedures for auditing of Project expenditure is followed by the EIF on an annual basis. The EIF assumes overall 
responsibility for financial management of the projects, and ensure that funds are used efficiently to support the 
intended activities. A certified external auditor will submit all accounts to the GCF on an annual basis. The audits are 
documented by a signed audit report. The public maintain the right to inspect the account on request as well as study 
reports, accounts, inventories and other relevant materials. The EIF Procurement Policy is closely aligned to the GCF 
and national laws in order to facilitate services within standardized framework.  
 
133. The EIF, working with the governance structure of the project will ensure: (i) the substantive quality of the project 
implementation, (ii) the effective use of both international and national resources allocated to it, (iii) the availability of 
time for national contributions to support project implementation, and (iv) the proper coordination among all project 
stakeholders, in particular national, sub-national and local partners.  Government has indicated its wishes to escalate 
efficient and effective project management and delivery, thus has agreed for the EIF (as an accredited entity of the 
GCF) within the approval of the EIF Board, to procure certain services by means of signing Memorandum of 
Agreement (MoA) where, for instance, additional and extra specialised national or global services providers may be 
required. The MoAs will govern the contract arrangements, thus will clearly spell out the responsibilities and roles 
regarding the delivery of the project outputs and the judicious use of the project resources allocated to them.  To 
expedite project implementation, the EIF will sub-contract civil society as deemed appropriate and feasible within this 
project.

=== PAGE 54 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 59 
 G
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures 
Selected Risk Factor 1: 
Description 
Risk category
Level of risk
Probability of risk occurring
Climate change does not remain remains a policy 
priority for the Government of Namibia and the MET
Other 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure 
 
The Project Support Team from the EIF compromising of the CEO, the Communications Officer, Director of Operation and 
Director of Finance must maintain communication with the NDA and continue engagement with government by providing 
project updates in order to keep climate change a policy priority.
Selected Risk Factor 2: 
Description 
Risk category
Level of risk
Probability of risk occurring
Climate change awareness raising and training events 
do not have appropriate stakeholders attending 
Technical 
and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measures 
 
ToRs documents for Component 1 to be prioritised so that they guide the EEs in developing processes that ensure targeted 
participants are invited and their attendance facilitated 
 
Similarly, drawing up the TORs for support organizations in such a way that they are responsible for ensuring that 
appropriate participants are targeted and their attendance facilitated to participate in training and technical support events.  
Selected Risk Factor 3: 
Description 
Risk category
Level of risk
Probability of risk occurring
Limited buy-in from targeted CBOs 
Social 
and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project 
value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measures 
 
Two activities have been included in the project framework to address this risk – the sharing of climate change awareness 
materials to all CBOs and the regional meetings to share information about grant opportunities. 
 
Local NGOs and MET with experience of local operational environments will support CBO understanding and capacity to 
identify and utilize opportunities. 
Selected Risk Factor 4: 
Description 
Risk category
Level of risk Probability of risk occurring
Proposals developed and submitted by CBOs are 
unrealistic with regard to expected outcomes and 
benefits to be generated 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
High 
Mitigation Measures 
 
Develop clear guidelines for grant options and grant parameters. 
 
Several opportunities have been created for information sharing about grants. Included in the project framework are 
regional meetings planned in order to share grant opportunities and parameters. It should be ensured that the information 
presented to possible applicants is realistic and complete. 
 
Provision has been made in the EDA Project Implementation Unit for technical support to be provided to CBOs for proposal 
development. This support will be essential in mitigating this risk. This should be a conditional to a grant proposal being 
accepted and awarded. 
Selected Risk Factor 5: 
Description 
Risk category
Level of risk
Probability of risk occurring
Internal social or political conflict within CBOs impacts 
successful access to direct funding 
Social 
and 
environmental 
Medium (5.1-
20% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measures 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary 
134. Risk factors associated with the project implementation include mainly technical, operational, and institutional 
aspects, as equipment installation does not causes major social and environmental impacts from the project (please 
refer to Section G2).

=== PAGE 55 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 59 
 G
 
In the inception phase of implementation, a CBO diagnostic will be undertaken and this process should be designed to 
identify such risks. If a high risk of conflict is identified during the CBO diagnostic, evidence must be presented that it has 
been resolved before that CBO can be included in a grant proposal. 
 
One of the roles that support organizations should fulfil is the identification of such potential conflicts and facilitates 
appropriate conflict resolution interventions before they impact on the implementation of the Programme. 
 
Since it is likely that several CBOS will jointly apply for a grant, this risk will be diluted (in comparison to the risk if only 1 
CBO is applying). 
Selected Risk Factor 6: 
Description 
Risk category
Level of risk
Probability of risk occurring
Extreme environmental conditions such as drought or 
flooding 
Social and 
environmental 
High 
(>20% 
of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measures 
 
Several potential activity options could be impacted by extreme drought or flood conditions. This will mitigate to an extent by 
the duration of the planned interventions. Since it is likely that most activities will be implemented over a 3-year period, 
extreme drought conditions are less likely to occur in 3 consecutive years.
Selected Risk Factor 7: 
Description 
Risk category
Level of risk
Probability of risk occurring
Insufficient co-ordination and/or co-operation between 
implementing partners (including responsible government 
ministries) at regional level results in lack of support for 
climate-resilient development interventions 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium (5.1-
20% 
of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measures 
 
The role of the EDA Project Implementation Unit is essential for mitigation of this risk. 
 
Several opportunities have been created for information sharing about grants. Included in the project framework are 
regional meetings planned in order to share grant opportunities and parameters. 
 
Provision has been made in the EDA Project Implementation Unit for technical support to be provided to stakeholders. 
Selected Risk Factor 8: 
Description 
Risk category
Level of risk
Probability of risk occurring
CBOs lack capacity to successfully implement CC grant activiti
and meet grant management, reporting and monitoring 
requirements 
Technical and 
operational 
High (>20% 
of project 
value) 
High 
Mitigation Measures 
 
The CBO diagnostic will determine the capacity of each CBO and this data will inform the proposal evaluation process. 
CBOs lacking the needed capacity should not be allowed to submit a proposal unless jointly with other CBOs or a service 
provider. In addition to the diagnostic, a measure of capacity could be proven track record – with a previous grant, audit 
reports, successful AGMs etc. 
 
The EDA Project Unit will provide support to proposal development and will be able to encourage CBOs to propose realistic 
projects. 
 
A group of CBOs can jointly develop a proposal and stronger CBOs will be able to support those with less capacity. 
 
Provision is made for the inclusion of support organizations as a partner with a group of CBOs in a mentoring and technical 
support role. This could provide the needed technical and grant management capacity and also provide an opportunity for 
capacity building. 
Selected Risk Factor 9: 
Description 
Risk category
Level of risk
Probability of risk occurring
 
Conservancies and community forests are not receptive 
to monitoring climate change indicators that are relevant 
to their livelihoods. 
 
Technical and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measures 
 
CBOs have already demonstrated commitment to monitoring through the EBS. The EE responsible for the development 
and introduction of the climate monitoring should dedicate time and resources to ensuring that CBOs understand the value 
of this monitoring. 
 
The EE developing the climate monitoring system must ensure that this process is participatory and responds to the 
identified needs of the CBOs. The EDA Project Implementation Unit will monitor the development process to ensure 
compliance to these aspects. 
Selected Risk Factor 10:

=== PAGE 56 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 59 
 G
Description 
Risk category
Level of risk
Probability of risk occurring
Market development for products (e.g. INPs) impacted by
economic downturn 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measures 
 
The cost of mitigation measures could be impacted by international financial changes such as exchange rate. The EDA 
Project Implementation Unit should support grant applicants in making financial provision for such impacts in their 
proposals. 
 
Diversification of livelihoods is an intended buffer against such impacts however in the process of developing new 
diversification measures, international economic downturns could impact their successful development. The diagnostic must 
include some evaluation of market potential, which will mitigate these possible impacts. 
 
Examples of climate change adaptation measures identified during the stakeholder consultation process did not indicate 
interest in a high level of activities that would be subject to this risk factor. 
Selected Risk Factor 11: 
Description 
Risk category
Level of risk Probability of risk occurring
Remoteness of implementation sites 
Financial 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
High 
Mitigation Measures 
 
The EDA Project Implementation Unit and service providers need to support applicants in realistic estimates of service 
costs, logistical constraints and time frames of planned activities. 
 
The EDA Project Implementation Unit will need to allocate sufficient budget for support activities and mechanisms that will 
accommodate regular communication and logistical needs in working with hard-to-reach CBOs.

=== PAGE 57 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 59 
 
 H
H.1. Logic Framework.  
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level14 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Increased climate-resilient 
sustainable development 
Overall Project Objective: Empower Rural Communities of the Namibian CBNRM 
Network to Respond to Climate Change in Terms of Awareness, Adaptive Capacity 
and Low-Carbon Development. 
Through Component I, the project will build and strengthen the institutional foundation for 
effective and sustainable community-led local climate action in the CBNRM network. 
Through Component II, the project will empower rural CBNRM communities by providing 
them direct access to climate finance for increased CBNRM livelihoods resilience and low-
carbon rural development. 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
(if 
applicable) 
Final 
Fund-level impacts 
A1.0 Increased resilience and 
enhanced livelihoods of the 
most vulnerable people, 
communities and regions 
Number of males and 
females benefiting from 
the 
adoption 
of 
diversified, 
climate-
resilient livelihood options 
(including 
fisheries, 
agriculture, tourism, etc.) 
Livelihood grant 
reports; 
EIF 
EDA 
Project 
M&E 
0 
150 direct 
 
250 
indirect 
(50% 
female, 
50% male) 
15,500 
direct 
61,000 
indirect 
(50% 
female, 
50% 
male) 
Project 
uptake 
comparable to similar 
grant 
projects 
concluded in the past. 
Mid-term (end of year 
3) numbers relatively 
low since most grant 
projects will only be 
concluded after mid-
term 
A2.0 Increased resilience of 
health and well-being, and 
food and water security 
Number 
of 
additional 
food-secure 
households 
(in areas/periods at risk of 
climate change impacts) 
Livelihood grant 
reports; 
EIF 
EDA 
Project 
M&E 
0 
0 
2,400 
No 
extreme 
climatic 
event such as drought 
or large-scale flood that 
undoes project benefits 
in 
more 
than 
one 
project year 
A4.0 Improved resilience of 
ecosystems and ecosystem 
services 
Coverage/scale 
of 
ecosystems 
protected 
and 
strengthened 
in 
response 
to 
climate 
variability and change 
EIF 
EDA 
Project M&E - 
Reports 
from 
implementing 
organizations 
0 
0 
7,200,000 
hectares 
(mainly 
tree 
and 
shrub 
savanna) 
Legal 
situation 
with 
regards to rights and 
responsibilities of local 
communities 
over 
natural 
resources 
in 
their 
area 
is 
maintained. 
 
 
                                                     
14 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks 
available 
at 
the 
following 
link 
(Please 
note 
that 
some 
indicators 
are 
under 
refinement): 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level

=== PAGE 58 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 59 
 
 H
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-
term (if 
applicable) 
Final 
Project/programme 
outcomes 
Outcomes that contribute to Fund-level impacts 
A5.0 Strengthened institutional 
and regulatory systems for 
climate-responsive 
planning 
and development 
Institutional 
and 
regulatory systems that 
improve 
incentives 
for 
climate 
resilience 
and 
their 
effective 
implementation: 
Number 
of 
additional 
CBNRM 
entities 
who 
demonstrate compliance 
with 
MET's 
SOPs 
as 
result of project 
 
 
 
 
MET 
reports/EIF 
EDA 
Project 
M&E 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
No drastic changes in 
MET 
Standard 
Operating Procedures 
(SOPs) 
A7.0 Strengthened adaptive 
capacity and reduced exposure 
to climate risks 
Use 
by 
vulnerable 
households, 
communities, businesses 
and 
public-sector 
services 
of 
Fund-
supported 
tools, 
instruments, 
strategies 
and activities to respond 
to climate change and 
variability 
Number of households 
implementing 
climate 
resilient 
agriculture 
actions 
Number of settlements 
whose vulnerability to CC 
has decreased 
Number of males and 
females 
benefitting 
directly from the adoption 
of 
diversified, 
climate-
resilient livelihood options 
Number of sustainable 
climate-resilient 
jobs 
generated, disaggregated 
by gender 
Number of households 
with 
improved 
water 
security, improved health 
and sanitation and at the 
same 
time 
increased 
resilience 
to 
slow 
onset/sudden 
climate 
induced disasters. 
Livelihood grant 
reports; 
EIF 
EDA 
Program 
M&E 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
0 
 
0 
 
 
0 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
24 
 
150 
 
 
0 
 
 
120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2,400 
 
 
90 
 
15,500 
 
 
186 
(50% 
female, 
50% male) 
 
450 
Project 
uptake 
comparable to similar 
grant 
projects 
concluded in the past. 
No 
extreme 
climatic 
event such as drought 
or large-scale flood that 
undoes project benefits 
in 
more 
than 
one 
project year 
Number of males and 
females reached by [or 
total geographic coverage 
of] climate-related early 
Livelihood grant 
reports; 
EIF 
EDA 
Program 
0 
 
150 
 
15,500 
(direct) 
61,000 
Project 
uptake 
comparable to similar 
grant 
projects

=== PAGE 59 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 59 
 
 H
warning 
systems 
and 
other 
risk 
reduction 
measures 
established/ 
strengthened 
M&E 
0 
250 
(indirect) 
(50% 
female, 
50% male) 
concluded in the past. 
A8.0 Strengthened awareness 
of climate threats and risk-
reduction processes 
Number of males and 
females made aware of 
climate 
threats 
and 
related 
appropriate 
responses 
EIF 
EDA 
Project M&E - 
Reports 
from 
grant 
implementing 
organizations 
0 
0 
420 
250 
510 (direct; 
40% 
female, 
60% male) 
61,000 
(indirect; 
50% 
female, 
50% male) 
Since 
training 
workshops will be held 
at regional level, it will 
be difficult to ensure 
equal participation of 
women and men as it is 
more 
difficult 
for 
women to get away 
from 
household 
responsibilities 
Number of CBOs whose 
awareness on CC issues 
is enhanced 
EIF 
EDA 
Project M&E - 
Reports 
from 
grant 
implementing 
organizations 
0 
60 
80 
 
Project/programme 
outputs 
Outputs that contribute to outcomes 
1. Climate change awareness 
raised 
Number of CBOs whose 
awareness on CC issues 
is enhanced 
EIF 
EDA 
Project M&E - 
Reports 
from 
grant 
implementing 
organizations 
0 
60 
80 
 
2. Local climate monitoring 
established 
Number of CBOs who 
have adopted the climate 
monitoring system 
 
 
Number of CBOs who 
deliver 
annual 
climate 
and 
biodiversity 
monitoring reports to EIF 
and MET 
Reports 
by 
implementing 
agency; 
EIF 
EDA 
Project 
M&E 
Reports 
by 
CBOs 
0 
 
 
 
0 
10 
 
 
 
10 
30 
 
 
 
30 
 
3. 
CBNRM 
governance 
strengthened 
Number 
of 
additional 
CBNRM 
entities 
who 
demonstrate compliance 
with 
MET's 
SOPs 
as 
result of project 
MET 
reports/EIF 
EDA 
Project 
M&E 
0 
10 
30 
No drastic changes in 
MET 
Standard 
Operating Procedures 
(SOPs) 
4. Capacity of CBNRM CBOs 
for community-led initiatives 
increased 
Number 
of 
proposal 
applications submitted to 
EDA grant facilities from 
CBOs directly (i.e. without 
external 
support 
by 
implementing 
partner) 
that are approved for 
funding 
Proposals from 
CBNRM 
entities; 
EIF 
EDA 
Project 
M&E 
0 
5 
10 
 
5. Grant facility for Resilient 
CBNRM 
Livelihoods 
implemented 
Number 
of 
grants 
awarded for community-
led climate action 
EIF 
EDA 
Project M&E 
0 
 
27 
 
33

=== PAGE 60 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 59 
 
 H
Number of grants fully 
implemented 
and 
reported on 
0 
4 
33 
Activities 
Description 
Inputs (USD) 
Description 
1.1. Develop and disseminate 
CC training and awareness 
materials 
Development and printing of materials. 
Dissemination 
through 
media 
campaign 
(radio, TV) for CC awareness and at CBO 
meetings 
55,000 
 
1.2. 
Regional 
training 
workshops 
on 
climate 
change 
awareness, 
monitoring, adaptation and 
mitigation 
17 training workshops in 14 regions to train a 
minimum of 40 CBOs with at least 10 reps 
from each (30-40 people per workshop). 
Only for CBOs which were identified as 
qualified candidates under activity 4.1. 
137,000 
 
2.1. 
Development 
and 
verification of a climate 
monitoring 
system 
with 
supporting 
training 
materials 
Development of approach, field verification 
and training materials development and 
production 
34,500 
 
3.1. Development or revision of 
governance 
and 
SOP 
training materials 
Materials development and production costs 
27,500 
 
3.2. 
Targeted 
training 
and 
technical support provided 
to 
CBOs 
by 
service 
providers 
Regional service providers (EEs) contracted 
to provide training and technical support to 
CBOs 
with 
regards 
to 
governance, 
management and monitoring processes 
411,000 
 
4.1. 
Information 
sharing 
meetings grant facility 
15 information sharing meetings in all 
regions and major centres - some regions 
will need more than one meeting to access 
most CBOs 
23,000 
 
4.2. CBO diagnostic designed 
and carried out in all 13 
regions to identify CBOs 
support needs 
At start of project, diagnostic carried out for 
13 regions (all 14 Namibian regions except 
for Khomas region - no CBNRM CBOs 
there). Updated annually for regions where 
implementation activities are taking place. 
68,500 
 
4.3. Training workshops for 
CBOs accessing grants 
10 workshops and associated technical 
support for implementation 
68,500 
 
4.4. 
Targeted 
support 
to 
potential 
grantees 
for 
proposal development and 
submission 
An independent service provider to be 
contracted to provide information, training 
and proposal development support 
68,500 
 
5.1. 
Awarding 
and 
implementation of grants 
under investment window 
1: 
Climate-resilient 
agriculture 
Minimum of 6 grants 
2,040,000 
 
5.2. 
 
Awarding 
and 
implementation of grants 
under investment window 
2: 
Climate-proof 
infrastructure 
Minimum of 15 grants 
1,200,000 
 
5.3. 
 
Awarding 
and 
implementation of grants 
Minimum of 12 grants 
4,740,000

=== PAGE 61 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 59 
 
 H
 
under investment window 
3: 
Ecosystem-based 
adaptation 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
135. The EIF monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) procedures for the grant will serve as basis for M&E. 
However, for the purposes of project, the MRV will be adjusted to suit the project environment. 
Project Start-up 
 
A Project Inception Workshop will be held within the first three months of project start with those with assigned 
roles in the project organisation structure. The main purpose of the inception workshop will be to inform 
relevant stakeholders about the project so that they: 
 
Fully understand and take ownership of the project. This will include detailing the roles, support services and 
complementary responsibilities of NIE staff vis-à-vis the project team. Discuss the roles, functions, and 
responsibilities within the project's decision-making structures, including reporting and communication lines, 
requirements and conflict resolution mechanisms. 
 
Based on the project results framework finalize the first annual work plan. Review and agree on the indicators, 
targets and their means of verification, and recheck assumptions and risks. 
 
Provide a detailed overview of reporting and M&E requirements. The M&E work plan and budget will be agreed 
and scheduled. 
 
Discuss financial reporting procedures and obligations, and arrangements for the annual audit. 
 
Agree on the ToR for the PSC and plan and schedule the PSC meetings. Roles and responsibilities of all 
project organisation structures will be clarified and meetings planned. The first PSC meeting will be held within 
the first 3 months. 
 
An Inception Workshop report will be prepared and shared with participants to formalize various agreements 
and plans decided during the meeting. 
136. Grant Project Monitoring and Reporting: Each approved Grant Recipient will define a set of measurable 
indicators against which they will report progress, and will establish baselines for these indicators. In addition to 
quantitative reporting, it is envisaged that qualitative reporting will form an important component of the project reporting 
processes. Particular attention will be given to the GCF result areas and the detection, reporting on and management of 
any minor and/or unanticipated environmental and social risks that arise during implementation. These processes will 
be supported by the EIF and used to capture learning and insights that will inform overall project learning. 
137. Quarterly and Six-monthly –Grant Recipients: The PSC, EDA Project Unit and the EIF (occasionally and 
leading to audits) will undertake site visits to each of the projects once every quarter. These site visits will support 
project implementation and management as well as financial and performance reporting processes. Particular attention 
will be given to the GCF results framework and the detection, reporting on and management of any minor and/or 
unanticipated environmental and social risks that arise during implementation. During these visits, the Facilitating 
Agencies will support all grant recipients to submit their quarterly financial reports and 6 monthly progress reports. All 
reports will be reviewed by the EIF, who will compile summary reports in a format prescribed by the GCF. The EE will 
receive all information, review it and include relevant components for reporting to the NIE and PSC. 
138. Quarterly and Six-monthly – Overall project: Progress will be monitored quarterly via quarterly financial reports 
and six-monthly performance reports that are submitted to and collated by the executing entity and submitted to the 
NIE. These will include six monthly screening and risk assessments undertaken by an Environmental and Social 
Safeguards Expert. These performance reports will align with the agreed annual project work plan and will include 
qualitative, quantitative and financial information. Grant Recipients will also report on financial progress quarterly, and 
this information will be compiled by the Facilitating Agencies for inclusion in the executing entity reports. 
139. Annually: Annual Project Implementation Reports will be prepared by the executing entity and submitted to the

=== PAGE 62 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 59 
 
 H
 
NIE through the EDA Project Unit in order to monitor progress made since project start and in particular for the previous 
reporting period. 
The Annual Project Implementation Reports shall include, but not limited to, reporting on the following: 
 
Progress made toward project objective and project outcomes – each with indicators, baseline data and end-of-
project targets (cumulative). 
 
Project outputs delivered per project outcome (annual). 
 
Lessons learned/good practice. 
 
Expenditure reports. 
 
Risks and adaptive management, including a summary of GCF compliance. 
140. A report template for the Annual Project Implementation Report will be prepared by the NIE in consultation with the 
GCF Secretariat within one month from the approval of this project. This will constitute the basis for the submission of 
the GCF Annual Performance Report (APR) as per GCF Monitoring and Accountability framework and Accreditation 
Master Agreement terms. The executing entity will also be responsible for conducting annual audits of the project. This 
is budgeted for as part of the executing entity fee. 
141. Periodic learning throughout the project: The project has been designed to support learning platforms at 
various levels throughout the project implementation period. These will be used to track project progress and to adapt 
interactively as required. They will also form an important platform for formulating policy recommendations for 
sustaining, replicating and scaling up positive project outcomes. 
142. Periodic Monitoring through site visits: The NIE will conduct visits to project sites based on the agreed 
schedule in the project's Inception Report/Annual Work Plan to assess first hand project progress. 
143. Mid-term of project cycle: The EDA Grant Project will undergo an independent Mid-Term Evaluation at the mid-
point of project implementation. The Mid-Term Evaluation will be commissioned by the NIE and will determine progress 
being made toward the achievement of outcomes and will identify course correction if needed. It will focus on the 
effectiveness, efficiency and timeliness of project implementation, will highlight issues requiring decisions and actions 
and will present initial lessons learned about project design, implementation and management. Particular attention will 
be given to the GCF investment and result framework and the reporting on and management of any minor and/or 
unanticipated environmental and social risks that may have occurred. Findings of this review will be incorporated as 
recommendations for enhanced implementation during the final half of the project’s term.  The organization, ToR and 
timing of the Mid-Term Evaluation will be decided after consultation between the parties to the project. The ToR for this 
Mid-term Evaluation will be prepared by the NIE based on guidance from the GCF. 
144. End of Project: An independent Terminal Evaluation that is commissioned by the NIE will take place three 
months prior to project closure and will be undertaken in accordance with NIE guidance. The Terminal Evaluation will 
focus on the delivery of the project’s results as initially planned (and as corrected after the Mid-term Evaluation, if any 
such correction took place). The Terminal Evaluation will look at impact and sustainability of results, including the 
contribution to capacity development and the achievement of global environmental benefits/goals. Particular attention 
will be given to the GCF investment and result framework and the reporting on and management of any minor and/or 
unanticipated environmental and social risks that may have occurred. The ToR for this evaluation will be prepared by 
the NIE based on guidance from the GCF. The Terminal Evaluation will also provide recommendations for follow-up 
activities and requires a management response.

=== PAGE 63 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 59 
 
 I
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents. 
 
 
I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal 
 
NDA No-objection Letter 
   
Feasibility Study 
☐ 
Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if applicable)  
☐ 
Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co-financing commitment (If applicable) 
  
Project/Programme Confirmation/Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, 
 
etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement, Annex I 
☐ 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Plan  
 
(If applicable) 
☐ 
Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (If applicable) 
☐ 
Evaluation Report of the baseline project (If applicable) 
☐ 
Map indicating the location of the project/programme 
☐ 
Timetable of project/programme implementation

=== PAGE 65 ===
GCF/B.14/07/Add.07 
 
 
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Basic project/programme information 
Project/programme title 
Empower to Adapt: Creating Climate‐Change Resilient Livelihoods 
through Community‐Based Natural Resource Management in 
Namibia 
Accredited entity 
Environmental Investment Fund of Namibia 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category C 
Environmental and social report disclosure information  
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/a 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/a 
Link to disclosure 
N/a 
Other link(s) 
N/a
