=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: Sunny Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 11 for Word
producer: Adobe PDF Library 11.0
creationDate: D:20160607153910+09'00'
modDate: D:20160608230358+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum  
Funding proposal package for FP016 
GCF/B.13/16/Add.08 
8 June 2016 
Meeting of the Board 
28 – 30 June 2016 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 12(e) 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled “Strengthening the resilience of smallholder farmers in the
Dry Zone to climate variability and extreme events through an integrated approach
to water management” submitted by United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP);
b) A no-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point; and
c)
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure.
The documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity, and national designated 
authority or focal point, respectively.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.13/16/Add.08 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point 
                 Environmental and social report(s) disclosure

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme Title: 
Strengthening the resilience of smallholder farmers in the 
Dry Zone to climate variability and extreme events through 
an integrated approach to water management  
Country/Region: Sri Lanka 
Accredited Entity: UNDP

=== PAGE 4 ===
Contents 
 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
 
Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 
 
Section C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
Section F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
Section G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
Section I 
ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
 
 
 
• 
Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document. 
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“[FP]-[Agency Short Name]-[Date]-[Serial Number]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 79 
 
 
 
A 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / programme title 
Strengthening the resilience of smallholder farmers in 
the Dry Zone to climate variability and extreme events 
through an integrated approach to water management 
A.1.2. Project or programme 
Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region                     
Sri Lanka 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies) 
Mr. Udaya Senevirathne 
Secretary, 
Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment 
A.1.5. Accredited entity 
United Nations Development Programme 
A.1.5.a. Access modality 
☐  Direct 
☒ International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary 
Executing Entity: Ministry of Mahaweli Development and 
Environment 
Beneficiary: About 1.5 million beneficiaries 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD) 
☐  Micro (≤10) 
☒ Medium (50<x≤250)  
☐  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus 
☐  Mitigation 
☒ Adaptation  ☐  Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission 
 Date of last submission 
29 March 2016 
29 April 2016 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details 
Contact person, position 
Srilata Kammila 
Regional Technical Specialist - Adaptation 
Organization 
UNDP 
Email address 
srilata.kammila@undp.org  
Telephone number 
+66 2 304 9100 ext. 5264 
Mailing address 
United Nations Service Building,  
Rajdamnern Nok Avenue, Bangkok 10200 Thailand 
 
 
 
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from: 
☐ 
Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ 
Low emission transport  
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)   
☐ 
Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-efficient equipment for companies and supply 
chain management, etc.)   
☐ 
Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and 
management, etc.) 
 
Increased resilience of: 
☒ 
Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and 
supply chain management, relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.)

=== PAGE 6 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 2 OF 79 
 
 
 
A 
☒ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.) 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.) 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
☐ 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words) 
1. 
The proposed project supports Government of Sri Lanka (GoSL) to strengthen the resilience of vulnerable 
smallholder farmers in the country’s Dry Zone, particularly women, who are facing increasing risks of rising temperatures, 
erratic rainfall, and extreme events attributable to climate change. It will address technical, financial and institutional 
barriers related to achieving integrated water management to improve agriculture-based livelihoods of smallholder 
farmers in the Dry Zone. GCF resources, in conjunction with government co-financing, will invest in improving the 
community irrigation water infrastructure and associated agricultural practices, scaling-up decentralized drinking water 
systems, and strengthening Early Warnings (EWs) and forecasting for flood-response and water management. The 
objective of the project is to strengthen the resilience of smallholder farmers, particularly women, in the Dry Zone 
through improved water management to enhance lives and livelihoods. The expected key Fund Level impacts 
are increased resilience of health and well-being, and food and water security and increased resilience and 
enhanced livelihoods of the vulnerable smallholder farmers in the Dry Zone of Sri Lanka. The primary measurable 
benefits include about 770,500 direct and 1,179,800 indirect beneficiaries who will gain from improved water 
management, resilient agriculture practices, and provision of climate and weather information. 
 
2. 
The project is aligned with GoSL’s key development goals including enhancing food security and ending poverty 
and inequality. It is anchored in the country’s National Climate Change Policy, National Climate Change Adaptation 
Strategy and Action Plan, and the commitments in the INDC. It promotes a paradigm shift through its integrated and 
holistic approach to enhancing water security and agricultural productivity at the sub-river basin level. By strengthening 
farmer organizations, agricultural value-chains, and community-managed investments, with a focus on women, the project 
promotes community-based enterprise development and private sector participation in the context of climate change 
adaptation. It yields sustainable development benefits by enhancing agricultural productivity (annual benefit USD 8M), 
reliable access to drinking water (access resulting in a savings of about 2M USD in labour hours), health co-benefits 
resulting from purification and filtration of water and improved agricultural practices, soil quality and cascade ecosystems, 
and lives and livelihoods of 390,000 women. (approx.) It yields a positive economic rate of return of 22%, leverages 
domestic financing (USD 14M), and builds capacities for sustained impact. GCF grant resources address the needs of 
highly vulnerable, poor, conflict-affected smallholder farmers in the Dry Zone of the country. The project was designed 
through extensive stakeholder consultations, including with civil society, in the targeted regions of the country and the 
NDA has issued a no-objection letter. 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone 
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) 
29 March 2016 
Expected financial close (if applicable) 
TBD (Date of agreement between UNDP and GCF) 
Estimated implementation start and end date 
Start: 01/12/2016 
End:  30/11/2023 
Project/programme lifespan 
7 years

=== PAGE 7 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 79 
 
 
B 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme 
3. 
A grant financing mechanism is sought to support the prioritised interventions of this project. The Government of 
Sri Lanka seeks maximum concessionality for the proposed urgent adaptation actions that will benefit largely poverty-
stricken and post-conflict regions of the island nation. The targeted populations’ baseline situation of poverty, conflict-related 
displacement, livelihood insecurity and access to services are significantly worsened by repeated cycles of flood and 
drought, climate variability, and gradual erosion of health, nutrition and income status. These districts contain large numbers 
of female-headed households and unemployed youth. Post-conflict investments in roads, schools, hospitals and housing 
have failed to deliver the required development benefit due to the continued livelihood vulnerability and increasing exposure 
to impact of climate variability and extreme events. 
 
4. 
The adaptation interventions in this project target largely public goods – village level irrigation systems, 
decentralized drinking water supply and early warning systems. As the project targets the very vulnerable and poor, there 
is little scope for end users to pay for the infrastructure established (beyond the operation and maintenance costs for minor 
repairs that are partly borne by the community-based organizations). There is no short or medium term prospect of private 
sector investment in the infrastructure for such public goods through the community-managed models. The additional 
investment required to build resilience to climate change in rural Dry Zone villages is prohibitive for a government that is 
constrained by heavy debt and an unfavourable balance of payments. Domestic financing is inadequate to meet recurrent 
costs and debt repayments.  
 
5. 
GCF resources are, therefore, critical to overcome several barriers that constrain GoSL’s ability to advance 
integrated approaches to rural water management for increased resilience of smallholder farmers in Sri Lanka’s Dry Zone 
to climate change impacts. These barriers (detailed in Section C2) include: limited community capacities to design integrated 
solutions, sustainably manage rural infrastructure and resolve user conflicts over water management; limited knowledge 
and awareness of climate-change risks, impacts, and adaptation solutions related to water management; limited technical 
capacity on climate resilient practices, especially for infrastructure development, in irrigation, agriculture and drinking water 
supply; weak institutional coordination to implement a river basin approach in village irrigation cascade systems; and Limited 
financial capacity of communities and government agencies to sustainably meet the incremental costs of adaptation. 
 
6. 
Current financing gaps in domestic financing are hampering GoSL’s ability to implement adaptation measures and 
overcome these barriers. Without GCF resources, the vulnerable, conflict-affected smallholder farmers in Sri Lanka’s Dry 
Zone will continue to face adverse impacts of climate change on their lives and livelihoods, steeping them further into poverty 
and food insecurity. The impacts of such a downward spiral would affect women the most, eroding their meagre coping 
capacity to deal with current challenges for food, income and household water in a region that has above-normal number 
of women-headed households. Therefore, GoSL seeks to combine GCF grant-resources with co-financing from its budget 
allocations to enhance water security and agricultural productivity for the vulnerable communities in three river basins of the 
Dry Zone through following three inter-linked Outputs: 
• 
Upgrading and enhancing resilience of village irrigation systems (small-scale rainwater storage reservoirs and 
related watersheds) and scaling up climate-smart agricultural practices in three river basins of the Dry Zone; 
• 
Enhancing climate-resilient, decentralized water supply and management solutions to provide safe, year-round 
drinking water to vulnerable communities; and 
• 
Strengthening climate and hydrological observing and forecasting systems to enhance water management and 
adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers to droughts and floods. 
 
7. 
Revenue generated as a result of these project interventions applies directly to the beneficiaries (for instance, 
improved agricultural incomes, savings from food/drinking water related expenditures, fee contribution from farmers to 
Farmer Organizations for O&M, and community payments to CBOs for water). In addition, the income accrued to CBOs 
from water supply is directed to subsidize water for households that are conflict-affected or have people with kidney disease, 
cover operation and maintenance costs for the infrastructure, support staff resources, and maintain a reserve fund that is 
used for community development activities. Therefore, the interventions do not lend themselves to reflows back to the 
government or the GCF, requiring maximum concessionality in grant financing. 
Co-Financing  
8. 
Co-financing from the government (USD 14 million) is leveraged to support project investments in village irrigation 
upgrading, water supply and generating meteorological information and advisories for flood and drought. Contributions from 
the five agencies which are Responsible Parties to the project include; 1) Department of Agrarian Development (DAD) 
contribution towards village irrigation systems (VIS) rehabilitation in the project targeted river basins and districts and

=== PAGE 8 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 79 
 
 
B 
upgrading of Agrarian Service Centres (USD 6 million: USD 5.5 million in cash contributions, USD .5 million in-kind); 2) 
Department of Agriculture towards development and dissemination of climate resilient agriculture packages and the co-
development of tailored agricultural advisories (USD 1.14 million: all contributions in-kind); 3) Department of National 
Community Water Supply to support establish and manage community water supply systems including the training of CBOs 
for this purpose (USD 2.11 million: USD 2 million in cash contributions, USD .11 million in kind); 4) National Water Supply 
and Drainage Board to design and development of community water supply schemes and water purification and filtration 
systems, water quality testing and monitoring, and O&M of these investments (USD 4 million: USD 3.5 million in cash 
contributions, USD .5 million in-kind) and Ministry of Disaster Management has committed USD 0.75 million as in-kind 
contribution for staff working on flood and drought response for agriculture and water management in project targeted 
districts, support to meteorological data and information sharing, convening meetings and working groups to develop flood 
and drought advisories and preparedness activities in these districts. This includes additional in-kind contribution from the 
Department of Meteorology, for the operational and maintenance of equipment (including agro met stations and automatic 
rain gauges that will be installed by the project) as well as staff support for development tailored weather and climate 
products.   
Breakdown of cost estimates analysed by sub-component in local and foreign currency  
Component 
Output 
Activity 
Financing (MUS$) 
Total Cost per output 
Strengthening the 
resilience of 
smallholder 
farmers in the Dry 
Zone to climate 
variability and 
extreme events 
through an 
integrated 
approach to water 
management. 
  
  
GCF 
Co-finance 
Foreign 
Currency 
(MUS$) 
Local 
Currency1 
(LKR) 
1) Upgrading and 
enhancing resilience of 
village irrigation systems 
and scaling up climate-
resilient farming practices 
in three river basins of the 
Dry Zone 
1.1 Improve technical 
capacity and knowledge 
management targeting 
ASCs, local field officials 
and community 
organizations for water 
management and climate-
smart agriculture 
0.695 
1.000 
30.296 
4,372,599,983 
1.2 Improve and upgrade 
village irrigation systems in 
the identified cascades 
including restoration of 
upstream watershed 
 
18.988 
 
5.000 
1.3 Develop and 
disseminate climate resilient 
agricultural practices 
3.473 
1.140 
2) Enhancing climate 
resilient, decentralized 
water supply and 
management solutions to 
provide year-round access 
to safe drinking water to 
vulnerable communities 
2.1 Improve capacity of 
water-supply support staff at 
district/divisions, selected 
partner organizations 
(NGOs) and CBOs to 
implement and maintain 
community-based drinking 
water related interventions 
0.436 
1.500 
17.013 
2,457,860,667 
2.2 Implement sustainable 
drinking water solutions 
through CBOs in 
coordination with the ASCs 
and National Water Supply 
and Drainage Board 
(NWSDB 
10.467 
4.610 
3)Strengthening climate 
and hydrological observing 
and  forecasting system to 
enhance water 
management and adaptive 
capacity of smallholder 
3.1 Establish effective 
monitoring systems for 
drought, floods and water 
management 
1.006 
0.350 
4.775 
690,989,739 
                                                             
 
1 Exchange rate used is as of 15 March 2016 (UN Operational Rates of Exchange)

=== PAGE 9 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 79 
 
 
B 
farmers to droughts and 
floods 
3.2 Co-develop and 
disseminate weather- and 
climate-based advisories for 
agricultural and water 
management through ASCs 
and FOs to farmers and 
village water managers 
1.932 
0.250 
3.3 Develop response 
measures to advisories and 
forecasts for agriculture, 
water management and 
flooding in cascade systems 
1.087 
0.150 
Total Project 
Financing 
  
  
38.084 
14.000 
52.084 
7,521,450,389 
Similarly, the expenditures by types of activities are presented in Annex 5 (b).  
B.2. Project Financing Information 
 
Financial Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing 
(a) = (b) + (c) 
…52.084… 
million USD 
($) 
 
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient 
 
(i) Senior Loans 
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans 
(iii) Equity 
(iv) Guarantees 
(v) Reimbursable 
grants * 
(vi) Grants * 
 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
 
…38.084… 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
million USD 
($) 
(  )  years 
(  )  years 
 
 
 
 
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR 
 
 
 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1 for the concessionality that GCF is 
expected to provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price 
between GCF financing and that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality 
should correspond to the level of the project/programme’s expected performance against the investment 
criteria indicated in section E. 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi) 
…38.084… 
Options 
 
(c) Co-
financing to 
recipient 
 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Name of 
Institution 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Grant 
Grant 
Grant 
Grant 
6.000 
1.140 
2.110 
4.000 
0.750 
 
million USD ($) 
million USD ($) 
million USD ($) 
million USD ($) 
Department of 
Agrarian 
Development 
(DAD) 
Department of 
Agriculture(DoA) 
Department of 
National 
Community Water
Supply (DNCWS) 
National water 
Supply and 
(  )  years 
( )  years 
 
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR 
 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options

=== PAGE 10 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 79 
 
 
B 
Drainage 
Board(NWSDB) 
Ministry of 
Disaster 
Management 
(MoD) 
Lead financing institution: N/A 
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co-financing 
institution. 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable) 
Not Applicable 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable) 
9. 
The public goods nature of the proposed project entails no revenue-generation or cost-recovery. With GoSL seeking
100% grant resources for the proposed project, the financial market overview is not applicable.

=== PAGE 11 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 79 
 
 
C 
C.1. Strategic Context 
Country Background  
10. 
Sri Lanka’s recent economic gains, following the end of a debilitating 30 year war and the aftermath of the 2004 
Indian Ocean Tsunami, are being threatened due to its increasing vulnerability to climate change which is characterized 
by increasing temperatures and unpredictability of rainfall. Almost 80% of poor Sri Lankans live in the rural areas and 
depend on agriculture for food and income. IPCC’s fifth assessment report predicts that South Asia, including Sri Lanka, 
is vulnerable to drought, flood, food shortages and heat-related mortality2. The country has been experiencing severe 
shifts in its seasonal rainfall patterns accompanied by increased flood and drought in the last decade directly impacting 
rural food security and incomes3.  
11. 
While categorized as a middle-income country, Sri Lanka masks a complicated situation with deep regional 
disparities in wealth and wellbeing. About 5.2 million people — equivalent to a quarter of the population — were estimated 
to be undernourished in 2014. 4  This persistence of rural poverty, indebtedness and vulnerability, high youth 
unemployment at 19%5, low participation of women in the labour force and large-scale migration in search of employment 
all indicate a high level of unevenness in growth and opportunity across the provinces and districts.  Poverty and social 
exclusion are most prevalent in under-developed rural districts where agriculture is the major livelihood. The conflict-
affected districts in the Northern and Eastern Provinces and peripheral districts are most deprived where many years of 
exclusion from the benefits of a steady economic growth and development resulted in greater social vulnerabilities.6 
Dry Zone Context – agricultural livelihoods, poverty, and conflict 
12. 
The Dry Zone is one of three climatic zones (dry, intermediate and wet) that divide Sri Lanka on the basis of 
variations in rainfall. It receives less rainfall than average and has pronounced dry periods. The Dry Zone covers 70% of 
the island’s land area and is the country’s agricultural heartland and the main area where the staple rice is grown. Small-
scale farmers with land holdings of less than 2 hectares dominate agriculture in this region.  Many other forms of 
employment in the Dry Zone are also related to agriculture – e.g. agricultural marketing, transport, and financial services. 
About two-third of the cultivated area in the country is rain fed or irrigated by numerous semi-rainfed minor reservoirs and 
diversions, collectively referred to as village irrigation schemes. A number of studies confirm that smallholder farmers 
cultivating under village irrigation systems are poorer7 and more vulnerable than their Dry Zone counterparts who have 
access to major irrigation8. Such farmers are much more vulnerable to impacts of climate change than farmers cultivating 
under larger irrigation systems. As productivity and crop yields decline with low water availability and unseasonal rains 
resulting from climate variability and extreme events, farmers are dragged deeper into poverty and face food deficits, 
which have to be met by buying food for consumption, increasing the level of indebtedness and further eroding their 
capacity to cope with climate risks.  
 
13. 
 While the impacts of the conflict were experienced throughout the country (eg. suicide bombing and attacks on 
public places, economic downturn, social issues with war casualties), several districts in the Dry Zone were directly 
affected by the fighting and resultant large-scale displacement. The five districts of the Northern Province, three districts 
in the Eastern Province and peripheral districts such as Puttalam, Anuradhapura, Moneragala and Polonnaruwa were 
directly impacted by the war. This is about 60% of the country’s land area and around two thirds of the coastline of the 
country. The end of the war in 2009 has allowed many of these districts to re-enter the economic mainstream. However, 
serious challenges remain in completing resettlement and meaningful resumption of economic activities in this region, 
complicated by frequent and recurrent climate-induced disasters and extreme weather events in the last five years. 
Recurrent floods and droughts in the last 5-6 years have battered all the districts struggling to overcome the direct impacts 
of conflict with severe impacts on food security, income, and water for drinking and sanitation of displaced/resettled 
communities as well as those living in remote border districts. 
 
                                                             
 
2 http://cdkn.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/CDKN-IPCC-Whats-in-it-for-South-Asia-AR5.pdf 
3 http://www.climatechange.lk/NAP/NationalAdaptationPlan_RevisedFinal.26.10.2015.pdf 
4 http://www.ips.lk/talkingeconomics/2015/10/26/food-security-does-it-matter-for-sri-lanka/ 
5 Labour Force Survey Annual Bulletin 2013 
6UNDP 2012: National Human Development Report on Regional Disparities of Human Development  
7IWMI 2010 and Sri Lanka Water Partnership 2012 
8Sri Lanka Water Partnership 2012: Aheeyar M.M.M Climate change adaptation in water management for food security: Recent developments in Sri Lanka-
A review of Existing Knowledge and Information.

=== PAGE 12 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 79 
 
 
C 
Government of Sri Lanka’s (GOSL) vision  
14. 
GOSL has committed to Sustainable Development Goals, including the goals of ending poverty, achieving food 
security and promoting sustainable agriculture, promoting inclusive growth, reducing inequality and promoting inclusive 
societies. Two policy pronouncements of the GOSL made in the recent past three months, the Prime Minister’s Economic 
Policy Statement9 and the Budget Speech made by the Minister of Finance10, emphasize the development of the rural 
economy, overcoming inequality of income distribution and supporting agriculture-based livelihoods as key priorities. The 
GOSL recognizes that no meaningful reduction in poverty can be achieved in the country without addressing the 
deleterious impacts of disasters and climate change. In responding to the challenges, the Government is focused on 
implementing a number of strategies as outlined in its National Climate Change Policy, National Climate Change 
Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan, and the Sri Lanka Comprehensive Disaster Management Programme. These 
strategies focus on adaptive measures to avoid/minimize adverse impacts of climate change to the people, their 
livelihoods and ecosystems and develop the country’s capacity to address the impacts of climate change effectively and 
efficiently. GOSL has in its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) to UNFCCC committed to minimizing 
climate change impacts on food security.  The INDC and National Adaptation Plans focus on the water sector as a crucial 
crosscutting sector to be addressed; and, as such, water management for farming in the Dry Zone, outside of the major 
irrigation works, is a key priority of government intervention. 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
Baseline Scenario: Dry Zone Water security 
15. 
Traditionally, smallholder farmers in the Dry Zone use village irrigation systems (VIS) to deal with the seasonality 
of rainfall where demand for water always exceeded supply.  A typical VIS comprises storage reservoirs (locally termed 
‘tanks’) and water diversions (locally termed as “anicuts”) to irrigate farm fields downstream. Many of these tanks are 
hydrologically connected along small streams and form “cascades”. These systems evolved over the past two thousand 
years as an outcome of ancient farming communities’ attempts to control seasonal flooding and droughts in the Dry Zone. 
This ensured the continuous cultivation of paddy during the year and provided drinking water for household and livestock 
consumption. In a cascade system, tanks, paddy fields, watersheds and canals are integrated with the natural 
environment forming a unique ecosystem that supports human needs and environmental water requirement. However, 
these systems have rapidly deteriorated in the past decades due to frequent floods and siltation from run-off, as well as 
human-induced impacts such as encroachment and cultivation in the watershed, deforestation of local catchments and 
unsuitable agricultural practices. Siltation due to intense rainfall events and evaporation losses due to high temperatures 
are more evident in small tank systems than in larger reservoirs. High run-off and siltation have decreased water storage 
and hence the viability of village irrigation schemes to provide continuous water resources to farmer communities11.   
 
16. 
Increasingly, prolonged dry periods in the Dry Zone districts have also limited communities’ access to safe 
drinking water.  The main source of groundwater in the Dry Zone is the weathered rock zone or regolith zone.  This aquifer 
is recharged by rainfall, which is seasonal, and by water in village irrigation systems during the dry period. There is limited 
recharging of groundwater during the dry periods and contamination of drinking water sources due to high run-off and 
sedimentation associated with high intensity rainfall have impacted availability and quality of drinking water. Many small-
scale water supply schemes also use irrigation reservoirs directly as water sources and many wells are linked to these 
systems, making the quality and availability of drinking water in the Dry Zone heavily dependent on the quality and 
availability of water in irrigation reservoirs. There is often insufficient water for domestic consumption, and water sources 
are often not available in close proximity to where people live (see Annex II, Technical Feasibility Report (herewith 
‘Feasibility Report’), Section 1.3). 
 
17. 
Furthermore, the reduced recharge of groundwater during dry periods concentrates minerals in the available 
water, well above the recommended levels for potable water. Similarly, accumulated pollutants from human activities tend 
to be concentrated during dry periods. The heavy floods that have followed some of the prolonged dry periods have led 
to runoff that has resulted in erosion and loss of soil nutrients, compelling farmers to apply increasing amounts of inorganic 
fertilisers.  This increases the concentration of pollutants in the water during the dry season, creating a continuously 
                                                             
 
 
 
 
11 Aheeyar M.M.M Climate change adaptation in water management for food security: Recent developments in Sri Lanka-A review of Existing Knowledge 
and Information. Sri Lanka Water Partnership 2012

=== PAGE 13 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 79 
 
 
C 
vicious cycle of drought, floods and ground and surface water contamination12. One of the biggest water-related health 
issues in the Dry Zone is the high incidence and geographical spread of Chronic Kidney Disease of Unknown Aetiology 
(CKDu). Though the exact cause of the disease has not been identified, heat stress related dehydration (partly a result 
of rising temperatures and reduced availability of potable water)13 and decreasing quality/availability of potable ground 
water are contributing factors14. The disease has affected 81 divisions in 11 Dry Zone districts with the number of patients 
being highest in Polonnaruwa and Anuradhapura (north centre) districts. The morbidity and mortality rates are highest 
among male farmers between the ages of 35-50, which has left women widowed and children orphaned in many areas 
of the Dry Zone15. Women in the Dry Zone are especially impacted by lack of water for cultivation, home-gardens, 
livestock, drinking and other domestic uses. There are a higher percentage of women headed households in the project 
targets districts compared to the national average of 23% and many women are caring for sick and disabled family 
members, victims of the conflict or lately, those affected by CKDu. 
 
18. 
Water security in the dry zone is also hampered by a lack of weather, climate and hydrological information which 
can be used for agriculture and water management. Farmers do not currently receive seasonal forecasts on which to 
base decisions about when and which crop varieties to plant. Water releases in the cascade system are not planned 
using early warnings of extreme rainfall, which would allow them to plan discharges and flood mitigation measures to limit 
damages to infrastructure. Additionally, there are limited weather and water level measuring stations to monitor the current 
situation as well as limited capacity to use this information to estimate floods and water availability which helps manage 
water supplies. For more details on the vulnerability and exposure to climate change in the Dry Zone, see Annex II, 
Feasibility Report, Section 1.3. 
 
Baseline Investments 
19. 
The Government of Sri Lanka invests close to a USD 150 million in its annual capital budget for rural development 
related programmes16. Around USD 68.7 million of underlying and parallel financing is invested by GOSL to meet regular, 
non-climatic development needs of target districts. Dis-aggregated by sector, these include: Repairs and restoration of 
damaged VIS (27.3 million); Investments in developing and improved seeds and planting material (7 million); New rural 
water supply investments in target districts (10 million); Repairs to water supply intakes and flood damages (2.07 million); 
CKDu control (safe drinking water and disease treatment - USD 13 million); Implementing water safety plans (0.5 million); 
Improved forecasting and disaster preparedness (2 million); and National Food Security Drive and Safe Agriculture 
Promotion (USD 7 million). The proposed project will invest in additional and incremental costs of adaptation building on 
such baseline investments.17 
 
20. 
There have also been many other investments in the past in water management in the Dry Zone including through 
donor supported projects such as the Village Irrigation Rehabilitation Project (VIRP) and its successor National Irrigation 
Rehabilitation Project (NIRP), the JBIC/JICA funded Pro-poor Economic Advancement and Community Enhancement 
(PEACE), and the World Food Programme (WFP) funded small tank rehabilitation projects. In addition to these 
investments, there are few highly relevant projects that the proposed project learns from and builds on including: (i) Plan 
International’s cascade based small tanks rehabilitation project in the Anuradhapura district which tested out the 
landscape approach to irrigation rehabilitation and Cascade Farmer Committee approach for improved upstream and 
downstream coordination; (ii) IUCN/HSBC project focused on restoring traditional elements of a cascading tank systems 
in the Dry Zone in Anuradhapura District; and (iii) two phases of the Community Water Supply and Sanitation Project 
(CWSSP) funded by World Bank which successfully tested out the community managed approach to rural water supply 
and was the precursor to the establishment of the Department for National Community Water Supply. (For further details, 
refer to Annex II, Feasibility Report, Sections 3.1 and 3.2). 
 
 
                                                             
 
12GOSL (2010) Sector Vulnerability Profile: Water, Supplementary document to the National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 2011 to 2016 pp7 
13 Johnson R.J Heat Stress Nephropathy from Exercise-Induced Uric Acid Crystal Uria: A Perspective on Mesoamerican Nephropathy. American Journal 
of Kidney Disease. January 2016 http://www.ajkd.org/article/S0272-6386%2815%2901156-7/abstract 
14 Gunatilake, S.K., Samaratunga, S.S. and Rubasinghe R.T., 2014. Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) in Sri Lanka - Current Research Evidence Justification: 
A Review.  Sabaragamuwa University Journal 2014, V. 13 NO. 2 pp 31-58 
15Ministry of Health and Provincial Renal Disease Prevention and Research Unit - North Central Province, in a presentation at the Technical Working 
Group for Project Preparation in October 2015 
16 http://www.treasury.gov.lk/images/depts/fpd/docs/budgetspeech/2016/bgtspeech2016E.pdf 
17 Specific co-financing of USD 14 million has been leverage as government financing to be directed towards the project targeted investments to 
proportionally finance the non-climatic drivers underlying proposed investments.

=== PAGE 14 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 79 
 
 
C 
Climate change impacts 
21. 
Trend analyses of temperatures recorded in Sri Lanka show that both daytime maximum and nighttime minimum 
temperatures are significantly increasing at a rate of 0.01 to 0.03°C per year18. Although total annual rainfall (past 10 
years compared to the 30 year average) remains steady19, the variability of the monsoon, including seasonal onset and 
duration, has been increasing. This is particularly true of the North-east Monsoon20, which supports agriculture in the Dry 
Zone and where extreme weather events are now more frequent and severe21. Rainfall modelling under different climate 
scenarios presents a more complex scenario than temperature (which will continue to increase) but generally indicates 
that large areas of the Dry Zone will receive less rainfall in the medium-term (see Annex II, Feasibility Report, Section 
1.2).  
 
22. 
Sri Lanka is also affected by a number of climatic hazards and extreme events and these are projected to worsen 
with climate change.22  Changes in rainfall are manifested in a higher number of intense/ heavy rainfall incidents leading 
to flash floods, as well as increases in the number of consecutive dry days and higher temperatures increasing the risk of 
drought during the dry season23. During 2010 - 2015, Sri Lanka suffered from a cycle of hydro-meteorological disasters 
in war-affected districts. Droughts and flood in quick succession, within a few months of each other affected the same 
vulnerable communities, greatly eroding their capacity to cope. The drought of 2012 was the worst hydrological deficit in 
past 20 years and one of the worst crop years for the country24. However, by January 2013, floods were affecting 10 
districts, many of which were earlier in the clutches of drought. In 2014, drought affected over 1.8 million people in 16 
districts.25  
 
23. 
The impacts of climate related rainfall variability and extreme events directly affect incomes and food security of 
Dry Zone farmers26. Climate related vulnerability puts additional pressure on Dry Zone agricultural households whose 
lives are already circumscribed by poverty, low incomes, and recovering from three decades of conflict. A recent study 
by ESCAP27 identifies Sri Lanka as one of the hotspots of food insecurity in the Asia-Pacific region, and according to 
IWMI (2010) farming districts in the dry and intermediate zones are more sensitive to climate change than the rest of the 
country due to land degradation and heavy reliance on primary agriculture.  Recurrent hydrological disasters (flood and 
drought) have eroded the coping capacity of Dry Zone communities making them even less able to plan for and overcome 
climate-related variability in water availability. In the recent years, drought and subsequent flooding, 44% of the crop in 
the North and East was damaged or lost and paddy farmers lost on average more than 67% of their expected income.  
Climate change impacts in the Dry Zone also affect people’s access to safe drinking water. Droughts reduce the 
sufficiency of water supply and falling water volumes increase the concentration of pollutants.28 Floods also affect the 
water quality of drinking water sources, by directly polluting the sources as well as by destroying village irrigation 
reservoirs that provide a source for drinking water.29 Deterioration of the village irrigation systems, increased runoff during 
frequent flooding, and longer dry periods compromise the recharging of the water in the aquifer leading to limited access 
to safe ground water for drinking.30  This means people (usually women) have to travel longer distances to secure water 
                                                             
 
18Premalal KHMS and Punyawardena BVR 2013. Occurrence of extreme climatic events in Sri Lanka. In: Gunasena HPM, Gunathilake HAJ, Everard 
JMDT, Ranasinghe CS and Nainanayake AD (eds), Proceedings of the International Conference on Climate Change Impacts and Adaptations for Food 
and Environment Security. Hotel Renuka, Colombo, Pages 49-57 
19Punyawardena et al. Spatial Analysis of Climate Change Vulnerability. Natural Resources Management Centre, Department of Agriculture, 2012 
20 National Climate Change Adaptation  Strategy and Action Plan 2010-2016, Climate Change Secretariat and ADB 2010 
21 Premalal KHMS and Punyawardena BVR 2013. Occurrence of extreme climatic events in Sri Lanka. In: Gunasena HPM, Gunathilake HAJ, Everard 
JMDT, Ranasinghe CS and Nainanayake AD (eds), Proceedings of the International Conference on Climate Change Impacts and Adaptations for Food 
and Environment Security. Hotel Renuka, Colombo, Pages 49-57 
22 National Climate Change Adaptation  Strategy and Action Plan 2010-2016, Climate Change Secretariat and ADB 2010 
23Abeysekara, AB, Punyawardena, BVR. and   Premalal, KHMS, 2015. Recent trends of extreme positive rainfall anomalies in the Dry zone of Sri Lanka. 
Annals of the Sri Lanka Department of Agriculture, 17: 1-4 
24Central Bank of Sri Lanka. Annual Report 2012 
25 Ministry of Disaster Management, Disaster Management Center/ Disinventar Database 
26Aheeyar M.M.M Climate change adaptation in water management for food security: Recent developments in Sri Lanka-A review of Existing Knowledge 
and Information. Sri Lanka Water Partnership/ Global Water Partnership 2012 P9 
27Aheeyar M.M.M Climate change adaptation in water management for food security: Recent developments in Sri Lanka-A review of Existing Knowledge 
and Information. Sri Lanka Water Partnership Global Water Partnership 2012 P9 
28Gunatilake, S.K., Samaratunga, S.S. and Rubasinghe R.T., 2014. Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) in Sri Lanka - Current Research Evidence 
Justification: A Review.  Sabaragamuwa University Journal 2014, V. 13 NO. 2 pp 31-58 
29Sectoral Vulnerability Profile: Water. National Climate Change Adaptation  Strategy and Action Plan 2010-2016, Climate Change Secretariat and ADB 
2010 
30 http://www.iwmi.cgiar.org/issues/water-and-health/irrigation-and-health/

=== PAGE 15 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 79 
 
 
C 
and farmers and their families reduce their water intake or resort to using unsafe sources (such as contaminated ground 
water wells or streams) during the dry periods.  Further details on the climate change impacts on Dry Zone livelihoods 
are detailed in Annex II, Feasibility Report, Section 1.3.  
 
24. 
Climate change impacts women and men differently. In rural communities in Sri Lanka, women’s role in the 
household care economy makes them more vulnerable to climate change and disasters due to impacts on household 
water availability, health of family members, and safety of domestic assets such as livestock. Women traditionally manage 
household water, family gardens, and livestock and are in the frontline of managing impacts of reduced water availability 
and disaster impacts.  This affects their own intra-household food security, which can be exacerbated during extreme 
climate events and in the aftermath of a disaster31.  Women take full responsibility for the care of children, the disabled 
and the elderly. In the Dry Zone districts of Sri Lanka the impact of the war and disease has left a number of women 
widowed and pushed others into precarious work, in Sri Lanka and overseas, as domestic migrant labour.    
 
Climate change impacts affecting baseline investments 
25. 
Despite heavy investment in rural infrastructure and livelihoods in the past three decades, recent weather/climate 
anomalies combined with the impacts of conflict and disease have seriously undermined the resilience of Dry Zone 
smallholder farmers. There has been no consideration of climate-related impacts in the design, financing and 
implementation of the previously described communal infrastructure including rehabilitation of water supply and storage 
systems, promotion of small-scale irrigation systems and improvement of agricultural production systems. The lack of 
climate risk integration has undermined the sustainability of investments, especially those in rural water supply and small-
scale irrigation. This can lead to a long-term situation in which a substantive part of post-conflict reconstruction, 
resettlement and development progress is set back by climate change-induced hazards, such as longer dry spells and 
drought and more intense rainfall and floods. The 2011 and 2013 floods caused heavy damages to irrigation structures 
especially in village systems. Both flood and drought compromise the viability of community water supply schemes and 
impact on household water security. The final project report of the World Bank’s CWSSP project has pinned the reason 
for failure of community drinking water schemes on the drying up of sources; and flood damages that are beyond the 
community’s ability to restore.32 
 
26. 
Village irrigation systems provide the Dry Zone communities with a means of overcoming the largely predictable 
seasonality of rain. However, changes in rainfall patterns and intensities mean that this traditional solution needs to work 
optimally and efficiently in order to reduce the vulnerability of farmers (facing increasing exposure to drought, floods and 
inundation in downstream areas). Crop recommendations that are traditionally viable for the Dry Zone may become 
increasingly unviable in an environment experiencing extremities in rainfall. The many years of investment in seed and 
horticultural production for Dry Zone farmers, to overcome poverty in these areas, struggles to demonstrate long-term 
transformation as droughts and floods cause heavy crop losses and damages at every stage of the cultivation cycle. 
Floods plundered the harvests in 2011 and 2013, while in 2012 and 2014, deep drought affected land preparation and 
sowing.  
 
Adaptation alternative for smallholder farmers 
27. 
A paradigm shift in addressing adaptation needs among farmers in the Dry Zone lies in developing an integrated, 
holistic approach to water security that considers the entire ‘cascade’ or sub-basin system and the inter-connectedness 
of the village irrigation systems, agricultural practices, and water supply and management techniques for multiple uses, 
including drinking water. Village irrigation systems (VIS) provide communities with a means of coping with seasonal 
variability; and, improving their functionality is seen as a means of adaptation to climate change. Increased resilience to 
floods and droughts require cost-effective design changes and enhancements to the system to reduce flood damages 
and improve dry-season storage. Efficient, planned, climate-risk informed water management at field and sub-basin level 
should complement improved availability and access to water. This includes resilient and ecologically sustainable 
agricultural practices, which substantially deviate from current field practices. Introduction of improved, short duration rice 
and other crops, simple micro irrigation techniques, semi-mechanisation for water efficiency etc. can ensure longer water 
storage and availability for multiple uses. Many villages secure their drinking water from wells that are immediately 
downstream of the village reservoir. Increased water capture and storage will improve both year round access to drinking 
                                                             
 
31Ibid 
32World Bank, 2011. Implementation completion and results report, Second Community Water Supply and Sanitation Report. Sri Lanka Country 
Management Unit. World Bank

=== PAGE 16 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 79 
 
 
C 
water and improved agricultural practices, including the reduction of agro-chemical use, will in the long-term improve the 
quality of drinking water. Harvesting rainwater at household-level can also improve access to quality drinking water as 
rainwater is considerably safer and of better quality than ground water in the Dry Zone. In addition, early warning 
information, based on meteorological and seasonal forecasts, is a key part of the water management system. It enables 
preparation and mitigating measures to be enacted ahead of climate-related disasters and variability ensuring the optimal 
management of water resources. 
 
Key Barriers addressed by the proposed project 
28. 
In order to achieve the above solution, there are a number of barriers, summarized below, that need to be 
overcome. Further details on gaps and barriers are presented in Annex II, Feasibility Report, Chapter 4. 
 
Limited financial capacity of communities and government agencies to sustainably meet the incremental costs 
of adaptation 
29. 
Traditionally, small farmers have managed their village irrigation systems, building on local knowledge and 
generally using their own resources, and communities have operated and managed community water supply schemes 
collecting moderate fees for O&M. But years of neglect of the irrigation systems (due to disruptions in productive 
activities), and the cumulative deterioration resulting from increasing climate-related shocks, have reduced productivity 
and impoverished small farmers. Farmer Organisations (FOs) no longer have the capacity to invest adequately in 
restoring the infrastructure to working conditions, much less upgrading them to withstand climate change impacts. Flood 
damages to a single reservoir can range from USD 15,000-35,000, which is beyond the financial capacity of the 
communities. Where government investments are leveraged, the investment is not sustained due to lack of financial 
capacity to bear the incremental costs of addressing the severity of climate shocks on these small-scale systems. Existing 
Agrarian Service Centres (ASCs), while established as decentralised service units for extension and technical support to 
small holder agriculture, cannot meet the demands for increased service delivery- especially for financing climate smart 
agro-technology among farmers in a sustainable manner. 
 
30. 
Government also has limited capacity to mobilize sustainable, local-level public financing for water management. 
The current drinking water crisis also warrants investment in long term solutions such as rainwater harvesting and short 
term capital-intensive schemes such as advanced purification and filtration options.  The upfront capital costs of these 
investments are outside the financial capability of individual farmer households or of poor farming communities, and due 
to extensive demand, extends the capacity of government. In addition, communities lack the ability to effectively mobilise 
financing to manage water for multiple uses adopting climate smart technologies and methods. Furthermore, the 
remoteness and disconnect to the national road network in many districts makes village irrigation and drinking water 
systems an unlikely target for lone private sector investment, domestic or foreign.  
 
Weak institutional coordination to implement a climate-risk informed, river basin approach in village irrigation 
cascade systems 
31. 
As Sri Lanka’s water resources are distributed along well-defined river basins with distinct geo-physical and agro-
ecological characteristics, rural development plans that do not take a comprehensive river basin approach would be less 
sustainable and more exposed to climate change impacts on water resources.33 A lack of awareness and understanding 
of climate change risks when managing water supply systems reduces the ability of government personnel to appreciate 
the problem.. The sectoral nature of development planning and implementation is further complicated by a multitude of 
actors at local level making it increasingly difficult for institutions to coordinate and work together. There are weaknesses 
and overlaps in the role of government institutions and this is evident in the case of village irrigation systems. The current 
institutional arrangement of the government and local/provincial governments is not strong enough to mobilize farmers to 
adopt climate-resilient agricultural and watershed management practices, as shown by the project implemented by Plan 
Sri Lanka34. In addition, the irrigation systems in a cascade are often managed by several organizations based nationally 
or provincially, with other organisations (national departments/community groups) managing drinking water. The absence 
of a coordinating mechanism is a constraint to operate and manage the cascade and its water resource as a planning 
unit. 
                                                             
 
33 Sector Vulnerability Profile: Water. National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy for Sri Lanka (2011-2016) ADB and Ministry of Environment 2010 
34Aheeyar M.M.M Climate change adaptation in water management for food security: Recent developments in Sri Lanka-A review of Existing Knowledge 
and Information. Sri Lanka Water Partnership Global Water Partnership 2012

=== PAGE 17 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 79 
 
 
C 
 
Limited technical capacity on climate resilient practices, including for infrastructure development, in irrigation, 
agriculture and drinking water supply 
32. 
A complete package of technology for the upgrading, improvement, operation and maintenance of village 
irrigation systems (VIS) is not readily available through government institutions. With regard to climate smart agriculture, 
the Department of Agriculture has developed a set of instructions and tools relevant to different ecological zones and 
climatic conditions. However, inadequate technical documentation and capacity to tailor these tools to the particular agro-
ecological zone of a village reservoir system is a constraint to adopt such solutions at the farm level.  There is also limited 
knowledge in the community on short term and long-term solutions to water quality issues. While there are plans by the 
NWSDB to extend current pipe-borne coverage to more households, either through main grid or community water supply 
schemes, the quality of local sources remains a major challenge. While the existing CBOs managing rural water supply 
schemes are generally functioning well, inadequate technical knowledge of water source protection as well as the ability 
to operate and maintain new innovations such as advanced filtration systems prevents these facilities being used in a 
sustainable way.  
 
33. 
Dry Zone farmers in general and the farmers of village irrigation systems in particular, have inadequate access 
to seasonal climate information, both seasonal forecasts of droughts and early warnings about floods. There is no 
mechanism in place at local level to disseminate weather and climate related information to the farmer community. Even 
when the farmers receive early warnings, they lack of the capacity to respond to such warnings by adapting their 
agricultural and local water management activities. This gap was evident during the 2011 floods that affected a large 
number of village irrigation systems. Flooding was35due to the release of excess water in irrigation tanks (reservoirs) 
through the spillways. Reservoir operating rules and better communication between upstream and downstream users 
could have minimized the damage, but only if there is a reliable rainfall forecasting system36.  At the river basin level, the 
problem is aggravated by non-availability of flood modelling and inadequate coordination of gate openings due to divided 
management responsibilities among many institutions and FOs.  
 
Limited knowledge and awareness of climate-change risks, impacts, and adaptation solutions related to water 
management 
34. 
Information on climate risks and adaptation options is not available to agricultural extension services, to field level 
extension officers, to local water managers and CBOs. There is a lack of knowledge flow and mechanisms for sharing 
learning in order to develop, disseminate, and adopt climate-friendly practices.  This is true for village irrigation 
management, agricultural planning as well as for preparedness and response to extreme weather events. Besides limited 
infrastructure and technology to develop and disseminate climate-sensitive technologies and information, there is no 
institutional knowledge management framework that facilitates knowledge generation and sharing on innovative and 
adaptive measures which can be used to improve local water management, climate resilient crops, water quality 
improvement, seasonal weather forecasting and early warnings.  Farmers and farmer communities in the Dry Zone have 
a very limited awareness of these adaptive solutions.  At the same time the traditional knowledge on which communities 
depended for agricultural planning and water management is fast becoming inadequate in the context of climate change.  
 
35. 
There is no local or provincial knowledge management mechanism that extracts lessons learned from recent 
interventions to integrate into a complete package of technology for the restoration, improvement, modernization, 
operation and maintenance for farmers. The Department of Agriculture (DoA) has initiated the development of climate-
resilient cultivation packages, but their dissemination is constrained by the limited capacity of the agricultural extension 
services to work with farmers to adapt these ‘packages’ to deliver practical and sustainable solutions. Adoption of solution 
packages such as climate resilient crops, agro-ecological zone based crop recommendations by the farmers is weak, 
also due to inadequate linkages with markets for such newly developed crops.  This is the result of a lack of linkages 
between FOs/ASCs and markets such as village fairs, supermarket chains including Keells and Cargill, and Dedicated 
Economic Centres managed by the Government. The Agrarian Service Centres that serve a cluster of villages can be a 
focal point for facilitating such awareness and coordination at local level, though currently their capacity to do so is limited.  
While the ASCs were designed to provide various services required by the farmers in a coordinated manner, the 
weaknesses in the ASCs - such as lack of trained advisors, lack of funding, lack of modern equipment such as computers 
                                                             
 
35 In the aftermath of floods in the Dry Zone of Sri Lanka in January 2011, the International Centre for Water Hazard and Risk Management (ICHARM) 
under the auspices of UNESCO, fielded a mission to study the causes of floods.   
36 Jayawardena, A. W. 2011. Report on the UNESCO-ICHARM mission to Sri Lanka.  Public Works Research Institute Tsukuba, Japan

=== PAGE 18 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 79 
 
 
C 
and software such as GIS - prevent such services from being provided in an efficient manner. Field officers and FO and 
CBO officers currently do not have the necessary skills and computer software packages, which can be used to store, 
process and translate weather/climate data to local level warnings. These skills are required to understand a risk 
management approach in which weather, climate and hydrological information are one source of information, are lacking 
and there is a clear need for training on how to correctly interpret and use this information. 
 
Limited community capacities to design integrated solutions, sustainably manage rural infrastructure and 
resolve user conflicts over water management 
36. 
Beyond technical and financial barriers, there has been a decline in capacity among CBOs, FOs and field level 
extension services in terms of human resources and social organization. Confined to up-keeping VIS, many of which are 
already in varied states of deterioration, the FOs are becoming less dynamic as rural development organisations and are 
finding it difficult to attract young men and women to participate. Women’s participation in traditional FOs is generally low, 
while in many villages of the north and east, women have formed their own organisations call WRDS (Women’s Rural 
Development Societies).  
 
37. 
FOs in VIS are currently farming areas less than 80 ha; and, as such, it is difficult to influence the markets as a 
production unit. Furthermore, the FOs are generally confined to the reservoir, sluice, spill and bund/dam, and the canal 
system. Therefore, the institutional arrangements for the management of the watershed are not clearly defined. There is 
an institutional gap with regard to mobilizing the FOs to include the watershed in their maintenance program and to 
arrange the linkages with the markets so that solutions/investments are holistically and sustainably maintained. FOs and 
other community based organisations at village level lack organizational capacity, guidance, access to technologies and 
training on integrated planning to design and implement climate smart solutions to local agricultural and drinking water 
issues and local extension officials lack the knowledge and understanding of an integrated approach to support them to 
engage in climate-smart water management.   
 
Project objective, outcomes, and impacts 
38. 
The key objective of the project is to support GOSL’s vision to increase resilience and enhance the lives and 
livelihoods of the smallholder farmers, particularly women, in the Dry Zone through an integrated approach to water 
management to safeguard food security, health, and well-being against climate change risks and impacts. The 
proposed project aims to address the above barriers and improve on the baseline scenario. First, it invests in a landscape 
and integrated approach to restore and rehabilitate village tank cascade systems (small-scale rainwater storage reservoirs 
and related watersheds) to enhance their resilience and scale up climate-resilient farming practices. The project will 
facilitate dissemination of such agricultural practices through enhanced technical capacity of farmers and facilitation of 
market linkages to sustain these practices. It focuses on enterprise development for women farmers to promote them as 
micro-small enterprises (MSEs) and enable linkages to markets. The project also promotes participatory approaches and 
capacity building targeting FOs, field officers of agriculture-related government institutions, private sector and local NGOs. 
It strengthens awareness, learning, as well as knowledge generation related to climate-risk management and supports 
such coordination through the ASCs. Second, the project will improve investments and strengthen institutional capacities 
to deal with unavailability of safe drinking water by scaling up climate-risk informed solutions including rainwater 
harvesting and community-managed advanced purification and filtration systems. Drinking water in the Dry Zone is closely 
linked to irrigation systems. The shallow ground water table is heavily interconnected and many irrigation systems provide 
for both agriculture/livelihood and domestic use with increasing priority for safe drinking water. Enhancing resilience of 
VIS and associated watersheds and introducing climate-smart agriculture will also enhance availability and quality of 
drinking water. The project strengthens this interconnectedness through cascade-level, climate-risk informed water 
management planning with an integrated approach to irrigated and drinking water. Third, the project will invest in 
strengthening early warning, forecasting and water management systems to enhance adaptive capacity of smallholder 
farmers to droughts and floods. Capacities will be strengthened at national and local level to generate and share 
information for coordinated operation of irrigation and drinking water systems and agriculture planning (supported through 
the above two interventions) as part of climate risk management. 
 
39. 
The main goal of this project is to contribute to climate-resilient sustainable development of Sri Lanka. The project 
expects to increase resilience of health and wellbeing, and food and water security and enhance livelihoods of 
the most vulnerable of the vulnerable smallholder farmers in the Dry Zone of the country. The project aims to 
strengthen the adaptive capacity and reduce exposure to climate risks of vulnerable populations through an integrated 
approach to water management and climate-resilient agriculture. The project targets vulnerable, conflict-affected farming 
communities, in particular, women, who continue to face adverse impacts of climate change on their lives and livelihoods. 
The project expects to result in strengthened and climate-resilient village irrigation infrastructure and capacities of

=== PAGE 19 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 79 
 
 
C 
smallholder farmers for water management and climate-resilient agriculture; improved access to safe and reliable drinking 
water through supply systems able to withstand climate change and variability; and strengthened capacities of Dry Zone 
farmers to use early warning and climate information for water management. 
 
40. 
The proposed project draws lessons from, complements, and build on on-going climate change adaptation 
projects such as: 1) UNDP/SCCF funded Strengthening the Resilience of Post Conflict Recovery and Development to 
Climate Change Risks in Sri Lanka that has just completed restoring a cascade of 31 tanks in Mi Oya Basin, Kurunegala 
District; 2) Adaptation Fund supported Addressing Climate Change Impacts on Marginalized Agricultural Communities 
Living in the Mahaweli River Basin of Sri Lanka which is testing out the model for Agrarian Service Centres to provide 
agro-technology and climate information to smallholder farmers; and 3) Climate Resilience Improvement Project (CRIP) 
of the World Bank which will conduct vulnerability and flood risk mapping in nine river basins. Further details on various 
related and relevant investments and projects are presented in Section 3.2 of the Feasibility Report.  In addition, the 
North-Central Province Canal Project (NCPCP) of GoSL, a 10-year project supported by ADB, plans to extend major 
irrigation northwards to conflict affected areas, augmenting water supply to a number of large, medium and small tanks 
along the canal path. For further details on lessons learned and best practices including references to the evaluations 
and case studies for these projects, see Annex II, Feasibility Report, Sections 3.2 and 3.3. 
 
41. 
However, these baseline initiatives (i.e. IUCN/PLAN, AF, SCCF, and CRIP projects) reflect narrowly focused 
solutions to a range of non-climate and climate pressures. While each provides important insights, they are constrained 
in a number of ways including either (a) not incorporating climate risks (e.g. the IUCN project), (b) does not adopt 
integrated, cross-sectoral approach (e.g. AF, SCCF, and CRIP projects). For instance, while managing water better is an 
essential component for adaptation strategies of the SCCF project, it does not address interlinked drinking water issues. 
The CRIP project, while adopting a river basin approach to improve climate resilience and disaster management, focuses 
primarily on the investments for physical infrastructure. 
 
42. 
The GCF financed project represents a paradigm shift as it will represent the first time an integrated approach to 
water management is advanced in Sri Lanka incorporating climate change concerns and understanding linkages across 
river basins/sub river basins and including multiple uses of water. The project will set comprehensive standards and 
precedents that will influence future river basin management planning. In the proposed design, Village Irrigation Systems 
(VIS) are considered as entities contributing to climate resilience of the entire basin. In recent river basin development 
projects, sectors such as drinking water were considered as indirect beneficiaries, or again as “demand nodes” where 
allocation of the required quantity of water would satisfy management needs. 
 
C.3. Project / Programme Description 
 
43. 
It is noted that as there are many donor agencies and NGOs working in provision of sanitation, and due to the 
fairly high coverage of sanitation in the Districts such as Anuradhapura, Puttalam and Polonnaruwa, this proposal does 
not include provision of sanitation facilities. As mentioned in the Fesibility Report, past water supply projects report that 
better water availability has resulted in positive health impacts. Current access to adequate sanitation in Sri Lanka is high, 
and public perception of the importance of sanitation has increased. Coverage has increased from 83% in 2008 to 90% 
in 2013. However, piped sewerage networks presently cover only about 2.5% of the country’s population in major urban 
areas. Sanitation facilities of rural households are on site. These are not connected to sewerage systems similar to those 
in urban areas. Use of water for sanitation could marginally increase with project investments, especially in the community 
water supply option; however, the project support to households is mainly for accessing drinking water. National Water 
Supply and Drainage Board which falls under Ministry of City Planning and Water Management has the responsibility for 
rural water supply and sanitation 37. The government has estimated a total investment of LKR 49 billion to achieve 
sanitation targets set for 2020 to be mobilized through government funding and development partner financing. UNCEF 
                                                             
 
37 
http://www.google.lk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwiqvv
zu863MAhWElZQKHeLLB4UQFggrMAE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.adb.org%2Fsites%2Fdefault%2Ffile
s%2Fpublication%2F161289%2Fsouth-asia-wp-035.pdf&usg=AFQjCNFB-QOcaVq5-
i0S8Z8fKFaTfbRVdA&bvm=bv.120551593,d.dGo

=== PAGE 20 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 79 
 
 
C 
supports  GoSL  (2013-17), partnering with National Water Supply and Drainage Board, Ministry of Education, schools, 
NGOs etc. to support national capacity development to reach minimum 80% of communities in low coverage areas to 
have equitable access to use of safe water and improved access to sanitation facilities.   
 
44. 
The key component of the project is strengthening the resilience of smallholder farmers in the Dry Zone to 
climate variability and extreme events through an integrated approach to water management. The component 
comprises three inter-linked “sub-components” (which refer to outputs as per the GCF logic framework) that will build on 
best practices in baseline and relevant projects and overcome barriers discussed earlier. These are: 
i.Upgrading and enhancing resilience of village irrigation systems and scaling up climate-resilient farming 
practices in three river basins of the Dry Zone (Output 1);  
ii.Enhancing climate-resilient, decentralized water supply and management solutions to provide access to safe 
drinking water to vulnerable communities (Output 2); and  
iii.Strengthening weather/climate and hydrological observing, forecasting and water management systems to 
enhance adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers to droughts and floods (Output 3).   
 
45. 
Geographical coverage, selection of cascade systems, and targeted beneficiaries: The project will use a 
river basin/ sub-basin approach to deliver an integrated package of interventions for irrigation and drinking water (see 
Annex II, Feasibility Report, Section 5.2). The selection of cascades has considered income poverty, multi-dimensional 
poverty and disaster impact on these communities as criteria. Poverty is worst in divisions that had seen large-scale 
conflict related displacement and losses such as in Mannar District (Malwatu Oya River Basin). The number of flood and 
drought affected people obtained from the DMC was used to analyze the impact of rainfall variability on these 
communities. In the case of droughts, stakeholder discussions showed that, generally the whole Dry Zone is affected in 
an event. Therefore, categorization of cascades using drought impacts was difficult. The data indicate that coastal areas 
of Mannar, Puttalam and Trincomalee districts are highly vulnerable to floods. However, the middle reaches of Yan Oya 
basin is also subjected to increased flood incidence from high intensity rainfall and this was substantiated during the 
stakeholder meetings.  
 
46. 
Selection of the target river basins and cascades within was, therefore, based on the following criteria that 
consider both socio-economic vulnerabilities and hydrological potential for adaptation.  
a. 
River basins were selected on the basis of: 1) high and very-high vulnerability to climate change; 2) river 
basins with high presence of village irrigation systems and cascade systems, and therefore vulnerable/poor 
farming populations; and 3) Areas with significant lack of safe drinking water and high levels of kidney disease 
risk.  
b. 
Pre-selection of target sub-basins or cascade systems within these river basins was based on poverty 
incidence, irrigation and hydrological potential (recommended by the District offices of DAD) and evidence of 
water quality issues such as CKDu, hardness and salinity.  
 
47. 
The selected river basins are Malwatu Oya, Mi Oya, and Yan Oya (see Annex XI for the project map) with 
watersheds situated almost entirely in the Dry Zone, resulting in highly unreliable water yields and flow in these rivers. 
The Mi Oya river basin has been identified as the most vulnerable river basin in the country (See Annex II, Feasibility 
Report, Section 5.2 for rationale), and all three are situated in areas currently facing drinking water challenges. Given that 
vulnerabilities arising as a result of poor quality drinking water are difficult to be addressed with a purely river basin 
approach (water quality is also dependent on the presence of fluorides and contaminated groundwater aquifers cut across 
river basin boundaries), interventions to provide good quality drinking water will expand to districts connected to the 
targeted river basins i.e. Kurunegala, Puttalam, Anuradhapura, Mannar, Trincomalee, Vavuniya and Polonnaruwa 
Districts.  
 
48. 
Targeting Beneficiaries: Climate-risk targeting as in the SCCF project has been taken into account for the GCF 
project. The GCF project further enhanced these criteria by including socio-economic vulnerabilities to extend beyond 
climate risks. Within selected cascades the project will target households meeting the below vulnerability criteria (one or 
more) for specific investments on climate smart agriculture, rainwater harvesting, community water supply programmes 
and flood early warning advisories:  
1) 
Women headed households 
2) 
Young unemployed women in target villages 
3) 
Households with disability or kidney disease 
4) 
Conflict displaced/resettled 
5) 
Flood affected in the last five years

=== PAGE 21 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 79 
 
 
C 
6) 
Families with children/women displaying low nutrition (underweight/ anemic)  
7) 
Households with at-risk subgroups such as children and girls (children charged with households duties, 
neglected children not attending school, girls at risk) 
Specific, targeted beneficiary groups for the various interventions are detailed in Section G, Annex XIII. 
Output 1:Upgrading and enhancing resilience of village irrigation systems and scaling up climate-resilient 
farming practices in three river basins of the Dry Zone 
49. 
The Feasibility Report (Annex II, Chapter 5) recommends a suite of best practices and tested solutions for 
improving resilience of and upgrading village irrigation systems to withstand climate change associated risks, focusing on 
prolonged droughts and intense rainfall events. Using a participatory approach that ensures community ownership during 
project implementation and beyond the project lifetime, these activities will improve the existing infrastructure and restore 
the watershed/catchment. Given the benefits demonstrated by Plan International, HSBC-IUCN and UNDP/SCCF financed 
projects, this Output will focus on improved climate-risk informed water management for agricultural production in the 
selected river basins by upgrading inter-connected cascade systems and associated agricultural practices. Considering 
the multiple uses of water, the project will invest in added elements (structural and landscaping) to village irrigation 
cascades to make them more resilient to climate change. Co-financing from the government will also be invested in these 
upgrades to address non-climatic drivers contributing to deterioration of these systems. Upgrading the village irrigation 
cascade systems will be delivered using a participatory approach that involves FOs, field officers of agriculture related 
government institutions, private sector and local NGOs. This Output will support capacity building, training, and knowledge 
generation for climate-risk management related to integrated water and agricultural management solutions.  
 
50. 
The Output will also support targeted women farmers to adopt recommendations made by the Department of 
Agriculture for drought tolerant crops and climate smart cropping practices for these agro-climatic zones. Women 
producers will be strengthened as MSEs through technology transfer, improved extension services, business 
development training, and market linkages with support from private sector for technology and financing38. The climate-
smart agricultural packages will also be widely disseminated through the Agrarian Service Centres and extension services 
of the Provincial Agriculture Departments. 
 
51. 
This Output also contributes to generation of health co-benefits in conjunction with the investments in drinking 
water systems in Output 2 in an integrated manner. The investments in drinking water supply systems and treatment 
facilities address the climate risks and impacts on drinking water availability and quality. While the advanced purification 
and filtration systems address the immediate needs for clean drinking water in areas with high incidence of CKDu and 
other health issues, the enhancement of watersheds around VIS and the climate-resilient agricultural practices also 
address long-term issues around agricultural inputs and water contamination. The landscape and cascade-based 
approach to irrigation rehabilitation considers the connection between agricultural practices in the upstream and water 
quality of the reservoir and associated wells. This Output promotes use of low chemical inputs/more organic inputs 
based on soil testing leading to long-term benefits and possible reversal of the current contamination of land and water. 
Climate resilient agriculture and water quality management practices are detailed in Annex II, Feasibility Report, 
Sections 5.3.2 and 5.4. Cascade-level water committees also link in water quality aspects for drinking water (Output 2) 
into broader water management plans produced under Output 1. Furthermore, under Output 2, women’s CBOs will be 
trained to regularly monitor source area - for source conservation and prevention of polluting agriculture practices - and 
measure water quality parameters. Health co-benefits are also enhanced through government’s initiatives for food 
security and chemical-free safe agriculture39 that will support Provincial Agriculture Departments’ to adopt organic and 
resilient agriculture practices.  
 
Overall, this Output includes the following key activities: 
Activity 1.1 Improve technical capacity and knowledge management targeting ASCs, local field officials and 
community organisations for climate-risk informed water management and climate-smart agriculture: This activity 
will support the development of cascade level water management plans and guidelines that incorporate climate risks and 
                                                             
 
38 In the project target areas, companies like Hayleys Plc and CIC Holdings provide modern agro-technology packages for farmers and farmer 
organizations. Other companies such as LOLC (Lanka Oryx Leasing Companies) have launched financing schemes to support farmer uptake of modern 
agriculture practices. Micro-finance institutions such as SANANA Bank and Sarvodaya Seeds Bank provide concessional financing for farmers to improve  
productivity. Companies like Holcim Plc fund CSR projects to support poor farmers to adopt water saving agro-technology packages.  
39 Launched by the Presidential Secretariat in March 2016

=== PAGE 22 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 79 
 
 
C 
impacts in a participatory, multi-stakeholder approach.  It will include training for FOs and other CBOs (women’s groups) 
to implement and maintain the project investments in light of a changing climate. The activity will improve collaboration 
for planning and equitable water sharing between users in a cascade. ASCs in the river basin will be developed as 
knowledge and communication hubs including supporting cross-district, cross ethnic experience sharing through 
exchange field visits and field training programmes. It will address the barriers of limited technical capacity, institutional 
coordination, and knowledge for integrated approach to climate-risk informed water and agriculture management.  
 
52. 
This activity is designed to improve the capacities of local level actors - field officers, farmer organizations and 
women’s groups - to develop integrated climate-risk informed water management plans for 50 cascades. The plans and 
guidelines will be implemented through mobilization of cascade level water committees that will include men, women and 
youth from communities and the local field officers. The activity invests in training of trainers approach (for provincial and 
district officials and ASCs) and farmer training programmes to ensure design, implementation, and O&M of climate-
resilient VIS as well as the development and adoption of climate-smart agriculture packages. It also invests in awareness 
raising, knowledge generation, and learning for climate-risk management including understanding and analysis of impacts 
and options for adaptation in the context of water management and agriculture planning. (e.g. input and crop selection 
based on climatic conditions and seasonal forecasts) Overall, this activity includes: 
 
• Development of a detailed climate change risk informed sub-basin or cascade-level water resources 
development plan with the ASCs, with full participation of all relevant local government officials, FOs, women’s 
organisations, and other CBOs in each village system. Drinking water issues, related to both access, 
especially dry season access (taking into account probability of longer dry periods), and quality will form an 
integral part of the cascade level water management plan and will be coordinated with Output 2. 
• Development of technical guidelines on climate resilient water management at sub-basin/cascade level with 
standard operating procedures (SOPs) agreed between Departments of Agrarian Development, Irrigation, and 
Agriculture, in coordination with activities under Output 3 for EWs and seasonal forecasts. 
• Formation, mobilization and training of cascade-level water committees for coordinated climate change risk 
informed water management at a sub-basin level and implementation of the water resources plan developed. 
• Training for district, ASC and FO officials/ lead farmers across the 30 cascades to plan and implement VIS 
upgrading and maintenance taking climate change risks into account including financial and maintenance 
planning for viability of these systems beyond the project lifetime. 
• Training on climate resilient agricultural practices (incl. crop and input selection, value-addition, water 
management etc.) for local extension officers, field officers, provincial and district-level officers involved in 
irrigation rehabilitation, agriculture, soil quality and forestry. 
• Strengthen 77 ASCs as local knowledge, coordination, and communication hubs for planning, design, and 
implementation of the proposed project interventions. Invest in awareness building, knowledge generation, 
learning and exchange to support climate-risk informed, integrated water management and climate resilient 
agriculture. This includes the provision of essential IT software and mobile phone applications to support local 
level data gathering (including rainfall and water-levels) and dissemination. 
 
Activity 1.2 Improve resilience of and upgrade village irrigation systems in the identified cascades including 
restoration of upstream watersheds. GCF resources and government co-financing will be used to support the design 
and upgrades of VIS, incorporating elements to enhance the resilience of these systems to climate change risks and 
impacts. About 325 village irrigation systems, including the upstream catchments, will be upgraded based on the cascade 
level water development plans. The interventions to upgrade the irrigation systems include: i. reforesting the watershed 
and re-introducing the vegetative interceptor to trap contaminants: ii. Restoring the reservoir bund (dam), spill, sluice and 
canals supplying the fields, and iii. Desilting the reservoir bed. These upgrades will incorporate climate risks and combine 
traditional and new design elements and practices including partial de-silting to deepen reservoirs close to the bund and 
retain more water during dry seasons, intensified reforesting of the catchment with multi-purpose trees, creating ponds 
and diversions for run-off capture in the catchment, upstream soil conservation practices like hedgerows, contour drains 
to prevent erosion, and creating small ponds in home gardens to capture intense rainfall.  
 
53. 
Project will incorporate climate risk reduction elements in the upgrading of the infrastructure according to the 
projected climate change impacts. Observations during 2014 floods showed that a main reason for flood damages is the 
inadequate spillway capacity, poor condition of the spillway approaches and drainage paths and weaknesses in the dams. 
These will be addressed in the designs. To mitigate the impact of droughts, the design proposes increasing the storage 
by de-silting, decreasing silt inflow by upstream watershed restoration, and restoring the “mud-sluice”. These are 
described in Annex II, TFR, Section 5. Construction design will be made climate resilient, and innovative designs will be

=== PAGE 23 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 79 
 
 
C 
introduced to spillways, using experiences from on-going pilot demonstrations.  These will include the use of labyrinth 
weir/duckbill weir for spillways, relocation of structures to minimize flood damage, increasing the discharge capacity of 
spill tail canals, improving the connectivity among the VIS within a cascade. 
 
54. 
This activity addresses technical and financial barriers impeding the upgrade and maintenance of VIS to cope 
with climate change and extreme events. Capacity of the FOs will be enhanced to manage the VIS through technology 
transfer, financial management, and aggregation of FOs to remove the institutional barriers to sustain the interventions in 
the long term. FOs used a combination of pooled reserves and a nominal fee (approx. USD1 per year) from constituent 
farmers to support minor repairs and upkeep of the VIS. To revive and strengthen the financial viability, FOs will be 
supported to develop maintenance and financing plans to undertake and sustain minor operation and maintenance (O&M) 
beyond the project duration. Government departments undertake major repairs. Operational viability is ensured through 
the combination of upfront technical and financial support to FOs and a phasing in of domestic financing (government and 
communities’) to support post-project O&M as well (See Annex XIII, O&M plan). The activity combines GCF resources 
and government co-financing to support climate-resilient design of the VIS.  It includes: 
• Participatory appraisal of improvement and upgrading needs incorporating climate risks, mapping of the VIS, 
and awareness raising for FOs to determine upgrading priorities and roles and responsibilities considering 
climate risks and observed climate vulnerabilities in the system 
• Development of climate-risk informed intervention plans based on the cascade-level water resources 
development plan (produced through Activity 1.1) for each village reservoir in the cascade with FOs and CBOs, 
integrating traditional elements with new resilience measures. This includes integrating structural 
improvements to the bund, sluice, spill and canals with natural elements such as village forests, wetlands, 
tree cover along the reservoir and the channels and allowing for ground water recharge/silt trapping and run-
off capture (as detailed in Annex II, Feasibility Report, Section 5.3.1). 
• Implementation of investments in upgrading and climate-proofing 325 village irrigation systems. Upgrading 
will be carried out by FOs and will engage local-level civil works contractors as necessary. FOs and village 
level extension officers of the Department of Agrarian Services will be responsible for implementing and 
monitoring the planned improvements in consultation with the cascade-level farmer committees set up in 
Activity 1.1.  
• Producing multi-year O&M and financing plans for FOs for sustained maintenance of the infrastructure and 
catchments. This includes stocking the tanks with food fish for harvesting during the dry season40. FOs 
generally lease out the tank for fishery post-cultivation season to generate revenue which builds up/maintains 
the FO reserve fund. 
• Operation and maintenance of VIS through FOs and extension officials including adapting and improving 
design elements in light of a changing climate.   
 
Activity 1.3 Develop and disseminate climate resilient agricultural practices with targeted enterprise development 
for women: The activity will support government extension services to develop and widely disseminate demand-driven, 
tested, climate change risk informed agriculture support packages which includes drought/flood resilient crops (seeds), 
organic inputs, soil and water management technologies and market oriented agro-processing technologies. Together 
with the seasonal climate forecasts (Activity 3.2) and improved marketing options for the recommended crops (supported 
by market mapping undertaken through this activity; crop recommendations co-financed by Department of Agrarian 
Development and Department of Agriculture), the climate resilient agriculture package will provide more food, income and 
improve ability of farmers to cope with seasonal variability and improve rational use of water. Based on the past 
experiences from other similar initiatives (e.g. IUCN/HSBC project and SAPSRI Project—refer to Annex II, Feasibility 
Report, Section 5.3), recommended practices include using short-term and climate resilient traditional rice varieties; 
landscaping/vegetative barriers for erosion control; crop diversification and composting in home gardens; use of organic 
fertilizers; crop diversification during the minor season; rational use of chemical inputs based on soil condition; agronomic 
and crop establishment techniques such as dry sowing in paddy fields in between seasons; and micro irrigation, with due 
regard to the agro-ecological regions. Resilient agriculture practices recognize the need to address climate-related factors 
(drought and flood resistant crops, shorter duration field crops) along with non-climate drivers for safe and chemical-free 
agriculture that contributes to long-term improvement of water quality.  
                                                             
 
40 Fish fingerlings are purchased as government nurseries and introduced to the tanks. There are several native and exotic species that are recommended 
for aquaculture in Dry Zone minor tanks. Due to the high biodiversity in these systems, the fish do not need additional feed or maintenance. The fish can 
be harvested in cycles of 6-10 months depending on the species.

=== PAGE 24 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 79 
 
 
C 
 
55. 
This activity will support enterprise development focused on women farmers and producers.  It will strengthen 
the participation of women in agri-businesses through technology transfer, financial support, business skills development, 
and access to markets to ensure financial viability and sustainability.  GCF resources will provide targeted packaging and 
support for uptake of the climate-resilient packages developed including inputs, information and advisories (linked to 
Output 3) and technologies (such as micro sprinklers/drip systems); facilitate value-addition based on market mapping 
(funded through this Activity); and linkages with markets including facilitation of private sector partnerships. Potential 
market linkages include supply to local markets (village fair or “Pola”), value added products for established supermarket 
chains41, and market linkages through ASCs with private sector companies seeking high-value, export oriented crops42. 
Market linkages will also be advanced through information exchange between private sector, ASCs or Provincial 
Agriculture Departments and cascade farmer committees. Long term buy back agreements between women or youth 
producer groups and private sector companies43 will be fostered through ASCs supervised by agriculture extension 
officers. The district private sector chambers will be linked to the ASCs through the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian 
Services (ACAS) to strengthen market links with local private sector. 
 
56. 
The activity will also enhance capacities of and collaboration with local NGOs, local ASCs (Agrarian Services 
Centre) and Provincial Departments’ of Agriculture. In particular, ASCs in each target area will be trained to deliver 
integrated planning and implementation services for climate smart water and agricultural management in cascade 
systems. In conjunction with government co-financing, this activity will also develop capabilities (training and equipment) 
of ASCs to undertake scientific crop selection with farmers and Department of Agriculture through soil testing and input 
management. It will implement improved soil testing facilities to support farmers to rationally select crops, inputs and 
climate-smart practices according to soil conditions. It will support development of a suite of climate resilient agronomic 
practices in upstream home gardens, upland farm fields and downstream-irrigated fields. Overall, the activity includes: 
• Mapping of farming systems and communities to support climate-resilient crop and input selection under each 
ASC. This will entail scientific crop selection in consultation with farmers and Department of Agriculture 
through soil testing and support for farmers to rationally select crops, inputs and agronomic practices 
according to soil conditions. 
• Development, packaging, and dissemination of suite of climate-smart practices (including support for adoption 
of drought resistant crops, soil conservation practices and water-efficient cultivation methods). 
• Enterprise development of women farmers through targeted implementation of tailored climate resilient 
agriculture packages including adapted, low-cost micro-irrigation and climate-smart agronomic practices in 
upstream home gardens, upland farm fields and downstream-irrigated fields. 
• Establish farmer-level seed nurseries with women producer groups to support adoption of climate-resilient 
crops. 
• Develop participatory market mapping for climate resilient crops including value-chain analysis to support 
market linkages. 
• Strengthen value addition, marketing and business development (based on market mapping) for climate 
resilient agriculture products to support targeted women enterprises and promote private sector participation. 
 
Output 2: Enhancing climate-resilient, decentralized water management solutions to provide safe year-round 
drinking water to drought vulnerable communities 
57. 
Village irrigation reservoirs are a primary source of drinking water in the Dry Zone. The shallow ground water 
table is heavily interconnected and many irrigation systems provide for both agriculture/livelihood and domestic use with 
increasing priority for safe drinking water.  GCF resources used for enhancing resilience of VIS and associated 
watersheds and introducing climate-resilient agriculture (as detailed in Output 1) will also enhance availability and quality 
of drinking water. The functional relationship of irrigation and drinking water lies in the climate-risk informed, integrated 
water resources planning at cascade level (Activities 1.1 and 2.1) as well as water supply and management informed by 
tailored advisories and SOPs established under Output 3. Water source protection committees will be created and 
mobilized with awareness of climate risks and impacts on water quality and equipment for quality testing and source 
monitoring.  
 
                                                             
 
41 Such as Keells Plc and Cargills Ltd 
42 Melons, papaya, dragonfruit, gherkins and mango 
43 Such as Hayleys, Saruketha Organic Food Supplier, Keells Foods, Nutrena Animal Food

=== PAGE 25 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 79 
 
 
C 
58. 
GCF resources will address the adaptation needs to ensure year round supply of drinking water which is 
jeopardized due to climate-induced prolonged dry periods and floods. These impacts also affect water quality as floods 
directly pollute water sources and falling water volumes increase concentration of pollutants. Deterioration of VIS, 
increased runoff during flooding, and longer dry periods compromise availability and quality of groundwater. Together 
with government co-financing that is leveraged, this Output will deliver drinking water solutions to poor farmer households 
through a multi-pronged partnership approach to replenish sources, build storage, supply clean and safe drinking water 
and address root causes of water quality issues (See Annex II, Feasibility Report, Section 5.4). One of the primary co-
benefits of the GCF investment (aligned with government investments) in improving access to safe drinking water is the 
expected reduction in the disease burden (and current medical costs) in areas where kidney disease is fast spreading. A 
detailed discussion on climate and non-climate drivers of CKDu is presented in Annex XIII.  
 
59. 
GCF resources and co-financing for rural drinking water supply will, therefore, be used to improve capacity of 
local officials, CBOs and FOs to incorporate climate-risks in design and management of sustainable rural drinking water 
solutions (community water supply systems - CWSS - and rainwater harvesting tanks). These various water supply 
options were successfully tested and proven by government and CSOs in Dry Zone locations as explained in Annex II, 
Feasibility Report, Sections 3.2 and 3.3. The design of the proposed community water supply schemes will incorporate 
climate-risks and be fully integrated into the cascade water management plan and managed by FOs and CBOs, informed 
by the tailored forecasts and advisories generated in Output 3. Many community-based organisations (predominantly 
women’s organisations) are currently operating CWSS supplying water to households with technical support from the 
National Water Supply and Drainage Board for major operation and maintenance. For the community water supply 
schemes, the CBOs collect a nominal fee to support the regular upkeep and maintenance of the supply systems. 
 
60. 
The project will also support the establishment of a selected number of advanced purification and filtration 
systems in areas where quality issues are particularly severe (including high CKDu risks) to support GoSL fill in existing 
gaps. (detailed in Annex II, Feasibility Report, Section 4.1). These investments supplement the enhancement of 
catchments around VIS and the climate-smart agricultural practices supported by Output 1 to address long-term issues 
around agricultural inputs and water contamination. These systems will also be managed by CBOs who charge 
households for the supplied water. The CBOs serve as social enterprises where some of the revenue from water supply 
is redirected to support the most vulnerable families like women headed households, and households afflicted by CKDu. 
Through project support, the CBOs can become financially viable organization supplying safer, reliable water and 
ensuring O&M of the systems through the income generated.  The income generated is also used for operating costs of 
the CBO (employees, travel, etc.) and to maintain reserves for community development investments (such as sewing 
machines for female-headed households). 
 
61. 
A number of community managed water supply schemes have been abandoned due to water sources drying up 
or poor quality of water.  In many of the target districts, water shortages have compounded ground water contamination 
issues as well as reduced the water table well such that community water supply systems have begun to fail.  Simple 
treatment alone will not be sufficient. The advanced filtration systems will operationalize abandoned drinking water 
systems providing clean water to households, hospitals and schools in these rural areas where, currently, users buy water 
from private vendors. The ease of access will have significant human development benefits in the region including gender 
benefits. It is critical to address the water quality issues to ensure community buy-in and to attract investments into long-
term solutions. Without addressing the urgent and immediate issue of drinking water quality, for the communities in the 
targeted area, longer-term solutions will be challenged to take off. The GCF financing will invest in capacity building of 
these communities and long-term solutions to address water quality. This will pave the way for communities to invest in 
water supply schemes in the long-run as well. Overall, this Output includes the following key activities: 
 
Activity 2.1 Improve capacity of water-supply support staff at district/divisions, selected partner organisations 
(NGOs) and CBOs to implement and maintain community-based climate change risk informed drinking water 
related interventions: Village irrigation reservoirs are a key source of drinking water in the Dry Zone. As such, the 
expected risks on drinking water on both the supply and demand side as climate change needs should be incorporated 
into the cascade water management plans in Output 1. The activity focuses on planning and capacity building to address 
the barriers of technical capacity and institutional coordination related to provision of safe drinking water to the Dry Zone 
communities. The capacities of local officials and women-led CBOs will be strengthened for climate-risk management

=== PAGE 26 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 79 
 
 
C 
related to drinking water sources, supply systems, and quality monitoring and management.  The activity will support 
training and mobilization to ensure the drinking water needs in light of a changing climate are incorporated into cascade 
development plans implemented through cascade-level water committees and water source protection committees. It will 
also build capacities for climate-risk informed planning for water source protection and quality monitoring coordinating 
with NWSDB. These will inform the selection of climate-risk informed treatment methods appropriate for the water 
sources.  
 
62. 
This activity focuses on strengthening of women-led CBOs and their coordination with irrigation water 
management structures at divisional, ASC and village level. Training for CBOs will include climate-risk management, 
financial management to run water supply schemes as rural social enterprises, technical upkeep of systems, and regular 
refresher trainings at DNCWS to promote climate-resilient, O&M practices. Overall, this activity includes: 
• 
Training of cascade-level water committees and the divisional officers on integrating climate-risks and adaptation 
options for drinking water access and quality into the sub-basin water resources development planning (plans 
developed under Output 1) 
• 
Development of climate-risk informed, cascade-level water supply source protection plans and mobilization of  
water source protection committees. 
• 
Training local CBOs, especially targeting women’s groups in rural areas in conjunction with the DNCWS, to 
design and manage climate-resilient water supply systems as rural enterprises. The training will include climate-
risk management, financial management, technical upkeep of systems, and regular refresher trainings at 
DNCWS to promote O&M best practices. 
• 
Training of local masons to construct ferro-cement rainwater harvesting tanks for domestic purposes. This 
involves increasing the local skilled labour base to meet the demand for increased household level rainwater 
harvesting. 
 
Activity 2.2 Implement sustainable, climate-resilient drinking water solutions through CBOs and government 
agencies: GCF resources and government co-financing will be invested to establish climate-resilient, community water 
systems (with simple treatment) for water extracted from irrigation systems and domestic rainwater harvesting (RWH) 
systems to supplement drinking water during prolonged dry periods. In addition, advanced purification and filtrations 
systems will be established to supplement long-term measures such as ecological agronomic practices (Output 1) that 
impact drinking water quality. This activity addresses the technical and financial barriers related to investments in rural 
water supply schemes, improved water treatment and purification schemes and domestic rainwater harvesting units. The 
design and operation of these systems will incorporate climate risks and information (including advisories and forecasts 
generated under Output 3) and will be fully integrated into the cascade water management planning (Output 1).  
 
63. 
Typically, in rural Sri Lanka, community-based organizations (predominantly women-led CBOs) operate water 
supply schemes and treatment units as local businesses with technical support from the National Water Supply and 
Drainage Board for O&M.  Generally in targeted villages, over 50% of the households are farmers so families are often 
represented in both FO and water CBOs but joint, climate-risk informed planning and monitoring of access and quality 
of water will be value added from the project. Enabling young women to take on the technical and financial roles of 
water supply infrastructure management has proven to be successful in earlier implemented community water supply 
programmes and this entrepreneurship model will be promoted through this activity and result in viable employment 
(through fee collection for part of the O&M costs) and income generation (from advanced purification and filtration 
systems water supply) (as detailed in Annex II, Feasibility Report, Section 5.4). A detailed O&M plan, including post-
project O&M is provided in Section B of Annex XIII.  Overall, this activity includes: 
• Climate-risk informed design and implementation of 35 community water supply systems (with government 
co-financing) associated with village irrigation systems. These systems will take water from the reservoir or a 
well close to the reservoir and incorporate simple physical/biological treatments such as filtration, chlorination 
or UV to bring the quality to acceptable potable levels.  
• Installing at least 4000 domestic rainwater-harvesting tanks of 5000-6000 litres. This involves establishing 
domestic rainwater harvesting units with community co-investments. 
• Establishing 125 advanced water purification and filtration systems to treat existing drinking water intakes to 
ensure quality and safety and address water quality issues in areas with high incidence of water-related 
chronic diseases. 55 of these systems will be used to supply water for schools and hospitals.

=== PAGE 27 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 79 
 
 
C 
• Support O&M of the infrastructure through women-led CBOs for CWSS, focusing on adaptation to the 
changing climate. The O&M for the advanced purification and filtration systems are covered through incomes 
generated by the CBOs managing these systems. 
• Enhance water quality monitoring and source protection through source protection committees, addressing 
climate risks and impacts. Water quality testing will be facilitated through DCNWS/ NWSDB offices for 
technical support and laboratory services. 
 
Output 3: Strengthening climate and hydrological observing and forecasting systems to enhance water 
management and adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers to droughts and floods 
Interventions in this output are related to improvements in the generation, modelling, and dissemination of 
weather/climate and hydrological information. This will include providing access to weather/climate related knowledge, 
such as advice on future seasonal conditions (for agricultural planning) and early warning of storms and flooding for flood 
and water management including planning of water release from irrigation tanks. Section 5.5 of the Feasibility Report 
(Annex II) recommends a suite of interventions that address gaps in both physical infrastructure, training and capacity 
building which, if addressed, will improve the information available to plan water- and agriculturally-related management 
activities in the catchment. These include: monitoring weather and hydrological conditions so that there is a clearer and 
more disaggregated understanding of the current situation and worsening conditions are detected in a timely manner and 
improved forecasting both of weather conditions (high intensity rainfall causing flooding) and seasonal conditions 
(affecting agriculture and long-term water management). It also identifies additional activities towards disseminating and 
using this information for agriculture and water management in the cascades, as well as capacitating relevant institutions 
involved in forecasting and flood water management to iteratively generate flood risk maps.  Improved climate and 
hydrological monitoring networks will provide fundamental data for improving forecasts in the long term (through 
developing statistical corrections to forecast model outputs), as well as calibrating satellite data and hydrological models 
to increase the extent to which information can be generated i.e. to areas not directly covered by the network. Training 
DoM, DAD, DoA and ID staff to operate and maintain these systems will contribute towards sustainability and successful 
implementation of the O&M plan with government co-financing sustaining these investments beyond the project duration. 
Improvement of forecasting capabilities within DoM will ensure they use updated techniques to generate accurate and 
skillful forecasts. 
 
64. 
Participatory co-development of tailored advisories (with FOs, farmers, DAD and ID) will ensure that weather and 
climate information is incorporated into decision making in agricultural and water management in the three river basins. 
Satellite-based estimates of rainfall generated through this Output will be used to extend advisories to areas not covered 
by the ground-monitoring network, hence reducing reliance on the network of raingauges. Participatory meetings and 
inter-agency workgroups will utilize feedback from FOs, farmers and VIS water managers to develop advisories for 
agriculture and water management. Different media (TV, radio and mobile technologies) will be used for dissemination of 
warnings to reach all parts of society, particularly women. This Output also addresses capacity barriers at local level to 
plan for and identify response measures to warnings and advisories. It will focus on identifying responses to floods, 
through mapping flood inundation levels, as well as developing plans, which identify appropriate spill areas in cascade 
systems and agricultural assets and infrastructure at risk. It will also develop response plans for agriculture to seasonal 
forecasts and associated advisories, as well as appropriate water management options. Coordination meetings and SOPs 
between DoM, DAD, DoA, DMC and ID at the district level will be developed to ensure appropriate coordination takes 
place. This output includes the following key activities: 
 
Activity 3.1 Establish effective monitoring systems for drought, floods and water management:  This activity 
expands the meteorological and hydrological observational network coverage by installing, operating and maintaining 
monitoring equipment in key catchments and VIS systems. This will enable DAD, ID and FOs to better understand and 
monitor current conditions within the cascade systems, as well as streamflow, which may cause flooding of agricultural 
areas further downstream. Agrometeorological data will be used to estimate a suite of products including 
evapotranspiration and soil moisture, which will help detect the onset of agricultural droughts. Along with 10 automatic 
rainfall gauges the rainfall data will be used to support the development of satellite-based estimates in activity 3.2. 
Additionally these data can help refine MOS-based forecasts (see 3.2), once a suitably long time-series (approximately 
3-5 years) becomes available. Automated water level sensors (50) will be used by DAD and ID to monitor water levels at 
critical points in the three river basins, which along with 8 streamflow gauges, will allow early detection of rising flood 
waters. Water levels and rainfall will be monitored in VIS systems by FOs and farmers using 330 manual staff (water-
level) and rainfall gauges.

=== PAGE 28 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 79 
 
 
C 
65. 
This activity also supports training and capacity building of DoM staff to develop weather (using Model Output 
Statistics) and seasonal forecasting abilities (using improved statistical and dynamical modeling), as well as of the 
relevant government departments’ field officers, staff and FOs to operate and maintain (O&M) the equipment in the field. 
Where equipment is sited close to VIS systems, FOs will be encouraged to O&M equipment, taking care of routine 
maintenance, with technical agencies called in whenever specialized knowledge is required. Overall, this activity includes: 
• 
Siting and verification for location of equipment based on target FOs, basins and waterways  
• 
Establishment of 5 automatic Agro-meteorological stations (AMS) in key agricultural zones to monitor weather 
and climate conditions in real time 
• 
Establish 10 automatic rainfall stations to improve the coverage for rainfall monitoring in the 3 river basins 
• 
Establish 50 automated water level sensors to improve the monitoring capabilities of water levels in the 3 river 
basins 
• 
Establish 8 streamflow gauges and rainfall sensors to improve knowledge of flows and potential downstream 
flooding  
• 
Establish 330 manual water level and rainfall gauges in village irrigation systems and the three river basins.  
• 
Training of forecasters to apply/develop new statistical and dynamical approaches to seasonal forecasting of 
drought and agromet related parameters 
• 
Training of forecasters to apply/develop Model Output Statistics (MOS) and skill testing to weather forecasts of 
high intensity rainfall and flooding 
• 
Training of field officers (DAD, DoA, DoM, ID) on operations & maintenance of equipment 
• 
Install communications and ICT equipment at ASCs to enhance capacity to receive and utilise warnings and 
advisories 
 
Activity 3.2 Co-develop and disseminate weather- and climate-based advisories for agricultural and water 
management through ASCs and FOs to farmers and village water managers: 
This activity address institutional capacity and financial barriers related to provision of early warnings and forecasting. It 
supports the eestablishment of protocols and SOPs for generating, sharing and using weather data and information 
between national agencies (DoM, DAD, ID and DMC) and ASCs/FOs. It will involve the sensitization of communities and 
FOs to the availability of weather and climate information, as well as the function of any local equipment, which will be 
used to generate data used in the advisories. Through this activity a sense of ownership will be cultivated to avoid 
vandalism of equipment etc. The sense of ownership will be further promoted through co-development of information 
requirements for agriculture and water management. A training of trainers to use and adapt weather/climate based 
advisories will be undertaken to enable FOs and lead farmers to understand the historical context of climate information 
as a basis for understanding the implication of and using weather and seasonal forecasts.  
 
66. 
Satellite-based estimates of rainfall will be generated and made operationally available to DoM and other 
agencies as a basis for developing new agro-meteorological and water management products in areas not sufficiently 
covered by rainfall measurements. Development of these products will be discussed and designed through inter-agency 
working groups, which will also contribute to synthesizing and balancing product development with information 
requirements articulated through the co-development meetings with FOs and communities. Additionally, advisories for 
agriculture, water management and floods will be synthesized and condensed for SMS/mobile communications, as well 
as being translated into local languages. These will be disseminated through mobile platforms (using the DEWN system 
operated by DMC and Dialog telecom), as well as other media such as radio. Staff from all agencies will be trained to 
understand weather/climate forecasts, and a central repository and GIS tools used to combine weather/climate 
information with the flood risk mapping (from 3.3) and other sources of risk-related information (on assets, poverty, 
vulnerability), including drought monitoring information from the IWMI. A market study will also help to identify potential 
paying clients for weather/climate-related services in the future. Specifically activities will entail: 
• Sensitization of communities through FOs and ASCs, for uptake of agromet information and advisories 
• Co-development of information requirements through ASCs (FOs, DoM, DAD, DoA), including training of 
trainers to understand and use advisories 
• Generation and operationalization of satellite-based estimates of rainfall, including training of trainers to ensure 
DoM staff are able to access and use the information. 
• Development of advisories for agriculture and water management, including inter-agency working groups. 
• Synthesize and disseminate agriculture advisories on agricultural best practices, flood warnings, and water-
related information linked to weather and seasonal forecasts through media such as radio shows, as well as 
mobile and other platforms. Real-time water level information and early warnings will be disseminated/ 
communicated to the FOs through local mobile networks.

=== PAGE 29 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 79 
 
 
C 
• Design SOPs for data sharing (including data collected by agromet, rainfall, streamflow and water level 
sensors) and communication of flood/drought warnings between DoM, DAD, ID and FOs. 
• Develop procedures for combining data collected through a central repository to identify risks using GIS-based 
tools. Meteorological and hydrological data combined with information on assets, livelihoods and vulnerability. 
• Training of staff to use and understand weather and seasonal forecasts for water management (DoM, DoA, 
DAD, ID). 
• Training and development for DOM/DAD/DoA/ID staff to access IWMI drought monitoring information and 
combine with locally collected drought related information and forecasts. 
• Market study to establish potential revenue generating services for agricultural, water management and flood 
advisories/warnings in the 3 river basins. This study will lay the groundwork for future work to generate public 
and private sector participation and markets for use of tailored advisories. 
 
Activity 3.3 Develop climate-risk management response measures based on advisories and forecasts for 
agriculture, water management and flooding in cascade systems: 
This activity will develop and plan appropriate climate risk management responses to the advisories developed through 
activity 3.2, including the additional impacts expected through climate change. This will involve inundation area mapping 
of areas in the three river basins prone to flooding in order to set the baseline flooding scenarios expected without climate 
change. Fieldwork will be undertaken to estimate historical flood lines and geo-locate assets, property and agriculturally-
related infrastructure in these areas and this information, along with climate and hydrological observations, will be 
collected and used to identify areas prone to flooding. Flood risk maps, along with those of assets and infrastructure at 
risk, will be used in the data repository described in 3.2. Based on this and stakeholder meetings with communities and 
FOs, plans will be developed for VIS and downstream communities to prepare for and respond to flood warnings, including 
measures such as improved drainage, water diversions and synchronizing the opening of spill gates. Plans will include 
assessments of the potential for change in climate to alter these recommended measures, helping to identify measures 
that are likely to be robust under climate change, as well as those measures that may break down if the climate changes 
significantly. (e.g. if rainfall intensities increase) Similar plans for responding to agricultural and water management 
advisories will be developed in consultation with FOs and communities, as well as preparedness measures to protect 
assets and agricultural infrastructure. Agriculture and water management plans will identify suitable responses to 
advisories for drought (including the impact of multi-season and multi-year droughts the risk from which may increase in 
the future) and higher than average rainfall, including the provision of water for irrigation, which needs to be balanced 
with the provision of safe drinking water (through Output 2). 
• 
Conduct inundation area mapping, including assets, property and services at risk from flooding under different 
flooding scenarios (including under future changes in rainfall). 
• 
Design and implement SOPs at the district-level to enable coordination of responses to agricultural and water 
management advisories, between DoM, DAD, DoA, DMC and ID. 
• 
Develop community/FO based response plans for agriculture and water management, including stakeholder 
meetings at ASCs, which integrate advisories and forecast products, as well as potential changes due to climate 
change. 
• 
Develop flood response measures for VIS/drinking water systems (DoM, DAD, ID). Identify spill areas in 30 
cascades. Synchronize spill gates with forecast rainfall and inflows. Promote adaptation measures such as 
improved drainage in command area and water diversions, ponds and wetlands in the watersheds of flood prone 
tanks in the cascades. Identify measures that are more likely to be resilient under extremes in a future climate. 
• 
Develop flood preparedness measures to protect assets and agricultural infrastructure in 30 cascades. Simple 
household adaptation measures for livelihood and water security (such as raised platforms for grain storage and 
livestock/raised rainwater storage tanks) will be introduced to households facing flood risk.   
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity) 
67. 
The Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment (MMDE) of Sri Lanka is the sponsor for the proposed 
project. The Cabinet Ministry was created in February 2015 by amalgamating the mandates of two large Ministries under 
the President. The MMDE is mandated to coordinate and oversee environmental conservation and natural resources 
management and water management and includes the only river basin authority of the country. The ministry has framed 
key policies for adoption in management of environment and natural resources of the country including on forest 
management, waste and chemicals management and climate change. 
 
68. 
Financial status and project support: For 2016, Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment has received 
an annual allocation of USD 500 million from the government for management of environment and natural resources of 
the country. Over the past few years, Ministry of Environment has received and managed projects with grant funding

=== PAGE 30 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 79 
 
 
C 
including from Government of Korea, Government of Japan, Asian Development Bank, UNDP, WFP, UNEP, and EXIM 
Bank – Korea. The Ministry’s recurrent expenditure allocation for the upcoming years of 2016 and 2017 will be USD 26 
million and USD 29.4 million respectively. Further, the capital expenditure denoting investment in environmental and water 
management projects implemented throughout the country for the two years is projected to be USD 55 million for 2016 
and USD 67 million for 2017. These include projects funded by GEF, Adaptation Fund and EU.  
 
69. 
MMDE has extensive past experience in executing large foreign funded projects and is also currently managing 
ongoing portfolio of foreign and government funded development projects. MASL (Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka) 
operates under MMDE as a semi-autonomous institution which has completed an array of large hydro and water resource 
development initiatives and its past experience will serve well in the implementation of the proposed project.  MMDE has 
played a major role in the successful implementation of the Pro-poor Economic Advancement and Community 
Empowerment (PEACE) project (USD 33.6million, 2006-2011)  in Kurunegala and Anuradhapura Districts to empower 
the farming community for increasing the productivity of their Agriculture lands through rehabilitation of Irrigation systems 
using a long given by the Japan Bank of International Corporation. In addition, major projects such as, Uma Oya 
Multipurpose Development Project (UOMDP, over USD500 million) and Dam Safety and Water Resource Planning 
Project (DSWRPP, over USD70 million) are currently being implemented. 
 
70. 
As the Implementing Partner under UNDP NIM modality, MMDE will provide project management support and 
in-kind contribution to project implementation through its technical and administrative staff and systems. It will provide 
operations and management support to the project through its staff as well as the dedicated PMU set up for the project. 
MMDE will also function as the ‘Executive’ in the Project Board. A micro-capacity assessment for the IP was undertaken 
by UNDP for another project with satisfactory results.  A detailed capacity assessment will be undertaken for the IP for 
the proposed project prior to project implementation.. Departments, Statutory Institutions and Public Corporations under 
the purview of the MMDE are: Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka, Central Engineering Consultancy Bureau (CECB), 
Moraghakanda & Kalu Ganga Reservoir Projects, Dam Safety and Water Resource Planning Project, Uma Oya 
Development Project, Department of Forests, Central Environmental Authority, Geological Survey and Mines Bureau, 
State Timber Corporation, Marine Environment Protection Authority, National Gem and Jewellery Authority and Coast 
Conservation Department. 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
71. 
The project, through Activity 1.3, will work with farmer organisations and producer groups (focusing on women 
and youth) to create sustainable and fair markets for agro products developed and promoted as climate smart crops. The 
project will engage with established marketing networks in the provinces and local regions, but work towards creating 
niche markets for ecologically produced and climate resistant new crops/agro technologies.  The products and services 
generated by the project include climate smart agro-technology packages and tailored agricultural advisories and 
information for water management. These value-added products are relevant for: (a) SMEs such as small-scale farmer 
enterprises, community drinking water supply enterprises, technology providers, agri-businesses, commercial scale fruit, 
spice and vegetable producers, agro product traders and transporters; and (b) Public sector agencies and private service 
providers in sectors such as agriculture, crop insurance, local tourism, agriculture transport, water supply system 
managers and water managers in a multitude of organisations. Finance and insurance services for agriculture and related 
service provision could also be spurred through reliable seasonal forecasting and tailored agro-technology packages. 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)

=== PAGE 31 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 79 
 
 
C 
72. 
There are no applicable licenses or permits for the implementation of the project. In addition, there are no tax 
implications applicable to village irrigation development, community water supply, and domestic rainwater harvesting 
systems or agriculture development. Agrarian Development Act stipulates the regulatory environment for development of 
village irrigation systems and water management therein (including water sharing among multiple users). Department of 
Agrarian Development and National Water Supply and Drainage Board are mandated for the investments in minor 
irrigation and drinking water systems. There are no licensing or permit requirements for these works.  There is also no 
licensing or permitting authority for hydromet infrastructure in the country. 
 
73. 
For activities related to procurement of services, including training, through UNDP, according to the SBAA signed 
with the GOSL, taxes are not applicable. Section 7 of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United 
Nations provides, inter alia, that the United Nations, including its subsidiary organs, is exempt from all direct taxes, except 
charges for utilities services, and is exempt from customs duties and charges of a similar nature in respect of articles 
imported or exported for its official use.  If the services are procured directly by the GOSL implementing partners, then 
the national procedures apply, which entail the payment of the Domestic Tax (VAT) amounting to 12.5% where applicable 
(e.g. venue and food for training). 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements 
74. 
The project will be implemented following UNDP’s National Implementation Modality (NIM), according to 
the Standard Basic Assistance Agreement between UNDP and the Government of Sri Lanka, the Country 
Programme Action Plan (CPAP), and as policies and procedures outlined in the UNDP POPP. (see 
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/ppm/Pages/Defining-a-Project.aspx) The national executing entity - also referred 
to as the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP terminology - is required to implement the project in compliance 
with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and procedures (including the NIM Guidelines).  In legal terms, this is 
ensured through the national Government’s signature of the UNDP Standard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA), 
together with a UNDP project document44, which will be signed by the Implementing Partner to govern the use of 
the funds (once the funds are secured). The Standard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA) was signed with the 
GOSL on May 29, 1990.  
 
 
 
                                                             
 
44 An example of a signed project document (cover page) is provided at http://cfapp2.undp.org/gef/documents/1/g4958/g2_19062/Prodoc Signature Page 
for PIMS 4958.pdf 
A sample letter of agreement between IP and Responsible Party is provided at http://cfapp2.undp.org/gef/documents/1/g4710/g2_19222/2013-12-
04_MoU_LDCF2_Final_Signed.pdf

=== PAGE 32 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 79 
 
 
C 
75. 
The Implementing Partner for this project is Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment (MMDE). 
MMDE is accountable to UNDP for managing the project, including the monitoring and evaluation of project interventions, 
achieving project outcomes, and for the effective use of UNDP resources.  UNDP, in agreement with the Government of 
Sri Lanka, will provide extensive implementation support (support to NIM) and oversight through UNDP Country Office 
in Sri Lanka. The following parties will enter into agreements with MMDE to assist in successfully delivering project 
outcomes and are directly accountable to MMDE as outlined in the terms of their agreement: Department of Agrarian 
Development (DAD); the Department of Agriculture (DoA); Department of National Community Water Supply (DNCWS); 
National Water Supply and Drainage Board (NWSDB) and Ministry of Disaster Management (MOD). UNDP has overall 
oversight of the IP and Responsible parties to ensure compliance with its policies and procedures. 
 
76. 
The Project Management Unit, established under the MMDE will have three thematic coordinators to liaise with 
responsible parties for each output. The management arrangements for this project are summarized in the chart below: 
 
 
77. 
The Project Board is comprised of Secretary MMDE, the National Project Director from MMDE (an Additional 
Secretary, Water Management Division) and the DNA (Designated National Authority, Climate Change Secretariat) and 
a representative of the Inter-Ministerial Coordinating Committee. As the Senior Beneficiary, the implementing partner is 
part of the board. Furthermore, as the Senior Supplier, UNDP provides quality assurance for the project, ensures 
adherence to the NIM guidelines and ensures compliance with GCF and UNDP policies and procedures. The Project 
Board45 is responsible for making, by consensus, management decisions when guidance is required by the Project 
Manager. Project Board decisions will be made in accordance with standards that shall ensure management for 
development results, best value money, fairness, integrity, transparency and effective international competition. In case 
a consensus cannot be reached within the Board, final decision shall rest with the UNDP (represented by the UNDP 
Programme Manager). The Project Board will meet twice year. A sub-committee comprising of National Project Director 
(MMDE/Senior Beneficiary) and Project Team will be delegated to provide more regular and periodic (monthly) guidance 
and implementation support to the PMU. UNDP will participate in sub-committee meetings in its oversight capacity as and 
when needed. 
 
Project Management 
Unit: 
National Project Manager 
Thematic project officers  
District coordinators 
Safeguards and Gender 
Officer 
Communications Officer 
M&E Officer 
Finance Officer 
Procurement Support 
Admin support 
PROJECT BOARD 
Senior Beneficiary: Additional Secretary, 
MMDE; Representative IMCC and  
NDA (Climate Change Secretariat) 
Executive:  
Secretary MMDE 
Senior Supplier: UNDP  
(Represented by Deputy Country 
Director (Operations and Programme)  
Project 
Assurance: 
UNDP 
(Country 
Office- 
Colombo, 
Regional Hub-
Bangkok and 
HQ-New 
York) 
Responsible Parties 
Department of Agrarian 
Development 
Department of Agriculture  
 
Department of National 
Community water Supply 
National water Supply and 
Drainage Board 
 
Ministry of Disaster 
Management  
 
Project Support:  
-Inter-Ministerial Coordinating Committee (IMCC) 
- Expert team for project monitoring and advice (TAC) 
-Agrarian Services Centres, Provincial Departments of Irrigation and Agriculture, NGOs, CBOs for Water Supply and FOs, 
Divisional Secretariat 
Sub-Committee:  
National Project Director 
(MMDE/Senior 
Beneficiary) and Project 
Team

=== PAGE 33 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 79 
 
 
C 
78. 
The Project Manager46 will run the project on a day-to-day basis on behalf of MMDE within the constraints laid 
down by the Project Board. The Project Manager function will end when the final project terminal evaluation report and 
other documentation required by the GCF and UNDP has been completed and submitted to UNDP.  The Project Manager 
is responsible for day-to-day management and decision-making for the project. The Project Manager’s prime responsibility 
is to ensure that the project produces the results specified in the project document, to the required standard of quality and 
within the specified constraints of time and cost. The annual work plan is prepared by the Project Manager and reviewed 
and approved by PB. However, the final approval is provided by the Regional Technical Advisor, Global Environmental 
Finance Unit of UNDP as part of the quality assurance role. The Project Manager is also responsible for managing and 
monitoring the project risks initially identified and submit new risks to the project board for consideration and decision on 
possible actions if required and update the status of these risks by maintaining the project risks log according to the NIM 
Guidelines.  
 
79. 
Project Support comprises of an Inter-ministerial Coordinating Committee (IMCC) and a Technical Advisory 
Committee (TAC) to enable coordination between the key actors of this multi-sectoral project. The IMC established under 
the Presidential Secretariat during project preparation to provide inputs and endorsement of project design will continue 
as the national coordinating and monitoring body. The TAC, consisting of 4-6 paid experts will support the Project Board 
and Inter-Ministerial Committee. TAC members will be drawn from ex-government, private sector, academia and civil 
society to provide strategic guidance on the project drawing from international knowledge and best practices.  At the local 
cascade level, which will be unit of planning and intervention of the project- the Agrarian Services Centres will provide 
the coordination and implementation support function. The Divisional Secretary, whose jurisdiction overlaps with the ASC 
coverage area, can play the role of project monitoring which is generally an assigned function of the office and also play 
a key role in the grievance redress mechanism for the project, as described in the Environmental and Social Management 
Plan (Annex VI).   
 
80. 
Local stakeholders and community members have a key role in the implementation and monitoring of the project. 
During the inception phase of the project, MMDE working together with UNDP, will consult with all stakeholders, including 
vulnerable community members, FOs, CBOs, etc. and facilitate an understanding of the roles, functions, and 
responsibilities within the Project's decision-making structures, including reporting and communication lines, and conflict 
resolution mechanisms. The project Logic Framework (indicators, means of verification, assumptions) will be reviewed 
and the quarterly and annual plans will be refined engaging the communities from the targeted districts. The stakeholders 
will also be engaged during the mid-term and final evaluations to assess the progress of the project and enable adaptive 
project management in response to the needs and priorities of the communities. 
                                                             
 
45 Sample ToR for Project Board: http://cfapp2.undp.org/gef/documents/1/g5710/g2_20672/PIMS3603TORProjectBoard.pdf 
46 Sample ToRs for project manager: http://cfapp2.undp.org/gef/documents/1/g5710/g2_20672/PIMS3603TORProjectManager.pdf; Sample ToR for 
Project Administrative and Financial Assistant: http://cfapp2.undp.org/gef/documents/1/g5710/g2_20672/PIMS3603TORProjectFinanceAdmin.pdf 
 
 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation 
Timetable of Project Implementation: The implementation schedule with detailed activity progress timeline and output 
completion, including monitoring and evaluation is provided in Annex X.

=== PAGE 34 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 79 
 
 
 
 
D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement 
 
 
81. 
The project is a game-changer in the following ways which are innovative and demonstrate value-add for GCF. 
With GCF financing: 
• 
Irrigation water, drinking water, and agriculture are brought together to address resilience of farmers 
holistically, and at scale; 
• 
An innovative approach is adopted in the design to demonstrate that both irrigation and drinking water needs 
can be viably met and managed; 
• 
Potential for replication and scale (number of beneficiaries reached as well as geographical coverage) is 
made possible by enhancing an integrated approach to climate risk management across sectors and sub-
basins by supporting climate-risk informed planning and implementation (cascade level water mgmt. 
committees) and district wide knowledge management and coordinated service delivery (through ASCs). 
 
82. 
Without GCF involvement to complement ongoing efforts and address gaps, GoSL cannot take adequate steps 
to help vulnerable smallholder farmers adapt to climate-related risks and impacts to water security.  GCF support enables 
additional investments that allow scaling up existing efforts for transformative reach and impact across the country. GCF 
involvement is critical to: 
 
83. 
Addressing the financial limitations in investing in the incremental costs of climate change resilience 
building in Dry Zone smallholder farming systems: Farmers in Dry Zone had devised, and largely maintained through 
own resources, traditional systems for effective management of water to cultivate in a rain-deficit environment and have 
used these systems for centuries. However, these systems have deteriorated over the years due a number of underlying 
causes including degradation of watersheds, intensive cultivation, and the armed conflict. Compounding this, there has 
been a cycle of climate change related extreme weather events in the past ten years that severely impacted on these 
systems. The intensity and frequency of the hydro-meteorological hazards as a result of climate change has left farmers 
with very little recovery time, and hence unable to repair and resume work in village irrigation systems. Smallholder 
farmers, who eke out a subsistence-level livelihood and manage their food through village irrigation systems clearly have 
insufficient resources to invest in addressing the incremental costs of enhancing resilience of these cascade systems. 
With the impacts of climate change expected to worsen, the Government of Sri Lanka recognises the importance of 
ensuring that the water distribution systems for small holder farmers is reconstructed and enhanced in a manner that is 
climate change risk informed. GCF resources are critical to address the incremental costs of climate-resilient water 
distribution systems and management practices, building on such baseline investments as maintenance of minor 
irrigation systems, pesticide-free agriculture and food security to address rural under-nutrition, establishment of new 
drinking water treatment plants in rural areas to address chronic kidney disease, treatment and early diagnosis for CKDu, 
implementing water safety plans to address point source pollution of drinking water sources, drought relief and flood 
preparedness by government agencies such as Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Irrigation, Ministry of City Planning 
and Water Supply, Ministry of Disaster Management and Ministry of  Health. 
 
84. 
Crowding in public and private sector financing and mobilizing community-level investments: GCF 
resources will catalyse government investment in resilience building of the Dry Zone farmers through mobilization of 
institutional and financial support towards the proposed investments in the form of co-financing of development 
investments (to address non-climatic drivers as well), staff support, and O&M support. Without GCF financing, as noted 
in the barriers section, the financial gaps and institutional barriers, impede government investments into a holistic, 
integrated approach to climate-resilient, water management in the Dry Zone. GCF resources enable combining of 
resources to support adaptation investments, which, along with mobilization of communities, assure resilient and 
sustained benefits of the infrastructure. The project also supports enterprise development and mobilizes MSE and private 
sector investments, particularly through women producers in climate-smart agriculture, FOs and CBOs in water supply 
and management, agri-businesses along the value chain, and ICT platforms for climate information and advisories. GCF 
funding through this project will facilitate sustained public and private participation and scale-up several successful 
models of government-community partnerships and inter-government agency collaboration. GCF support will incentivise 
government agencies to invest in improved coordination, mobilize communities to invest in managing public services, 
encourage farmers to invest in land and in water management, and through positive externalities, incentivize private 
sector investments beyond the project lifetime.

=== PAGE 35 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 79 
 
 
 
 
D 
85. 
Reaching the most vulnerable: GCF funding will directly reach and support a very vulnerable group of people 
who were dragged deeper into a cycle of poverty, food deficits and debt due to combined impacts of remoteness, conflict, 
and, now, increasing climate change risks and related disasters. Many of these farmers, who used to grow their own 
rice, were reduced to purchasing food. Smallholder farmers living in village irrigation systems are poorer and more 
disconnected from government service delivery than their counterparts who have access to large-scale irrigation. They 
have very limited market access, poor basic infrastructure such as roads, drinking water and communication, and are 
also disadvantaged due to other social and health issues such as conflict and chronic disease. Such villages have very 
few alternate employment or income opportunities, forcing families to take tough decisions such as sending sons to the 
armed forces, women migrating as domestic help to oil-rich middle-eastern countries and children dropping out of school 
early in order to survive. In areas directly affected by conflict, families are resettling in to villages where the basin 
infrastructure has been neglected for years and then decimated by recent extreme weather events. In the long run, 
investing in village irrigation systems will have a number of spin-off benefits that impact on this baseline vulnerability as 
well, by creating rural enterprises and allowing young men and women to engage more in managing water related 
solutions and technologies. Dealing with their vulnerabilities now will preclude the need to have extensive relief and other 
safety nets to respond to climate change events that are expected to aggravate in the future.  
 
86. 
Without GCF support, Sri Lanka will not be able to invest in the resilience of the village irrigation systems and 
integrated water management to guard against the increasing climate risks and impacts worsening the plight of 
smallholder farmers in the Dry Zone. By restoring these systems with new and improved features that increase resilience 
to climate change and investing in the supportive development of technologies, knowledge and institutional capacities, 
GCF investment will help GOSL strengthen the country’s adaptive capabilities in water management. These systems 
could well become an international best practice in adaptation for rural smallholder farmers in other countries with similar 
climate change impacts.   
D.2. Exit Strategy 
 
87. 
The proposed project has been designed in close consultation with and involvement of relevant government 
agencies and technical line Departments, International agencies such as IWMI and IUCN, local NGOs, local and national 
private sector, Farmer Organisations and women-led CBOs in the target river basins. These consultations and 
discussions (detailed in Annex XIII), combined with tried and tested models for improved and resilient water management 
that are detailed out in Annexes 4,5 and 6 of the Feasibility Report (Annex II) provide the project with a sound approach 
and suite of interventions which are implemented with strong community participation and engagement of local officials. 
Building on this foundation, the project ensures that the investments as well as the results of the interventions are 
sustained beyond the project period and in the longer-term through the following elements of project design and 
implementation: 
 
88. 
Combining traditional knowledge and practices with climate-resilient technologies and innovative 
practices: Building on traditional systems and mechanisms of village irrigation, maintenance models, and community 
organizational structures, such as the FOs that have buy-in and ownership amongst the smallholder farmers, provides 
a strong basis to integrate climate-resilient design and practices thereby enabling adoption for the long-term. Capacity 
building and training on climate-risk informed planning, design, and implementation of climate-resilient practices will be 
more effective through these locally suited and community-owned systems.  Interventions in upgrading the systems 
through modern structural elements, increasing water capture and yield through partial de-silting and multi-use 
watersheds, field testing new crops and water-efficient irrigation conveyance, and improved early warning of rainfall and 
water level monitoring to manage gate operations will rejuvenate the existing, often dilapidated cascades and strengthen 
their functioning as buffers against increasing climate change variability and frequency of extreme events. 
 
89. 
Capacity building for integrated, locally owned solutions: GCF resources will be invested in building 
capacities for climate-resilient, integrated solutions for irrigation and drinking water following a landscape or ecosystem 
approach based on sub-river basins (cascade systems). The project promotes institutional planning and coordination 
across government officials and communities to overcome the sectoral and piecemeal approach to water management 
that had been adopted in the past. Project outputs will also contribute to enhancing organisational capacity of farmers to 
plan for and implement climate-risk informed local water management solutions, adopt technologies and systems for 
climate-smart agricultural production and safe drinking water, and integrate climate information and advisories for water 
management ensuring their financial and human resource viability post-project. In designing such solutions, the

=== PAGE 36 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 79 
 
 
 
 
D 
approach is to strongly engage communities at every level of planning and execution. By doing so, the project will not 
only ensure that the investments respond to beneficiary needs but also ensure that community organisations, including 
youth and women’s groups, will have sufficient technical and financial capacity to keep improving system design and 
operations, even as climate variability increases and seasons become more unpredictable.  
 
90. 
Co-investments by government institutions and communities: The project leverages domestic co-financing 
in the form of government financing that supports baseline funding of the proposed interventions as well as co-mingling 
of resources to support project implementation. Co investments (totalling USD 14M) for the project include investments 
from DAD towards village irrigation systems (VIS) rehabilitation and O&M in the project targeted river basins and districts 
and upgrading of ASCs; DOA towards development and dissemination of climate resilient agriculture packages and the 
co-development of tailored agricultural advisories; DNCWS to establish and manage and support O&M of community 
water supply systems including the training of CBOs; NWSDB to support design and development of community water 
supply schemes and water purification and filtration systems, water quality testing and monitoring, and O&M of these 
investments; and MOD to support flood and drought response for agriculture and water management in project targeted 
districts and O&M of observational networks. The project will also leverage considerable domestic/community co-
investment into the proposed activities. Drinking water solutions and farmer field trials of climate smart crops and agro-
technology will be implemented with community co-investments that can range from 15-30% of the capital cost (please 
see Technical Feasibility Report sections 5.4 and 5.7). Maintenance of village irrigation systems will be supported by 
FOs’ savings and collections improved through project interventions. Overall, domestic financing strengthens 
commitment and ownership in implementation of the project and enable these actors to sustain the investments beyond 
project duration. 
 
91. 
Ex-post plan for Operations and Maintenance of observing equipment: An O&M plan (project and for post-
project O&M) including the budgeting for the human and financial resources required for O&M for the project investments 
is presented in the Annex XIII. The plan reflects local ownership and commitment for the long-term sustainability of the 
project activities and outcomes. The costs of developing a long-term strategy for O&M, is provided for in the first two 
years, and the strategy will be reassessed towards project completion (final two years). GCF resources will finance and 
leverage financing to support the human and technical resources required for O&M initially, with a decreasing 
contribution towards the end of the project lifetime, after which domestic financing (from the budgets of designated 
authorities as reflected in the co-financing letters and local communities including FOs and CBOs) will continue to support 
O&M.  Project will also support FOs managing VIS to supplement their reserve funds with income from food fishery in 
the upgraded VIS. Project also builds in contingency funds for unforeseen events (e.g. climate shocks) and includes a 
provision for spare parts to last beyond the lifetime of the project. The farmers traditionally manage village irrigation 
systems and the project will improve the capacity of FOs (development of O&M and financing plans, O&M manuals, 
technical guidelines for water management, SOPs, initial seed fund, etc.) to function more efficiently. Supported by 
enhanced incomes from agriculture, it is envisaged that FO contribution would also improve. The CBOs managing 
drinking water supply systems will be capacitated to sustain the maintenance of community water supply facilities through 
initial support for stock of spare parts, training in maintenance and financial management, cascade level source 
protection plans, training of skilled labor, etc. The CBOs managing the advanced purification and filtration systems will 
cover the O&M costs through the incomes generated. For O&M of hydro-agro-met network, project supports 
maintenance of the equipment for a limited period after the warranty periods and training of government officials and 
local communities along with domestic financing is expected for post-project O&M.  
 
92. 
Promoting private sector participation through enterprise development and enabling environment: The 
project will promote entrepreneurship among communities to deliver a suite of new technologies for resilient agriculture, 
drinking water and climate information. It will build capacity of young men and women in these rural areas to engage in 
managing these ventures as enterprises in the village.  The engagement of women in FOs and as interlocutors between 
private sector markets for ecologically produced, climate smart crops will increase livelihood options and income sources 
for women entrepreneurs in villages.  Many rural water supply schemes already provide space for women-led CBOs to 
manage these schemes as local social enterprises. The project will also introduce IT-based climate information sharing 
platforms that can be developed and managed by local youth. Furthermore, the strengthened environment through 
enhanced institutional coordination (SOPs, water management plans, training of government agencies on planning and 
implementation), information and data sharing (incl. on EWs, forecasting, and advisories), and market linkages will

=== PAGE 37 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 79 
 
 
 
 
D 
 
enable and incentivize private sector investment beyond the project life time. For instance, strengthened value-chains 
for agriculture, improved ecosystems, enhanced climate information can spur private sector investments in agro-
processing, tourism and ecosystem services, insurance sector, etc. In addition, the project will strengthen the 
environment for engagement of microcredit institutions and banks as village level agri-businesses scale-up. Since there 
are many NGOs working with MFIs, the project resources will be invested in strengthening the demand and capacities 
of farmers and MSEs to engage with the MFIs.  The project will strengthen the capacity of farmers and micro enterprises 
through awareness, business development, technology transfer, improved income generation and facilitation of market 
linkages. Project will also strengthen the use and interpretation of climate information for effective business planning 
benefiting both farmers/micro enterprises as well as microcredit institutions.

=== PAGE 38 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas 
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential 
93. 
The project incorporates lessons learned and best practices from several successful international efforts in 
order to enable a transformative impact through the improvement of community irrigation water infrastructure and 
associated agricultural practices as well as a scale up of decentralized drinking water systems and effective Early 
Warning (EW), forecasting and water management systems to enhance the resilience of smallholder farmer livelihoods 
to climate-related impacts. Key lessons and success factors drawn include: i) upgrading village irrigation systems 
(small-scale rainwater storage reservoirs and related watersheds) in India47,48; ii) scaling up climate-smart agricultural 
practices in Vietnam49; iii) enhancing decentralized water supply and management solutions to provide safe drinking 
water to vulnerable communities in Bangladesh50; iv) Strengthening early warning, forecasting and water management 
systems to enhance the adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers to drought and floods in India.51 
 
94. 
The project will advance climate-resilient sustainable development of Sri Lanka by ensuring adaptation of its 
smallholder farmers in the Dry Zone (agricultural heartland of the country) to climate risks and impacts. It will contribute 
to the Fund Level Impacts of Increased resilience of health and wellbeing, and food and water security and increased 
resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities and regions. The climate-impact 
potential derives from the fact that GCF funding will support an integrated approach to strengthening the resilience of 
smallholder farmers in the Dry Zone through three inter-related outputs contributing to climate resilient water and 
agricultural management.  Please refer to the Project Logframe and Economic Analysis (Annex XII) for the assumptions 
and estimates of the impact potential: 
 
• 
The project will directly benefit 770,500 (about 70% of the vulnerable population in the seven districts) people 
in the three river basins of whom about 392,000 are female. The direct beneficiaries are a combination of the 
direct beneficiaries of the irrigation and agriculture investments, drinking water investments, and EWs and 
forecasting investments, not counting the overlapping populations. The project will indirectly benefit about 
1,179,000 more people of whom about 601,000 are female, with agriculture planning and water management 
advisories in the districts associated with the targeted river basins. Together, the total beneficiaries (approx. 
1.9M) account for 57% of the population across the seven districts.  This is about 9.6% of the population of the 
country. 
• 
Of the total direct beneficiary population, 520,000 smallholder farmers (254,800 males and 265,200 females) 
in the three river basins benefit through the adoption of diversified, climate resilient livelihood options related 
to climate-smart agriculture. (Fund Level impact, Result Area A1.0)  
• 
Related to Result Area A2.0, the project also benefits about 517,800 people who receive year round and safe 
drinking water (through direct investments in drinking water systems) and whose drinking water supply systems 
are protected and sustained through flood advisories disseminated through cascade water management 
committees and through SMS. This includes 445,500 beneficiaries of flood advisories under Output 3 which 
subsumes the 144,700 people benefiting from drinking water systems. An additional 72,300 benefit from 
drinking water systems outside the river basins targeting high incidence CKDu areas. Please note that 
combined target populations from Result Area 1 and 2 does not add up to (and exceeds) total direct 
beneficiaries as these numbers both count farmers that benefit from CSA and water advisories. The total direct 
beneficiary number removes this duplication. 
• 
The project can potentially result in an annual benefit of 8 million USD per annum to the agricultural sector and 
about 2 million USD per annum of labor hours saved with increase access to drinking water. 
                                                             
 
47 Fisheries & Animal Resources Development Department website, Government of Odisha. “Orissa Community Tank Management Project”. Retrieved 
from: http://fardodisha.gov.in/?q=node/137 
48  Asian Development Bank (2006). “Rehabilitation and Management of Tanks in India: A Study of Select States”. Retrieved from: 
https://openaccess.adb.org/bitstream/handle/11540/5073/rehabiliation-management-tanks.pdf?sequence=1

=== PAGE 39 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
95. 
The project outcome will strengthen the adaptive capacity and reduce exposure of smallholder farmers in the 
Dry Zone to climate risks posed by extreme events and variability through strengthened village irrigation infrastructure 
and capacities of smallholder farmers for water management and climate-resilient agriculture; improved access to safe 
and reliable drinking water through supply systems able to withstand climate change and variability; and strengthened 
capacities of Dry Zone farmers to use early warning and climate information for water management. The project directly 
benefits about 392,000 women and 377,000 men through improved strategies and activities for water and agriculture 
to respond to climate variability and change.  
 
96. 
The project will result in strengthened village irrigation infrastructure and capacities of smallholder farmers for 
water management and climate-resilient agriculture.  It enhances the cropping intensity (CI<1.6) of about 9750 ha of 
land under minor irrigation under targeted cascades. It enables dissemination and adoption of climate resilient 
agriculture technology packages to about 520,000 smallholder farmers living in the targeted river basins. It will, 
particularly, benefit about 16,677 women farmers through implementation of climate resilient agriculture technologies 
and practices and market linkages. In the near-term, project interventions will improve access and availability of water 
for irrigation and domestic consumption in the 325 cascades. Over time, these solutions will also contribute to the 
recharge of ground water and improve the quality of water, increasing the availability of safe water for domestic 
consumption.  
 
97. 
The project will enhance the adaptive capacity and resilience of vulnerable populations through improved 
access to safe and reliable drinking water through supply systems able to withstand climate change and variability. The 
project will benefit approximately 217,000 women, men and children with improved and year-round access to safe 
drinking water, and about 20,000 women with employment and livelihoods by building their capacities to manage 
community water solutions. 
 
98. 
The project reduces exposure to climate risks posed by extreme events and variability through the enhanced 
capacity of farmers to use early warning and climate information for water management and agricultural planning. 
Timely and locally relevant weather/seasonal weather forecasts and agricultural advisories will benefit 520,000 people 
targeted through ASCs and improved flood management through early warnings will benefit approximately 445,500 
people living in the targeted river basins. These include families that engage in agriculture and families that depend on 
rural water supply schemes based on village irrigation systems who will manage water allocations efficiently based on 
timely, accurate climate and weather information dissemination.  
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below. 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only) 
Annual 
 
Lifetime 
 
• 
Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by 
Total 
770,500 direct beneficiaries and 
1,179,874 indirect beneficiaries 
expected (of which 51% are female) 
                                                             
 
49 CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security and the Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation 
(2013). 
“Climate-smart 
agriculture 
success 
stories 
from 
farming 
communities 
around 
the 
world”. 
Retrieved 
from: 
https://cgspace.cgiar.org/rest/bitstreams/24750/retrieve 
50 The World Bank website. “Safe Water for Rural Population in Bangladesh: Bangladesh Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (BRWSSP) Fact 
Sheet”. Retrieved from: http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2016/03/15/safe-water-for-rural-population-in-bangladesh-bangladesh-rural-water-
supply-and-sanitation-project-brwssp-fact-sheet 
51
 K. 
K. 
Singh 
(2011). 
“Weather 
Forecasting 
and 
Agromet 
Advisory 
Services 
in 
India”. 
Retrieved 
from: 
http://www.iasri.res.in/ebook/TEFCPI_sampling/WEATHER%20FORECASTING%20AND%20AGROMET%20ADVISORY%20SERVICES%20IN%20
INDIA.pdf

=== PAGE 40 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
gender (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
• 
Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only) 
Percentage 
(%) 
9.6%52 
Other 
relevant 
indicators 
Expected strengthening of adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks: 
Indicator: Extent to which vulnerable households, communities and businesses use improved strategies 
and activities to respond to climate variability and climate change: 704,440 persons 
                                                             
 
52 The vulnerable populations (indicated by poverty, health, under-nutrition, and disaster impact indicators - UNDP Sri Lanka 2012: National Human 
Development Report Regional Disparities in Human Development) within the 7 districts are estimated to be about 30%, with the district population 
estimated at 3.4 million. Of the vulnerable population, project benefits about 75%. Including the indirect beneficiaries, the project benefits about 57% 
of the total district populations across the 7 districts.

=== PAGE 41 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
99. 
The total number of direct beneficiaries (in targeted districts) has been calculated as an aggregate of the 
estimate of the direct beneficiaries from the farmer and non-farmer populations in targeted river basins who benefit 
from the improved water (irrigation and drinking water) and agricultural management as well as from the EWs and 
forecasting information. The total direct beneficiary number is arrived at by combining the direct beneficiaries in the 
three river basins under the three outputs, while avoiding overlaps. The estimates of populations, the beneficiary 
estimates from the three Outputs, and the total direct beneficiary calculation is provided below: 
• 
Population estimates and sources: 
a. Country population: 20,271,464 (Department of Census and Statistics (DCS)) 
b. Rural population of the seven targeted districts: 3,423,974 (80% of total district population, Department 
of census and statistics) 
c. Population of three river basins: 925,000 (calculated based on DCS and GIS data) 
d. Farmer population is around 60%. (DCS) 
• 
Output 1 beneficiaries: This number is calculated on the assumption 3250 VIS in the three river basins, 
with 40 families under each irrigation system, and 4 members per family (DAD and DCS statistics). Therefore, 
the total number of small holder farmers working in village irrigation systems in the three river basins (520,000) 
will have access to climate resilient agriculture packages disseminated through the 77 ASCs. (each serving 
about 6753 farmers) 
• 
Output 2: There will be 217,000 (includes beneficiaries of advanced purification and filtration systems: 
131,000 (70 large units serving 112,000 members in 400 HHs, 55 serving 19,000 people in schools and 
hospitals); CWSS: 70,000 (35 units serving 500 HHs); and RWH: 16,000 (4000 serving one HH)) people 
benefitting from the different drinking water interventions that the project will invest in linked to the village 
irrigation systems. Of these, geographically (See Annex VIII, Map of the project), 70% of the systems (and 
therefore 144,700 beneficiaries) will be located within the 3 river basins and remaining 30% of them or 72,300 
of these beneficiaries will be located outside the river basin boundaries but within the associated 07 districts, 
targeting divisions with high vulnerability to CKDu, salinity and poverty.  
• 
Output 3: The Cascade Level Committees are the primary target for flood advisories for water 
management. Each cascade level water committee will reach around 4800 people (each cascade= 12 VIS/ 
each VIS=100 familiesx4 members) comprising of farmers benefitting from village irrigation systems, farmers 
working in non-irrigated lands and non-farming households. The project will form cascade water management 
committees bringing together the local-level representatives of drinking water supply systems and Farmer 
Organisations in 50 cascades.  This is a total of 240,000 people directly reached through such committees. Of 
the remaining river basin population (925,000-240,000=685000), we also count those people benefiting from 
SMS service, Given the penetration of mobile phones according to statistics and recent survey 
(http://www.tradingeconomics.com/sri-lanka/mobile-cellular-subscriptions-per-100-people-wb-data.html and 
http://dbsjeyaraj.com/dbsj/ archives/ 20172 ) is round 40-50%, we use a conservative estimate of 30% as 
actually receiving the SMS advisories. Therefore, this amounts to 205,500.  The total number of beneficiaries 
from water related EWs and advisories, 445500, is a sum of those reached by cascade level committees and 
SMS.  
• 
Total Direct Beneficiaries: The target combines the direct beneficiaries in the three river basins under 
the three outputs above, avoiding overlaps. This was calculated using: (i) the total number of beneficiaries 
reached under Output 1 which is 520,000 (which subsumes 144700 of the 217000 beneficiaries from Output 
and overlaps with the 520,000 beneficiaries of agricultural advisories under Output 3); (ii)  the additional 
drinking water beneficiaries outside river basin (72,300) not counted under Output 1; and (iii) the additional 
number of river basin population receiving flood advisories through cascade level water committees and SMS 
and not counted under Output 1. This would be the non-farming population of the total reached under Output 
3 which is about 40% of 445,500 (178,200). The total number of direct beneficiaries is, therefore, 770,500 
(520,000+72,300+178,200). 
 
100. 
The total number of indirect beneficiaries was derived as follows: Total rural population in 7 districts is 
3,423,974; total population in targeted 3 river basins is 925,000. Therefore, the base figure for indirect beneficiaries is 
those people outside the river basins, 2,498,974 (3,423,974-925,000). Of these: 1) 614545  indirect beneficiaries, 
farmers, will benefit under Output 1 based on assumptions that training on CSA and interpretation and use of drought 
advisories will be adopted by other 91  ASCs in the seven target district, outside the river basins. Each ASC targets 
6753 farmers based on DAD statistics and 2) Of the remaining population of potential indirect beneficiaries, which is

=== PAGE 42 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
1,884,429 (2,498,974-614545), we count the population receiving flood advisories for water management through the 
SMS services. Assuming 30% penetration of mobile services (see footnote 99 for basis of this assumption), we estimate 
30% of 1,884,420 (565,328) will receive SMS based early warnings. Therefore, total indirect beneficiaries is 1,179,874. 
(614545 plus 563,328)  
101. 
The direct estimates are conservative compared to the estimates of existing efforts nationally and 
internationally (See Impact Potential section for discussion on impact of comparable interventions). For instance, the 
estimates (i) limit the reach of agricultural benefit to the river basins (not the entire district even though ASCs are 
trained); (ii) limit the beneficiaries of the water management and planning to cascade systems and not entire river 
basins; and (iii) use a conservative estimate of 30% penetration of mobile phones for use of SMS advisories.

=== PAGE 43 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential 
DEGREE TO WHICH THE PROPOSED ACTIVITY CAN CATALYZE IMPACT BEYOND A ONE-OFF PROJECT/PROGRAMME 
INVESTMENT 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale) 
102. 
The paradigm shift for the project lies in the project’s integrated, holistic approach to enhancing water 
management through the interconnected elements of irrigation systems and farming practices, drinking water supply 
and management. It is the first time that an integrated approach to water management is being advanced in the country 
incorporating climate change concerns, understanding linkages across river basins/sub-river basins, and including 
multiple uses of water. The project sets standards and precedents for future river basin management planning, 
including the selection of river basins and VIS cascades based on adaptation potential and vulnerability, using the 
linkages among domestic water needs, livelihood needs, information needs and responding to community requirements 
in an integrated manner. 
 
103. 
The theory of change articulated below illustrates how each of the three outputs of the proposed project 
contribute to the long-term objective and how the resulting project impacts can be sustained, replicated and scaled to 
contribute to climate-resilient development in Sri Lanka. Through integration of the specific elements described in the 
Exit Strategy into the project design and implementation, conditions are created that lead to sustained impacts and 
potential for scale up.

=== PAGE 44 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
104. 
Output 1 invests in the restoration and rehabilitation of village tank cascade systems and scale up of climate-
resilient farming practices. The project will facilitate dissemination of such agricultural practices through both enhanced 
technical capacity of farmers and facilitation of market linkages to sustain these practices. The project assures long-
term sustainability and potential for scale up and replication of these investments through a participatory approach and 
capacity building targeting Farmer Organisations, field officers of agriculture-related government institutions, private 
sector and local NGOs, as well as knowledge management through the ASCs. Output 2 of the project will improve 
investments and strengthen institutional capacities to deal with unavailability of safe drinking water by scaling up 
solutions including rainwater harvesting and community-managed purification systems, which were successfully 
demonstrated in Sri Lanka. The project will promote participatory and entrepreneurial approaches for sustainability of 
drinking water supply and management solutions, lending these investments for potential to scale up across the 
targeted districts as well as to replicate drinking water solutions to other vulnerable parts of the country. Output 3 will 
introduce technology and create systems that allow farmers and communities to access and actively participate in 
generating and sharing information for timely and coordinated operation of irrigation and drinking water systems and 
agriculture planning. At the national level, tailored forecast products and advisories will be developed to support 
decision-making. GCF funding will also strengthen ASCs in these areas to produce participatory advisories based on 
climatic forecasts and climate resilient agriculture options, using farmer knowledge and experience.  Training of trainers 
conducted in Outputs 1 and 3 will enable the approach to be immediately replicated in and adopted by Agrarian 
Services Centres in the district but outside the river basins. Overall, the project’s integrated approach can be scaled 
up in at least 08 other Dry Zone districts with vulnerable small holder farmers through 192 Agrarian Services Centres 
delivering support for VIS rehabilitation and climate resilient agriculture; and SMS-based flood advisories to protect 
drinking water and irrigation infrastructures. 
 
105. 
Through these output activities, the project establishes pathways for future replication and scale. 
• 
The integrated, cascade-level approach to upgrading village irrigation systems and water management allows 
for future replication and scale to both adjacent cascades within the targeted basins as well to other identifiable 
vulnerable river basins in the country. The integrated approach to cascade water management planning and 
VIS upgrading has the potential to be up-scaled five (x5) times the initial number of 30 cascades within the 
targeted river basins. The training of trainers for district/provincial officers and ASC officers would support 
future replication within the three river basins.  This approach can then be replicated to five (05) other 
vulnerable river basins in the Dry Zone with large populations of smallholder farmers reaching up to 25 times 
its initial impact 
• 
The climate resilient agriculture can be immediately up-scaled to 91 other ASCs using district officers trained 
reaching 614545 farmers, and doubling (x2) the initial impact. There is potential to replicate climate resilient 
agro-technology packages and tailored agriculture advisories in 8 other Dry Zone districts through 192 ASCs 
reaching 1,296,623 small holder farmers, creating up to four times (x4) replication potential of the initial 
beneficiaries. This replication is supported by project activities such as investments in developing climate 
resilient agriculture packages co-financed training programmes conducted by DOA for Provincial and ASC 
staff for dissemination of climate smart agro technology and crop selection. 
• 
The cascade water management plans and water source protection plans/committees that are being 
introduced through the project for 50 cascades in Outputs 1 and 2 can be replicated up to five times (x5) the 
initial target in the river basins themselves. Upscaling the community-based model for drinking water can 
benefit up to twice (x2) the initial beneficiaries in the target cascades (144,600 or a third of 217,000) themselves 
and could be replicated by at least five times (x5) in the river basins to benefit additional vulnerable 
communities without access to safe drinking water creating ten times (x10) potential beneficiaries (or 
1,446,000) through training of officials and CBOs, and exchange visits for knowledge transfer through the 
project.  
• 
Dissemination of flood advisories for water management through SMS is targeted to 30% of the rural population 
of the districts. The SMS- and media based dissemination has the potential, depending on coverage to 
potentially can reach all the rural population in the 7 target districts associated with the river basins which is 
3,423,973 people (x3 of the initial target) all of whom depend on either irrigation or rural drinking water supply 
schemes. Replicating this flood advisory can potentially double this benefit (x2) benefiting as many as 
3,213,112 rural people in 8 other Dry Zone districts across the country.

=== PAGE 45 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
106. 
Overall, the project’s cascade based approach to water management has potential to be replicated in other 
vulnerable, Dry Zone river basins and the climate resilient agriculture practices and advisories for flood management 
in all Dry Zone districts. The cascade approach to water management including drinking water source protection 
committees can be replicated in at least 5 other river basins for up to 25 times its initial impact reaching 79680053 
farmer families or 3,187,200 people. This accounts for as much as 44% of the total Dry Zone population of 7,245,000.54 
The climate smart agriculture and advisories related to drought and flood have the potential to be replicated in 8 other 
Dry Zone districts in the country through ASCs and mobile networks reaching the 6,600,000 people55 in 15 districts, 
which accounts for over 90% of the total Dry Zone population of 7,245,000. 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning 
107. 
The project facilitates improved knowledge generation, creation and sharing for collective and iterative learning 
among farmers, technical agencies and their field officers. It will generate substantive knowledge on climate-related 
aspects of water management, and on collaborative and participative multi-stakeholder processes. By aligning local 
knowledge of village irrigation systems, farming practices, drinking water management and understanding of weather 
patterns with scientific knowledge that takes into account climate information and understanding of new technologies, 
the project supports co-creation of climate resilient technical knowledge appropriate to the local context. The project 
will develop a number of knowledge products including guidelines for integrated water resources planning, O&M 
manual for upkeep of village irrigation systems and SOPs for reservoir gate operations. These products complement 
training of FOs and other community organizations to evaluate risks and design locally suited adaptation measures. 
Knowledge generation and learning will address technical and infrastructure issues; support the production of climate 
resilient and organic/low-input/drought resistant crops; and enhance capacities of local communities and government 
agencies to operate and maintain technologies and sustain practices beyond the project lifetime. 
 
108. 
The nodal point of the project’s knowledge generation and learning activities will be the ASCs maintained by 
DAD as community services centers. These centers are located at sub-district level and house a number of sectoral 
agencies providing agriculture related information and services in traditionally segmented approach. The project will 
invest in strengthening ASCs to provide services, facilitate community-managed initiatives (e.g. water provision for 
agriculture and for drinking) and be the channel for scientific knowledge from outside to add value to local knowledge 
(and vice versa).  ASCs will also facilitate the coordination of the different institutional inputs into the project, enabling 
the different state and non-state agencies to work together with the local technical officers, field extension services and 
community organizations such as FOs, women’s groups, private sector and NGOs. The project will also support sharing 
of lessons learned and best practices through the continuous monitoring and evaluation of the project. The M&E plan 
(Section H.2) will include provision for generation of lessons learned and best practices (reports, publications, and 
other communication and knowledge products for various media) to not only support adaptive project management but 
also to inform learning across national/sub-national/community levels within Sri Lanka and regionally. 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
                                                             
 
53 This assumes that the approach is replicated in 83 (16.6 cascades in each RB*5) cascades in each river basin (83x3 initial RBs +83*5 new RBs) 
totaling 664 cascades in eight riverbasins. Each cascade has an estimated population of 1200 families or 4000 people. Both farmers and non-farmers 
benefit from the integrated water management approach.  
54 Central Bank of Sri Lanka 2013. Economic and Social Statistics 
55 3,423,973+3,213,112 (total for 15 districts)

=== PAGE 46 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
Enabling effective and sustained participation of private and public sector actors:  
109. 
The project invests in improved technical capacity and knowledge of government agencies and community 
organizations on integrated water management and enhances coordination among the stakeholders. The project 
builds on existing experiences of community participation and strengthens a range of rural CBOs and local enterprise 
development. Sustained participation of various actors is ensured through training and investments including for 
farmer and youth organizations to deliver on restoring and maintaining resilient irrigation infrastructure, women 
producers as MSEs to carry out climate-smart agriculture and leverage markets, women-led CBOs as social 
enterprises to manage community water supply systems, and communities in co-developing and adopting seasonal 
forecasting and early warning systems. Focus on enterprise development water management systems enables viable 
business models and sustained ownership of the local communities in long-term water security. The project also 
proposes innovative partnerships with private sector to determine market-oriented climate smart crops and develop 
marketing linkages through the cascade-level farmer committees or youth-led enterprises. Furthermore, the 
strengthened environment through enhanced institutional coordination (SOPs, water management plans, training of 
government agencies on planning and implementation), information and data sharing (incl. on EWs, forecasting, and 
advisories), and market linkages including engagement of upstream value-chain actors and financial intermediaries 
will enable and incentivize private sector investment, beyond the project life time.  
 
110. 
The paradigm shift of the project hinges on an integrated approach and the project promotes am enabling 
environment for such integration across many levels. The project addresses the ‘business-as-usual’ and fragmented 
nature of local level decision making in multiple ways across agencies (horizontal) and at various levels (vertical): 
• 
Horizontal coordination: The project ensures cross-sectoral integration through inter-linked investments and 
project implementation arrangements to build capacities long-term. 
o 
The project build capacities to support integration of irrigation, drinking water, agriculture, and 
climate information in a holistic manner to address resilience of dry zone farmers. 
o 
The inter-linked activities for design, planning, and implementation brings together the key agencies 
across these sectors. 
o 
Sectoral plans of these various agencies are implemented sub-nationally, locally in an integrated 
manner through water management plans, SOPs, and targeted capacity building activities that will 
sustain the coordination beyond the project lifetime. 
o 
Implementation arrangements and the project management framework also advance institutional 
coordination by creating best practices through this project. 
• 
Vertical coordination: The project links local, community level water management to cascade level and 
district level planning that support implementation of various national level sectoral plans. Coordination works 
from ground-up to advance the integrated approach. 
o 
Formation of cascade level water management committees bringing together farmers (irrigation 
interest) and other users (drinking water CBOs) to manage the local water resources 
o 
Strengthening the Agrarian Service Centres at the local level to become a pivot for information, 
knowledge and coordinated response of government service delivery for agriculture and marketing

=== PAGE 47 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
o 
SOPs for climate and weather-related information sharing and transmission from farmer organization 
to cascade committee to ASC to district/national level  
o 
Project progress monitoring through established mechanisms such as divisional and district 
development committees 
Inter-Ministerial Committee at the National Level with representation from national level agencies and provincial 
councils. 
Innovation, market development, and transformation 
111. 
Innovation: The project’s adoption of an integrated sub-basin level ecosystem-based approach to Dry Zone 
water management is an innovation that could transform the current sectoral approach to investments in agriculture, 
drinking water and irrigation in the Dry Zone. The project design moves away from the conventional, compartmentalized 
functioning of government agencies, and brings together the different agencies to provide an integrated solution at a 
sub-basin or cascade level. The project approach is innovative in the following ways: 
• 
Irrigation water, drinking water, and agriculture are brought together to address resilience of farmers 
holistically at scale; 
• 
Enabling both irrigation and drinking water needs to be viably met and managed through cascade 
rehabilitation which will increase water yield in the system and manage demand by crop diversification; 
• 
Advancing cascade-wide approach incorporating climate risks for water management and agriculture; 
• 
Enabling scale by enhancing an integrated approach to climate risk management across sectors and sub-
basins by supporting climate-risk informed planning and implementation (cascade level water mgmt. 
committees) and district wide knowledge management and coordinated service delivery (through 
ASCs) 
 
112. 
The project will also promote development and adoption of innovative adaptation technologies and practices 
for enhancing water management and agricultural livelihoods. For instance, the project will upgrade traditional 
cascades to be climate-resilient through design changes such as strengthened bunds; introduce climate-resilient crops 
and low cost methods of drip irrigation; scale of practice of inputs selection through soil testing; and apply innovating 
drinking water solutions such as roof-top rainwater harvesting and advanced water purification and filtration systems. 
 
113. 
Implementation of this project will introduce technical guidelines on adopting a basin-approach and climate 
risk management for water security driving national and provincial planning agencies to a new way of planning and 
delivering rural development. The project also invests in innovative information gathering, knowledge generation and 
dissemination practices involving ASCs, communities, and technical agencies. The project envisages developing a 
data gathering and sharing smart phone application to communicate weather and water level information to develop 
basin-level climate information and forecasting capacities.

=== PAGE 48 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
114. 
Market development and transformation: The project will work with farmer organizations and producer groups 
(women and youth) to create sustainable and fair markets for agro products developed and promoted as climate smart 
crops. The project will engage with established marketing networks in the provinces and local regions, but also work 
towards creating niche markets for ecologically produced and climate resistant new crops/agro technologies. Local 
seed production and storage will be encouraged to overcome the dependence on external seed production. The 
products generated by the project such as the climate smart agro-technology packages and tailored agricultural and 
water advisories can spur market development engaging small-scale farmer enterprises, technology providers, agri-
businesses, and service providers in sectors such as agriculture, crop insurance, local tourism, and transport. Through 
focus on market linkages and enterprise development in climate-smart agriculture and water supply and management 
systems, the project creates sustained and transformative impact empowering communities towards resilience, well-
being, food security and growth. The project is also transformative in its empowerment of women as key change agents 
for climate change adaptation in these vulnerable communities. Project interventions towards resilience building include 
specific strategies to target female-headed households considering gender-differentiated roles and responsibilities in 
water resource management and agricultural livelihoods. Project empowers women through enhanced access and 
control over water supply and management as well as increased income generating opportunities related to agricultural 
production and community water supply schemes. 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
115. 
GOSL has committed to Sustainable Development Goals, including the goals of ending poverty, achieving 
food security and promoting sustainable agriculture, reducing inequality and promoting inclusive societies. The project 
contributes to these goals through the enhanced resilience of VIS and adoption of climate-resilient agricultural practices 
that increase productivity and food security, improved access to safe drinking water reducing burden of labour (in 
particular on women) and illness, and empowering of local communities, particularly women and youth, with improved 
decision making, planning, and coping capacities against climate-risks and impacts.  The GOSL has a clear vision of 
developing rural economies and recognizes that smallholder farmers, hovering on or just above the poverty line and 
forming the backbone of these rural economies, need to have livelihood security and be prevented from falling back 
into poverty. Recognizing that climate change can severely constrain the productive capacities of small farmers, 
especially in the Dry Zone, who are Sri Lanka’s key food producers, GOSL in its INDC committed to minimizing climate 
change impacts on food security focusing on water sector as a crucial cross-cutting issue. 
 
116. 
The integrated approach to effective water management from the perspective of agriculture, drinking use, 
floods and drought preparedness will be a model for partnership and collaboration between stakeholders and will 
engage national and provincial governments through the inter-ministerial and basin-level committees (see 
implementing arrangements). The approach can create a framework for government engagement with civil society to 
deliver essential public services to remote and rural populations. The project responds to a number of government 
policies and strategies as outlined in the Agricultural Policy, National Rainwater Harvesting Policy, National Climate 
Change Policy, National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan, and the Sri Lanka Comprehensive 
Disaster Management Programme. The proposed project makes an important contribution to Sri Lanka’s national 
policies on land management, agriculture, water resources, disaster management and climate change. The knowledge 
and technical products such as technical guidelines, SOPs, and water management plans and capacity building 
activities such as training of technical agencies and local level organizations on climate-resilient technologies and 
practices make significant contribution to the implementation of the National Adaptation Plan, National Climate Change 
Adaptation strategy and the National Disaster Mitigation Strategy. Project implementation can also provide insights into 
the ongoing revisions of the Flood Ordinance of 1924. 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential 
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive development impact

=== PAGE 49 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
Economic benefits 
118. 
The project will yield many economic benefits, at the micro and macro levels, as well as direct and indirect. 
The project will enhance the agricultural production of 130,000 smallholder farmer families (520,000 people) and 
increase productivity (accruing a benefit of USD 8 million per year to the agricultural sector) as well as incomes in three 
river basins through improved access to irrigation, adoption of climate resilient cropping patterns, and market linkages. 
Improved access to safe and reliable drinking water can result in about 2M USD in labour hours saved along with 
benefits to reduction of health costs and expenditures. In addition, the community-based enterprise development will 
create employment for around 20,000 women and men in the targeted communities – in managing drinking water 
systems, developing climate-smart agriculture market linkages and value-chains, and in working with the farmer 
organisations on early warnings and seasonal forecasting. There will also be some indirect employment opportunities 
created as the local economy is stimulated by the activities of the project, such as tank infrastructure rehabilitation, 
crop value addition (milling, transporting) and the building of rainwater harvesting infrastructure by local masons.  
 
119. 
There will be macro level indirect economic benefits derived by the contribution to food security, self-sufficiency 
in the staple rice, and production of local fruits vegetables and grains, thus saving on potential imports.  Reducing the 
vulnerability of the farming households will also reduce the likelihood of the households needing social protection/safety 
net pay-outs.  Provision of safe drinking water to 165000 people will reduce the potential costs of water-related illness, 
both for the household, and the country’s health system.  The Ministry of Health has allocated Rs. 9 million, Rs. 40 
million and an estimated Rs. 100 million in 2012, 2013 and 2014 respectively for treating CKDu through the state-
supported health extension system- much of additional expenditure goes to five of the project target districts. 
 
Social benefits 
120. 
Smallholder farming communities were marginalized and subordinated to local officials, as they are dependent 
on subsidies and welfare programmes. Most of the project’s target areas were isolated during the years of the conflict, 
and this intervention will initiate much needed infrastructure development and exposure to new technology. The project 
proposes to substantially improve decision making among farmers, as they become active stakeholders in integrated 
water management catering to local needs. Their capacity will be improved through training and engaging in 
implementing project activities and interface with government officials for service provision and private sector for market 
negotiations. By working in partnership with the FOs and other community groups and by acknowledging their existing 
knowledge and mobilization potential, the project will create significant social capital. The project will promote social 
cohesiveness among upstream and downstream villages through planning and implementation of integrated cascade 
level water management plans. By promoting collective decision making and establishing protocols for water sharing 
for multiple uses, the project advances social and inter-community harmony. It also promotes post-conflict reconciliation 
by ensuring equitable access to natural resources and public services between ethnic groups and social classes.  
 
121. 
The existence of a safe source of water for consumption will ease the pressure on farmer households, 
especially on women, who are responsible for domestic water and care of the sick. The project also tries to indirectly 
address the issue of CKDu type of water-related chronic disease by   integrated and eco-system level water 
management and improves the health and wellbeing of the targeted populations. It will also promote safety, well-being, 
and decision-making among farmers through the benefits of EWs and climate information. Communities will benefit 
from the timely early warnings and reduced disruption to educational activities, family and community structures. The 
ability to adjust seasonal cultivation practices and crops according to tailored seasonal forecasting impacts positively 
on farmers ability to rationalise his inputs and assess his cultivation options for the coming months, preventing undue 
losses of crops and inputs.  
 
Gender-sensitive development impact   
122. 
Around 23.5% of all households in Sri Lanka are female-headed. Social isolation and poverty are inevitable 
for this group, many of whom are widowed at a young age mainly due to the conflict and deaths due to CKDu.  The 
Dry Zone has larger number of women headed households and women taking care of disabled members of the family 
due to conflict and chronic diseases (especially the high incidence of chronic kidney failure affecting male farmers in 
the north and north central regions). In addition to this, the female unemployment rate, at 22%, is double that of men 
in Sri Lanka.  Poverty in rural areas has pushed women to take up precarious work such as migrating overseas as 
unskilled domestic workers, or taking low paid jobs in the garment and other sectors.

=== PAGE 50 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
123. 
GCF resources will be invested in interventions that directly impact on women’s well-being and livelihood 
options in Dry Zone villages.  Under Output 1, women will benefit from support to drought resilient home garden 
production with fruit/spice crops and low-cost, time saving micro irrigation. Women entrepreneurship will be promoted 
strengthening women’s producer groups to adopt climate-smart agricultural practices, invest in agro-technology for 
value added products, and foster strong market linkages. Under Output 2, women-led CBOs will benefit from technical 
and business training to run sustainable drinking water supply schemes as social enterprises. Under Output 3, women 
FOs and CBOs will also be targeted to adopt ICT/mobile platforms to receive and transmit weather and climate 
information and benefit from response measures to floods and droughts. Project will benefit over 350,000 women 
(about 50% of the target beneficiaries). In particular, the project will benefit over 15000 women producer groups and 
at least 22,000 women (in CBOs) through enterprise development and income generation activities.  
 
124. 
The project will yield positive outcomes related to health and well-being, decision making, access to resources, 
livelihoods, and income generation for women targeted through these various project interventions. With opportunities 
to generate additional income, women are more likely to respond to incentives that address their family’s basic needs, 
such as better health and nutrition, linking to agriculture and food security improvements. The project will result in 
timesavings for women as a result of improved access to drinking water. The project will expand the sphere of decision-
making and action through involvement in project implementation and impacts including water management planning, 
uptake of climate-resilient practices, management of water supply systems, and gender-targeted response measures 
for flood and droughts. Women will benefit from training and educational activities which may include activities related 
to climate change, agriculture, water management, leadership, business, finance, entrepreneurship and decision-
making, thereby enabling empowerment and involvement of women in climate change adaptation planning and 
investments. For project specific assessment and action plan for gender, refer to Section C, Annex XIII. 
 
Environmental co-benefits 
125. 
Project activities will deliver a number of specific environmental benefits that include: a) soil conservation and 
reduction of erosion, sedimentation, and siltation of anicuts (diversions) and village reservoirs; b) improved tree cover 
in home gardens, catchment areas and other components of the cascade ecosystems such as silt barriers, salt/mineral 
balancing areas etc. that will have several interlinked environmental benefits such as improved micro-climate, improved 
soil structure, bioremediation for irrigation and drinking water quality, increased biodiversity; c) restoration of ecosystem 
integrity, goods, and services; and d) preservation of biodiversity in home gardens, in forests and in crop fields. The 
reduction of chemical inputs, especially N2 fertilisers through climate smart agriculture, will contribute to reduced 
emissions from agriculture as well. Agro-forestry in the watersheds and catchment areas will also contribute to 
enhanced emissions reduction. 
 
126. 
Environmental benefits also include positive impacts on biodiversity and agro-biodiversity of the village 
irrigation systems and in home gardens. The project will enhance the ecological connection between the different 
functioning aspects of the cascade system. Introduction of perennial crops and timber in upstream watershed areas, 
protecting village forests and increasing tree cover in home gardens will have multiple environmental benefits. Soil 
conservation measures introduced in upstream farm fields and home gardens will not only prevent siltation of reservoirs 
but also support soil biota and improve ground-water yields by allowing greater percolation. Improved water yields will 
have a positive impact on water availability during the dry season to both humans and wildlife. The biodiversity value 
of VIS to provide food and habitat for many species is well recorded56. Some indigenous fish species, such as the 
snakehead, climbing perch and local catfish use small puddles in the village irrigation ecosystem to survive the dry 
period. Even fish found in larger lakes migrate upstream to colonize and breed on smaller seasonal reservoirs during 
the dry period. Trees around the perimeter of tank provide shelter against temperature extremes and microclimates 
required by certain species, hideouts and refuges from predators, and nesting ground for birds. The restored irrigation 
reservoirs harbour endemic fish and other important aquatic biota, which form essential components of the Dry Zone 
ecosystem and food chain for other terrestrial species. Ecological agriculture practices introduced by the project will 
reduce the harmful effects of agro chemical use on soil, animals and plants; and increase the diversity of soil biota.

=== PAGE 51 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient 
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only) 
127. 
Across the country, climate change related weather aberrations and extreme weather events are becoming 
increasingly common. The increased intensity of rainfall, frequency of flood and drought incidence in the last ten years, 
has caused severe hardship to poor farmers across Sri Lanka impacting mostly on agricultural workers in the Dry Zone. 
2015 witnessed a significantly higher incidence of high rainfall resulting in localised floods, especially in the post-war 
North57, affecting roughly 31,500 people, and landslides in 3 districts,58 affecting 295 people and leading to 7 deaths.59 
In addition, droughts affected 7 out of 25 districts and roughly 258,000 people.60 In 2014, 1.8 million people in 16 
districts including the target districts for this project (i.e. Mannar, Trincomalee, Puttalam, Kurunegala, Anuradhapura 
and Polonnaruwa) were affected by drought.  WFP assessments showed that in April 2014 over 750,000 people were 
in a situation of food insecurity a condition that was worsened by low rainfall until October 2014. Heavy floods in 21 
districts in November-January 2015 subsequently impacted the same districts that same year affecting 1.1 million 
people. The variability of the northeast monsoon, which supports agriculture in the Dry Zone, is evident through the 
increased number of high and very high rainfall events followed by longer dry spells. Rainfall modelling presents a 
more complex scenario than temperature increase but generally indicate that large areas of the Dry Zone will receive 
less rainfall in the medium term. 
 
128. 
The impacts of climate related rainfall variability and extreme events directly affect incomes and food security 
of Dry Zone farmers61 and compounds existing vulnerabilities owing to poverty, low incomes, and recovering from three 
decades of conflict. According to IWMI (2010) farming districts in the dry and intermediate zones are more sensitive to 
climate change than the rest of the country due to land degradation and heavy reliance on primary agriculture. 
Recurrent hydrological disasters (flood and drought) have eroded the coping capacity of Dry Zone communities making 
them even less able to plan for and overcome climate-related variabilities in water availability. Climate-change induced 
droughts also impact access to reliable drinking water as they reduce the sufficiency of water supply and falling water 
volumes increase the concentration of pollutants.62 Floods also affect the water quality of drinking water sources, by 
directly polluting the sources as well as by destroying village irrigation reservoirs that provide a source for drinking 
water.63 Farmers in the Dry Zone are also increasingly exposed to water related chronic illnesses such as kidney 
disease. High rates of morbidity and mortality among young male farmers are reported in the north central and northern 
provinces.  
 
                                                             
 
57  Disaster Management Centre (2015). Situation Report, November 2015. Use of DesInventar query system, retrieved from: 
http://www.desinventar.lk:8081/DesInventar/main.jsp?countrycode=sr&continue=y. Accessed [30.11.2015] Also in Sunday Times (29 November 2015), 
“Climate Change Has Come to Stay…” quoting the Director General of the Department of Meteorology.  
58  Disaster Management Centre (2015). Situation Report, November 2015. Use of DesInventar query system, retrieved from: 
http://www.desinventar.lk:8081/DesInventar/main.jsp?countrycode=sr&continue=y. Accessed [30.11.2015] 
59  Disaster Management Centre (2015). Situation Report, November 2015. Use of DesInventar query system, retrieved from: 
http://www.desinventar.lk:8081/DesInventar/main.jsp?countrycode=sr&continue=y. Accessed [30.11.2015] 
60  Disaster Management Centre (2015). Situation Report, November 2015. Use of DesInventar query system, retrieved from: 
http://www.desinventar.lk:8081/DesInventar/main.jsp?countrycode=sr&continue=y. Accessed [30.11.2015] 
61Aheeyar M.M.M Climate change adaptation in water management for food security: Recent developments in Sri Lanka-A review of Existing Knowledge 
and Information. Sri Lanka Water Partnership/ Global Water Partnership 2012 P9 
62Gunatilake, S.K., Samaratunga, S.S. and Rubasinghe R.T., 2014. Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) in Sri Lanka - Current Research Evidence 
Justification: A Review.  Sabaragamuwa University Journal 2014, V. 13 NO. 2 pp 31-58 
63Sectoral Vulnerability Profile: Water. National Climate Change Adaptation  Strategy and Action Plan 2010-2016, Climate Change Secretariat and ADB 
2010

=== PAGE 52 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
129. 
Women and youth in the Dry Zone communities are particularly more vulnerable to climate change impacts. 
Women’s role in the household care economy makes them more vulnerable to climate change and disasters due to 
impacts on household water availability, health of family members and safety of domestic assets such as livestock. 
Women traditionally manage household water, family gardens and livestock and are in the frontline of managing 
impacts of reduced water availability and disaster impacts.  This affects their own intra-household food security, which 
can be exacerbated during extreme climate events and in the aftermath of a disaster64.  Women take full responsibility 
for the care of children, the disabled and the elderly. In the Dry Zone districts of Sri Lanka the impact of the war and 
disease has left a number of women widowed and pushed others into precarious work, in Sri Lanka and overseas, as 
domestic migrant labour.   Further details on the profile of the communities targeted under the project intervention are 
provided in Annex II, Feasibility Report, Section 5.2. 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
130. 
Sri Lanka is facing a significant strain on its economy.65 The country has just recovered from a debilitating civil 
war. Growth was largely driven by reconstruction and increased consumption and averaged about 6.3 percent between 
2002 and 2013. Even while the country is categorized as middle-income, there are deep regional disparities in wealth 
and wellbeing. The percentage of people living below the national poverty line in Sri Lanka (calculated at LKR 3950 
per person per month/ or USD 1.25 per person per day at PPP) declined from 22.7% in 2006/2007 to 6.7% in 
2012/201366. Loans and borrowings that financed the post-war infrastructure expansion (roads, railways, housing) 
created a serious balance of payments crisis and an onerous debt burden that needs to be addressed by new 
macroeconomic policies. In the short-term, therefore, GOSL is constrained by these crises to fund resilience-related 
investments through domestic financing, especially the incremental investment required to build the coping capacity of 
vulnerable, rural communities in the Dry Zone. For example, while the government will invest around USD 14 million in 
irrigation repairs in 201667, much of this finance is directed to repairing flood damages from December 2014, and will 
be expended in urgent repairs and not in climate-smart, cascade-based upgrading. The government is also responding 
to urgent health needs arising from CKDu by assigning as much as USD 40 million in improved early detection and 
health care. RO plants were identified (Reverse Osmosis Plants) for those areas where pipe borne water is unavailable, 
however government budgets for this task cannot meet 10% of the requirement. 
 
131. 
Poverty and social exclusion are most prevalent in the under-developed rural districts and in all the conflict-
affected districts in the Northern and Eastern Provinces where many years of deprivation and exclusion from the 
benefits of a steady economic growth and development resulted in greater social vulnerabilities68. The districts where 
the project interventions are situated contain large numbers of conflict-affected families, female-headed households 
and unemployed youth. Smallholder farmers cultivating under village irrigation systems are poorer 69 and more 
vulnerable than their Dry Zone counterparts who have access to major irrigation70.  They have very limited market 
access, poor basic infrastructure, and were disadvantaged due to other social and health issues such as conflict and 
chronic disease. While the impacts of the conflict were experienced throughout the country (e.g. suicide bombing and 
attacks on public places, economic downturn, social issues with war casualties), several districts in the Dry Zone were 
directly affected by the fighting and resultant large-scale displacement. 
 
                                                             
 
64Ibid 
65 http://www.treasury.gov.lk/images/depts/fpd/docs/budgetspeech/2016/bgtspeech2016E.pdf 
66Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report 2014 
67 http://www.treasury.gov.lk/images/depts/fpd/docs/budgetspeech/2016/bgtspeech2016E.pdf 
68 UNDP 2012: National Human Development Report on Regional Disparities of Human Development 
69IWMI 2010 and Sri Lanka Water Partnership 2012 
70Aheeyar M.M.M Climate change adaptation in water management for food security: Recent developments in Sri Lanka-A review of Existing 
Knowledge and Information. Sri Lanka Water Partnership 2012

=== PAGE 53 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
132. 
There is an urgent need to implement a new model of water management for Dry Zone farming communities 
that will demonstrate how such smallholder farmers can access modern, improved technology and services to make 
traditional systems more climate smart and resilient.  As such, the Government of Sri Lanka seeks GCF financing to 
implement such a model in three of the most climatically sensitive river basins with some of the most vulnerable 
populations. The adaptation interventions in this project target public goods – irrigation, water supply and early warning 
systems. As the project targets the very poor, there is no scope for end users to pay for the services generated through 
the project. There is no short or medium term prospect of private sector investment in such public goods for the very 
poor.  
 
133. 
The project will focus on targeting the vulnerable populations across its interventions. The most vulnerable 
groups include the rural farmers, persons with disabilities, and female-headed households and ex-combatants, in a 
post-conflict setting.71 In the Dry Zone districts of Sri Lanka, the impact of war and disease has left a number of women 
widowed, resulting in a significant number of female-headed households. Women traditionally manage household 
water, family gardens and livestock and are in the frontline of managing impacts of reduced water availability and 
disaster impacts.  This affects their own intra-household food security, which can be exacerbated during extreme 
climate events and in the aftermath of a disaster72.  Addressing gender dimensions within the project design and 
implementation, this proposal works to identify and integrate interventions to provide gender responsive and 
transformative results. As women are key players in agricultural sector and, therefore, food security, livelihoods and 
water management, this proposal seeks to address the issue that women own fewer assets, have access to less land, 
have less input, and have limited access to financial services.73 See Sections E.3.1 and F.3 for more details on social 
and gender benefits of the project. 
 
134. 
Sri Lanka also faces technical and financial capacity gaps across institutions impeding an integrated approach 
to water management and security. A lack of awareness and understanding of sectoral links when managing water 
supply systems also makes it difficult for institutions to coordinate and work together.  The proposed project strengthens 
institutional capacity of the various government agencies through support to planning, coordination, and 
implementation of activities for water management, agriculture, flood and drought response. The project provides 
training for development of water resources management, planning and implementation of climate-resilient agriculture, 
water source protection planning and drinking water solutions, agriculture and flood advisories, SOP development, etc. 
across sectors and national and sub-national levels. 
E.5.  
Country Ownership 
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs 
                                                             
 
71 World Bank Sri Lanka (2015). “Ending Poverty, Promoting Shared Prosperity: A Systematic Country Diagnostic”. 
72Ibid 
73 The National Climate Change Policy of Sri Lanka http://www.climatechange.lk/CCS%20Policy/Climate_Change_Policy_English.pdf

=== PAGE 54 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
135. 
The project is line the different national policies that provide the policy framework for rural economic 
development, water management and climate change adaptation in Sri Lanka, and will contribute towards their 
implementation. The government’s vision for development recognizes that while agriculture plays a less important 
role in the national economy, it still employs more than 30% of the population and over 50% of the population in rural 
areas. GoSL has reiterated its commitment to rural economy and agricultural productivity in the recent policy statement 
of the Prime Minister. The budget for 2016 targets subsidies and low-interest credit for agriculture and support to 
rehabilitation of irrigation amounting to USD 150 million and the government has committed around USD 14 million to 
disaster risk reduction through sectoral agencies. The project aligns with the National Agriculture Policy of Sri Lanka 
in promoting food and nutrition security and technically feasible, socially acceptable, economically viable and 
environment friendly agricultural production technologies, marketing and related strategies. It also contributes to the 
implementation of National Watershed Management Policy of 2004, which recommends promoting and 
strengthening communities or stakeholders to manage their respective watersheds. The project fully supports the 
current government’s National Food Security drive, led by the Presidential Secretariat. Under this project, agricultural 
water availability, efficiency and crop diversification and productivity are prioritised. 
 
136. 
In addition the project’s interventions are consistent with key national policies and strategies addressing 
climate change: 
• 
The National Climate Change Policy of Sri Lanka, which promotes climate change adaptation and mitigation 
within the framework of sustainable development. More specifically, the Climate Change Policy recognizes the 
need to assess climate change vulnerability in the national development agenda, develop an information 
dissemination strategy to enhance adaptive capacities at all planning levels, and adopt multiple approaches to 
enhance knowledge and skills of different stakeholders to address current and emerging issues of climate 
change. 
• 
The Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) of Sri Lanka, which commits to minimizing 
climate change impacts on food security and notes that the water sector cuts across all the other sectors 
including health, food security and renewable energy generation and is the most crucial sector where 
immediate adaptation measures are required.   
• 
The Draft Disaster Management Policy of Sri Lanka (2013) advocates for a participatory, multi-agency, 
multi-stakeholder engagement in line with national and international standards for effective disaster relief and 
response.  
• 
The Sri Lanka Comprehensive Disaster Management Programme (SLCDMP) implemented by the Ministry 
of Disaster Management, aims to create national and sub national level agencies capable of assessing disaster 
risk and make decisions for short, medium and long term disaster management and to strengthen the capacity 
of communities, local governments and sub national agencies to respond to and recover from disasters. 
 
137. 
GoSL produced a Technology Action Plan and Project Ideas for each technology under priority sectors as part 
of the Technology Needs Assessment.  Improving irrigation and drinking water for the Dry Zone; 
rehabilitation/restoration minor tank network (cascade) in Dry Zone; improving fish culture in reservoirs in Dry Zone 
districts; sustainable land management for improving crop productivity; crop diversification and precision farming to 
manage climate vulnerabilities; and promoting roof top rainwater harvesting for drinking and household use are 
amongst the prioritized project ideas.   
 
138. 
Finally, The United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF 2013-2017) for Sri Lanka 
acknowledges that – in the context of climate change – improved disaster management enhances the sustainability of 
economic growth, particularly in districts that are prone to natural disasters. The proposed project is consistent with 
three specific output areas from the UNDAF, namely: 1.1.2) Increased awareness in government planning for 
integration of DDR into development planning by providing support for mobilising Government, civil society and the 
private sector to collectively integrate DRR concepts into national, regional and local development plans; 1.1.3) 
Integrate data from multiple sources and sectors as well as carryout physical, social, economic and environmental 
analysis to support policies and programmes and target resources in improving sustainability and resilience to improve 
information management promoting evidenced based policy making; and 1.1.6) Support to adapt to climate change 
induced rainfall and temperature variations on the fauna, flora and soils, by facilitating adaptive agro-forestry, soil-
water management and sustainable energy services through practical and innovative approaches. 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver

=== PAGE 55 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
139. 
The proposal is aligned with UNDP’s comparative advantage in the areas of capacity building, providing 
technical and policy support, reducing barriers and creating enabling conditions for adaptation planning and 
investments. Specifically, the proposed project will build upon UNDP’s comparative advantage stemming from 
experience in working with governments and communities in Sri Lanka and globally on: i) establishing and 
strengthening institutional, policy and legislative mechanisms; ii) building capacity; iii) undertaking risk assessments; 
iv) mainstreaming climate change adaptation, disaster risk reduction and early warning systems into development 
planning; and v) harnessing best practices and community-based approaches across different thematic areas for 
climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction. This includes experience with initiatives focused on transferring 
knowledge and technology via South-South cooperation. 
 
140. 
The UNDP Country Office (CO) in Sri Lanka is well placed to oversee the implementation of the proposed 
project. This is because it has built close connections with Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment through 
its support to the implementation of at least 15 projects on enhancing biodiversity, sustainable energy, sustainable land 
management and forestry in the country including with financing from the GEF, SCCF and Bi-lateral donors. UNDP 
has played a pivotal role among the UN agencies and other development partners in supporting the government of Sri 
Lanka, through Ministry of Disaster Management in mainstreaming DRR and early warning system aspects into 
national development planning processes and sectoral agencies. UNDP provides technical support to the 
implementation of the Comprehensive Disaster Management Programme of the Government of Sri Lanka, which is 
spearheaded by the Ministry of Disaster Management.   
 
141. 
UNDP can provide a vital co-ordination role for catalyzing enhanced capacity to adapt to climate change risks 
and impacts across sectors in Sri Lanka. To ensure that the necessary capacities and institutional mechanisms are 
achieved at both the national and district levels, UNDP will maintain its upstream focus. Furthermore, UNDP will 
facilitate and ensure transformational impacts at the community level. UNDP also has considerable experience in 
providing additional support to National Implementation (NIM) to facilitate smooth project delivery. UNDP has been 
using an approach based on the principle of optimizing resources and capacities through multi-sectoral and multi-
stakeholder driven partnerships in Sri Lanka. The country office in Sri Lanka is supported by Regional Technical 
Advisors at the UNDP offices in Bangkok, Thailand, as well as by policy, adaptation, economics and climate modeling 
experts in New York, Cape Town and Bangkok. The project will be implemented by Ministry of Mahaweli Development 
and Environment using UNDP’s National Implementation Modality, which is designed to ensure domestic systems are 
used for accountability. The interventions through this project will be compliant with the Fund’s ESS and compliant with 
stakeholder consultations. 
 
142. 
The Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment (MMDE) of Sri Lanka is the sponsor for the proposed 
project and the Executing Entity. The MMDE is mandated to coordinate and oversee environmental conservation and 
natural resources management and water management and includes the only river basin authority of the country. The 
ministry has framed key policies for adoption in management of environment and natural resources of the country 
including on forest management, waste and chemicals management and climate change. For 2016, Ministry of 
Mahaweli Development and Environment has received an annual allocation of USD 500 million from the government 
for management of environment and natural resources of the country. Over the past few years, Ministry of Environment 
has received and managed projects with grant funding including from Government of Korea, Government of Japan, 
Asian Development Bank, UNDP, WFP, UNEP, and EXIM Bank – Korea. The Ministry’s recurrent expenditure 
allocation for the upcoming years of 2016 and 2017 will be USD 26 million and USD 29.4 million respectively. Further, 
the capital expenditure denoting investment in environmental and water management projects implemented throughout 
the country for the two years is projected to be USD 55 million for 2016 and USD 67 million for 2017. These include 
projects funded by GEF, Adaptation Fund and EU.  
 
143. 
MMDE has extensive past experience in executing large foreign funded projects and is also currently managing 
ongoing portfolio of foreign and government funded development projects. MASL (Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka) 
operates under MMDE as a semi-autonomous institution which has completed an array of large hydro and water 
resource development initiatives and its past experience will serve well in the implementation of the proposed project.  
MMDE has played a major role in the successful implementation of the Pro-poor Economic Advancement and 
Community Empowerment (PEACE) project (USD 33.6million, 2006-2011)  in Kurunegala and Anuradhapura Districts 
to empower the farming community for increasing the productivity of their Agriculture lands through rehabilitation of

=== PAGE 56 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
Irrigation systems using a long given by the Japan Bank of International Corporation. In addition, major projects such 
as, Uma Oya Multipurpose Development Project (UOMDP, over USD500 million) and Dam Safety and Water Resource 
Planning Project (DSWRPP, over USD70 million) are currently being implemented. Please see section C.4 for 
additional details. 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
144. 
Engagement of the NDA and other agencies: Project development was initiated and led by Ministry of 
Mahaweli Development and Environment (MMDE), supported by the Presidential Secretariat (the President is the 
Minister of Mahaweli Development and Environment) through a multi-stakeholder consultative process. The priorities 
addressed in this project were first identified in the National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (2011-2016) and 
further elaborated in the Second National Communication (2012) and National Adaptation Plan (2015). The INDCs 
submitted by Sri Lanka just before Paris Conference of Parties in 2015 identified water sector as a critical intervention 
area for climate change adaptation- focusing on food security, health and disasters. 
 
145. 
The Climate Change Secretariat (within the MMDE) represented the NDA and coordinated the concept and 
proposal development through the establishment of the Technical Working Group (TWG) to oversee project design. 
An integrated river-basin based approach for project implementation was endorsed by the TWG which comprised 
members from the following agencies: Ministry of Mahaweli Development & Environment, Ministry of Agriculture, 
Ministry of Disaster Management, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Irrigation, Department of Agriculture, Ministry 
of Health, Ministry of City Planning and Water Supply, Department of Agrarian Development, National Water Supply 
and Drainage Board, Department of National Community Water Supply, International Water Management Institute 
(IWMI), National Planning Department, External Resources Department, Department of Meteorology, Department of 
Irrigation. Under the guidance of the TWG, the Technical Feasibility Report (Annex II) was developed through extensive 
stakeholder consultations (including community consultations). The report analyses the gaps, needs, and barriers, 
examines lessons learnt and best practices from past and on-going projects, and provides recommendations for the 
design and implementation of the proposed interventions. 
 
146. 
Led by the NDA, the TWG met multiple times in the period between October and March, to provide input to 
and review the draft Feasibility Report as well as the concept note. An inter-ministerial committee chaired by the 
Secretary to the President was established to coordinate inputs from different agencies and obtain their 
recommendations. The concept was endorsed in the 3rd meeting of the TWG, providing the approval to proceed with 
proposal development. Subsequent inputs and review informed the finalization of the proposal and no-objection letter 
was issued by the NDA on March 24th, 2016 (post UNDP appraisal meeting). Please refer to Annex XIII, for further 
details on the NDA and TWG engagement and approval process. 
 
147. 
Stakeholder consultations including civil society organizations: A number of civil society 
organizations were consulted during the development of the feasibility study and the proposal. Field 
consultations were held in six districts involving various NGOs (Such as IUCN, SAPSRI, Janathakshan, and GEF 
SGP), FOs, women’s organisations managing community water supply projects, and other CBOs. Field consultations 
included visits to local ASCs and discussions with field extension officers of Agrarian and Agriculture Departments. 
Targeted consultations were held to consult with and engage women stakeholders in the design of the project as well 
as the development of the Gender Assessment and Action Plan (Refer to Section C, Annex XIII). These consultations 
took place during the field visits (to consult communities) as well as the consultation event organized at the UN 
Compound with a number of local organisations and women’s groups working in project target districts. Meetings were 
also held with Provincial Departments of Agriculture and their extension services during the field visits. In addition to 
civil society, women groups, and community field consultations, a number of bilateral discussions were held with 
Ministries, technical experts, academics and research institutions. Other national and international actors such as the 
International Water Management Institute (IWMI) and Sri Lanka Carbon Fund (as potential Direct Access entity for 
GCF) were also consulted and engaged in the process of preparing the funding proposal.  Please see Section D, 
Annex XIII for details on the various stakeholder Consultations including for the targeted Community-based 
Consultations. 
 
148. 
Stakeholder engagement plan: The project would engage multiple stakeholders at national and local level. 
This includes the five government agencies who are responsible parties to the project. In addition, the project will 
engage with Provincial agencies, Divisional Secretariats, Agrarian Services Centres (ASCs), Farmer Organisations,

=== PAGE 57 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
Community Based Organisations, Private Sector and NGOs to implement and monitor project impact. Project 
specifically targets women and youth groups in implementation, maintenance, and monitoring of project investments. 
Detailed stakeholder engagement plan by Activity level is provided in Annex XIII. 
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
149. 
The effectiveness of proposed solutions has been tested out in a number of projects at varying scale. This 
project builds on those lessons of cost-effectiveness and efficiency of delivery. The geographic, hydro-climatic and 
socio-economic suitability of the recommended activities were successfully tested in the field and they offer the most 
effective and efficient solutions to the climate stresses on local water resources in Dry Zone Sri Lanka. 
 
150. 
The costs of implementing the project are heavily co-financed by existing systems and staff of government 
agencies. For example the Agrarian Services Centres (ASCs) will become the project’s nodal implementing ‘hub’ at 
the local level, coordinating the integrated water management plans at sub-basin level as well as the procurer and 
conveyor of climate and technology-related information. The project will build synergies with other projects in the same 
geographical location and working on issues like water resource development and management, disaster management 
and climate resilience to maximize effectiveness. For instance, the project will synergize with NCPCP interventions 
such as water augmentation, which increases the productivity in the farms. It will also use local materials such as 
excavated silt for catchment protection and dam strengthening.   
 
151. 
Costs of the infrastructure investments have been estimated utilizing comparable benchmarks from other 
projects. A cascade could have varying number of village irrigation systems (VIS). On average the project costs the 
upgrading of a VIS including catchment conservation at USD 50,000. A cascade that has 10-12 tanks (the generalized 
median) would cost 500,000-600,000. This is comparable to the cost of IUCN-HSBC (500,000) and SCCF (600,000) 
projects. Average costs for water treatment facilities (advanced filtration USD 3500 for a small sized/17,000 for large 
and 120,000 for a small community managed water supply system) and RWH (USD 550) have been derived from the 
benchmarks of other projects discussed in the Technical Feasibility Report. The benchmarks have also been tabulated 
in Annex XIII.  
 
152. 
Community participation in the implementation and operational stages will ensure cost-effectives of the 
investments.  Previous experience shows that in some instances (e.g. for catchment protection) labour is usually 
volunteered. The RWHs will be managed by the community, thereby reducing the operation and maintenance costs 
for the government in the long term. Similarly, the community contribution to the management of hydro-meteorological 
stations can make the maintenance cost-effective because this will reduce the inputs (travel, salaries and 
accommodation) from the project. The data collected by the communities from the manually operated rainfall gauges 
will be made available to the researchers and organizations such as DoM, which will enhance the current weather 
information database, and the resolution of forecasting, without the government having to spend on operation of rainfall 
and water level gauges. 
 
153. 
Alternative solutions were considered in the design of the proposed interventions. An alternative solution to 
the loss of productivity in village irrigation systems is to divert the agricultural population to other forms of production 
such as industries, which is not a foreseeable investment for the agricultural heartland of the country. Therefore, the 
government policies in the past 60-70 years are aimed at improving the agricultural productivity in this region. While 
there are significant investments in major irrigation, there is a need to invest in strengthening the village irrigation 
systems and improved agricultural practices to complement the government investments. In the case of drinking water, 
the feasibility study has considered all the possible alternatives including RWH, small-scale water supply schemes with 
simple treatment and advanced filtering methods for complicated water pollution cases. The option that has not been 
considered is the large-scale water supply schemes. Considering the extraction capacity of the water resources and 
scattered nature of the population compared to town centres, the study proposes an optimum mix of above-mentioned 
solutions excluding large and medium scale water supply schemes. Related to the investments in weather forecasting 
and early warning systems, an alternative solution is a fully automated system of weather and hydrological information, 
which can be centrally operated. However, the country’s ability to maintain such a sophisticated system is not clearly 
established at present. Overall, the proposed solutions were designed to be in line with best practices, community

=== PAGE 58 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
ownership, and synergies across the three inter-related outputs and build on ongoing efforts to ensure their efficiency 
and cost-effectiveness.  
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only) 
N/A 
E.6.3. Financial viability  
154. 
The public goods nature of this project’s outputs doesn’t entail significant revenue generation or cost recovery 
from the project. Where income generation opportunities exist, these apply directly to the beneficiaries (for instance, 
improved agricultural incomes and fee contribution from farmers to Farmer Organizations for O&M) primarily as 
household incomes or contributions to sustain O&M. In addition, the revenues accrued to each CBO managing 
advanced purification plants from water sold (USD.007 per liter) to communities is directed to (a) subsidize water for 
households that are conflict-affected or have people with kidney disease, (b) cover operation and maintenance costs 
for the infrastructure, (c) support staff resources, and (d) maintain a reserve fund that is used for community 
development activities. A financial analysis for the project is therefore not deemed pertinent given the proportion of 
financial flows at the CBO level relative to the project costs. 
 
155. 
The expected economic internal rate of return is 22% for this project, which exceeds 10%, the assumed 
discount rate. Under all test cases including the “worst case” scenario combining 20% increase in investments costs 
with a 20% reduction in total benefits; EIRR remains above the minimum threshold. Please refer to Annex XII for the 
detailed economic analysis. 
 
156. 
Financial viability of the project investments is assured through a combination of elements that builds 
ownership and the technical, financial, operational and institutional capacities of the national and sub-national 
governments and local communities to maintain and derive economic, social, environmental benefits from the proposed 
investments. These aspects include: (i) Co-investments by government institutions and communities. The project will 
leverage additional financing (USD 14M) from the GoSL through the departments engaged in the project 
implementation. It will also leverage considerable community co-investment for the proposed activities through O&M 
of water solutions and field trials of climate smart crops and agro-technology. Project will thereby promote ownership 
and catalyse further public sector financing to sustain beyond the project lifetime; (ii) Building on traditional systems 
with innovative climate-resilient technologies and best practices: Interventions that combine traditional systems with 
modern elements will rejuvenate the water supply systems and inject much needed finance and capacity to continue 
to operate these for recurring benefits that will ensure operational and financial viability beyond the project period; (iii) 
Decentralized solutions with capacity for local community O&M and management: The project will revive community 
engagement at a scale and build capacity and ownership for operation and maintenance of these systems. It will 
enhance organisational capacity of farmers to plan and implement local water management solutions, provide 
technologies and systems for improved agricultural production and safe drinking water, and enhance financial capacity 
to sustain investments post-project; and (iv) Enterprise development and employment: The project will promote 
entrepreneurship among communities to deliver a suite of new technologies for resilient agriculture, drinking water and 
climate information. It will build capacity of young men and women in these rural areas to engage in managing these 
ventures as enterprises in the village. The engagement of women in FOs and as interlocutors between private sector 
markets for ecologically produced, climate smart crops will increase livelihood options and income sources that will 
enable financial viability and impact of the project beyond its lifetime. 
E.6.4. Application of best practices 
157. 
The project applies best practices from Sri Lanka and elsewhere to address three distinctly inter-connected 
issues –lack of irrigation and drinking water and timely weather/climate information- which affect the resilience of the 
targeted vulnerable communities in the Dry Zone of Sri Lanka. The technological approaches and design builds on the 
traditional knowledge and practices, combined with modern systems for improved water use efficiency and community-
based management practices for maintaining both irrigation and drinking water systems. The project design learns 
from best practices of recent projects that have applied the cascade-wide approach to minor irrigation rehabilitation. 
These include cascade-level farmer committees, reviving traditional elements of the irrigation systems and combining 
with modern engineering solutions; reviving and strengthening community co-management of resources (land and 
water) as well as community input in to maintenance of structures for village irrigation and drinking water.

=== PAGE 59 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 79 
 
 
 
E 
158. 
Climate resilient agriculture and tailored advisories for floods and drought learn from regional best practices- 
scaling up climate-smart agricultural practices in Vietnam and strengthening early warning, forecasting and water 
management systems to enhance the adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers to drought and floods in India. These 
projects have demonstrated very positive results on the ground in changing farmer behavior in relation to chemical 
use, low-input drought-resistant seeds, water efficient technologies for agriculture and linking tailored climate 
advisories and technical inputs with positive farm-level productivity increase. 74 
 
159. 
The effectiveness of the best practices applied were tested and the results are discussed in Section 3.3 of the 
Technical Feasibility Report. Village irrigation rehabilitation is shown to have greater impacts and sustainability when 
watersheds are preserved and farmer organizations strengthened for maintenance. Rural water supply schemes are 
better managed through empowered women in these villages who have a very strong stake in obtaining clean drinking 
water. Climate resilient crops and practices have a better chance of success if accompanied with marketing initiatives 
and private sector engagement and climate advisories will have a good chance of adoption if farmer knowledge is 
considered through a participatory approach. 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only) 
 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only) 
 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme) 
 
                                                             
 
74 CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (2014). “Assessment of India’s Integrated Agro-meteorological 
Advisory Service from a farmer’s perspective”. Retrieved from: https://cgspace.cgiar.org/rest/bitstreams/34467/retrieve

=== PAGE 60 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 79 
 
 
 
F 
 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis 
160. 
Economic analysis of the project (See Annex XII for details) was carried out in accordance with the Guidelines 
for the Economic Analysis of Projects of United Nations Development Program (UNDP 2015). The feasibility of the 
investments was determined by computing the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) and economic net present value 
(NPV), and comparing the EIRR with the assumed 10% discount rate (as recommended in UNDP 2015). The period of 
analysis covers 25 years. 
 
161. 
Please note that, in the absence of guidance in the proposal template on the selection of a specific economic 
discount rate to use in the economic analysis, all proposals supported by UNDP have opted to use a 10% discount 
rate, in line with the existing practice of multilateral development banks. Should the GCF request that all proposals 
submitted for review use the same discount rate and that this rate be other than 10%, we will be happy to revise the 
economic analysis accordingly. 
 
162. 
The economic analysis is based on the following additional assumptions about the project and economic 
conditions: 
• 
Benefits generally won’t accrue the first year of the project. Because of the soft nature of the 
interventions, benefits can accrue starting from the second year. 
• 
Based on the budget and phasing of the project, we use the proportion of the project that is 
implemented each year to calculate the benefits that accrue from the project up to the 7th year when 
the entire project will be implemented. 
 
163. 
Economic benefits valued for this analysis include: 
• 
Improved irrigation access for farmers that will maintain carry-over storage to the dry periods and 
increases the agricultural productivity and farmer incomes through efficient water distribution. 
• 
Value of introducing fingerling per tank. 
• 
Increased water availability and quality due to better storage capacity of the tanks 
o 
Focusing on travel time saved due to water available in the community. 
• 
Strengthening early warning, forecasting and water management systems to improve agricultural 
productivity as a result of improved climate advisory services. 
 
164. 
The total cost of the project amounts to USD 52.08 million that includes operating and maintenance costs for 
the interventions over the lifetime of the project and the Government of Sri Lanka’s co-financing.  
 
165. 
The cost benefit analysis shows that with a 10 percent discount rate, the discounted net present value of the 
project is valued at about 34.7 million USD. The economic internal rate of return is 22%, which exceeds 10%, the 
discount rate assumed for the analysis. 
 
166. 
All proposed investments are economically feasible, with positive NPVs and EIRRs exceeding the minimum 
threshold of 10%. Under all test cases including the “worst case” scenario combining 20% increase in investments 
costs with a 20% reduction in total benefits; EIRR remains above the minimum threshold. There are a number of direct 
benefits of the projects that were not explicitly estimated in the economic analysis. The implication of ignoring these 
additional benefits is that the estimates of the economic IRR and NPV will be the lower bound and provide conservative 
estimates of the value of the project. 
 
167. 
The targeted populations’ baseline situation of poverty, conflict-related displacement, livelihood insecurity and 
access to services are significantly worsened by repeated cycles of flood and drought, climate variability, and gradual 
erosion of health, nutrition and income status. These districts contain large numbers of female-headed households and 
unemployed youth. Post-conflict investments in roads, schools, hospitals and housing have failed to deliver the required 
development benefit due to the continued livelihood vulnerability and increasing exposure to impact of climate variability 
and extreme events.

=== PAGE 61 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 79 
 
 
 
F 
168. 
The public goods nature of this project’s outputs doesn’t entail significant revenue generation or cost recovery 
from the project. Where income generation opportunities exist, these apply directly to the beneficiaries (for instance, 
improved agricultural incomes and fee contribution from farmers to Farmer Organizations for O&M) primarily as 
household incomes or contributions to sustain O&M. In addition, the revenues accrued to each CBO managing 
advanced purification plants from water sold (USD.007 per litre) to communities is directed to (a) subsidize water for 
households that are conflict-affected or have people with kidney disease, (b) cover operation and maintenance costs 
for the infrastructure, (c) support staff resources, and (d) maintain a reserve fund that is used for community 
development activities. A financial analysis for the project is therefore not deemed pertinent given the proportion of 
financial flows at the CBO level relative to the project costs. 
 
169. 
Without significant cost-recovery, the additional investment required to build resilience to climate change in 
rural Dry Zone villages is prohibitive for a government that is constrained by heavy debt and an unfavourable balance 
of payments. The project is economically viable and advances financial viability of the investments beyond project 
duration. A grant financing mechanism is, therefore, sought to support the prioritised interventions of this project. The 
Government of Sri Lanka seeks maximum concessionality for the proposed urgent adaptation actions that will benefit 
largely poverty-stricken and post-conflict regions of the island nation. 
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
170. 
This project focuses on infrastructure facilities and services critical for enhancing and protecting life and 
livelihoods and reducing the impacts of weather/climate related disasters: irrigation facilities and their watersheds, 
climate-resilient agriculture, drinking water purification and supply, and seasonal weather forecasting and early warning. 
The technological approaches to deliver these services are designed to suit the local priorities and needs including the 
abilities to operate and maintain the infrastructure in a cost-effective way. The project builds on the traditional 
methodologies for operating and maintaining village irrigation systems, and successful community-based management 
practices of water supply facilities. 
 
171. 
The technologies required to deliver these services are identified based on gaps and barriers (detailed in 
Feasibility Study, Annex II): upgrading and improving approximately 325 village irrigation systems in three vulnerable 
Dry Zone river basins and restoring their watersheds; providing drinking water facilities to seven districts linked to those 
river basins; and installing a network of weather and hydrological measurement network. Furthermore, use of improved 
weather forecasting together with agricultural advisories, provision of market access and related training will enable 
farmers to adopt climate resilient and environment-friendly agricultural practices that will minimize pollution of drinking 
water sources.  
 
172. 
Upgrading and improving village irrigation systems will incorporate the traditional designs such as “mud sluice” 
which enables removal of silt, upstream tree belt and mechanisms to trap sediment, and downstream interceptor to 
trap alkaline water seeping through the dam will be re-introduced, and will be combined with modern designs of 
spillways, dams, sluices and water measuring structures. The structural designs make the irrigation system more 
resilient to the climate change impacts such as floods and droughts, while the restoration of the watershed enhances 
the sustainability, by reducing land degradation and reservoir siltation. Accordingly, the design builds on the best 
practices learnt from past interventions, and revives the traditional management system where the community operated 
and maintained the village irrigation systems. The selection of irrigation systems is cascade-based, which contributes 
to better river basin management. 
 
173. 
The drinking water facilities will include a combination of community water supply schemes with simple 
treatment, advanced filtering techniques and rainwater harvesting units. The selection of technologies depends on 
water quality and safe yield of the source, remoteness of the area, and socio-economic factors. Water supply with 
simple treatment will use the sources with acceptable raw water quality and cater for villagers who could be connected 
with a pipe network. The type and particle size of the contaminants and health issues will decide the selection of 
advanced filtering technologies. Rainwater harvesting will target remote areas, areas with topographic constraints, 
women-headed households and areas having water quality issues, but will be promoted as a sustainable solution 
among other areas, as well. Accordingly, the design builds on the best practices in rural water supply in Sri Lanka, 
including using the technologies that were found to be easily managed by the communities.

=== PAGE 62 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 79 
 
 
 
F 
174. 
The technologies to deliver improved seasonal forecasting and early warning of extreme climatic events were 
identified as a network of agro-meteorological stations, automated rain gauges, and water level sensors at critical 
locations. The agro-meteorological stations are manually operated to ensure low cost in maintenance, while the design 
incorporates medium-cost automatic rain gauges located reference existing automated weather equipment in or in 
proximity to the selected river basins. Vulnerable locations in the river flood plain and close to large irrigation reservoirs 
were identified and such locations will be equipped with automated water level sensors and rain gauges. In addition, 
floods in the upper catchments of the rivers and breaching of small reservoirs are found to be resulting from local floods 
and low-cost water level sensors, which can be maintained with local expertise, are proposed in the sub-watersheds of 
the river basin. Village irrigation system level low-cost water level gauges and rain gauges are designed to enable 
farmers to schedule irrigations, improve operations and make the optimum use of water resources. The network is 
designed to improve the seasonal forecasting, which facilitates climate resilient agriculture, as well as providing early 
warning to prevent frequent damages to irrigation and other rural infrastructure. 
  
175. 
Finally, the project also promotes technological innovation through the use of the Internet and mobile phone 
technology to distribute and receive communications, warnings and advisories. While sharing of data over the Internet 
allows a wider audience to use the data for seasonal and shorter duration forecasting and hydraulic modeling, the 
capacity of early warnings and advisories is enhanced by direct transmission of data to the end-users and also ensures 
cost-effectiveness of the interventions.  
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations 
 
A Social and Environment Screening Procedure and a detailed ESMP plan have been developed for the project 
(See Annex VI) to assess and address environmental and social risks arising from the project. 
 
Environment 
176. 
The project is expected to have some short term small to medium scale environmental impacts particularly in 
relation to the rehabilitation of existing infrastructure (tanks specifically) but will have significant long lasting 
environmental benefits (See Section E.3.1). The project will rehabilitate existing irrigation infrastructure to allow for 
greater water retention during rainfall seasons, capturing the flood flow from upstream areas during intense rainfall 
events.  This water can then be used for irrigation during dry seasons, thus providing a far more secure food source.  
Further, the additional water can be used for drinking water during drought periods. This will provide both environmental 
and social benefits in the short to long term including provision of improved water quality and quantity retention and 
provide for improved water management which will in turn, provide more climate resilient agriculture. 
 
177. 
The project will involve earth works that will be undertaken during the dry season to reduce erosion and air 
quality issues.  Sediment that is removed from the irrigation infrastructure will be placed back on to agricultural land, 
thereby provided a significant environmental and social benefit by returning previously lost sediment that is normally of 
high quality back into the agricultural sector.  Changes in land use and water management will ensure this sediment is 
retained in-situ rather than being lost again.

=== PAGE 63 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 79 
 
 
 
F 
178. 
The project areas currently use groundwater as a source of potable water. The groundwater is contaminated 
with heavy metals, nutrients and other chemical attributes that make it not only non-palatable but more importantly, 
extremely dangerous to life through its consumption.  The consumption of the water has contributed to illnesses such 
as kidney disease and even death.  Water sterilisation and purification processes will be established to remove 
chemicals, heavy metals etc. from the water to increase its quality and contribute to reduction in the potential for kidney 
disease and other diseases.  There will be no additional water taken above that currently used.  There will be some 
waste generated from this process (filters predominantly, potentially some small amount of liquid residue, that will be 
recycled where possible); however, the environmental and social benefits are extremely significant in that the 
sterilisation and purification will save lives. The project also includes the installation of rainwater tanks that will provide 
potable water for households.  This will reduce the reliance on groundwater as well as water coming from overland flow 
through the irrigation channels. 
 
179. 
The project has developed a complaint’s register along with a two tiered Grievance Redress Mechanism 
consistent with the UNDP’s Stakeholder Response Mechanism: Overview and Guidance (2014) and World Bank Group 
Safeguards Policies.  The Grievance Redress Mechanism has further been designed in consideration of the specific 
local context and draws on existing processes and procedures for the resolution of complaints and grievances in Sri 
Lanka.  The Grievance Redress Mechanism established goals and objectives along with eligibility requirements to make 
a complaint and/or grievance.  It has been designed that all parties will act in good faith throughout the process and 
more importantly, that is will be arbitrary in nature in trying to achieve mutually acceptable resolutions for all parties.  The 
Grievance Redress Mechanism also provides for the covering of costs for legitimate complaints or grievances so as 
individuals and/or groups are not disadvantaged by bring complaints to the attention of the Ministry and UNDP.  Finally, 
the Grievance Redress Mechanism allows individuals and/or groups to also file a complaint with the Social and 
Environmental Compliance Unit within the Office of Anticorruption and Integrity within the UNDP should they have any 
concerns as to corruption, unethical behavior or where they believe their complaint or grievance has not been 
adequately addressed. 
 
Social 
180. 
The interventions will be undertaken in areas of Sri Lanka that have observed significant conflict in the past.  
Many of the people of the area were impacted by the past civil war and as such, there is a need to rebuild peace within 
and among ethnic groups; and community spirit. The project will benefit individuals through improved agricultural 
productivity and access to clean disease free drinking water as highlighted above. Communities can feel safer and 
cope better with flood events through changes in agricultural practices that are more climate resilient and have improved 
access to water during drought periods.  This in turn increases community resilience by providing strengthened village 
irrigation infrastructure which is central to life in the Dry Zone, therefore enhancing the lives of vulnerable groups 
including those with disabilities, minority groups, youth and the elderly. By having water available for longer, the 
community has far better means of being sustainable with respect to food production and thereby increasing their 
livelihoods. 
 
181. 
As highlighted above, the project will also increase the safety of people though access to clean water through 
sterilization and purification, particularly in high-risk areas that have observed mortality and extreme sickness from 
drinking contaminated water. Finally, the project will implement an early warning system that will allow communities to 
adapt their current activities to meet the increasing threat of climate change.  With this information, it is highly likely that 
livelihoods will be saved and it will improve two-way communication mechanisms and inclusion of resilience building in 
the socio-economic planning process. 
 
Gender 
182. 
The project was designed in consultation with women’s organizations and CBOs in the field and through a 
structured consultation. The design integrates gender sensitive planning and implementation particularly for women 
farmers, women-headed households and for younger women without employment. The Sri Lankan National Action Plan 
for the Protection and Promotion of Human Rights 2011–2016 includes a section highlighting the rights of women and 
a “commitment to ensuring gender equality.” Within the project design and implementation, the interventions will provide 
gender responsive and transformative results.  As women are key players in agricultural sector and therefore food 
security, livelihoods and water management, this proposal seeks to address the issue that women own fewer assets

=== PAGE 64 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 79 
 
 
 
F 
and have access to less land, have less input, and access to fewer financial services. Around 23.5% of all households 
in Sri Lanka are female-headed. 
 
183. 
The project will work to improve the lives of women more broadly through increased food security and clean 
drinking water in locations, where, in the past, women were impacted by cultural practices.  Women have a reliance on 
home gardens to support their families and project interventions under Output 1 will support women to grow food and 
earn income through agro-based small industry. Moreover, the project will target women-headed households and 
disabled women for low-tech agriculture and household drinking water improvement, lessening the current burden on 
such families. Quantitative outcomes of this targeting include female-headed households as beneficiaries, improved 
access to drinking water, and improved livelihoods and business development services targeting rural women 
entrepreneur groups. 
 
184. 
At least 15,000 women in the project target area will benefit from income opportunity and entrepreneurship 
through implementation of climate resilient agriculture technologies and market linkages and about 22,000 women will 
benefit from empowerment, skills development and employment by managing community drinking water projects as 
local social enterprises.  The expected outcomes of the project include improvements in health and well-being, improved 
livelihoods, and business development services targeting rural women entrepreneur groups.  The qualitative outcomes 
include increased opportunities to generate additional income, as women are more likely to respond to incentives that 
address their family’s basic needs, such as better health and nutrition, linking to agriculture and food security 
improvements; time-savings for women as a result improved access to drinking water; contribution to improved self-
esteem and empowerment of women in the community; expanded involvement in public and project decision-making 
as a result of initiation of women into active participation in income generating activities; support for training and 
educational activities which may include activities related to climate change, agriculture, water management, 
leadership, business, finance, entrepreneurship and decision-making, thereby enabling empowerment and involvement 
(or increased involvement) of women to participate with confidence in community meetings; and effectiveness of 
awareness raising. A detailed Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan is provided in Annex XIII. 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement 
185. 
The financial management and procurement of this project will be guided by UNDP financial rules and 
regulations available here: https://info.undp.org/global/documents/frm/Financial-Rules-and-Regulations_E.pdf. Further 
guidance is outlined in the financial resources management section of the UNDP Programme and Operations Policies 
and Procedures available at https://info.undp.org/global/popp/frm/Pages/introduction.aspx. UNDP has comprehensive 
procurement policies in place as outlined in the ‘Contracts and Procurement’ section of UNDP’s Programme and 
Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP).  The policies outline formal procurement standards and guidelines across 
each phase of the procurement process, and they apply to all procurements in UNDP. See here: 
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/cap/Pages/Introduction.aspx.  
 
186. 
The project will be implemented following the National Implementation Modality (NIM) following NIM 
guidelines available here: 
https://info.undp.org/global/documents/_layouts/WopiFrame.aspx?sourcedoc=/global/documents/frm/National%20Imp
lementation%20by%20the%20Government%20of%20UNDP%20Projects.docx&action=default&DefaultItemOpen=1. 
UNDP will ascertain the national capacities of the implementing partner by undertaking an evaluation of capacity 
following the Framework for Cash Transfers to Implementing Partners (part of the Harmonized Approach to Cash 
Transfers - HACT). All projects will be audited following the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted above and 
applicable audit guidelines and policies.   
 
187. 
The NIM Guidelines are a formal part of UNDP’s policies and procedures, as set out in the UNDP Programme 
and 
Operations 
Policies 
and 
Procedures 
(POPP) 
which 
are 
available 
here: https://info.undp.org/global/popp/Pages/default.aspx.  The NIM Guidelines were corporately developed and 
adopted by UNDP, and are fully compliant with UNDP’s procurement and financial management rules and regulations.

=== PAGE 65 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 79 
 
 
 
F 
188. 
The national executing entity MMDE - also referred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP 
terminology - is required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and 
procedures (including the NIM Guidelines).  In legal terms, this is ensured through the national Government’s signature 
of the UNDP Standard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA), together with a UNDP project document which will be 
signed by the Implementing Partner to govern the use of the funds.  Both of these documents require compliance.  Prior 
to signature of the project document, all national Implementing Partners like MMDE need to have undergone a 
Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) assessment by UNDP to assess capacities to implement the 
project.  During implementation, UNDP will provide oversight and quality assurance in accordance with its policies and 
procedures, and any specific requirements in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and project confirmation to 
be 
agreed 
with 
the 
GCF. 
 This 
may 
include, 
but 
is 
not 
limited 
to, monitoring 
missions, 
spot 
checks, facilitation and participation in project board meetings, quarterly progress and annual implementation reviews, 
and audits at project level or at implementing partner level on the resources received from UNDP. 
 
189. 
The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) framework consists of four processes: (1) macro 
assessments; (2) micro assessments; (3) cash transfers and disbursements; and (4) assurance activities. Assurance 
activities include planning, periodic on-site reviews (spot checks), programmatic monitoring, scheduled audits and 
special audits. During micro-assessment, there can weaknesses identified for which actions are required to addresses 
the gaps. When a spot check finds that the gaps are not addressed it will mean that the level of assurance activities 
will have to remain higher and modalities of engaging with that implementing partner will have to be reviewed if 
necessary. All details are available here:https://undg.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/2014-UNDG-HACT-Framework-
English-FINAL.pdf. 
 
190. 
The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits, informed by and 
together with any specific requirements agreed in the AMA currently being negotiated with the GCF. According to the 
current audit policies, UNDP will be appointing the auditors. In UNDP scheduled audits are performed during the 
programme cycle as per UNDP assurance/audit plans, on the basis of the implementing partner's risk rating and 
UNDP’s guidelines. A scheduled audit is used to determine whether the funds transferred to the implementing partner 
were used for the appropriate purpose and in accordance with the work plan. A scheduled audit can consist of a financial 
audit or an internal control audit.  
 
191. 
All GCF resources will be provided to the implementing partner, less any agreed cost recovery amount.  Under 
UNDP’s national implementation modality, UNDP advances cash funds on a quarterly basis to the implementing partner 
(executing entity) for the implementation of agreed and approved programme activities, in accordance with UNDP 
standard policies and the NIM Guidelines. The implementing partner reports back expenditure via a financial report on 
quarterly basis to UNDP.  Any additional requirements will be as in accordance with the AMA as and when it is agreed. 
 
A draft procurement plan (which will be further discussed and revised prior to UNDP Project Document signature) is 
provided in Annex XIII.

=== PAGE 66 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 79 
 
 
G 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures 
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Limited capacity among farmer organisations, 
government officials and other partner organisations to 
design and implement integrated solutions 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will invest in local level mobilisation and technical capacity building for communities and officials to 
ensure adequate design and implementation of project solutions. It builds on traditional systems and local 
knowledge and introduces innovative design elements through a participatory approach. Technical training and 
capacity building will ensure sustained capacities for design and implementation of project solutions. The 
mitigation measure should lower the risk level to low. 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary 
192. 
Risk factors associated with the project implementation include mainly technical and operational, 
institutional, and social and environmental aspects (please refer to section F.3 for ESS assessment). The risks 
related to technical and operational capacities may affect design and installation of the irrigation, drinking water, 
and early warning systems infrastructure. Risks related to inadequate operation and maintenance of the water 
supply solutions and early warning systems can impede sustained water supply and generation of EWs and 
forecasts. Other risks could be related to operational issues of delays in completion of the infrastructure or 
availability of sufficiently trained personnel to complete the installations. Risks related to limited coordination 
among agencies and stakeholders can lead to inefficiencies in the implementation and impact of the project 
interventions. Risks related to limited awareness and preparation of communities can impede adoption of the 
technologies, practices, and information advanced through the project. Climate shocks can lead to a risk of 
damage to the project investments affecting implementation as well as sustained impact post-project. Finally, 
there are environmental and social risks related to sediment control, noise, etc. that could affect communities 
targeted in the project. These are detailed in Section F.3 as well as added in the table below. 
 
193. 
The proposed project includes several mitigation measures to address these risks. The project will invest 
in local level mobilisation and technical capacity building for communities and officials to ensure adequate 
design and implementation of project solutions.  Project will implement tested O&M models for community 
management with clear guidelines and delineation of responsibilities at the outset and focus on building technical and 
financial capacity for sustained O&M. Developing SOPs for maintenance and data sharing for Agromet stations and 
other weather information systems will ensure that reliable seasonal forecasts and flood information received by the 
community. A sound implementation and project management framework will be established to overcome challenges 
of inter-sectoral coordination. The project will continue engage and build capacity for various stakeholders at national 
level and sub-national level, including large ASCs, NGOs, FOs, and CBOs. The project support to coordinated planning 
and investments through water management plans, cascade level water committees, SOPs, etc. will also build the 
capacity and mechanisms for sustained institutional coordination. The risk of low commitment to and adoption of 
project solutions is mitigated through inclusive multi-stakeholder consultative approach to project design and 
implementation, investments in sensitization and capacity building, implementation of community-based 
management models for project investments, and support to financial viability and sustainability of the solutions. 
Impact of climate shocks is mitigated through use of reliable forecasts for planning and operation of the 
infrastructure as well as incorporating design elements to increase the resilience of the investments to extreme 
events. Finally, detailed ESMP plan (See Annex VI) is established to address environmental and social risks 
arising from the project.

=== PAGE 67 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 79 
 
 
G 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability 
of 
risk 
occurring 
Inadequate operation and maintenance of the local 
level community managed interventions can lead to 
reduced viability and impact of the water and early 
warning/forecasting solutions 
Technical and 
operational 
Low 
(<5% 
of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Project will implement tested O&M models for community management with clear guidelines and delineation of 
responsibilities at the outset and focus on building technical and financial capacity for sustained O&M. The O&M plan 
for the project incorporates support for building the O&M capacity through training and strengthening of business 
models for financial viability of FOs to maintain these systems. Domestic financing, including government financing, is 
phased in increasingly through the project life-time to ensure post-project O&M as well. The mitigation measure should 
keep the risk level as low. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability 
of 
risk 
occurring 
Limited 
coordination 
among 
agencies 
and 
stakeholders can lead to inefficiencies in the 
implementation 
and 
impact 
of 
the 
project 
interventions 
Technical and 
operational 
Low 
(<5% 
of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
A sound implementation and project management framework (through IMC, district and local level project coordination) 
is established to overcome challenges of inter-sectoral coordination during implementation. The project will continue 
to engage and build capacity for various stakeholders at national level and sub-national level, including large ASCs, 
NGOs, FOs, and CBOs. The project support to coordinated planning and investments through water management 
plans, cascade level water committees, local cultivation (kanna) meetings, SOPs (for water supply management as 
well as data sharing for EWs and forecasts), etc. will also build the capacity and mechanisms for sustained institutional 
coordination.  
 
The coordination of service delivery through the ASCs, the integrated planning through water management plans, 
SOPs, and the implementation/project management framework advance institutional coordination to address 
fragmentation. In addition, each of the project Outputs invests in capacity building of the institutions at national sub-
national level to promote the integrated approach.The mitigation measure should lower the risk level to low. 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability 
of 
risk 
occurring 
Delays in completion of the infrastructure due to 
issues such as rainfall season and availability of 
sufficiently trained masons to complete RWH 
installations. 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium 
(5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will allocate two months for planning cascade rehabilitation work and develop a time plan for the entire 
cascade as well as individual reservoirs with local officials (Department of Irrigation and department of Agrarian 
Development) and FOs of each tank, based on seasonal forecasts. The timetable will ensure that farmer cultivation 
practises are impacted only during the dry season and for the minimum possible time. To mitigate risk of lack of trained 
masons, project will mobilize local personnel that were involved in such solutions in the past and institute training to 
ensure they are capacitated to undertake installation of the solutions. The mitigation measure should keep the risk 
level as low. 
Selected Risk Factor 5

=== PAGE 68 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 79 
 
 
G 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability 
of 
risk 
occurring 
Limited awareness and preparation of communities 
can impede adoption of the technologies, practices, 
and information advanced through the project 
Other 
Low 
(<5% 
of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The risk of low commitment to and adoption of project solutions is mitigated through inclusive multi-stakeholder 
consultative approach to project design and implementation, investments in sensitization and capacity building 
including technical training, implementation of community-based management models for project investments, 
and support to financial viability and sustainability of the solutions. The mitigation measure should lower the risk 
level to low.  
Selected Risk Factor 6 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability 
of 
risk 
occurring 
Climate shocks can lead to a risk of damage to the 
project investments affecting implementation as well 
as sustained impact post-project. 
Other 
Medium 
(5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Farmer Organizations will be trained to combine traditional and modern design elements to the entire village irrigation 
system to withstand longer dry periods and flash floods caused by intense rainfall. The cascade level water 
management committees established will develop and implement SOPs for water allocation between multiple users 
and flood management in a cascade. Changing cropping patterns and technologies is also important to sustaining the 
benefits. Switching from Yala season rice to other field crops such as onion, watermelon, traditional rice varieties and 
adoption of water saving modern irrigation methods are promoted through Output 1.The greatest input to enhanced 
resilience of investments made in Outputs 1 and 2 comes from the climate/weather advisories generated in output 3 
which will support farmers to face greater periods of climatic uncertainty by providing timely information. Together with 
technology and seeds, and community capital developed in output 1 and 2, smallholder farmers should be able to 
overcome future climatic uncertainty with greater preparation. The mitigation measure should lower the risk level to 
low. 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability 
of 
risk 
occurring 
Selected Risk Factor 7 
 
Description 
Lack of financing for operations and maintenance of 
irrigation systems for sustained impact of investments 
Other 
Medium 
(5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Generally village irrigation systems are community owned and managed with technical support from Department of 
Agrarian Development. A strategy for overcoming lack of financing for upkeep and regular upgrade of these systems 
were discussed at national and field level consultations. This was also discussed under the ‘Financial Viability’ 
comment, above, and addressed through project funded activities participatory design and upgrades for the VIS; FO 
training for O&M and financial management (improved collection of fees from membership) linking with ASCs for 
financial services; and cascade-level water committees to build capacity for iterative planning.  A detailed O&M plan 
has been developed for the project that combines GCF and domestic resources (with the latter phased in to take over 
the O&M post-project). The mitigation measures should lower the risk level to low. 
Selected Risk Factor 8 
 
Description

=== PAGE 69 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 79 
 
 
G 
Sediment movement during the rehabilitation of 
irrigation infrastructure 
Social 
and 
environmental 
Medium 
(5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Activities proposed as part of the project build on experiences from a number of ongoing efforts including 
investments undertaken by the Asian Development Bank, World Bank, IUCN and UNDP across all of Sri Lanka. 
Past activities were successfully undertaken and the effective methodologies used for irrigation system rehabilitation 
as part of those projects will be replicated (modified spatially as required). By following a proven practice, the project 
will result in reduced impacts. 
To ensure that the sediment is not mobilised through current movement that will result in any significant impacts, it will 
be necessary to prepare an erosion control sediment plan and install silt curtains to restrict sediment movement from 
the site. Further, any earthworks should be undertaken during the dry season and compacted sufficiently to reduce 
sediment movement. The plan should contain aspects including but not limited to the installation of sediment curtains 
to reduce sediment movement and the quick placement of footing material. These impacts will be spatially and 
temporally restricted to rehabilitation periods. 
Selected Risk Factor 9 
 
Description 
Contamination of existing water sources 
Social 
and 
environmental 
Medium 
(5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
As with the above, to ensure contaminants etc. do not enter waterways and groundwater systems, a water quality 
monitoring plan and management framework will be developed to ensure chemicals are not released. This will involve 
testing sediment prior to movement and planning so that the works are not undertaken during rain events. Where 
rainfall is anticipated, appropriate material should be placed under the sediment prior to excavation to ensure there is 
no seepage into groundwater systems. The water quality monitoring for the sources will be designed to identify 
potential impacts so that management measures can be proactively rather than reactively enacted upon. 
Selected Risk Factor 10 
Description 
Construction Noise 
Social 
and 
environmental 
Low 
(<5% 
of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
An assessment should consider any sensitive receptors including communities. Further, noise shields should be 
constructed to reduce the potential for noise to reach these communities if an impact occurs. The noise will 
predominantly relate to the construction through the rehabilitation of the irrigation network, which will have very limited 
temporal scales. 
Selected Risk Factor 11 
Description 
Construction of Rainwater Tanks 
Social 
and 
environmental 
Low 
(<5% 
of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Prior to installation, a full site evaluation will be undertaken to assess each site. Appropriate measures will be taken 
to ensure the specific amount of material is only required, thus, reducing waste. Further, any excavations, which are 
currently anticipated to be extremely minor, will follow the erosion and sediment control plan contained in the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan. As such, with the appropriate mitigation measures, it is not anticipated 
that the component of the work will have any additional impacts.

=== PAGE 70 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 79 
 
 
G 
Selected Risk Factor 12 
Description 
Construction of Early Warning System 
Social 
and 
environmental 
Low 
(<5% 
of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Prior to installation, a full site evaluation will be undertaken to assess each site. Appropriate measures will be taken 
to ensure the specific amount of material is only required, thus reducing waste. Further, any excavations, which are 
currently anticipated to be extremely minor, (eg a small hole poured with concrete to hold the post) will follow the 
erosion and sediment control plan contained in the Environmental and Social Management Plan. As such, with the 
appropriate mitigation measures, it is not anticipated that the component of the work will have any additional impacts. 
Selected Risk Factor 13 
Description 
Production of waste 
Social 
and 
environmental 
Low 
(<5% 
of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
All used filters and other waste should be managed and placed in an appropriate waste facility, thus reducing any 
impact.  Budget is included for the development of such a facility. 
Selected Risk Factor 14 
Description 
Low accuracy of the forecasts and advisories due 
to highly dynamic weather conditions for tropical, island 
country 
Other 
Medium 
(5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Beyond the capacity building for data modeling and forecasting (particular near-casting ability of the Met Department), 
the project will also support development of multiple advisories for different climate scenarios. The participatory 
approach to co-development of advisories will enhance the assessment of risks and decision making for agricultural 
planning based on viable response options. This mitigation measure should lower the risk to low. 
Selected Risk Factor 15 
Description 
Risk of overuse of water in the absence of water tariffs 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium 
(5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The DAD has documented community system of management of VIS in local languages as a handbook titled 
“Cultivation Meetings and Minor Irrigation Maintenance” which deals with reducing the irrigation releases in response 
to rainfall, using rainfall for land preparation etc. While farmers do not pay directly for irrigation water based on its use, 
individual farmers contribute to a maintenance fund. Decisions such as the use of water or the amount of contribution 
to the maintenance fund are made collectively. There are also community introduced principles to prevent wastage of 
water, including fines, as the traditional system does not consider irrigation water as a free good that can be wasted. 
The current proposal further strengthen this system by helping farmers better understand economic gains of adequate 
investments into proper maintenance and provides the necessary technical back-up by providing rain gauges and 
measuring devices. More importantly, the project strengthens the institutional mechanisms including the FOs, 
cultivation meetings, cascade level water management planning, and cross-sectoral coordination to ensure that 
collectively, efficient and conservative water management practices are implemented. This mitigation measure will 
keep the risk low. 
Selected Risk Factor 16

=== PAGE 71 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 79 
 
 
G 
Description 
Risk of conflict and grievances among beneficiaries 
around selection and water use. 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium 
(5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Decision on water sharing is taken with heavy involvement of FOs and it has worked quite well over many years with 
no known incidence of water conflicts in Sri Lanka. The FOs are linked to women’s organizations and youth 
organizations in the village and decisions are highly participatory.  There is an informal system of grievance, where 
farmers can complaint about officials of FOs or officials of ASCs/DAD to the DAD, divisional and District secretaries. 
The above mentioned grievances redress system is awell accepted system. Cultivation meetings (called ‘kanna’ 
meetings) and FOs have legal recognition, and DAD officials and DS are bound to implement them. 
Project Activity 2.1 improves the capacity of water-supply support staff at district/divisions, selected partner 
organizations (NGOs) and CBOs to implement and maintain community-based drinking water related interventions. 
The activity will facilitate the drinking water needs to be incorporated in to cascade development plans so that water 
use conflicts can be resolved through cascade farmer committees and water source protection committees facilitated 
by the project. In addition, in compliance with ESS, the project will establish a Grievance Redress Mechanism, as 
outlined in the ESMP. This mitigation measure will keep the risk low.

=== PAGE 72 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 79 
 
 
 
H 
H.1. Logic Framework.  
 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level75 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Increased climate-
resilient sustainable 
development 
The proposed project contributes to climate-resilient water resources development in the Dry Zone of Sri 
Lanka through the sustained impact of project measures that have high potential for replicability and 
scale. Overall, the project will contribute to the Fund level impacts of Increased resilience and enhanced 
livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, communities, and regions and Increased resilience of health 
and wellbeing, and food and water security. Combined with government co-financing, GCF resources 
will support an integrated approach to strengthening the resilience of smallholder farmers in the Dry Zone 
through three inter-related outputs contributing to climate smart water management.  The interventions 
will directly benefit 704,000 people in three river basins and indirectly benefit at least 840,000 more 
people living and working in agriculture in the associated districts benefitting from improved access to 
climate information and early warnings and improved agricultural service delivery. The main outputs of 
the proposed project are (i) strengthened village irrigation infrastructure and capacities of smallholder 
farmers for climate-resilient water management and agriculture; (ii) improved access to safe and reliable 
drinking water through supply systems able to withstand climate change and variability; and (iii) 
strengthened capacity of Dry Zone farmers to use weather and climate information for agricultural and 
water management. This integrated approach contributes to strengthened adaptive capacities and 
improved water security among smallholder farmers in the Dry Zone, a key priority under the Intended 
National Development Contribution of Sri Lanka to climate change adaptation. 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-
term  
(if 
applica
ble) 
Final 
Fund-level impacts 
 
Total number of 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries (% of 
whom is female) 
 
Agrarian Services Centres 
databases on farm 
households and cropping 
intensities 
SMS reach monitored by 
the District and National 
Disaster Management 
Centre 
Gender-sensitive field 
surveys undertaken within 
the targeted river basins 
and districts 
 
 
Total  
1,950,37476 
(51% of 
whom is 
female)  
 
9.6% of the 
total 
population of 
Sri Lanka77 
 
770,50078 
(51% of 
whom is 
female) 
(direct) 
 
Completed infrastructure and 
sustained maintenance for 
water supply systems 
 
Uptake of training and 
capacity building by 
provincial, district and ASC 
officials on water 
management, climate 
resilient agriculture packages, 
flood/drought and 
management advisories 
 
Efficiency and reach of the 
SMS-based communication 
system for flood warning and 
water management 
advisories 
                                                             
 
75 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks available at the following link (Please 
note that some indicators are under refinement): http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf 
76 This total combines direct and indirect beneficiaries. 
77 Total population of Sri Lanka 20,271,464 according to Census of 2012 
78 See footnote 82.

=== PAGE 73 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 79 
 
 
 
H 
1,179,87479 
of (51% of 
whom is 
female) 
(indirect) 
A 1.0 Increased 
resilience and 
enhanced livelihoods 
of the most 
vulnerable people, 
communities, and 
regions 
 
 
Indicator 1.2 
Number of males 
and females 
benefiting from the 
adoption of 
diversified, climate 
resilient livelihood 
options 
 
Agrarian Services Centres 
databases on farm 
households and cropping 
intensities 
Project baseline, mid-term 
and end term surveys 
Gender-sensitive field 
surveys undertaken within 
the targeted river basins 
and districts 
0 
 
520,00080 of 
which 
265,200 are 
women 
Completed irrigation 
infrastructure and sustained 
O&M. 
 
 
Uptake of training and 
capacity building by farmers 
related to the CSA practices. 
A 2.0 Increased 
resilience of health 
and well-being, and 
food and water 
security 
Indicator 2.3: 
Number of males 
and females with 
year-round access to 
reliable and safe 
water supply despite 
climate shocks and 
stresses. 
 
Project baseline, mid-term 
and end term surveys 
SMS reach monitored by 
the District and National 
Disaster Management 
Centre 
Gender-sensitive field 
surveys undertaken within 
the targeted river basins 
and districts 
0 
 
 
517,80081 of 
which 
264,078 are 
women 
 
 
Completed infrastructure and 
sustained maintenance for 
water supply systems 
 
Uptake of training and 
capacity building by 
provincial, district and 
community stakeholders on 
water management, 
flood/drought and 
management advisories 
 
Efficiency and reach of the 
SMS-based communication 
system for flood warning and 
water management 
advisories 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
 
79 The total number of indirect beneficiaries was derived as follows: Total rural population in 7 districts is 3,423,974; Total population in targeted 3 river 
basins is: 925,000. So, the base figure for indirect beneficiaries are those outside the river basins (3,423,974-925,000): 2,498,974. Of these: 1) 614545  
indirect beneficiaries, farmers, will benefit under Output 1 based on assumptions that training on CSA and interpretation and use of drought advisories will 
be adopted by other 91  ASCs in the seven target district, outside the river basins. Each ASC targets 6753 farmers based on DAD statistics.  2) Then of the 
remaining population of potential indirect beneficiaries, which is 1,884,429 (2,498,974-614545), we count the population receiving flood advisories for water 
management through the SMS services. Assuming 30% penetration of mobile services (see footnote 101 on basis for assumption), we estimate 30% of 
1,884,420 (565,328) will receive SMS based early warnings. Therefore, total indirect beneficiaries is 614545 plus 563,328 = 1,179,874. 
80 See footnote 88.  
81 This is the total number of beneficiaries who receive year round and safe drinking water and whose drinking water supply systems are protected and 
sustained through flood advisories disseminated through cascade water management committees and through SMS. The number is calculated based on 
Output 2 and Output 3 beneficiaries avoiding overlaps. To avoid duplication, since the number of beneficiaries of water management and flood advisories 
of Output 3 (445,500, see footnote 99) are calculated at the river basin level population, we assume this already subsumes the beneficiaries of drinking 
water systems residing in the river basins (144,700, see footnote 94). Therefore we estimate the target population for this indicator as 445,500 plus the 
additional 72,300 beneficiaries of drinking water systems outside the river basins, under Output 2. This totals to 517,800 people. Please note that combined 
target populations from Result Area 1 and 2 does not add up to (and exceeds) total direct beneficiaries as these numbers both count farmers that benefit 
from CSA and water advisories. The total direct beneficiary number removes this duplication.

=== PAGE 74 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 79 
 
 
 
H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level 
 
 
 
 
Target 
 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Mid-term (if 
applicable)  
Final 
Assumptions 
Project/programme 
outcomes 
Outcomes that contribute to Fund-level impacts 
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks 
7.1: Extent to 
which vulnerable 
households, 
communities and  
businesses 
use improved  
strategies and 
activities to 
respond to 
climate 
variability and 
climate 
change 
 
Project 
baseline, mid-
term and end 
term surveys 
Gender-
sensitive field 
surveys 
undertaken 
within the 
targeted river 
basins and 
districts 
 
Extent to which 
the advisories 
are used will be 
evaluated 
through 
qualitative 
assessment 
(such as 
scorecard) 
0  
422,66482 
770,50083 of 
which 
392,955 are 
women 
Completed infrastructure 
and sustained 
maintenance for VIS 
Agrarian Service Centres 
are able to reach all small 
holder farmer families in 
their areas with climate risk 
information and agriculture 
packages. 
There is continued 
commitment and uptake of 
the information by targeted 
communities in the project. 
Project/programme 
outputs 
Outputs that contribute to outcomes 
Output 1:  Village 
irrigation infrastructure 
and capacities of 
smallholder farmers 
strengthened for climate-
resilient water 
Extent of minor 
irrigation under 
targeted 
cascades with 
increased 
cropping 
intensity (CI<1.6) 
Field reports of 
DAD extension 
service 
Household 
surveys 
through ASCs  
0 
 
 
 
 
CSA 
packages are 
8875 ha85 
 
 
 
975088ha 
 
 
 
Village irrigation 
upgradation is completed 
on schedule without large 
disruptions from extreme 
weather events or from 
bureaucratic delays in 
approvals etc. 
                                                             
 
82 The mid-term target calculates that by the fourth year of the project 60% of the targeted population receiving climate resilient agriculture advisories, 
water management advisories that support adaptive strategies for both irrigation and drinking water. 
83 The target combines the direct beneficiaries in the three river basins under the three outputs, avoiding overlaps. This was calculated using: (i) the 
total number of beneficiaries reached under Output 1 which is 520,000 (which subsumes 144700 of the 217000 beneficiaries from Output and overlaps 
with the 520,000 beneficiaries of agricultural advisories under Output 3); (ii)  the additional drinking water beneficiaries outside river basin (72,300) not 
counted under Output 1; and (iii) the additional number of river basin population receiving flood advisories through cascade level water committees and 
SMS and not counted under Output 1. This would be the non-farming population of the total reached under Output 3 which is about 40% of 445,500 
(178,200). The total number of direct beneficiaries is 520,000+72,300+178,200 = 770,500. 
85 The project is upgrading 325 village irrigation systems in 30 cascades. Each of these VIS currently does not support farmers to complete one full 
season. The minor season, which is generally dry depends heavily on stored water in the village reservoirs. If there is not sufficient storage, minor 
season cultivation is abandoned. Therefore cropping intensity, measured by the number of times the irrigated downstream is fully cultivated, is less than 
1. By upgrading storage and efficient water allocation, project aims to increase cropping intensity in these village irrigation systems to 1.6 or more, by 
improving the ability to use the downstream lands during the minor season. According to Department of Agrarian Development each of the Village 
Irrigation systems has 25-30 hectares as a median command area. So the targets reflect the extent of command area that will directly benefit from the 
improved irrigation potential and water availability through VIS upgrade. The full extent is 9750 ha but the project assumes that by the mid-term of 
delivery, around 80% of the farm fields would have increased production in the two seasons.  
88 The project is upgrading 325 village irrigation systems in 30 cascades. Each of these VIS currently does not support farmers to complete one full 
season. The minor season, which is generally dry depends heavily on stored water in the village reservoirs. If there is not sufficient storage, minor 
season cultivation is abandoned. Therefore cropping intensity, measured by the number of times the irrigated downstream is fully cultivated, is less than 
1. By upgrading storage and efficient water allocation, project aims to increase cropping intensity in these village irrigation systems to 1.6 or more, by 
improving the ability to use the downstream lands during the minor season. According to Department of Agrarian Development each of the Village 
Irrigation systems has 25-30 hectares as a median command area. So the targets reflect the extent of command area that will directly benefit from the 
improved irrigation potential and water availability through VIS upgrade. The full extent is 9750 ha by end of the project.

=== PAGE 75 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 79 
 
 
 
H 
management and 
agriculture 
Number of male 
and female 
farmers reached 
through 
dissemination of  
climate resilient 
agriculture 
technology 
packages 
No of women 
farmers 
implementing 
climate resilient 
agriculture 
technologies and  
practices  
Field inspection 
visit reports of 
the project 
Update of 
Village 
Irrigation 
System 
database of 
DAD 
 
currently not 
being 
disseminated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
084 
416,00086 of 
which 212,160 
are women 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13,20987 
520,00089 of 
which 
265,200 are 
women90 
 
 
16,67791 
Agrarian Service Centres 
are able to reach all small 
holder farmers through 
Farmer Organisations 
Climate smart packages 
and agriculture advisories 
are available in every 
Agrarian Services Centre 
 
 
2. Improved access to 
safe and reliable drinking 
water through supply 
systems able to withstand 
climate change and 
variability 
Number of 
households with 
year round 
access to 
reliable and safe 
water supply 
 
 
Number of 
women engaged 
in managing and 
maintaining  
community 
Field inspection 
reports of the 
project 
DS (Divisional 
Secretariat) 
level social 
indicators 
update- access 
to safe drinking 
water. 
092 
 
 
 
 
 
 
130,20094 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
217,000 of 
which 
72300 are 
based 
outside river 
basins95 
 
 
 
 
Completed infrastructure 
and sustained 
maintenance for water 
supply systems 
 
Uptake of training and 
capacity building by 
women enterprises on 
sustained O&M. 
                                                             
 
84 There are no field-level interventions promoting the adoption of climate resilient practices among women farmers currently in 30 cascades and 325 
VIS targeted by the project. 
86 Output 1 beneficiary number is calculated based on the assumption that the total number of small holder farmers working in village irrigation systems 
in the three river basins (520,000) will have access to climate resilient agriculture packages disseminated through the 77 Agrarian Service Centres.  The 
mid-term target therefore is calculated on the basis that 80% of this target would be reached by the end of year 04. No of women farmers is 51.2 % of 
the total. 
87 The project through activity 1.3 will provide investments to women farmers to adopt agro-technology packages that will increase income and food 
security. This includes 300 women entrepreneurs engaged in value addition of climate resilient crops, 822 small-farmer seed production facilities, 4950 
demonstrations of improved home gardens, 8250 low-cost drip systems and 355 farm field water management demonstrations. Another 2000 women 
will benefit from agro-processing technologies. The total number of beneficiaries is 16,677 of which 75% will be reached by end of year 4 
89 Output 1 beneficiary number is calculated based on the assumption that the total number of small holder farmers working in village irrigation systems 
in the three river basins (520,000) will have access to climate resilient agriculture packages disseminated through the 77 Agrarian Service Centres 
(each serving about 6753 farmers).  The mid-term target therefore is calculated on the basis that 100% of this target would be reached by the end of 
year 7. 
90 Output 1 beneficiary number is calculated based on the assumption that the total number of small holder farmers working in village irrigation systems 
in the three river basins (520,000) will have access to climate resilient agriculture packages disseminated through the 77 Agrarian Service Centres 
(each serving about 6753 farmers).  The mid-term target therefore is calculated on the basis that 100% of this target would be reached by the end of 
year 7. No of women farmers is 51.2 % of the total. 
91 The project through activity 1.3 will provide investments to women farmers to adopt agro-technology packages that will increase income and food 
security. This includes 300 women entrepreneurs engaged in value addition of climate resilient crops, 822 small-farmer seed production facilities, 4950 
demonstrations of improved home gardens, 8250 low-cost drip systems and 355 farm field water management demonstrations. Another 2000 women 
will benefit from agro-processing technologies. The total number of beneficiaries is 16,677. 
92 Project investments will go in to communities that do not currently have access to year round and safe (treated, sterilized and filtered) water. So the 
baseline value is 0 (based on the year-round availability – these communities do have access for some of the year and for these periods, they purchase 
water) 
94 The mid-term target for drinking water access is 60% of the total beneficiaries reached. 
95 There will be 217,000 (includes beneficiaries of advanced purification and filtration systems: 131,000; CWSS: 70,000; and RWH: 16,000) people 
benefitting from the different drinking water interventions that the project will invest in linked to the village irrigation systems. Of these, geographically, 
70% of the systems (and therefore 144,700 beneficiaries) are located within the 3 river basins and remaining 30% of them or 72,300 of these 
beneficiaries will be located outside the river basin boundaries but within the associated 07 districts, targeting divisions with high vulnerability to CKDu, 
salinity and poverty. The 217,000 population includes the beneficiaries of 4000 rainwater harvesting tanks (individual households) and 35 community 
managed water supply schemes and 125 advanced filtration systems for locations with serious water quality issues.

=== PAGE 76 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 79 
 
 
 
H 
drinking water 
supply schemes 
District reports 
of NWSDB and 
DNCWS 
Gender-
sensitive field 
surveys 
undertaken 
within the 
targeted river 
basins and 
districts 
<100093 
 
 
 
>10,000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
>20,00096 
 
 
 
 
 
3.    Capacity of Dry Zone 
farmers strengthened to 
use weather and climate 
information for 
agricultural and water 
management 
Number of 
female and male 
farmers reached 
through seasonal 
forecast for 
agriculture 
planning 
Number of 
female and male 
farmers receiving 
advisories for 
water 
management  
Gender-
sensitive field 
surveys 
undertaken 
within the 
target districts, 
representative 
of the local 
population 
Post disaster 
needs 
assessment 
reports at 
Divisional 
Secretariat 
level  
Extent to which 
the advisories 
are used will be 
evaluated 
through 
qualitative 
assessment 
097 
 
 
 
 
098 
 
 
156,000 of 
which 79,560 
are women 
 
 
 
133,650 of 
which 68,161 
are women 
 
 
 
520,00099 of 
which 
265,200 are 
women 
 
 
 
445,500100 
of which 
227,205 are 
women 
Agro-hydro-meteorological 
infrastructure established 
implemented according to 
the timeline. 
 
Uptake of training and 
capacity building on 
development of agricultural 
and flood/drought 
management advisories 
 
Efficiency and reach of the 
SMS-based 
communication system for 
flood warning and water 
management advisories 
                                                             
 
93 While many water supply schemes are run by women-led CBOs field surveys showed that they need capacity development and institutional 
strengthening support to effectively manage the O&M and business model of community water supply. Active engagement of women in the project 
target river basins is estimated as less than 1000 women.  
96 The project aims to provide training and capacity building and institutional strengthening to at least 400 women led CBOs by the project’s end. Each 
CBO will have an estimated 50 members of whom at least 5 will earn an income from maintaining the water supply scheme. 
97 The developed seasonal forecasts (as of Maha 2015) are disseminated to the PDOA but is yet to reach the farmer organizations with practical and 
timely advice on adaptation to the forecast. 
98 There is currently no SMS service for flood early warnings.  
99 The forecasts and agricultural advisories will be disseminated through 77 Agrarian Services Centres in the three river basins. Farmers will contribute 
to the preparation of these advisories through ASCs and have access to the advisories through seasonal cultivation meetings at each village irrigation 
system, twice a year. These advisories will reach 520,000 small holder famer population who are connected to the 77 ASCs (serving about 6753 farmers 
each) for service delivery through both agriculture and agrarian services extension services which also will deliver tailored, climate resilient agro-
technology packages to these farmers under Output 1. 
100 The Cascade Level Committees are the primary target for flood advisories for water management. Each cascade level water committee will reach 
around 4800 people (each cascade= 12 VIS/ each VIS=100 familiesx4 members) comprising of farmers benefitting from village irrigation systems, farmers 
working in non-irrigated lands and non-farming households. The project will form cascade water management committees bringing together the local-
level representatives of drinking water supply systems and Farmer Organisations in 50 cascades.  This is a total of 240,000 people directly reached 
through such committees. Of the remaining river basin population (925,000-240,000=685000), we also count those people benefiting from SMS service, 
Given the penetration of mobile phones according to statistics and recent survey (http://www.tradingeconomics.com/sri-lanka/mobile-cellular-
subscriptions-per-100-people-wb-data.html and http://dbsjeyaraj.com/dbsj/ archives/ 20172 ) is round 40-50%, we use a conservative estimate of 30% 
as actually receiving the SMS advisories. Therefore, this amounts to 205,500.  The total number of beneficiaries from water related EWs and advisories 
is a sum of those reached by cascade level committees and SMS. (445500)

=== PAGE 77 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 79 
 
 
 
H 
(such as 
scorecard) 
Activities 
Description 
Inputs 
Description 
1.1 Improve technical 
capacity and knowledge 
management targeting 
ASCs, local field officials 
and community 
organisations for climate-
risk informed water 
management and climate-
smart agriculture 
Activity will develop cascade level water 
management plans and guidelines in a 
participatory, multi-stakeholder approach 
and train farmer organizations (FOs) and 
other CBOs (women’s groups) to 
implement and maintain the project 
investments. 
The activity will improve collaboration for 
planning and equitable water sharing 
between users in a cascade. ASCs in the 
river basin will be developed as knowledge 
and communication hubs, including 
supporting cross-district, cross ethnic 
experience sharing through exchange field 
visits and field training programmes. 
1.1.1 Develop multi-stakeholder, climate-risk 
informed cascade level water resources 
development and management plans for 50 
cascades in target districts 
1.1.2 Develop technical guidelines for 
climate-resilient, water management 
(irrigation and drinking water) and standard 
operating procedures for water management 
at cascade level and water allocation based 
on seasonal forecasts  
1.1.3 Build awareness and mobilize FOs and 
women’s groups to implement and maintain 
cascade water resources plans and SOPs  
1.1.4 Train district (100), ASC (500) and FO 
officials/ lead farmers  (975 in 50 cascades) 
to plan and implement VIS upgrading and 
management taking CC risks into account 
and including financing and business 
development.  
1.1.5 Training of Trainers (75 District Officials, 
ASC staff and FO representatives) for climate 
resilient crop and input solutions based on 
seasonal forecasting 
1.1.6 Strengthen 77 ASCs as local knowledge 
hubs for the project and as coordination and 
communication mechanism for the climate-
resilient integrated solutions 
Inputs are designed to 
improve the capacities 
of local level actors- 
field officers, farmer 
organizations and 
women’s groups- to 
develop integrated 
water management 
plans for 50 cascades. 
The plans and 
guidelines will be 
implemented through 
cascade level farmer 
committees that will 
include men, women 
and youth and local 
field officers. 
The activity invests in 
training of trainers and 
farmer training 
programmes to ensure 
design, 
implementation, and 
O&M of VIS and 
adoption of agriculture 
packages. 
It also invests in 
awareness building, 
exchange visits, and 
knowledge generation 
and sharing to support 
integrated water 
management, climate 
resilient agriculture and 
input/crop selection 
based on physical 
parameters, water 
availability, climatic 
conditions and 
forecasts.  
1.2 Improve resilience of 
and upgrade village 
irrigation systems in the 
identified cascades 
Mapping of individual irrigation systems, 
designing upgrade elements based on the 
cascade level plans and combining 
traditional and new technology design 
elements to upgrade 325 village irrigation 
1.2.1 Rapid participatory appraisal and 
mapping of each village irrigation system 
(VIS) to determine upgrading priorities 
incorporating CC risks 
VIS are mapped and 
design and 
implementation of 
upgrades are 
undertaken. FOs are

=== PAGE 78 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 79 
 
 
 
H 
including restoration of 
upstream watershed.  
systems including the upstream 
catchment. Undertake O&M. 
 
1.2.2 Develop climate-risk informed, VIS-
specific intervention plans linked to cascade 
water management plans  
1.2.3 Upgrade and climate-proof325 village 
irrigation systems  
1.2.4 Develop a multi-year maintenance and 
financing plan for each VIS  
1.2.5 Undertake participatory O&M (FOs and 
DAD) taking into account evolving CC risks 
supported to develop 
maintenance and 
financing plans to 
undertake O&M. 
1.3 Develop and 
disseminate climate 
resilient agricultural 
practices with targeted 
enterprise development 
for women 
The activity will support government 
extension services to develop and widely 
broadcast demand-driven, tested resilient 
agriculture support packages which 
includes resilient crops (seeds), organic 
inputs, soil and water management 
technologies and market oriented agro-
processing technologies. Targeted 
implementation of these packaged will be 
supported for women smallholders 
develop value-chains and market linkages. 
Resilient agriculture practices recognize 
the need to address climate-related factors 
(drought and flood resistant crops, shorter 
duration field crops) along with non-
climate drivers for safe and chemical-free 
agriculture that contributes to long-term 
improvement of water quality.  
1.3.1   Mapping of farming systems and 
communities to support CC resilient crop and 
input selection under each ASC  
1.3.2 Develop and disseminate (through 
ASCs) tailored climate resilient agriculture 
practices   
1.3.3 Targeted implementation of tailored 
climate resilient agriculture packages through 
women farmers 
1.3.4 Establish 800 farmer-level seed 
nurseries for resilient crops 
1.3.5 Develop participatory market mapping 
for climate resilient crops  
1.3.6 Train 400 women in value addition, 
marketing and business development for 
climate resilient agriculture products  
Agro-technology 
packages for climate 
resilient crops 
developed by the 
Department of 
Agriculture will be 
broadcast through 77 
Agrarian Services 
Centres in the three 
river basins. Farmers, 
especially women 
farmers, will be trained 
through targeted 
implementation, 
improved extension 
services and market 
linkages to adopt water 
saving methods of 
cultivating, such as 
low-cost drip systems 
and agro-product value 
addition. These inputs 
will be delivered in 
collaboration in 
collaboration with local 
NGOs, local ASCs 
(Agrarian Services 
Centre) and Provincial 
Departments’ of 
Agriculture.  
2.1 Improve capacity of 
water-supply support staff 
at district/divisions, 
selected partner 
organisations (NGOs) and 
CBOs to implement and 
maintain community-
based drinking water 
related interventions 
Village irrigation reservoirs are a key 
source of drinking water in the Dry Zone. 
As such, drinking water needs should be 
planned in to the cascade water 
management plans in Activity 1 and local 
officials, women-led CBOs strengthened to 
deliver (implement and maintain) drinking 
water solutions at village level, and ensure 
water quality does not deteriorate due to 
agricultural or other activities in the water 
source catchment. 
 
2.1.1 Training of cascade-level water 
committees and the divisional officers on 
integrating climate-risks and adaptation 
options for drinking water access and quality 
into the sub-basin water resources 
development planning 
2.1.2 Develop climate-risk informed, cascade-
level water supply source protection plans 
through water source protection committees  
2.1.3 Train women-led CBOs in villages to 
design, develop and maintain rural, climate-
resilient drinking water supply schemes  
2.1.4 Train local masons to construct ferro-
cement rainwater harvesting tanks for 
domestic purposes  
2.1.5 Surveys, including water quality testing 
to site drinking water supply schemes 
 
 
The inputs will facilitate 
the drinking water 
needs to be 
incorporated in to 
cascade development 
plans so that water use 
conflicts can be 
resolved through 
cascade farmer 
committees and water 
source protection 
committees facilitated 
by the project. Training 
will include financial 
management to run 
water supply schemes 
as rural enterprises, 
technical upkeep of 
systems, and regular 
refresher trainings at 
DNCWS to promote 
O&M best practices. 
The inputs also 
account for surveys of 
feasible locations and 
quality for siting of

=== PAGE 79 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 79 
 
 
 
H 
drinking water systems 
investments in Activity 
2.2 
2.2 Implement 
sustainable, climate-
resilient drinking water 
solutions through CBOs 
and government agencies 
This activity will expand the coverage of 
community- managed treatment facilities 
for water extracted from irrigation systems 
and invest in domestic rainwater 
harvesting (RWH) systems to supplement 
drinking water during prolonged dry 
periods.   
 
2.2.1 Design and implement 35 climate-
resilient community water supply schemes  
2.2.2 Install 125 water treatment and 
purification systems to existing drinking water 
intakes to ensure quality and safety.  
2.2.3 Construct 4,000 household rainwater 
harvesting units of 5000 liters for women-
headed or disability or chronic disease-
affected households  
2.2.4 Enhance water quality monitoring and 
source protection through source protection 
committees, incorporating CC risks and 
impacts 
The inputs are largely 
investments in rural 
water supply schemes, 
and improved water 
treatment and 
purification schemes 
and domestic rainwater 
harvesting units. These 
schemes will be fully 
integrated in to the 
cascade water 
management plan and 
the dry-period water 
requirement managed 
by FO and CBO 
together based on 
advisories generated in 
3.2 below. Water 
source protection 
committees will be 
created through activity 
2.1.2 will be mobilized 
here with equipment for 
quality testing and 
financing for source 
monitoring.  
3.1 Establish effective 
monitoring systems for 
drought, floods and water 
management 
Installing, operating and maintaining 
monitoring equipment in key catchments 
and VIS systems. Training and capacity 
building of field officers, staff and FOs to 
operate and maintain equipment. Training 
on developing weather and seasonal 
forecasting capabilities at DoM. 
3.1.1 Training of forecasters to apply/develop 
new statistical and dynamical approaches to 
seasonal forecasting of drought and agromet 
related parameters  
3.1.2 Training of forecasters to apply/develop 
Model Output Statistics (MOS) and skill 
testing to weather forecasts of high intensity 
rainfall and flooding 
3.1.3 Training of field officers (DAD, DoA, 
DoM, ID) on operations & maintenance of 
equipment  
3.1.4 Install 5 automatic agro-meteorological 
stations in key agricultural zones to monitor 
weather and climate conditions in real time 
3.1.5 Install 10 automatic rainfall gauges to 
improve the coverage for rainfall monitoring in 
the 3 river basins 
3.1.6 Install and operate 50 automated water 
level sensors to improve the monitoring 
capabilities of water levels in the 3 river 
basins 
3.1.7 Install and operate 330 water level and 
rainfall gauges in VIS, operated by FOs 
3.1.8 Install and operate 8 stream gauges 
and rainfall sensors in the 3 river basins to 
improve knowledge of flows and potential 
downstream flooding 
Installing and operating 
a range of 
meteorological and 
hydrological monitoring 
equipment, covering 
the cascade systems 
and downstream. This 
will help to improve 
knowledge of the 
current status of 
weather and hydrology, 
which in turn can serve 
as the basis for making 
forecasts, calibrating 
satellite data and 
hydrological models. 
Training DoM, DAD, 
DoA and ID staff to 
operate and maintain 
these systems will 
ensure sustainability 
and contribute to 
successful 
implementation of the 
O&M plan. Training to 
improve the forecasting 
capabilities of DoM will 
further ensure that 
DoM uses the 
technology available to 
it to produce the 
accurate and skillful 
forecasts. 
3.2 Co-develop and 
disseminate weather- and 
climate-based advisories 
for agricultural and water 
management through 
ASCs and FOs to farmers 
Co-development of information 
requirements for agricultural planning and 
water management with FOs, and ASCs. 
Development of satellite-based rainfall 
estimates to enhance coverage of areas 
without rainfall monitoring equipment. 
3.2.1 Sensitization of communities through 
FOs and ASCs, for uptake of agromet  
information and advisories 
3.2.2 Co-development of information  
requirements through ASCs (FOs, DoM, DAD,  
DoA), including training of trainers  to  
Information 
requirements of ASCs 
and FOs will be 
ascertained through 
participatory meetings 
and trainings designed

=== PAGE 80 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 79 
 
 
 
H 
and village water 
managers 
Development of new advisories and 
warnings for both agriculture and water 
management and dissemination through 
media including SMS and radio. Central 
repository for collected data and GIS-
based tools developed to combine 
weather and climate data with exposure 
and other information sources, including 
IWMI drought monitoring.  Establishment 
of protocols and SOPs for generating, 
sharing and using weather data and 
information between national agencies 
(DoM, DAD, ID and DMC) and ASCs/FOs. 
understand and use advisories 
3.2.3 Generation and operationalizing of  
satellite-based estimates of rainfall,  
including training of trainers to ensure  
DoM staff are able to access and use the  
information 
3.2.4 Development of advisories for water 
management, including inter-agency 
working groups 
3.2.5 Development of advisories for 
agriculture, including inter-agency working 
groups 
3.2.6 Synthesize and broadcast radio and 
TV shows on agricultural best practices 
linked to weather and seasonal forecasts 
3.2.7 Synthesize and disseminate  
flood warnings and water-related 
information through mobile and other 
platforms 
3.2.8 Develop procedures for combining 
data collected through the central repository to  
identify risks using GIS-based tools.  
3.2.9 Training and development for DOM/DAD/ 
DoA/ID staff to access 
IWMI drought monitoring information and 
combine with locally collected drought 
related information and forecasts 
3.2.10 Market study to establish potential 
revenue generating services for 
agricultural, water management and flood 
advisories/warnings in the 3 river basins 
to understand the way 
weather and climate 
information is used for 
decision making in 
agriculture and water 
management. Satellite-
based estimates of 
rainfall will be used to 
extend advisories to 
areas not covered by 
the ground-monitoring 
network, hence 
reducing reliance on 
the continual operation 
of the network. 
Advisories for 
agriculture and water 
management will be 
developed through 
working groups and a 
separate development 
process to ensure data 
is communicated in 
useful forms. Different 
media will be used for 
dissemination to 
maximize the potential 
reach to all parts of 
society, including 
women. A market study 
will lay the groundwork 
for future work to 
capitalize on using new 
advisories as a source 
of revenue.

=== PAGE 81 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 79 
 
 
 
H 
 
3.3 Develop climate-risk 
management and 
response measures to 
advisories and forecasts 
for agriculture, water 
management and flooding 
in cascade systems 
 
Address capacity barriers at local level to 
plan for and identify response measures to 
warnings and advisories. This activity will 
focus on identifying responses to floods, 
through mapping flood inundation levels, 
as well as developing plans, which identify 
appropriate spill areas in cascade systems 
and agricultural assets and infrastructure 
at risk. It will also develop response plans 
for agriculture to seasonal forecasts and 
associated advisories, as well as 
appropriate water management options. 
Coordination meetings and SOPs between 
DoM, DAD, DoA, DMC and ID at the 
district level will be developed to ensure 
appropriate coordination takes place.  
3.3.1 Conduct inundation area mapping, 
including assets, property and services at risk 
from flooding under different flooding 
scenarios 
3.3.2 Design and implement SOPs at the 
district to enable coordination of responses to 
agricultural and water management 
advisories, between DoM, DAD, DoA, DMC 
and ID.  
3.3.3 Develop community/FO based response 
plans for agriculture and water management, 
including stakeholder meetings at ASCs, 
which integrate advisories and forecast 
products, as well as potential changes to 
climate  
3.3.4 Develop flood response measures for 
VIS/drinking water systems (DoM, DAD, ID).  
3.3.5 Develop flood preparedness measures 
to protect assets and agricultural 
infrastructure in 30 cascades.  
Flood inundation 
mapping will identify 
areas that experience 
floods under different 
water levels and will 
form the basis for 
identifying assets and 
infrastructure at risk. 
This risk information 
will be included in the 
central repository and 
GIS data server. SOPs 
and coordination 
meetings between 
DoM, DAD, DoA, DMC 
and ID will ensure that 
the consequences of 
flood mitigation 
measures in the 
cascades e.g. spill 
releases, will be 
understood and 
coordinated between 
agencies. Response 
plans will be developed 
and mitigation 
measures identified 
which will be 
institutionalized and 
disseminated amongst 
communities and 
households so that 
appropriate responses 
to warnings are 
understood. 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
194. 
Project-level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the UNDP POPP and the UNDP 
Evaluation Policy. The primary responsibility for day-to-day project monitoring and implementation rests with the Project 
Manager. The Project Manager will develop annual work plans to ensure the efficient implementation of the project. The 
Project Manager will inform the Project Board and the UNDP Country Office of any delays or difficulties during 
implementation, including the implementation of the Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) plan, so that the appropriate support 
and corrective measures can be adopted. The Project Manager will also ensure that all project staff maintain a high level 
of transparency, responsibility and accountability in monitoring and reporting project results. 
 
195. 
The UNDP Country Office will support the Project Manager as needed, including through annual supervision 
missions. The UNDP Country Office is responsible for complying with UNDP project-level M&E requirements as outlined 
in the UNDP POPP. Additional M&E, implementation quality assurance, and troubleshooting support will be provided by 
the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor as needed. The project target groups and stakeholders including the NDA Focal 
Point will be involved as much as possible in project-level M&E.   
 
196. 
A project inception workshop will be held after the UNDP project document is signed by all relevant parties to: a) 
re-orient project stakeholders to the project strategy and discuss any changes in the overall context that influence project 
implementation; b) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team, including reporting and communication lines 
and conflict resolution mechanisms; c) review the results framework, re-assess baselines as needed, and discuss 
reporting, monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities and finalize the M&E plan; d) review financial reporting 
procedures and mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual audit; e) plan and schedule 
Project Board meetings and finalize the first year annual work plan. The Project Manager will prepare the inception report 
no later than one month after the inception workshop. The final inception report will be cleared by the UNDP Country 
Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project Board.

=== PAGE 82 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 79 
 
 
 
H 
 
197. 
A project implementation report will be prepared for each year of project implementation. The Project Manager, 
the UNDP Country Office, and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor will provide objective input to the annual PIR. The 
Project Manager will ensure that the indicators included in the project results framework are monitored annually well in 
advance of the PIR submission deadline and will objectively report progress in the Development Objective tab of the PIR. 
The annual PIR will be shared with the Project Board and other stakeholders. The UNDP Country Office will coordinate 
the input of the NDA Focal Point and other stakeholders to the PIR. The quality rating of the previous year’s PIR will be 
used to inform the preparation of the next PIR. The final project PIR, along with the terminal evaluation report and 
corresponding management response, will serve as the final project report package. Semi-annual reporting will be 
undertaken in accordance with UNDP guidelines for quarterly reports that are produced by the project manager. 
 
198. 
An independent mid-term review process will be undertaken and the findings and responses outlined in the 
management response will be incorporated as recommendations for enhanced implementation during the final half of the 
project’s duration. The terms of reference, the review process and the final MTR report will follow the standard templates 
and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center. The final MTR report will be cleared by the UNDP 
Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project Board. The final MTR 
report will be available in English. An independent terminal evaluation (TE) will take place no later than three months 
prior to operational closure of the project. The terms of reference, the review process and the final TE report will follow 
the standard templates and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center. The final TE report will be 
cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project 
Board. The TE report will be available in English. The UNDP Country Office will include the planned project terminal 
evaluation in the UNDP Country Office evaluation plan, and will upload the final terminal evaluation report in English and 
the management response to the public UNDP Evaluation Resource Centre (ERC) (www.erc.undp.org). The MTR and 
TE will be carried out by an independent evaluator. The evaluation report prepared by the independent evaluator is then 
quality assessed and rated by the UNDP Independent Evaluation Office. 
 
199. 
The UNDP Country Office will retain all M&E records for this project for up to seven years after project financial 
closure in order to support ex-post evaluations. A detailed M&E budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan will be 
included in the UNDP project document. 
 
200. 
A key tool for MRV for the project is the field reports and gender-sensitive impact surveys that will be conducted 
(by PMU, Gender Officer, and DAD field level extension officers) throughout the project to monitor progress of 
implementation and progress towards the expected outputs and outcomes. To monitor and verify the irrigation systems 
rehabilitation and adoption of climate-smart agriculture packages, field inspection of infrastructure sites will be conducted 
by DAD through district offices and ASCs. Installations are captured in the village irrigation system database of DAD that 
will be reviewed during the mid-term and final evaluations to report on progress.  Agrarian Services Centres databases 
on farm households and cropping intensities will also be reviewed for progress on reach of agricultural practices and 
improved productivities. Household surveys will also be conducted through the ASCs to monitor the progress and capture 
the impact of the project. The progress and impact of the drinking water solutions will be monitored through the field 
inspection reports on infrastructure established, the district reports of NWSDB and DNCWS, the Divisional Secretariat’s 
database on level and progress of social indicators such as access to and safety of drinking water, and gender-sensitive 
field surveys undertaken within targeted communities and river-basins. Finally, the development and diffusion of 
advisories, early warnings, and forecasts will be monitored through field surveys conducted by MoD and ASCs (for 
communities, end-user farmers and non-farmers, extension services, etc.), reports from DoM/MoD, and SMS services. 
 
201. 
While the Sri Lanka CO, through its ongoing presence in the country, will continue to engage with the GoM, there 
is no provision for human and financial resources to undertake formal reporting post-completion of the project. 
Information, where available, will be communicated to the GCF Secretariat as feasible.

=== PAGE 83 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 79 
 
 
 
 
I 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents. 
 
 
I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal 
☒ 
 NDA No-objection Letter  Annex I 
☒ 
 Feasibility Study  Annex II 
☐ 
 Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements Annex III  Not Applicable 
for this project 
☒ 
Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co-financing commitment Annex IV 
☒ 
 Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement schedule, etc.) Annex V (a) 
☒          Confirmation as per AMA   Annex V (b) 
☒ 
 Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Plan  
             Social and Environmental Screening Template Annex VI (a) 
             Environmental and Social Management Plan  Annex VI (b) 
☒ 
 Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations Annex VII 
☐ 
 Evaluation Report of the baseline project  Annex VIII  Not Applicable for this project 
☒ 
 Map indicating the location of the project/programme  Annex IX 
☒ 
 Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation Annex X  
☒ 
 Project/Programme confirmation Annex XI Forthcoming 
 
Additional information 
☒          Economic Analysis Annex XII (a), Annex XII (b) 
☒          Additional Background Details Annex XIII 
☒          Responses to GCF comments on Proposal Annex XIV 
☒          Letter of Endorsement from UNDP Senior Management Annex XV

=== PAGE 84 ===
GFC/B.13/16/Add.08 
 
 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority

=== PAGE 85 ===
GFC/B.13/16/Add.08 
 
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Basic project/programme information 
Project/programme title 
Strengthening the resilience of smallholder farmers in the Dry Zone 
to climate variability and extreme events through an integrated 
approach to water management 
Accredited entity 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
Environmental and social report disclosure information 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
2016-05-03 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English, Sinhala and Tamil 
Link to disclosure 
http://www.lk.undp.org/content/srilanka/en/home/presscenter/ar
ticles/2016/05/03/Environmental-and-Social-Management-Plan-
for-the-proposed-GCF-Project/  
Other link(s) 
http://
