=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: Sunny Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 11 for Word
producer: Adobe PDF Library 11.0
creationDate: D:20160607153302+09'00'
modDate: D:20160608230303+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum  
Funding proposal package for FP013 
GCF/B.13/16/Add.05 
8 June 2016 
Meeting of the Board 
28 – 30 June 2016 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 12(e) 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled “Improving the resilience of vulnerable coastal
communities to climate change related impacts in Viet Nam” submitted by United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP);
b) A no-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point; and
c)
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure.
The documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity, and national designated 
authority or focal point, respectively.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.13/16/Add.05 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point 
                 Environmental and social report(s) disclosure

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme Title: 
Improving the resilience of vulnerable coastal 
communities to climate change related impacts in 
Viet Nam  
Country/Region: Viet Nam 
Accredited Entity: United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)

=== PAGE 4 ===
Contents 
 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
 
Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
 
 
Section C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
Section F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
Section G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
Section I 
ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
 
 
 
• 
Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all 
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they 
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this 
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to other project documents 
such as project appraisal document. 
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50. 
 
 
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“[FP]-[Agency Short Name]-[Date]-[Serial Number]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 62 
 
 
 
A 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / programme title 
Improving 
the 
resilience 
of 
vulnerable 
coastal 
communities to climate change related impacts in  
Viet Nam 
A.1.2. Project or programme 
Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region                     
Viet Nam 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies) 
Pham Hoang Mai 
GCF NDA of Viet Nam 
Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI) 
A.1.5. Accredited entity 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
A.1.5.a. Access modality 
☐  Direct 
☒  International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary 
Executing Entity:  Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development 
Other beneficiaries: Ministry of Construction, Provincial 
People’s Committee (PPC) of participating provinces 
 
# of beneficiaries (people): 20,000 people from climate-
resilient housing, 3,865,100 people in the target coastal 
provinces, which will benefit from the protection offered by 
healthy and robust mangrove regeneration, 30,000,000 
coastal residents benefiting from improved planning 
integrating climate risk information benefiting 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD) 
☐  Micro (≤10) 
☐  Medium (50<x≤250)  
☒  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus 
☐  Mitigation 
☐  Adaptation ☒  Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission 
          Date of last submission 
31/07/2015 
28/12/2015  
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details 
Contact person, position 
Keti Chachibaia, Regional Technical Advisor 
Organization 
UNDP 
Email address 
keti.chachibaia@undp.org  
Telephone number 
+66 (0) 2 304 9100 ext 5091 
Mailing address 
United Nations Development Programme 
4th Floor United Nations Service Building 
Rajdamnern Nok Avenue 
Bangkok 10200, Thailand 
 
 
 
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from: 
☐ 
Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ 
Low emission transport  
 (E.g. high-speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)   
☐ 
Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☒ 
Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.)

=== PAGE 6 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 2 OF 62 
 
 
 
A 
 
Increased resilience of: 
☒ 
Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.) 
☐ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.) 
☒ 
Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.) 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
 
☒ 
 
 
 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words) 
1. Poor communities living in coastal regions of Viet Nam are adversely impacted by frequent flooding. Each year 
approximately 60,000 houses are destroyed or damaged by floods and storms in coastal provinces. This is likely to 
worsen given climate change scenarios for Viet Nam. Resultant economic impacts make it increasingly difficult for 
vulnerable families to escape the cycle of poverty.   
 
2. The proposed GCF project seeks to scale up interventions that are already tested to increase the resilience of 
vulnerable coastal communities. Building on ongoing social protection programmes related to housing for the poor and 
marginalized, the project will incorporate storm and flood resilient design features in new houses benefiting 20,000 poor 
and highly disaster-exposed people. As part of an integrated response to managing flood risks, 4,000 hectares of 
mangroves will be rehabilitated and/or planted to function not only as storm surge buffers, but also to provide ecosystem 
resources that can support coastal livelihoods. Moreover, to support and sustain both the impact of this project as well 
as future requisite government policy adjustments that strengthen the resilience of coastal and other communities, 
resources will be used to systematize climate and economic risk assessments for private and public sector application in 
all 28 coastal provinces of Viet Nam. 
 
3. The project relies on grant finance as (a) the proposed interventions will benefit vulnerable families identified as poor 
by the government, (b) strengthens natural defenses proving public value, and (c) does not generate revenue that lends 
itself to providing reflows to the GCF. The project is fully aligned with the Government of Viet Nam (GoV)’s strategies and 
was designed following extensive stakeholder consultations. The NDA has issued a no-objection letter for the project. 
 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone 
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) 
N/A 
Expected financial close (if applicable) 
N/A 
Estimated implementation start and end date 
  Start: 01/11/2016 
End:  31/10/2021 
Project/programme lifespan 
5 years

=== PAGE 7 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 62 
 
 
B 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme 
4. The project relies on grant finance as (a) the proposed interventions will benefit vulnerable families identified as poor 
by the government, (b) strengthens natural defenses proving public value and (c) does not generate revenue that lends 
itself to providing reflows to the GCF.  
 
Component 
Sub-component (if 
applicable) 
Amount 
(for entire 
project) 
Currency  
Amount 
(for entire 
project) 
Local 
currency 
GCF 
funding 
amount 
million 
USD ($) 
Increased 
resilience of 
vulnerable 
coastal 
communities to 
climate change 
related impacts 
in Viet Nam 
Output1: Storm and 
flood resilient design 
features added to 
4,000 new houses on 
safe sites, benefiting 
20,000  poor and 
highly disaster-
exposed people in 100 
communes  
20.152 
million 
USD ($) 
454,387 
million 
Vietnamese 
Dong 
12.152 
Output 2: 
Regeneration of 4,000 
hectares of costal 
mangrove storm surge 
buffer zones  
12.937 
million 
USD ($) 
291,703 
million 
Vietnamese 
Dong 
11.530 
Output 3: Increased 
access to enhanced 
climate, loss and 
damage data for  
private and public 
sector application in all 
28 coastal provinces of 
Viet Nam  
7.441 
million 
USD ($) 
167,780 
million 
Vietnamese 
Dong 
5.841 
Total project financing 
40.530 
million 
USD ($) 
913,870 
million 
Vietnamese 
Dong 
29.523 
* Please expand the table if needed. 
B.2. Project Financing Information 
 
Financial Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing 
(a) = (b) + (c) 
40.530 
million USD 
($) 
 
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient 
(i) Senior Loans 
(ii) Subordinated 
Loans 
(iii) Equity 
(iv) Guarantees 
(v) Reimbursable 
grants * 
(vi) Grants * 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
 
 
29.523 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
million USD 
($) 
(  )  years 
(  )  years 
 
 
 
 
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR

=== PAGE 8 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 62 
 
 
B 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1 for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E. 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi) 
29.5231 
million USD 
($) 
 
(c) Co-
financing to 
recipient 
 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Name of 
Institution 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Grant 
Grant 
Grant 
Grant 
8.000 
1.407 
1.600 
…………… 
million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) 
      
Ministry of 
Construction 
Ministry of 
Agriculture 
and Rural 
Development 
UNDP 
……………… 
(  )  years 
(  )  years 
 
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR 
 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Lead financing institution: Not Applicable 
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co-financing institution. 
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable) 
In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deploys the GCF financing directly to the recipient, (i.e. the GCF financing 
passes directly from the GCF to the recipient through the AE) or if the AE is the recipient itself, in the proposed 
financial instrument and terms as described in part (b), this subsection can be skipped. 
If there is a financial arrangement between the GCF and the AE, which entails a financial instrument and/or financial 
terms separate from the ones described in part (b), please fill out the table below to specify the proposed instrument 
and terms between the GCF and the AE. 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Grants 
29.523 
million USD ($) 
(  )  years 
(   ) %  
Please provide a justification for the difference in the financial instrument and/or terms between what is provided by 
the AE to the recipient and what is requested from the GCF to the AE. 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable) 
5. The Government of Viet Nam is requesting 100% grant resources for the proposed project, the financial market 
overview is therefore not applicable. 
                                                             
1 While not included in this proposal as per the instructions of the GCF Secretariat, an additional cost of 9% of the value of the project will be 
necessary to cover quality assurance and oversight services performed by UNDP as a GCF Accredited Entity over all phases of the project 
cycle. This includes as follows: (i) oversight of proposal development; (ii) appraisal (pre and final) and oversight of project start-up; (iii) 
supervision and oversight of project implementation; and (iv) oversee project closure. UNDP awaits confirmation from the GCF Board on this 
matter and expect that the AE fee, over and above the project cost, will be approved by the GCF Board prior to commencement of 
implementation activities.

=== PAGE 9 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 62 
 
 
C 
C.1. Strategic Context 
6. Viet Nam has seen significant economic growth in recent years. Political and economic reforms have transformed 
Viet Nam from one of the poorest nations in the world to a middle-income country within a quarter of a century. With 
88.5million people from 54 different ethnic groups, the country has seen growth per capita rise from below US$100 in the 
1990s to an estimated at US$1,596 in 2012. This has coincided with a dramatic reduction in poverty from 58% to 14% 
between 1993 and 2008 and an estimated 11.8% in 2011.  
 
7. While Viet Nam has been an incredible success story in terms of economic development over the past quarter century, 
its coastal communities lag behind in resilience. These communities have double the poverty rate of the nation as a whole 
and are increasingly vulnerable to climate change impacts due to development pressures on natural buffers, such as 
mangroves.  
 
8. Per the Climate Change Vulnerability Index2, Viet Nam is considered one of 30 “extreme risk countries” in the world.  
The rural poor are at especially high risk given their reliance on the natural resources for their livelihoods, particularly in 
agriculture and fisheries. The Mekong River Delta and Red River Delta have already suffered from saltwater intrusion, 
threatening agricultural productivity and the millions of people relying on these watersheds for their income. Urban 
populations living in informal settlements are also at risk; particularly suffering from extreme heat, and humidity, as well 
as floods and storms.   
 
9. The fifth assessment report (AR5) from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) indicates that 
temperature in the sub-region has been increasing at a rate of 0.14°C to 0.20°C per decade since the 1960s, and predicts 
increases from 0.8°C to 3.2°C by the end of this century.  The report further highlights the positive trend in the occurrence 
of heavy (top 10% by rain amount) and light (bottom 5%) rain events, and the influence of climate change on several 
large-scale phenomena affecting the region. Future increases in precipitation extremes related to the monsoon are very 
likely in Southeast Asia, and increases are projected related to tropical cyclones, with medium probability and high impact, 
resulting in extreme precipitation near the centers of tropical cyclones making landfall along coasts of South China Sea, 
Gulf of Thailand, and Andaman Sea. Even under the most conservative scenario, sea level is expected to be about 40cm 
higher than today by the end of 21st century and this is projected to increase the annual number of people affected by 
coastal flooding.  
 
10. Consistent with these findings, the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment’s (MONRE) records suggest that 
climate change has contributed to temperature increases in excess of 0.5°C and sea level rise of about 20cm over the 
past 50 years in Viet Nam. Extreme events have already been increasing. Between 1990 and 2012, the country suffered 
annual average disaster losses of 457 lives and 1.3% per GDP.  During the same period, more than 96,703 houses were 
totally destroyed or swept away and 996,721 were significantly damaged due to natural disaster impacts.  Viet Nam’s 
Second National Communication forecasts a 57-73cm rise in mean sea levels along the Viet Nam coast by 2100. Without 
major action, this would inundate approximately 30,000km2 equivalent to 9.3% of the total national land surface. Climate 
projections also point to an increase in the probability of intense typhoons, or super storms, accompanied by storm surges, 
similar to that which devastated the Tacloban area (Typhoon Haiyan/Yolande) in the Philippines in 2013.  
 
11. These trends place coastal and low lying delta areas in Viet Nam at particular risk. At 23%, the poverty rate in coastal 
areas is more than twice the national average, in part due to the increasing losses incurred annually from climate related 
disaster impacts. More than 500,000 people live within 200 meters of the coast. Their homes are most often directly 
impacted by typhoons as they make landfall and storm surges. Increasing numbers of predominantly poor and vulnerable 
people in coastal areas live in unsafe housing, in part due to the rapid urbanisation, the lack of suitable employment and 
therefore persistent poverty. 
 
12. Coastal ecosystem assets, such as coastal mangrove forests, provide a vital buffer against storms, sea surges and 
salt water intrusion. However, the coverage area of mangrove forests has reduced significantly, primarily due to ongoing 
population pressure and, more recently, from the expansion of poorly planned shrimp aquaculture. In 1943 there were 
approximately 408,500 hectares of mangroves in Viet Nam.  The National Forest Inventory now shows that the area of 
mangroves in Viet Nam had been reduced to 290,000ha in 1962, 252,000ha in 1982 and 155,290ha in 2000.  According 
to government reports, the total area of natural mangrove forests in Viet Nam at the end of 2008 stood at only 59,760ha3.  
 
                                                             
2 https://maplecroft.com/about/news/ccvi.html  
3 Government of Viet Nam Decision No. 1267/ QĐ-BNN-KL, 2009

=== PAGE 10 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 62 
 
 
C 
13. The Government of Viet Nam (GoV)’s Sustainable Development Strategy 2011-2020 states as its general objective, 
that: sustainable and effective growth must come along with social progress and equality, national resources and 
environment protection, socio-political stability, firm protection of independence-sovereignty-unification and territorial 
integrity of the country. Specifically, the strategy seeks: 
• 
To ensure macro-economic stability, especially macro indexes; to firmly maintain food security, energy security 
and financial security. To transform the growth model into harmoniously deep and wide development; to gradually 
carry out green growth, low-carbon economic development; to economically and effectively use all resources.  
• 
To develop a democratic, disciplined, harmonious, equal and civilized society; a progressive culture deeply 
imbued with national identity; prosperous, progressive and happy families; to ensure people’s comprehensive 
development in all physical, spiritual, intellectual aspects, having creativeness capacity, a sense of citizenship, 
and a sense of law observance. To make education and training, science and technology the major driving force 
for development. To firmly maintain socio-political stability, firmly protect independence, sovereignty, unity and 
territorial integrity. 
• 
To mitigate negative impacts of economic activities on the environment. Reasonably exploit and effectively use 
natural resources, especially non-renewable ones. Prevent, control and repair environmental pollution and 
degradation, improve the quality of the environment, protect and develop forests and conserve bio-diversity. To 
reduce harmful effects of natural disasters, actively and effectively respond to climate change, especially sea 
level rise. 
 
14. A suitable solution to addressing climate change in vulnerable coastal areas must find a balance between economic 
growth, environmental protection, and social progress.  Further, the Constitution of Viet Nam, under Article 59 section 3, 
affirms that the State shall exercise a policy of housing development and create conditions so that everyone shall have 
housing. As coastal provinces in Viet Nam are home to a third of the population (30million people), a suitable solution 
must also include climate-resilient housing to ensuring safety of households in vulnerable areas. 
 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
15. Supporting the government’s long term solution, the objective of the proposed GCF project is to increase the 
resilience of vulnerable coastal communities to climate change related impacts in Viet Nam, through:   
• 
Safe housing to protect vulnerable coastal communities from increased flooding and storms  
• 
Robust mangrove coverage to provide a natural buffer between coastal communities and the sea  
• 
And enhanced climate risk information to guide climate-resilient and risk-informed planning 
 
16. Below is a description of the baseline. 
 
Baseline Scenario 
Safe housing to protect vulnerable coastal communities from increased flooding and storms  
17. While government programmes are in place to provide safer houses to vulnerable coastal communities, government 
engineering and construction standards for housing along flood prone regions are not currently compliant with requisite 
standards to safeguard the public from flood and storm impacts. Government (especially local authorities) have not yet 
examined the appropriate standards to apply and introduce the necessary regulatory reform that would establish 
standards that the public and business sector would need to adhere to; however it is acknowledged that the enforcement 
capacities are also weak. Local engineers and construction companies are not trained to instruct the local workers and 
households, and building codes have not been revised to create conditions for incorporating flood resistant features in 
structure designs.  
 
18. Although best practice designs are available and tested through small pilot projects, a full scale diffusion of flood and 
storm resistant housing technologies has not taken place as such policies and incentive mechanisms are currently absent. 
As a result, each year, approximately 60,000 houses are destroyed or severely damaged by floods and storms in coastal 
areas of Viet Nam. Poor families have a higher vulnerability to disaster risk, as they are more likely to live in sub-standard 
housing.  Damage, loss and related recovery costs from extreme weather events (e.g. typhoons) and natural hazards 
(e.g. floods), place a long term burden on the limited financial resources of already vulnerable people.     
 
19. Recent studies have shown that in disaster prone areas, improving housing is often a priority for investment.  
However, as knowledge of safe housing technologies is generally low, without technical guidance and training, families

=== PAGE 11 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 62 
 
 
C 
may inadvertently make investments which further destabilize the structure in the face of storms 4. With the rapid 
urbanization of coastal Viet Nam, and increasing climate change risk, action to promote safer housing and community 
based risk sensitive planning within communes for safe siting of the houses is urgently required.   
 
Government Support to Safe Housing for Vulnerable Communities 
20. Recognizing the need to support vulnerable families, the GoV is implementing the National Programme to provide 
support policies and solutions for poor households to build storm and flood resilient houses in Central Region5. 
Led by the Ministry of Construction (MOC), the programme has developed low cost design specifications in terms of 
house lay-out, materials and building technologies that can increase structural stability in the face of recurring storms, 
typhoons and floods.  The houses are constructed next to the existing home, so there is no disruption to living 
arrangements.  
 
21. This government programme helps families, categorized as ‘extreme poor’ and ‘poor’ by government criteria, to 
access finance to build safe houses that conform to government design and materials standards. Specifically the 
programme makes available a combination of a grant and training on the approved flood and storm-resilient house design.  
Details are as follows:   
• 
Grant of VND12m or US$550/household, for poor households, up to VND14m (US$690) for households in 
particularly difficult areas or VND16m (US$735) for households in especially difficulties communities6.  Support 
is provided in 2 installments (70% upon completion of the foundation and the second upon completion of the 
house frame meeting the design specifications) 
• 
Training for villages/communes and provision of technical assistance to the beneficiaries  
 
22. While a grant is available for extreme poor households, the grant amount is not sufficient to cover the total cost of the 
house.  Therefore a concessional loan is also made available with a 3% interest rate/year from the Bank for Social Policy, 
payable over 10 years, with 5-year concession period.  Any balance would be met through other means (i.e. the 
household’s own resources or community contributions).   
 
23. Selection of grant recipients is decided through consultations with villages, assessment at the commune level, then 
ultimate approval at the provincial and national level for programme support. Criteria for assessment include, the 
household’s categorization as poor (as per Decision No. 09/2011/QĐ-TTg of the Prime Minister dated 30 Jan 2011) and 
the flood/storm resilience of their existing dwelling compared to government minimum standards. Selection is further 
prioritized to ensure that especially vulnerable groups in Viet Nam benefit.  The prioritization is stated as follows:  
• 
Households are of an ethnic minority group 
• 
Households with difficult living circumstances (i.e. senior citizen-headed households, single member households 
particularly senior citizens, households with members with disabilities, etc.) 
• 
Households which are living in difficult administrative (remote) locations  of highly disadvantaged zones and 
villages of the provinces 
• 
Households located in the most poor districts under the government poverty targeted programme, following 
national resolution No. 30a/2008/NQ-CP dated 27 July 2008 of the government 
• 
Other socially vulnerable groups 
 
24. The project selection process has been designed to be transparent, and includes review by the commune committee.  
The data to assess criteria for grant assistance is independently collected by the government as part of wider social 
services programmes.  Once identified, the beneficiaries are reviewed by a committee of stakeholders, and the results 
are publically posted.  Should concerns arise, community members are able to direct concerns to the commune for 
response.  As residential land in Viet Nam is leased from the government, recipients are also assessed based on legality 
of land tenure. Recipients are not permitted to sell the property during the 10-year loan period. The loan repayment by 
recipients is further used as a revolving fund overseen by the government to enable replication of the approach to 
additional families.   
 
25. The government programme has been successful in engaging civil society organizations such as, Fatherland Front, 
Veteran’s Association and Viet Nam Youth Union to support the above prioritized groups, as well as female-headed 
households, in the actual construction of the houses. 
                                                             
4 Sheltering from a Gathering Storm: Typhoon Resilience in Viet Nam (P. Tran, et. al., 2014) 
5 Government of Viet Nam Decision 48/2014/QĐ-TT 
6 As per Decree 1049/QD-TTg

=== PAGE 12 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 62 
 
 
C 
 
Opportunities for Improvement of the Government Housing Programme 
26. The Pilot programme to support poor households improve safety conditions for accommodation, coping with 
floods in North and South Central coastal provinces targeted 700 households in 7 provinces. The original design 
included a raised floor of 1.5m and a flat roof.  The total cost of the pilot design house meeting minimum requirements 
was approximately US$1,300/house7 (this is considered a very conservative estimate as it does not reflect the higher 
costs of materials and labor in remote areas). The house design however did not adequately consider projected flooding 
and increased storms due to climate change. As a result, damages to the pilot programme houses were reported.  
Specifically, there were cases of flooding that exceeded the height of the raised floor, and damage to the flat roofs during 
storms.  This resulted in enhancements to the MOC house design.    
 
27. Based on lessons learned of the pilot, MOC produced an enhanced design (see Figure 1) which is applied in the 
ongoing phase of the housing programme.  The enhanced design builds on the climate-resilient features of the original 
design (i.e. 10m2 base and reinforced concrete frame), to a 2-story structure with a mezzanine at 3m, with a pitched 
corrugated metal roof.  The estimate cost of the enhanced house design is estimated at US$1,500 - US$2,000, depending 
on costs of materials and labor in the location.    
 
Figure 1:  Flood and Storm-Resilient House Design 
 
 
28. While the current design is an improvement from the pilot, the need for additional enhancements has been highlighted 
by MOC to better protect vulnerable households from the increasing frequency and intensity of flooding and super 
storms/typhoons resulting from climate change.  Specifically these include (a) a concrete roof with strengthened bracings 
and fittings (US$900), (b) reinforced windows, doors and sealing (US$400) and (c) improvements to drainage, siting and 
raising plinths (US$400).  Improved monitoring is also required to ensure that the finished product is one that reflects all 
of the resilience features of the house design (US$300).  The combined costs of these enhancements are estimated at 
US$2,000/house.   
 
29. As the grant support provided through the government housing programme does not cover the total cost of the house, 
the increased financial burden of these additional enhancements place vulnerable households, particularly ‘extreme poor’ 
households, in a difficult position.  Additional grant support to households is needed to construct the house design with 
additional climate-resilience features.    
 
30. There is also a need for more informed site selection for the new houses under the government programme. Though 
flood history is considered, the current risk assessment process is limited and does not systematically include recently 
developed data on key risks including sea level rise and extreme typhoon related storm surge.  Per GoV policy, 
                                                             
7 Final Report - Results of pilot measures supporting poor households to improve safety home, responding to floods in Northern Central and Central 
Coast according to Decision No. 716/QD-TTg dated 14/6/2012 of the Prime Minister (see Annex VIIIa)

=== PAGE 13 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 62 
 
 
C 
households on sites with a history of flooding over 3.6m are not eligible through the government programme, but should 
instead be relocated.  In such cases, households are linked to other national support programmes to support relocation. 
 
31. Further, the government housing programme has not applied available flood and storm risk data at the local level, 
nor has it harnessed community knowledge in siting and design decisions. In part this is because MOC lacks outreach 
capacity at the commune level. This means that the current investments in safe housing are detached from land use 
planning and annual budgeting at the community and sub-national level, thus opportunities for enhancing overall risk 
reduction or contributing to protective measures are missed. These may include development planning investments such 
as storm resistant infrastructure (e.g. safer water and sanitation supply, or dyke reinforcement, etc.) to ensure that basic 
public services are not destroyed and disrupted by storms or typhoons.  
 
32. An overall vulnerability assessment/risk index was conducted for combined hazards at the national level.  Additional 
maps indicating flood and storm risk have been included in Annex IX, these maps do not yet include climate projections, 
nor related river flooding.   
• 
historical storm probability  
• 
probability of rainfall-related flooding  
 
33. There are, however, good practices in Viet Nam of community-based disaster risk mapping and planning, applying 
well-tested methods. The Community Based Disaster Risk Management (CBDRM) programme 2009-2020 promotes a 
six step process (see Figure 2) to actively engage communities in all activities of disaster and climate change adaptation 
risk management, from risk identification and analysis, to action planning, implementation and monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E), aiming to reduce vulnerabilities and enhancing communities’ coping and adaptive capacities.  The programme 
provides training on disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation, as well as guidance on conducting community-
based disaster risk assessments (CBDRA), resulting in community-based CBDRM plans for how communes will work to 
manage disaster and climate change risk more effectively. Community groups comprised of local leaders, technical 
experts and a cross-section of local residents and representatives from civil society organizations, including the Viet Nam 
Red Cross, Women’s Association and Association for People with Disabilities.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2:  6-Step CBDRM Process

=== PAGE 14 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 62 
 
 
C 
 
 
34. The CBDRM programme aims to reach 6,000 high risk communes by 2020 (more than 60% of all communes in Viet 
Nam). The programme has already been successfully initiated in more than 1,700 communes. In line with the integrated 
disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation (DRR-CCA) approach mandated by Viet Nam’s Change 
Committee, the program has been designed to address both traditional disaster and added climate change adaptation 
requirements. The planning methods, guidance materials, trainers and monitoring and evaluation systems have been 
highlighted as a highly effective means of resilience building in Viet Nam’s Special Report on Extreme Events submitted 
to the IPCC and have been identified as a good practice example by the UN, the Red Cross, the EU and ASEAN among 
others. CBDRM and CBDRA guidelines are attached for information under Annex XV.    
 
35. Evaluations of the government housing programme and the CBDRM programme can be found in the Annex VIII. 
 
Robust mangrove coverage to provide a natural buffer between coastal communities and the sea  
36. Coastal mangrove forests play a critical role in coastal protection, acting as a natural buffer between the sea and 
communities – absorbing some of the impact of typhoons and storm surges. Mangroves also have an important role in 
preventing coastal erosion (as well as great potential for carbon sequestration). In Viet Nam, mangrove forests have been 
dangerously degraded, from 408,500ha 1943 to only 59,760ha in 2008, leaving coastal communities exposed to coastal 
flooding.  Key factors contributing to this decline include urbanization, infrastructure development and the growth of 
aquaculture plantations operated by local farming cooperatives and households.   
 
37. Successful mangrove rehabilitation is complex and, if not implemented correctly, extremely costly. For instance, 
examples from other countries indicate the costs to successfully restore both the vegetative cover and ecological functions 
of a mangrove forest to range from US$225/ha to US$216,000/ha. Unpublished data would indicate that even higher 
costs, as much as US$500,000/ha, have been spent on individual projects8. This is due to the extent of degradation at 
the site and the level of effort needed to rehabilitate the area, and continued interventions resulting from failures.  
Mangrove rehabilitation in general has a high rate of failure globally, citing the same lessons learned from pilot projects 
in Viet Nam.   
 
38. In 2008, the government launched the Mangrove Restoration and Development Programme 2008-2015, which 
has been successful in reversing the decline in coastal mangrove coverage. However, as the current programme was 
designed to apply a monoculture planting regime, survival rates for mangrove forests supported under the programme 
are only 50%. This is due to a number of factors including (a) low seedling quality, (b) a lack of protection for seedlings 
from the physical damage in the early stages of growth, (c) a lack of diversity in species selection, (d) planting methods 
not well-suited to the specific site and (e) poor community engagement for maintenance and monitoring. Government 
statistics indicate that 62% of the existing mangrove forests in Viet Nam are newly planted and monoculture. Inadequate 
                                                             
8 Mangrove Restoration - Costs and Benefits of Successful Ecological Restoration (Roy R. Lewis III, 2001)

=== PAGE 15 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 62 
 
 
C 
community consultations, and a lack of awareness raising among local residents regarding the benefits of mangrove 
reforestation, has also resulted in low levels of community engagement in some areas hindering long term forest 
management. The current government programme applies a cost norm for regeneration of mangroves of between 
US$800-1000 per hectare, with higher rates of US$1,000-7,000 being applied for full replanting depending on the difficulty 
of the site selected.  
 
39. A number of international organizations have been contributing enhanced approaches in support of the government’s 
targets: 
 
Table 1:  Pilot Projects on Mangrove Rehabilitation 
Project Name 
Source of 
Funds 
Budget 
Duration 
Hectares 
Locations 
Mangrove reforestation program 
to prevent natural disasters  
Japan Red 
Cross 
1,743,938 
2009 - 2015 
2,296 
06 districts: Nga 
Sơn. Hậu Lộc, 
Hoằng Hóa, Sầm 
Sơn, Quảng 
Xương, Tĩnh Gia 
Projects for investment in 
development of mangrove forests 
in the coastal communes of Hau 
Loc district, Thanh Hoa province  
 
Fund for 
Central Natural 
Hazards  
925,250 
2010 - 2015 
200 
Hậu Lộc district 
Integration of coastal protection 
and restoration of the mangrove 
forests in Ca Mau province  
 
Germany 
(KfW) 
1,200,000 
2013 - 2019 
219 
Western part of Ca 
Mau (U Minh 
district) 
 
40. These pilots have been implemented with official development assistance (ODA) mainly in southern Viet Nam and 
have aimed to rectify current challenges by applying enhanced technologies and planting methods. These improved 
approaches include (a) diversifying and tailoring the application of mangrove varieties to local conditions, (b) modifying 
planting techniques, (c) using tools, such as bamboo break waters, to encourage young plant growth, and (d) enhancing 
soil quality and improving maintenance of young forests. Some pilots have also sought to more actively engage 
communities in planning and maintenance, as well as in the site selection so that local livelihoods, such as aquaculture, 
and mangroves can coexist.10 Although the cost norms for these pilots are higher than the current government rate, 
recent studies have shown that application of improved technological approaches can increase average survival rate to 
more than 80% – significantly higher than the current 50% average. The above projects, which are still ongoing, will 
contribute in part to the targets of the next phase of the government’s mangrove programme. The Restoration of Coastal 
Mangrove Forest in Viet Nam Study Report, 2012, attached as part of Annex VIII (Evaluation Reports), provides 
assessments of previous mangrove regeneration efforts.  
 
41. The Project for the protection and development of coastal protection forests in response to climate change 
2015-2020 was recently approved through Decision 120/QD-TTg for the 28 coastal provinces of Viet Nam. The project 
requires a total of US$245million (5,415billion VND) and has a planned annual investment rate of US$41.4million 
(902billion VND). The central government aims to provide 70% of total programme cost with 25% coming from ODA and 
5% from local contributions, though only a portion of the funding has been secured to date. This government project is of 
high priority, and is specifically cited as a cornerstone for adaptation action in Viet Nam’s draft adaptation INDC. This 
project aims to: 
• 
protect 310,695ha of existing coastal protection forests  
• 
reforest 46,058ha of coastal forests (of which 29,500ha are mangroves)  
• 
reforest 7,508ha of forests for sand and wind break and 9,050ha of production forests  
• 
and rehabilitate 9,602ha of the poor quality forests  
 
                                                             
9 The KfW project’s hectare target is relatively low because the project’s main focus is more on infrastructure for coastal protection. 
10 GIZ, 2012. Coastal Rehabilitation and Mangrove Restoration Using Malaleuca Fence: Practical Experience from Kien Giang Province. 
Conservation and Development of the Kien Giang Biosphere Reserve Project. Kien Giang.

=== PAGE 16 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 62 
 
 
C 
42. Recognizing the need to scale-up and replicate improved approaches, which promote more effective mangrove 
restoration, the government is considering raising the cost norm from US$800-1000 per hectare to US$1,500 for 
regeneration through natural recruitment processes, and applying an increased average cost of US$4,000 for replanting.  
 
Enhanced climate risk information to guide climate-resilient and risk-informed planning  
43. A critical element, of enhancing the effectiveness of efforts to tackle coastal climate change impacts, is ensuring that 
decisions are underpinned by quality climate risk data. When developing maps on where to safely locate housing and 
other assets, and assessing which parts of the coastline require the protection of mangroves, clear information on climate 
change projections and risks is essential. This information needs to combine available risk assessments, storm surge 
maps, historical knowledge on disaster and loss, with climate change projections to guide climate-resilient and risk-
informed development planning.   
 
44. In order for this information to be convincing to policy makers, hazard impacts also need to be able to be expressed 
in economic and financial terms that convey the value of current and future assets at risk. This requires analyzing historical 
loss and damage data to better understand its current impacts on an economy, and then building the capacity to model 
this for likely future climate change related impacts. The GoV has recognized the need for this information, but efforts to 
support improved economic and financial modeling of climate change risk, within key institutions which need this 
information (in both the public and private sector), are fragmented and largely under-developed. The long term impact of 
these gaps on development potential, business development and risk management is significant.   
 
45. Strengthened risk mapping for provinces on potential climate change and hazard risk was identified as a key need 
under the National Action Plan for DRM in Viet Nam and followed by a series of Decisions by the Government Office to 
develop detail hazard maps for different regions in Viet Nam, particularly the Decision 172/2007/QĐ-TTg in 2007 for 
landslide and flash flood mapping; and the Prime Minister Communication 171/TB-VPCP on 23/4/2014, and 410/TB-
VPCP on 13/10/2014 for development of inundation mapping for strong storm and sea surge. This gap was also 
highlighted by more than 400 scientists from Viet Nam and the region as a core conclusion of the Viet Nam Special Report 
on Extreme Events (SREX 2014).  Similarly, a 2010 World Bank study on Options for Disaster Risk Financing in Viet 
Nam highlighted the need for catastrophe risk modeling, risk assessment and disaster related damage assessments as 
key recommendations for action. At the commune level, the lessons learned workshop for CBDRM implementation at 
commune level conducted jointly by the Government of Viet Nam, UNDP, Viet Nam Red Cross, Women’s Union and 
Oxfam in 2014 specifically highlighted the need for improved accessible data on risk as a key component of effective 
commune level planning. 
 
46. Currently in Viet Nam climate-change projections and associated disaster risk trends are not well understood or 
widely disseminated, hindering their application particularly at sub-national level. The government has been working with 
key research institutes and government departments at the national level, to develop improved climate change projections 
and to conduct specific research in key areas such as storm surge risk associated with a likely increase in typhoon 
intensity. This data, however, has yet to be systematically applied. The government has recently developed Viet Nam’s 
first coastal storm surge maps to improve coastal inundation mapping. Data quality will also be improved to include super-
storm and storm surge data based on 2014-2015 models and more accurate sea level rise projections included in the 
fifth IPCC assessment report. Additional analysis of salt water intrusion zones using new satellite based technology is 
also beginning. While much of this data has been developed, or is near finalization, it is not currently being systematically 
applied in planning or effectively disseminated. 
 
47. Although capacity has been developed for disaster and climate change loss and damage reporting within MARD, 
further capacity building is required at the national and sub-national levels. Communes require technical advice on how 
to collect improved data on climate change loss and damage in their locality to support systematic monitoring of resilience 
building in coastal areas. To effectively measures changes in resilience from local to national level in the context of climate 
change, further upgrading of current systems is required.    
 
48. With support from UNDP, the government already has begun to draft an improved official circular that will outline how 
climate and disaster loss and damage data should be collected, processed and made available for analysis and planning. 
The current draft circular builds on the existing DesInventar disaster damage system that was developed in 2012 with 
support from UNISDR and UNDP. DesInventar is a conceptual and methodological tool for the generation of national 
disaster inventories and the construction of databases of damage, losses and in general the effects of disasters. The 
system aims to develop a sustainable disaster information management system within an institution for the systematic 
collection, documentation and analysis of data about losses caused by disasters associated with natural hazards. MARD

=== PAGE 17 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 62 
 
 
C 
is now fully operating the database using existing government funds and resources, and annual disaster statistics are 
posted on the Central Committee for Disaster Prevention and Control Website and form the basis for Viet Nam’s official 
disaster data reported to ISDR and IPCC. 
 
49. Provinces and cities regularly use the DesInventar disaster report forms to report data on damage and relief needs 
to populate the software. However, with only 1,900 data cards for the period 1989-2010, the available disaster/loss data  
for Viet Nam is quite low, with little disaggregation beyond the provincial level11. Increasing the skills of communes to 
report quality data will, over time, enable national disaster data sets to become significantly more accurate and therefore 
useful in monitoring changes in resilience and in planning well-targeted adaptation investments. The new circular, if well 
implemented, can be a key means of improving disaster data collection and recording, as well as the institutional 
mechanism for hosting and updating the database. The scaling up of the national CBDRM programme can also be a key 
vehicle for increasing understanding regarding how and when disaster data should be sent for inclusion in national 
records. To make sure that commune level data collected is effectively processed and used, there is a need to provide 
support at provincial and national level to upgrade existing loss and damage databases on existing national disaster 
tracking data sets. This will improve the quality of national resilience building monitoring and evaluation.    
 
50. UNDP has two ongoing programmes Strengthening Institutional Capacity for Disaster Risk Management in Viet 
Nam Phase 2 (SCDM-II) and Capacity Building for Implementation of National Climate Change Strategy (2014-
2017) which contribute to national capacity to collect, analyze, apply and disseminate climate and disaster risk 
information. These programmes are supporting studies, providing training, and strengthening coordination within the 
National Climate Change Strategy. 
 
51. Access to data is a key issue, and there is a need for an improved government risk data repository that can manage 
incoming data and make it accessible across government ministries, as well as to academic institutes and other relevant 
stakeholders. Improved climate related loss and damage data has far reaching uses in government planning, but also in 
the private sector where it can help for example in the pricing of insurance products or financial risk sharing and transfer 
tools. 
 
52. Finally, although the government has been proactive in developing climate scenarios to estimate future impacts, 
government institutions are finding it challenging to apply this information in planning and decision-making. Disaster and 
climate change risk data is not sufficiently linked to investment/capital expenditure planning processes at the national and 
provincial level ministries. Current practices involve production of meteorological (weather) data, not probabilistic 
forecasts of climate and climate related risks. Quantification of risks would enable costing of alternate risk reduction 
options. Adaptation planning has also not yet begun to factor in risks of long term loss and damage, particularly land loss 
due to sea level rise, which is increasingly being experienced in low-lying exposed coastal areas and deltas.   
 
53. Through recent ADB-UNDP supported initiatives, the MARD has also been piloting integrated risk indexes for 
resilience that can help provincial decision making regarding adaptation priorities. These tools aggregate climate hazard 
risk and with local level socio-economic vulnerability data to give a more accurate understanding of not only climate 
impacts but local level exposure to them. Accessible indexes and maps can be used as a tool to help guide investment 
planning and decision-making. Replicating this type of mapping to the entire coastline, applying comparable and 
consistent data, would be a transformative change in Viet Nam’s ability to analyze and compare climate change risks in 
coastal areas. 
 
54. Another aspect of this challenge is creating enabling conditions in which the public and private sector can invest in 
risk reduction efforts more systematically. In order to unlock, as well as direct and redirect, public and private sector 
investment into risk reduction, accurate data on historical loss and damage, specific hazard risk, and downscaled climate 
impact data are required. This, however, has not been possible due to capacity constraints, as these are currently 
inaccessible outside of government, or of insufficient quality in coastal Viet Nam. 
 
55. Although the government has been proactive in developing climate scenarios to estimate future impacts, government 
institutions are finding it challenging to apply this information in planning and decision-making. Disaster and climate 
change risk data is not sufficiently linked to investment/capital expenditure planning processes at the national and 
provincial level ministries. Current practices involve production of meteorological (weather) data, not probabilistic 
                                                             
11 http://222.252.27.1:8081/DesInventar

=== PAGE 18 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 62 
 
 
C 
forecasts of climate and climate related risks, nor economic analysis. Quantification of risks would enable costing of 
alternate risk reduction options.  
 
56. The UNDP/USAID-Adapt Capacity Building Programme on the Economics of Climate Change Adaptation (ECCA12) 
is supporting Viet Nam to strengthen institutional capacity to apply economic principles and techniques to inform cost-
efficient and sustainable adaptation planning. The programme has provided training on economic analysis (i.e. cost-
benefit analysis (CBA)) to technical staff from MPI, MONRE and MARD. As part of the programme a survey was 
conducted of over 600 households to gauge the impact of climate change on economic activity. Data collection was 
recently completely with support on analysis to be provided over the next few months. ECCA is also in the process of 
compiling its training materials into a course available to government staff, either online or through a local university.  
There is an opportunity integrate this training into the relevant institutions, as well as to link this economic survey data 
with the DesInventar data in order to estimate the economic impact of disasters at various sub-national levels.   
   
57. Climate change projections suggest an increasing likelihood of major climate change related disasters in Viet Nam, 
such as the 2013 super typhoon which devastated neighboring Philippines, resulting in losses in excess of 3% of GDP.  
The ability to manage financial risk of low probability/high impact events has been identified as perhaps the largest 
difference between low and middle income countries’ adaptation capabilities. Currently, the government directly bears 
the burden of virtually all major financial risks associated with extreme climate events, compensating victims through 
disaster relief or reconstruction projects. The proposed GCF project will therefore also apply improved data collated above 
to support development a government plan for risk transfer in case of large scale coastal climate related disaster (loss of 
more than 3% GDP). It will support the government to identify appropriate risk transfer mechanisms, particularly looking 
at insurance or catastrophe bond options for financing reconstruction after a large scale typhoon. This will be based on a 
review of successful global and regional models, and on understanding of the local context, in order for such instruments 
to be successful.   
 
58. Although much of the potential loss and damage associated with climate impacts can be managed through effective 
adaptation action, including private sector risk transfer and sharing, some residual loss will remain. GCF resources will 
also support the design of a system to better account for the risk of long-term loss and damage due to climate change 
impacts in planning and policy formulation on existing systems. Technical support will also be provided to help the 
government to begin to define and track its long term losses associated with climate change in line with the requirements 
of the recent Warsaw Declaration.   
 
59. In light of its high and varied levels of risk, public-private risk sharing will likely be a key element to long term effective 
adaptation in Viet Nam. Financial risk transfer and sharing mechanisms are currently underdeveloped in Viet Nam. 
Household insurance levels per capita are low, and the government lacks climate related risk management strategies. 
Solid climate and disaster data is the engine for private sector risk transfer product development. In contrast to agricultural 
insurance where determining the exact extent of affected areas is highly complex and costly, determining the extent of 
flooding and storm damage after an extreme hazard event such as a flood or storm is less complex. The challenge for 
insurance companies however is in being able to competitively price products based on mathematical probabilistic 
analysis, which requires commune level historical loss and damage data as its base. Comprehensive data is not currently 
available in Viet Nam. Therefore, the disaggregation of historical loss and damage data (and verification of the results 
through the CBDRM consultation process) down to commune level to be undertaken by the proposed GCF project, will 
not only support government risk mapping but also private sector product development. 
 
60. While there are clear areas for intervention to improve coastal resilience, there are several barriers which must be 
addressed. 
 
 
Key barriers addressed by the proposed GCF project 
 
61. In order to increase the resilience of coastal communities to the threats of storms, sea surges and sea level rise, it is 
necessary to address the following barriers to sustainable coastal protection and safer settlements. 
 
Ineffective Collaboration Between Ministries and Programmes Preventing Regulations Critical for Long-term Climate 
Resilience 
                                                             
12 http://www.undp-alm.org/projects/ecca-asia

=== PAGE 19 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 62 
 
 
C 
62. A key barrier to coastal resilience in Viet Nam is uninformed planning, due to lack of collaboration. As a result, 
available assessments of climate and disaster risks, data on permanent as well as temporary loss and damage, and 
monitoring and confirming land loss due to climate-induced hazards, have not begun to be factored into government 
planning.  While data is currently limited, collaboration is critical to integrate the existing data effectively.  For example, 
risk assessments from the CBDRM Programme and the storm surge maps generated by the Disaster Management 
Center, have not been considered in land use planning related to government housing programmes.  Further, best 
practices of small scale pilot projects have not been integrated into existing housing designs in coastal areas to ensure 
the construction adequately reflects risks. Failure to make these links can result in (a) houses being built on unsafe sites 
and (b) higher costs related to loss and damage given projected climate and flood risk.  Failure to make these links, as 
well as the financial limitations in domestic public sources, impacts the GoV’s ability to enhance planning and update 
related policy and regulations towards climate smart development.   
 
Coastal protection measures are not informed by best practices 
63. Coastal protection has been limited to hard protective structures such as sea dykes that incur high capital investment 
and maintenance cost, as well as significant ecological consequences that are counter-productive to their purpose. 
Although necessary in certain strategic locations, evidence has shown that hard structures interfere with natural 
sedimentation process and often aggravate coastal erosion, leading to land loss and greater exposure. In the past, strong, 
reliable man-made (“hard”) infrastructure was used to operate effectively and efficiently, although more recently, evidence 
suggests mixed results13.   
 
64. In recent years, businesses and governments are seeing the enormous potential for natural infrastructure in the form 
of wetlands and forests, watersheds and coastal habitats to perform many of the same tasks as grey infrastructure, 
sometimes better and more cheaply.14  For example, investing in protection of coral reefs and mangroves can provide a 
stronger barrier to protect coastal operations against flooding and storm surge during extreme weather, while inland 
flooding can be reduced by strategic investments in catchment forests, vegetation and marshes.15  Evidence from coastal 
adaptation practices in Viet Nam and in the region further suggests that integrated solutions based on ecosystem services 
such as mangrove stands can serve as more effective means to protect communities from the increased incidence of 
storms. Although the government and partners have recently invested in mangrove rehabilitation efforts (and as such 
these are tried and tested pilot solutions), these still remain nascent in scope and require larger geographic coverage to 
reinforce and protect poor and marginalized communities living along the coastline.   
 
Inadequate climate risk information preventing effective adaptation planning and resources mobilization 
65. The absence of rigorous climate risk information places considerable limitations on climate-resilient planning and 
adaptation investments. Availability and uptake of climate risk information is lagging related to what is required for 
effective decision-making. Improving (a) access to high-quality meteorological data to characterize present weather, (b) 
climate change scenarios (including for variability) at the spatial and temporal scales to support decision-making, (c) 
historical and projected loss and damage data (d) technical capacity to undertake impact assessments based on loss 
and damage data and (e) economic appraisals of adaptation options are necessary to design sustainable, risk-informed 
and economically-efficient adaptation measures.   
 
66. Currently, the government directly bears the burden of virtually all major financial risks associated with extreme 
climate events, compensating victims to the extent possible through disaster relief or reconstruction projects. Public 
expenditure, however, is not readily available for local risk finance16. The increasing frequency and intensity of the impacts 
of climate change are already straining limited public resources, as ministries are challenged to secure the necessary 
financing from public funds. The above limitations of skills and data therefore also prevent effective engagement of the 
private sector in climate hazard risk sharing and transfer.  The lack of commune level data related to historical loss and 
damage, and ease of monitoring and confirmation of impacts, make premium setting difficult.  The absence of a 
comprehensive weather monitoring system makes triggering payments for any market orientated solutions (e.g. 
insurance) prohibitively expensive. The design of the output is further detailed in section, C.3. Project / Programme 
Description.  
                                                             
13 UNEP-WCMC (2006) In the front line: shoreline protection and other ecosystem services from mangroves and coral reefs. UNEP-WCMC, 
Cambridge, UK 33 pp 
14 UNEP-WCMC (2006) In the front line: shoreline protection and other ecosystem services from mangroves and coral reefs. UNEP-WCMC, 
Cambridge, UK 33 pp 
15 UNEP-WCMC (2006) In the front line: shoreline protection and other ecosystem services from mangroves and coral reefs. UNEP-WCMC, 
Cambridge, UK 33 pp 
16 GoV’s recent Public Climate Expenditure and Investment Review in Viet Nam, supported by UNDP, showed that domestic climate change 
response related spending is mainly directed towards large-scale infrastructure projects in the sectors of irrigation and transport (UNDP, 2015).

=== PAGE 20 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 62 
 
 
C 
 
C.3. Project / Programme Description 
67. Recognizing the impacts of sea level rise, increased flooding and increased incidence of extreme events, the 
objective of the project is to Increase resilience of vulnerable coastal communities to climate change related 
impacts in Viet Nam. The project seeks to meet this objective by achieving the following complementary results: 
 
1. Storm and flood resilient design features added to 4,000 new houses on safe sites, benefiting 20,00017 poor and 
highly disaster-exposed people in 100 communes 
2. Regeneration of 4,000 hectares of coastal mangrove storm surge buffer zones using successful evidence-based 
approaches 
3. Enhanced climate, loss and damage data for private and public sector application in all 28 coastal provinces of 
Viet Nam  
 
68. Each output is critical to meeting the project objective. Implemented separately, the outputs would have limited impact 
on building resilience of coastal communities.  For instance, mangrove rehabilitation will absorb some of the impact of 
sea surges and typhoons (see Figure 3), but the poor in sub-standard houses would remain vulnerable.  Construction of 
flood and storm-resilient houses built on high risk sites (without the integration of risk assessments) would inadvertently 
put already vulnerable people at continued risk. And, improving data and information management systems, and 
identifying suitable financial mechanisms to better respond to extreme events (e.g. significantly impacting GDP), will 
enable climate risk informed decisions about the adaptive investments in the risk exposed coastal regions, reducing loss 
and damage over time. Thus the proposed GCF project will promote a transformational impact by enabling the GoV to 
comprehensively tackle the issues at hand, resulting in an adaptation solution that will have significant long-term benefits 
for poor and marginalized communities. 
 
69. The outputs work together to strengthen inter-ministerial collaboration and community engagement.  For example, 
currently two main challenges for the mangroves and housing programmes are ensuring effective community participation 
and oversight.  Linking these elements to scale up proven effective community based disaster risk management 
programme helps to address this.  CBDRM planning, housing and mangrove site selection often lacks up-to-date data 
on hazard risk, which can be provided through local level information packs.  And enhanced preparedness and planning 
for extreme events can ensure sustainability of these programmes, as well as overall development planning in the country.  
 
70. The benefits of this integration are at the core of project sustainability and transformational impact.  Underpinned by 
sustained improved in risk data quality and management, the project directly facilitates ministries to benefit from data and 
programmes outside their traditional siloes.  As the joint development process for the proposed project has shown, there 
is often willingness to apply better data and approaches, but technical level staff seldom has the time or the specific 
technical knowledge on how to access it.  These cross-ministerial links and relationships will be core to more effective 
long term adaptation in Viet Nam.  In addition, strengthening the central and provincial government’s ability to quantify 
and estimate its financial exposure to climate change risk will be key to enabling key future adaptation decisions. 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Potential Role of Mangroves in Protecting Coastal Communities18 
                                                             
17 Household size in target areas is estimated at 5 people/household, though reports exist that state an average of 4/household, these estimates 
are considered low for rural areas, as cities which tend to have smaller household sizes, were included in the calculations. 
18 The Importance of Mangroves to People: A Call to Action. van Bochove, J., Sullivan, E., Nakamura, T. (Eds). United Nations Environment 
Programme World Conservation Monitoring Centre, Cambridge. 128 pp. 52-53 (UNEP, 2014).

=== PAGE 21 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 62 
 
 
C 
 
 
71. The project takes an integrated participatory approach working with communities to reduce the impacts of flooding, 
storms/typhoons and storm surge risk, by providing safe housing and increasing mangrove protection in coastal 
communities. At the national level, it will increase integration and effectiveness of on-going government investments in 
resilience, and use quality climate data to direct public sector expenditure where it is most needed and unlock private 
sector investment towards risk reduction. To meet its objective the project looks at the challenges faced by coastal 
communities from the perspectives of climate and risk informed planning, application of best practices for climate-resilient 
infrastructure (particularly as it relates to the most vulnerable in coastal areas), and reduction of the impacts of climate 
change induced events. Importantly, the overall design of the project underscores the engagement of coastal 
communities, as their commitment is critical to ensuring long term resilience.  The outputs have been designed to promote 
collaboration and generate knowledge to enhance planning and improve resilience, creating a flow of data and analysis 
across the outputs.      
 
72. As agreed by MOC and MARD, ensuring complementarity with previous/ongoing/planned efforts and highlighting 
government priorities, 7 provinces have been selected for GCF intervention.  In year one and two, activities will focus on 
Thanh Hoa, Thua Thien Hue, and Quang Ngai where particularly pressing needs for both housing support and mangrove 
regeneration exist.  In year three and four, activities will be expanded to Quang Binh, Quang Nam and Ca Mau and Nam 
Dinh.  Nam Dinh will receive only mangrove support.  While not currently under the housing programme, Nam Dinh is 
under consideration for the next phase. The seven provinces selected for housing and mangrove regeneration support 
have all been identified as areas at high risk to inundation related to extreme sea-levels/ storm surges as well as losses 
from tropical storms/typhoons. 
 
Output 1:  Storm and flood resilient design features added to 4,000 new houses on safe sites, benefiting 20,000  
poor and highly disaster-exposed people in 100 communes 
 
73. In the flood and typhoon prone areas of coastal of Viet Nam. GCF finance will provide for the additional cost of safety 
features and improved monitoring (approximately US$2,000/house), to 4,000 houses constructed under the broader 
government housing programming benefitting the poor. Specifically these include (a) a concrete roof with strengthened 
bracings and fittings (US$900), (b) reinforced windows, doors and sealing (US$400) (c) improvements to drainage, siting 
and raising plinths (US$400) and (d) improved monitoring to ensure that the finished product is one that reflects all of the 
resilience features of the house design (US$300).  As the GCF project will build on the existing government housing 
programme, the general design of the house is consistent with Figure 1: Flood and Storm-Resilient House Design.   
 
74. Output 1 will be fully coordinated with the government housing programme, and grant support to beneficiaries will 
follow the government’s monitoring and disbursement schedule. Government financial support is provided to beneficiaries 
in 2 financial installments (70% upon completion of the foundation and the second upon completion of the house frame 
meeting the design specifications). At these critical milestones, there will be a thorough inspection of the construction by 
MOC, expertise from the GCF project team and UNDP. As part of regular project management, the same team will 
conduct site visits to assess project progress and provide tailored support as needed to ensure the targets and the

=== PAGE 22 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 62 
 
 
C 
objective of the GCF project, as well as the government housing programme, are on track and ultimately met.   GCF 
supplementary funds for housing will be managed through the project bank account and will be provided directly to 
households once relevant monitoring and oversight has been completed.  
 
75. GCF finance will also support risk assessments through the established CBDRM mechanism, to ensure that house 
siting is on a safe location. Links will be made to existing information such as the storm surge maps generated by the 
Disaster Management Center. 
 
76. The 100 target communes selected for this work will serve as learning hubs for broader dissemination in adjacent 
communes and provinces. Selection of communes and households to receive support will follow existing government 
criteria. Criteria and prioritization criteria are further detailed in Annex II: Feasibility Study. 
 
77. GCF resources will also be used to provide training on engineering innovations for flood and storm resistant housing 
technologies, and to deliver hands-on advice and guidance to local authorities and affected households on safe and 
affordable house designs and construction.   
 
78. A component on safe housing design will also be added to the current CBDRM risk mapping and planning process 
which will be rolled out extensively in all coastal provinces.  A greater scale of housing schemes that embed the evidence-
based good practice of siting and design of climate resilient houses will trigger greater change in family house 
construction. 
 
79. Climate risk informed selection of safe locations for house construction is critical for stability and resilience. The 
information necessary to inform site selection is already available and will be collated quickly into information packs at 
the start of the project, in order to help improve the quality of site verification. While this information is already available, 
it is not currently well presented and shared, therefore not applied.  For example, storm surge hazard maps for large 
scale typhoons are being finalized by the government for all coastal provinces, but data has not yet been applied at the 
commune level.  Similarly, climate change and sea level rise data is available centrally, but not regularly shared at local 
level, and even historical disaster data availability is uneven. 
 
80. Based on the information packs, communities will also develop climate sensitive Community Based Disaster Risk 
Management (CBDRM) action plans, and ranking priorities for community-based risk reduction investments that will be 
budgeted into the local commune and provincial budgets. Completed commune plans will be approved by the People’s 
Committee and actions that require additional funding can be recommended for inclusion in the government’s regular 
annual socio-economic planning and budgeting (SEDP) process. Climate risk informed commune plans will enable future 
housing schemes to be climate risk informed in terms of siting decisions and other protective and risk reduction measures. 
Such risk reduction measures may include reinforcing local dykes, improving local drainage canal networks and other 
risk reduction measures for excess flood water diversion away from the houses and other units of public infrastructure 
critical for local service provision and commune development. 
 
81. Existing government-approved planning methods, trainers and monitoring and evaluation systems already developed 
through the national CBDRM program will be used, applying methodologies which have reached more than 1,700 
communes since 2009 and have been identified as a good practice example by the UN, Red Cross, EU, ASEAN among 
others. This will ensure that implementation costs will be minimized as GCF resources will be used to complement an 
already ongoing government led programme.  
 
82. Activities for this output thus include: 
• 
Activity 1.1.  Grant support for cost of additional flood/storm resilient features to 4,000 houses 
• 
Activity 1.2.  Community-based climate and disaster risk mapping and planning 
• 
Activity 1.3.  Knowledge products, developed based on lessons learned, for policy makers and communities  
 
83. Further breakdown of the activities is provided in Section H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at the 
Programme/Project level. 
 
Output 2: Regeneration of 4,000 hectares of coastal mangrove storm surge buffer zones using successful 
evidence-based approaches

=== PAGE 23 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 62 
 
 
C 
84. GCF funds will support regeneration of approximately 4,000 hectares of mangroves, in coastal areas vulnerable to 
climate change impacts. GCF resources will enable scale up of good practices from various pilots and integrate field 
proven best practices. Supplementary funds will allow for the application of improved planting and maintenance 
technologies outlined above, and implement the measures to ensure that livelihoods are maintained (such as relocating 
communal shrimp ponds to where the pressures on the mangrove stands will be minimized and the shrimp production 
can be well maintained).   
 
85. Specific sites within the province for project intervention will be identified/assessed through various criteria, namely 
(a) exposure to climate change induced events (i.e. typhoons, storm surges, sea level rise, coastal flooding), (b) potential 
for mangrove restoration, and (c) complementarity with ongoing government or partner support to maximize the impact 
of combined resources. Regeneration and rehabilitation efforts will be implemented in phases. While the techniques to 
be used are based on best practices of previous mangrove rehabilitation efforts, a phased approach will allow time for 
further monitoring and assessment of techniques, as well as review of risk mitigation measures. Adjustments will be made 
as needed to maximize the survival rate.   
 
86. As the project will focus on scaling up existing good practices to a transformational scale, regeneration will focus on 
low to moderate difficulty sites, directly applying evidence-based best practices from efforts in sites with similar 
challenges. Once the sites are selected, target communes will set up a community committee incorporating both local 
government and a cross-section of residents to complete a CBDRM risk assessment and planning process using the 
same six-step methodology outlined under the Output 1. Additional sessions on coastal mapping, mangrove regeneration 
and livelihoods maintenance will be added. The community CBDRM plans will therefore include location specific actions 
to support implementation and maintenance of the mangroves.     
 
87. The project will then roll out mangrove regeneration actions to enable application of improved techniques to increase 
survival rates. This will be community driven process as part of the commune planning and implementation using the 
CBDRM process for community mobilization and engagement. 
 
88. Interventions will particularly replicate efforts in Southern and Northern provinces of Viet Nam which are currently the 
main priority area for implementation under the government mangrove regeneration project and where mangrove forests 
are most naturally suited. They will aim to replicate best practices in replanting and restoring mangroves considering local 
conditions of target areas for restoration of mangroves; promote sustainable management of mangroves through 
community based management; support livelihood development for local people in the mangrove forested areas; and 
consolidate capacity building, awareness raising and participatory monitoring. GCF funds will also be used to provide 
additional training to enable government technical experts to learn about enhanced approaches for potentially wider 
application in other areas. Community groups mobilized through the CBDRM program will also receive training in 
sustainable mangrove forest management that will support their coastal livelihoods and enhance their protection from 
coastal storms and flooding. 
 
89. Activities supporting this output are as follows: 
• 
Activity 2.1. Regeneration or replanting of 4000 hectares of mangroves in coastal areas vulnerable to climate 
change 
• 
Activity 2.2. Community-based programme on mangrove rehabilitation, maintenance and monitoring for target 
communities 
• 
Activity 2.3. Knowledge products, developed based on lessons learned, for policy makers and communities  
 
90. Further breakdown of these activities can be found in H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs and Inputs at Project/Programme 
level. 
 
Output 3: Increased access to enhanced climate, loss and damage data for  private and public sector application 
in all 28 coastal provinces of Viet Nam 
 
91. MARD with assistance of UNDP has worked to establish the first natural disaster loss and damage database, 
strengthening early warning system design and meteorological service capacity. MONRE with assistance of UNDP has 
strengthened climate change data and analysis and has completed the Special Report on Extreme Events (SREX) 
submitted to the IPCC in 2014.  The government has recently developed Viet Nam’s first coastal storm surge maps to 
improve coastal inundation mapping.

=== PAGE 24 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 62 
 
 
C 
92. Building on this body of work, GCF funds will be used by MARD and MONRE to make this improved information more 
accessible to government decision makers especially at the sub-national level, on-going national programs and the 
private sector. This will be done by developing integrated risk maps at the sub-national level using the established 
methodology that Viet Nam has already been applied to produce maps in 20 out of 63 provinces. With GCF funding, Viet 
Nam will be able to produce risk mapping of the entire coastal area, combing local level knowledge with the best scientific 
data. Data quality will also be improved by including super-storm and storm surge data based on 2014-2015 models and 
more accurate sea level rise projections included in the fifth IPCC assessment report. Additional analysis of salt water 
intrusion zones using new satellite based technology will also be included. Although this data has been developed, or is 
near finalization, it is not currently being systematically applied by the government at any level.  This would be a 
transformative change in Viet Nam’s ability to analyze and compare climate change risks in coastal areas. 
 
93. To help support financial analysis of potential climate related loss and damage, existing loss and damage databases 
will be upgraded, by collecting and digitizing existing information at the provincial level, as well as systematizing the 
process of data collection and dissemination following extreme events. GIS-based socio-economic risk model for loss 
and damage assessments will be developed for use at all tiers of government institutions. This will aggregate climate risk 
and socio-economic data into accessible indexes and maps to guide investment planning and decisions. These tools will 
help make a link between climate data and investment/capital expenditure at provincial or national level.  
 
94. The enhanced quantity and quality of data will enable climate risk projections to be designed to directly support the 
development of Viet Nam’s next five year planning cycle (2020-2025), as well as longer term climate change trends and 
impacts up to 2050.  In relation to this, skills and methods for cost and benefit analysis of a range of risk reduction and 
adaptation options will be introduced at key government institutions at all levels. A web-based version of climate change 
risk information will enable public access to risk information. The net result will be a significantly more accurate datasets 
on, and improved management of, all major climate change related risks and hazards for the entire coastal region of Viet 
Nam.   
 
95. As both slow onset climate change, and increased frequency and intensity of extreme events, are impacting Viet 
Nam, this also impacts the private and finance/insurance sectors.  Support will be provided to design tailored products to 
the private and finance/insurance sectors, as well as to identify innovative financial mechanisms, in order to strengthen 
risk-sharing and better protect public resources from the related financial burden of response and recovery to climate 
change.     
  
96. Activities supporting this output include: 
• 
Activity 3.1 – Update disaster database and establish risk data repository, with mechanisms established for 
sharing/disseminating information 
• 
Activity 3.2 – Policy support for planning/line ministry staff at the national and sub-national levels to apply 
disaster/loss information to inform climate resilient planning  
• 
Activity 3.3 – Analysis of risk transfer mechanisms for insurance, including for cases of large scale coastal climate 
related disaster (loss of more than 3% GDP). 
 
97. Further breakdown of these activities can be found in H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs and Inputs at Project/Programme 
level. 
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity) 
98. The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) is the project sponsor (i.e. executing ministry, or Line 
Ministry in accordance with the Harmonized Programme and Project Management Guidelines (HPPMG), signed between 
the Government of Viet Nam and UN in Viet Nam). 
 
99. MARD is a governmental agency with mandated responsibility in the fields of agriculture, forestry, salt production, 
fishery, irrigation/water services and rural development nationwide, including state management functions with regard to 
delivery of public service in accordance with legal documents.  MARD performs its tasks and authorities based on Decree 
No.178/2007/ND-CP dated 3 December 2007 issued by the government. 
 
100. 
Following UNDP National Implementation Modality (NIM) guidelines, the executing entity or Implementing 
Partner/Executing Entity (UNDP terminology)/Executing Entity (GCF terminology) is the entity responsible and 
accountable for managing a project, including the monitoring and evaluation of project interventions, achieving project

=== PAGE 25 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 62 
 
 
C 
outputs, and for the effective use of UNDP resources. A single Implementing Partner/Executing Entity is designated to 
manage each UNDP-supported project. The Implementing Partner/Executing Entity may enter into agreements with other 
organizations or entities to assist in successfully delivering project outputs.  
 
101. 
Under MARD, the Water Resource Directorate (WRD) will be appointed as the National Implementing 
Partner/Executing Entity according to HPPMG. WRD has been directly responsible implementation of key National 
Programmes, such as the national CBDRM programme and the super storm surge and flood mapping projects for all 
coastal provinces, which the GCF project will complement. WRD already works closely with provinces, MONRE, MOC 
and MPI including at the commune level. MARD, through WRD, will also tap into on-going partnerships with development 
partners (e.g. GIZ, JICA, World Bank, ADB, etc), CSO, INGOs and private sectors to mobilize and catalyze resources, 
maximizing the impact of combined resources. Nationally, WRD serves as the Standing Office for Central Committee for 
Natural Disaster Prevention and Control, which is an inter-ministerial coordination body with strong capacity to mobilize 
across sectors, line ministries and provinces.  
 
102. 
Through the NIM modality, UNDP provides the required financial resources to the Implementing 
Partner/Executing Entity to carry out project activities during the annual cycle. These arrangements will be clearly stated 
in the annual work plan. Under the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT), three cash transfer modalities are 
available: direct cash transfer (advance), direct payment, and reimbursement.  Additional information about financial 
management is provided in section F.4. of the proposal. 
 
103. 
Engagement with MOC, as a Responsible Party, will be formalized through a Letter of Agreement (LoA). A 
Responsible Party is defined as an entity that has been selected to act on behalf of the Implementing Partner/Executing 
Entity on the basis of a written agreement or contract to purchase goods or provide services using the project budget. In 
addition, the Responsible Party may manage the use of these goods and services to carry out project activities and 
produce outputs. All Responsible Parties are directly accountable to the Implementing Partner/Executing Entity in 
accordance with the terms of their agreement or contract with the Implementing Partner/Executing Entity. Implementing 
Partners/Executing Entities use Responsible Parties in order to take advantage of their specialized skills, to mitigate risk 
and to relieve administrative burdens. 
 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
104. 
As Output 3 includes the generation of climate risk information products for the private and insurance sectors, a 
brief summary of the potential for these products is provided below. 
 
105. 
There are more than 30 million people live in coastal provinces in Viet Nam that face increasing storm and flood 
risk. GDP growth rates for these areas averaged more than 5% annually in recent years, and there is a strong demand 
from provincial authorities to ensure that people’s houses and public infrastructure is climate resilient and to maintain 
natural mangroves to buffer against storm surge risk. Viet Nam needs a better integrated coastal master planning and 
coastal defense management to protect development gains from climate change related impacts. Improved historical 
disaster databases at commune level and improved data on loss and damage are required to increase public planning 
quality and financial risk modelling. 
 
106. 
To act upon improved data, communities require access to proven resilience building technologies which are 
available but which have not been widely disseminated or applied at commune level. 
 
107. 
Viet Nam’s emerging middle class and rapid pace of development suggest significant untapped potential for the 
insurance sector, as long as products are able to be appropriately priced, tailored to client needs, and policy systems and 
safeguards are in place for consumers.  Per the Ministry of Finance’s annual Insurance Market reports, from 2005 to 
2012, insurance business revenue increased by an average annualized rate of 13% to 15% per year, totalling 
approximately US$2 billion by the end of 2012. However, only about 20% of this market covers housing and property and 
less than 1% agricultural product insurance. 
 
108. 
Government staff has requested technical skills development in risk transfer and loss and damage accounting to 
enable them better apply financial planning parameters in their planning at national and provincial level. It is envisaged 
that the proposed GCF project will lay the foundation for these types of financial services to be developed and 
disseminated. Without this type of barrier removal intervention, Viet Nam will not be able to tap into the potential of such 
financial services.

=== PAGE 26 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 62 
 
 
C 
 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable) 
Permits for Construction, Land Use and Reforestation 
109. 
Residential land in Viet Nam is leased from the government.  The existing methods for checking the legality of 
land tenure for the ongoing government housing programme will be applied to sites of the GCF-supported interventions.  
Similarly mangrove forests are government property; sites selected for mangrove regeneration activities will reflect 
government conservation policies and priority areas. 
 
Tax Management Under UN-supported Projects in Viet Nam 
General Provisions 
110. 
Procurement for UN-supported projects is VAT-refundable. In principle, VAT is paid from counterpart funds. In 
case such counterpart funds are not yet available, the PMU pays VAT to the supplier from the cash transfers received 
from the UNCO and the amount of VAT is refunded to the project budget.  
 
VAT Accounting 
111. 
VAT shall be accounted for in a separate account. VAT of the fourth quarter of each year is accounted for in the 
following year.  
 
VAT Refund 
- 
On a quarterly basis, the Project Director is responsible for clearing the claims for VAT refund for each quarter, 
in accordance with current State rules and regulations. If the project has completed all the procedures for tax 
refund but VAT has not been refunded at the time when a scheduled audit is conducted, the UNCO will not deduct 
the VAT value from the amount of cash to be transferred for project activities in the following quarter.  
- 
VAT refunds are deposited at the bank account of the project. 
 
112. 
The timelines, procedures and supporting documents necessary for claiming VAT refunds and the tax authority 
responsible for VAT refund are specified in the Project Accounting Handbook.  
 
Foreign Exchange and Insurance Policies 
113. 
UNDP’s currency hedging policy is based on the use of natural hedges (matching cash flows (i.e. revenues and 
expenses) in non-USD currencies) to the extent possible. UNDP Country Office bank account balances are managed not 
to exceed approximately one month’s disbursement requirements to minimize risk.  
 
114. 
The Government of Viet Nam signed a Standard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA) with UNDP in 1978.  
Consistent with the Article III of the SBAA, the responsibility for the safety and security of the Implementing 
Partner/Executing Entity and its personnel and property, and of UNDP’s property in the Implementing Partner/Executing 
Entity’s custody, rests with the Implementing Partner/Executing Entity.   
 
 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements 
115. 
The project will be implemented following UNDP’s National Implementation Modality (NIM), according to the 
Standard Basic Assistance Agreement between UNDP and the Government of Viet Nam, the One Plan (2012-2016), and 
the policies and procedures outlined in the UNDP POPP (see https://info.undp.org/global/popp/ppm/Pages/Defining-a-
Project.aspx). 
 
116. 
The national executing entity - also referred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner in UNDP terminology - is 
required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and procedures, including the 
NIM Guidelines. These include relevant requirements on fiduciary, procurement, environmental and social safeguards, 
and other performance standards. In legal terms, this is ensured through the national government’s signature of the 
UNDP Standard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA), together with a UNDP project document which will be signed by 
the Implementing Partner/Executing Entity to govern the use of the funds. The SBAA was signed with the Government 
of Viet Nam in 1978.

=== PAGE 27 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 62 
 
 
C 
 
117. 
The (national) Implementing Partner/Executing Entity for this project is the Water Resource Directorate 
(WRD) in the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) which is accountable to UNDP for managing the 
project, including the monitoring and evaluation of project interventions, achieving project outcomes, and for the effective 
use of UNDP resources.   
 
118. 
The following parties will enter into agreements with WRD to assist in successfully delivering project outputs and 
are directly accountable to WRD as outlined in the terms of their agreement: the Ministry of Construction (MOC), the Viet 
Nam Administration of Forestry (VNFOREST) and the Provincial People’s Committees (PPCs) of seven provinces (Thanh 
Hoa, Thua Thien Hue, Quang Ngai, Quang Binh, Quang Nam, Nam Dinh and Ca Mau).  
 
Figure 3: Schematic of the Management Arrangements for the Proposed Project 
 
119. 
UNDP’s overall role as an Accredited Entity is to provide oversight and quality assurance through its 
Headquarter, regional and Country Office units.  This role includes: (i) project preparation oversight; (ii) project 
implementation oversight and supervision, including financial management; and (iii) project completion and evaluation 
oversight.  It also includes oversight roles in relation to reporting and knowledge-management.  The ‘project assurance’ 
function of UNDP is to support the Project Board by carrying out objective and independent project oversight and 
monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate project management milestones are managed and completed. Project 
assurance has to be independent of the Project Manager; therefore, the Project Board cannot delegate any of its 
assurance responsibilities to the Project Manager. A UNDP Programme Officer, or M&E Officer, typically holds the Project 
Assurance role on behalf of UNDP. The ‘senior supplier’ role of UNDP is to represent the interests of the parties which 
provide funding and/or technical expertise to the project (designing, developing, facilitating, procuring, implementing). 
The senior supplier’s primary function within the Board is to provide guidance regarding the technical feasibility of the 
project. The senior supplier role must have the authority to commit or acquire supplier resources required. If necessary, 
more than one person may be required for this role. Typically, the Implementing Partner/Executing Entity, UNDP and/or 
donor(s) would be represented under this role. 
 
120. 
The Project Board is comprised of the following organizations: Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 
(MARD, Ministry of Construction (MOC), UN Development Programme in Viet Nam, and the Provincial People’s 
Committees (PPCs) of seven provinces (Thanh Hoa, Thua Thien Hue, Quang Ngai, Quang Binh, Quang Nam, Nam Dinh 
and Ca Mau). The Project Board is responsible for making, by consensus, management decisions when guidance is 
 
National Project 
Director 
 
 
Project Assurance 
UNDP 
 
Project Organization Structure 
 
Project Support  
(PMU) 
Project Team of MOC 
 
Project Board 
Senior Beneficiaries  
Ministry of Construction, 
PPC Representatives from 
participating provinces  
Executive 
MARD Leader 
 
Senior Supplier 
UNDP 
 
Provincial Project 
Teams (7 provinces) 
Project Team of 
VNFOREST

=== PAGE 28 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 62 
 
 
C 
required by the National Project Director. Project Board decisions will be made in accordance with standards that shall 
ensure management for development results, best value money, fairness, integrity, transparency and effective 
international competition. In case a consensus cannot be reached within the Board, final decision shall rest with the UNDP 
Programme Country Director. The Project Board will meet every six months. 
 
121. 
The National Project Director will run the project on a day-to-day basis on behalf of WRD within the parameters 
laid down by the Project Board. The National Project Director will end when the final project terminal evaluation report, 
and other documentation required by the GCF and UNDP, has been completed and submitted to UNDP. National Project 
Director is responsible for day-to-day management and decision-making for the project. The National Project Director’s 
prime responsibility is to ensure that the project produces the results specified in the project document, to the required 
standard of quality and within the specified constraints of time and cost.  
 
122. 
In accordance with HPPMG and Viet Nam’s ODA regulations, MARD’s Minister will delegate authority to the 
Ministry of Construction and PPCs of seven participating provinces to take the roles and responsibilities of the Line 
Ministry (executing ministry) for outputs/activities designed for their ministry and provinces, respectively.  
 
123. 
On behalf of MARD, WRD will be coordinating MOC and seven PPCs on planning, management, implementing 
and M&E of the project based on the signed agreements. A standard template of the agreement and working modality 
are specified in the HPPMG. 
 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation 
 
See Annex X

=== PAGE 29 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 62 
 
 
 
 
D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement 
 
 
124. 
The GoV invests heavily in disaster risk reduction. Climate related disasters in Viet Nam have caused an 
average annual loss of US$1.8 billion or 1.5% of GDP (UNDP, 2014). In response, the government allocates budgetary 
resources through targeted government programmes to minimize losses and to protect the population and economic 
assets. The recent CPEIR outlined that 18% of spending in five key government ministries could be linked to climate 
adaptation benefits.   
 
125. 
Despite these investments, the performance of government programmes is often sub-optimal, disconnected and 
geographically scattered. The below table summarizes strengths of ongoing government programmes and areas where 
GCF support would provide needed value.  
 
Table 1: Synergy of Impacts of Existing Programme Strengths 
  
Strengths of Current Government 
Support 
GCF Value Added 
Mangrove Rehabilitation 
MARD’s experience in mangrove rehabilitation, 
and firm commitment by government to scale 
up current programme using evidence 
supported approaches to improve mangrove 
survival rates. 
 
GCF intervention will scale-up the good 
practices from various pilots and integrate 
successful methods of natural recruitment as 
a best practice approach to regenerate 4,000 
hectares of mangroves.  Funds will allow for 
the application of improved regeneration and 
maintenance technologies outlined in above 
sections, and implement support measures to 
ensure that temporary disruptions to 
livelihoods are addressed (i.e. relocating 
communal shrimp ponds impacted by 
plantations as part of the regeneration plan).   
 
 
Improved approaches will also include 
support activities to engage participation by 
communities, through the CBDRM 
programme, at all stages of mangrove 
regeneration (i.e. nurseries, planting, 
monitoring), and to support communities as 
necessary to ensure livelihoods are not 
adversely impacted by project interventions.  
 
Technical and financial support will also be 
provided to enable MARD to upgrade official 
technical guidelines and policies to integrate 
proven approaches as standard in future 
mangrove regeneration plans and 
programmes.    
 
Government Housing 
Programmes 
MOC’s strong technical expertise in house 
design and construction, experience in rolling 
out large scale projects, and functioning 
financial model to support vulnerable 
households. 
 
The proposed GCF intervention will combine 
the approved CBDRM methodology for 
community risk mapping with the application 
of the enhanced MOC building designs + 
climate resilience features, to increase the 
effectiveness and scale up of safe housing 
schemes for the most vulnerable in coastal 
areas.  This critical link will ensure that 
homes, often the sole asset of the poor, are 
located on a safe site and can withstand, not 
only current climate change related impacts, 
but also those of projected increased intensity 
in the years to come.   
 
Community Based 
Adaptation/ Disaster 
Risk Management 
Participatory, inclusive and accountable 
structures that can reach communities and has 
strong, sustained ownership.  Communities are 
also the generators or valuable data on loss 
and damages as well as other climate change 
impacts.  Programme includes mechanism to 
develop community-based adaptation plans

=== PAGE 30 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 62 
 
 
 
 
D 
and includes support needs into regular 
provincial planning processes. 
GCF support will also ensure training for 
stakeholders in all 28 coastal provinces on 
improved climate resilient housing design, 
which (a) address the incremental increases 
in risk associated with projected climate 
change and extreme events, and (b) apply 
improved risk data and community knowledge 
to ensure that selected sites are safe.  At the 
national level, GCF support will enhance 
technical standards and regulatory 
frameworks for future government disaster-
resilient housing programmes.   
Climate Risk information 
The government has been proactive in working 
with national and international institutions to 
promote strengthening of data for climate 
change projections and key risks such as 
super-typhoon storm surge. 
GCF support will build on past and ongoing 
efforts to collect and record disaster and loss 
data, and to build a cadre of technical 
government staff with the necessary skill set 
to analyze the data, as well as train policy 
makers on applying the analysis into planning.  
Overall, actions are designed to contribute to 
a transformation of the Government of Viet 
Nam’s current approach to supporting and 
facilitating adaptation. GCF funds will enable 
the government to pursue a long term 
strategy that combines current risk reduction 
approaches with improved probabilistic 
climate change risk management approaches 
to protect development gains.  
 
To ensure that data is provided in a format 
and means that is useful for the private 
sector, and to increase government 
understanding of how it can create incentives 
for risk manage product in the future, the 
project will support dialogue between the 
private sector and relevant national and 
provincial government actors.  This will 
include technical dialogue with the private 
sector on improving the application and 
accessibility of hazard and loss and damage 
data. Industry wide consultations on current 
barriers and solutions for increasing private 
sector risk sharing and transfer engagement 
in managing climate is in Viet Nam will also 
be supported. 
 
 
126. 
GCF involvement is critical twofold: (i) climate change projections suggest that coastal threats will likely to 
increase in Viet Nam. Floods, sea swells, storms and typhoons will likely increase in occurrence and intensity. Therefore 
additional investment in generating climate risk information to inform and improve the current government programmes 
in safe housing and coastal protection is necessary; and (ii) climate related threats also require additional climate finance 
to increase the scale of climate risk reduction investments to protect the coastal settlements (people and their main 
assets – the homes) as well as improve the methods and application of a good practice, GCF involvement will 
considerably enhance the ongoing government programmes with climate risk information, employing best practices and 
scaling-up achievement of successful pilots and good international practice. As a result the proposed investment will be 
transformational. The value addition of the GCF funding is discussed further elaborated by Output below.

=== PAGE 31 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 62 
 
 
 
 
D 
                                                             
19 Household size in target areas is estimated at 5 people/household, though reports exist that state an average of 4/household, these estimates 
are considered low for rural areas, as cities which tend to have smaller household sizes, were included in the calculations. 
Output 1:  Storm and flood resilient design features added to 4,000 new houses on safe sites, benefiting 20,00019 
poor and highly disaster-exposed people in 100 communes 
127. 
The current government housing programme prioritizes the security and safety of the poorest segments of 
society, particularly those residing in the most exposed coastal regions. However, methods of siting and designs of 
houses are not well established, and lack the sufficient technical rigor to withstand increasing coastal threats.  While 
enhanced designs exist and have been tested, MOC is unable to apply the improved design due to budgetary 
constraints. GCF funds will cover the incremental costs of the additional safety features, based on lessons learned from 
previous housing programme designs and the successful design piloted in Da Nang, estimated at $2000/house. GCF 
involvement will also link the housing programme to community based approaches for risk assessment to inform safe 
siting for the new constructions.  Engagement of the community is essential for behavioral change and long term 
adoption of construction methods and standards for greater stability and safety. The GCF funds will thus facilitate the 
dissemination of potentially life-saving data on extreme zones for storm surges, sea level rise and flooding to 
communities for the first time. 
 
128. 
This improved linkage between national level data and communes will be essential for land-use decision making 
and for reducing the exposure of assets to potential climate change impacts as Viet Nam’s rapid development continues. 
By introducing climate smart CBDRM across the entire coast (covering all 28 provinces and 500 communes), GCF 
assistance will enable the risk information to be compared across the entire coast, triangulating central and local data 
spatially to provide critical risk information inputs into the planning and decision-making. Improvements in trade-off 
assessment, cost-benefit analysis will only be possible with robust statistics to improve coastal planning and investment 
decisions. Given a high degree of exposure of the coastal area, such full coverage in risk information will transform the 
government planning and budgeting processes.  
 
Output 2:  Regeneration of 4,000 hectares of coastal mangrove storm surge buffer zones using successful 
evidence-based approaches 
129. 
Mangrove areas create a vital buffer between the sea and coastal communities. Storm and flood resilient homes 
protect families and their productive assets from the impacts of climate change. Mangrove rehabilitation efforts have a 
high failure rate in many countries. This is also a challenge the GoV is facing. The government has invested in 
rehabilitation of mangroves, however the current survival rate is only 50%.  By providing technical assistance to replicate 
successful approaches, specifically natural generation, GCF funding will increase the survival rate to 80%. Similar to 
Output 1, GCF resources will link mangrove regeneration to participatory community-based approaches to mapping, 
planting and monitoring, to ensure sustainability of mangrove regeneration efforts.  Importantly, mangrove regeneration 
will be preceded by research and analysis to ensure that soil conditions and community pressures are taken into account.  
Where necessary, critical livelihoods which interfere with mangrove growth (i.e. aquaculture) will be relocated to a more 
suitable and sustainable location.   
 
130. 
Each of the above outputs will be implemented in phases, to allow for the further generation of best practices 
and lessons learned, to inform the continued roll-out of existing programmes, as well as to enhance related policies and 
future planning. 
 
Output 3: Increase access to enhanced climate, loss and damage data for private and public sector application 
in all 28 coastal provinces of Viet Nam 
131. 
Existing climate risk information databases are currently weak in Viet Nam. The critical data and analyses 
generated from Outputs 1 and 2 will be collected and documented for use in mainstreaming CCA and DRR into broader 
government investment planning, at the national and local level.  Further, improved climate risk information both in terms 
of quality and accessibility will enable additional public and private finance to flow into climate risk reduction and climate 
resilient solutions in the coastal region.  Tailored climate risk products will be developed and made available to the 
private/finance sector to improve their planning and to incentivize their investment in climate change adaptation and 
disaster risk reduction activities.  Given the ongoing investment to adapt to climate change, the GoV is not financially 
prepared for a major climate event.  Given the increased likelihood of a major event, such as a typhoon, the GoV requires

=== PAGE 32 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 62 
 
 
 
 
D 
                                                             
20 http://dibi.bnpb.go.id  
21 http://camdi.ncdm.gov.kh 
22 http://www.desinventar.lk 
support in identifying and exploring risk sharing options, such as catastrophe bonds. GCF funds will therefore not only 
improve public planning, but also open opportunities for cost and risk sharing. 
 
D.2. Exit Strategy 
 
132. 
The activities undertaken through this project are embedded in ongoing government programs, government staff 
will therefore be centrally involved in implementing activities, thus ensuring sustainability of interventions and retention 
of knowledge beyond the duration of GCF involvement.  The project aims to build upon and enhance existing government 
programmes in key areas including safe housing, mangrove restoration and community based disaster risk management 
and assessment.  Evidence-based best practices established by the GCF project will continue to inform subsequent 
phases of the programmes as well as enhance policy and planning, extending beyond the duration of the project. This 
is ensured through a collaborative partnership with UNDP, MARD, MOC and other stakeholders throughout 
implementation.  Related costs are therefore already captured in the programme budget.  
 
133. 
The housing output builds on the well-established government resilient housing programme. Best practices and 
lessons learned from the proposed activities will inform the planned subsequent phases of programme, as well as 
broader infrastructure planning, ensuring continued project impacts in the longer term. GCF funds will cover only the 
incremental costs of additional safety features. The main investment is a grant/loan combination provided under the 
government programme. As programme recipients commit to a 10-year loan under the government programme, there 
is already vested interest on their part to maintain the structure. This is already evident in the current phase of the 
programme as families further invest in personal touches (e.g. paint color on exterior walls and other embellishments) 
to the flood and storm-resilient structures. In addition, as housing is often the sole major asset of poor families, the ability 
of families to protect their productive assets (e.g. seeds, livestock, etc.) during a flood or strong storm will reduce the 
damages and losses they would otherwise incur. This avoided loss and damage will relieve some of the financial 
pressure of recovering from climate change events. 
 
134. 
The housing design being applied has been developed to incur low on-going maintenance costs. Design 
features also aim to ensure that the more vulnerable structural elements, such as the roof and corner bracings are 
reinforced during construction, reducing potential repair costs. Due to their concrete construction, annual maintenance 
costs are often lower than in thatch and bamboo construction which requires significant annual care and investment. In 
addition, the project will also disseminate information on how to prepare for storms to reduce potential damage based 
on existing MOC materials (i.e. securing items, use of sandbags, etc.). In the event that a house should be damaged 
during a storm despite these efforts, households will be eligible for limited compensation for repairs through existing 
disaster response assistance schemes operating at the provincial level. 
 
135. 
Community-based planning processes undertaken through the project will ensure that mangrove regeneration 
is only supported in areas where long term maintenance is feasible. As most areas to be selected will already have been 
designated as protected forests in some form, regular maintenance budgets will be provided to communities through 
existing government budget lines for maintenance after the project. A community-based approach to regeneration and 
monitoring will ensure a sense of ownership by the community, as well as a financial incentive to maintain the mangrove 
areas and, in some cases, change behavior which would otherwise interfere with mangrove growth (e.g. aquaculture).  
Similar to the above, the best practices and lessons through GCF involvement will feed into MARD planning processes 
to inform future investments/programs on protected areas and mangrove regeneration. 
 
136. 
For Output 3 on climate risk information, data will be collected and documented in government disaster and loss 
database. To ensure that the database is being actively populated and maintained after GCF involvement, a successful 
model will be employed which has been used by UNDP in previous efforts to establishing disaster databases in the 
region. Indonesia20, Cambodia21 and Sri Lanka22 are considered best practices, as extensive work has been done to 
populate and verify their disaster databases.  In each of these cases, the government has now assumed full responsibility 
for maintaining the database going forward.

=== PAGE 33 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 62 
 
 
 
 
D 
 
137. 
In preparation of the mentioned country databases, UNDP provided financial support for a database manager 
and assistant to support with establishing the database and populating it with historical data.  Training was provided to 
the designated disaster agency in the country on how to collect, verify and document data. Training was also provided 
to planning and line ministries on how to apply the data in planning. This project will use this same approach. Given the 
prioritization of this activity by government, there is little to no risk that the database would not be maintained going 
forward, provided that adequate support and training is provided through implementation of the proposed GCF project.   
 
138. 
Skills training provided by the project (e.g. CBA training and application of climate risk information into planning) 
and will be made available on web-based platforms, to ensure that learning opportunities are available as refreshers, as 
well as to offer the training to a greater number than those targeted by the project.  In this way, the project supports the 
development of a cadre of experts on economic analysis and the integration of climate risk information into planning.  
The tailored climate risk information products and de-risking mechanisms of Output 3 will seek to incentivize greater 
engagement and investment with the private and finance sectors, thus relieving some of the financial pressure the GoV 
faces, and will continue to face, related to responding to current and projected climate change. 
 
139. 
As Outcome 3 seeks to incentivize engagement by the private and finance/insurance sector, where necessary, 
legal arrangements will formalize interventions and partnerships. This will be decided, as necessary, during project 
implementation upon discussion and negotiation with relevant parties.   
 
140. 
Overall, the common thread across the project outputs is the integration of enhanced climate risk information 
and application of best practices in broader planning, thereby ensuring sustainability and introducing a paradigm shift.

=== PAGE 34 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 62 
 
 
 
E 
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas 
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential 
141. 
The GCF funds will benefit a number of different constituents in Viet Nam. This includes: 
• 
20,000 highly vulnerable people directly benefit from safer, more climate resilient housing (direct beneficiaries, 
60% female)23 
• 
The total population of 3,865,100 people in the target coastal provinces will benefit from the protection offered 
by healthy and robust mangrove areas (indirect beneficiaries, 50% female)24 
• 
More than 30million people living in 28 coastal provinces benefit from improved climate risk mapping and 
participatory disaster risk management planning and risk reduction practices (indirect beneficiaries, 50% 
female) 
 
142. 
In addition, 500,000 people will have access to safe low cost flood and storm resistant housing technologies 
through further dissemination of CBDRA and safe housing designing and training though the CBDRM programme. 
 
143. 
Registered members of the Association of Viet Nam Insurers gain free access to improved disaster and climate 
change risk data. 
 
144. 
At least 4 government institutions ministries will benefit from targeted institutional capacity development in the 
area of climate risk management: Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI); Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development (MARD); Ministry of Construction (MOC) and Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MONRE). 
 
145. 
At least 4 of national academic institutions will benefit from improving their human resource and knowledge 
base in the area of climate change adaptation: Institute of Meteorology, Hydrology, Environment and Climate Change 
(official technical focal point for climate projections) and Viet Nam Academy of Water Resources (official technical focal 
point for flood risk and mapping), the Institute for Building Science and Technology (IBST) (official technical focal point 
for building code and housing standards and the Viet Nam Academy of Forest Sciences (as technical focal point for  
forestry, including site assessment for tree species selection, technical measures for restoration of mangroves). 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below. 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only) 
Annual 
93,036 
Lifetime 
1,860,720 
• Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender 
(reduced vulnerability or increased 
resilience);  
• Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only) 
Total 
30 million people who live in coastal 
provinces of Viet Nam (15 million 
female), indirect beneficiaries 
Percentage 
(%) 
 30% 
Other 
relevant 
indicators 
N/A 
                                                             
23 Average household size in target areas is 5/household, targeting 4,000 houses 
24 There are an estimated 4,000 – 10,000 people/commune.  The conservative 4,000 was used for the target 25 communes.

=== PAGE 35 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 62 
 
 
 
E 
146. 
The estimation of carbon sequestration in the project is based on a review of studies on carbon stock in 
mangroves (Y. Okimoto et al 2013 for Nam Dinh and Thanh Hoa; Vu Tan Phuong et al 2012 for Kien Giang and Ca 
Mau provinces; GIZ 2012 for Kien Giang and Soc Trang province). The studies estimated the annual biomass 
increment varies from 15 – 20 ton/ha/year depending on the sites (in the South, the biomass increment is higher). 
Information is not available for degraded mangroves. To be conservative, an increment rate of 15 ton/ha/year for 
estimation carbon sequestration. The carbon fraction used is 0.5; emission associated with mangroves regeneration 
comes mainly from seedlings production (e.g. emissions caused by fertilizers) and transportation of seedlings to the 
site (i.e. gasoline) and is estimated at 80tCO2 eq/ha/year. The estimation of emission reductions in mangroves 
activities is as follows: 
 
Total area of mangrove regenerated (ha) 
4,000 
Mean biomass increment (ton/ha/year) 
15.4 
Carbon fraction 
0.5 
Lifetime/rotation (year) 
2025 
Carbon sequestration per hectare in lifetime (tCO2 eq/ha) 
565 
Net carbon sequestration (emissions deducted) (tCO2 eq/ha) 
485 
Total emission reduction for regenerated areas (tCO2/20 years) 
1,860,720 
Costs for reduction (US$/t CO2 eq) 
6.20 
 
147. 
Carbon sequestration of mangroves in Viet Nam varies from site to site and depends on species composition.  
In the South, mangroves have the highest growing stock, thus carbon sequestration capacity is higher compared to 
the North.  Several studies indicated that annual biomass increment of mangrove is 20 tons/ha/year for the North (Nam 
Dinh and Thanh Hoa province; Okimoto 2013) and 25-40 tons/ha/year in the South (Ca Mau, Kien Giang, Can Gio; 
Tan 2002; Nam 2010; Wilson 2010). This value is about 36 tons/ha/year in Malaysia (Ong 1993), and is 28-70 
tons/ha/year in Thailand (Christensen 1978). This indicates that biomass increment rate of mangrove in the South of 
Viet Nam is quite similar to that of Malaysia and Thailand. 
 
148. 
Estimation of carbon dioxide equivalent to be reduced or avoided is based on biomass increment generated 
by restoration of mangroves. The formula for the estimation is:  CO2eq = biomass*CF*44/12. 
 
149. 
Where biomass is dry mass generated by forest growing; CF is carbon fraction (considered as 0.5) and 44/12 
is conversion from carbon to carbon dioxide.  As the biomass increment varies from sites to site, a “conservative 
estimation” was used (i.e. an estimated minimum biomass increment value).  
 
150. 
The biomass increment is estimated for 20 years as the minimum lifetime of the mangroves and the increment 
rate is estimated based on ages of mangrove. For age < 5 year, biomass increment is 5 tons/ha/year; age of 5-10, 
increment is 17 tons/ha/year; age of 11-15 is 21 tons/ha/year; age of 16-20 is 14 tons/ha/year. 
 
151. 
The reduction of 1,860,720 tCO2e over 20 years though the rehabilitation of 4,000 hectares of coastal 
mangroves is captured in section E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive 
development impact. 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale) 
                                                             
25 The project is 5 years in duration, but mangroves will be at least maintained for 20 years - it is estimated that mangroves become stable at 
20.  Emissions are therefore counted for whole lifetime of mangroves. As an estimate, within 5 years, the project will generate: 15.4 ton 
biomass* 4000ha*0.5*3.67 = 565,180 ton CO2

=== PAGE 36 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 62 
 
 
 
E 
152. 
The project will catalyse a paradigm shift in government climate change resilient investment, moving from top-
down sector investment towards participatory, integrated risk-informed approaches. Two complementary 
transformative effects are expected: First, increased community participation and strengthened synergies between on-
going Government programs will increase their effectiveness and sustainability. Second, increases in quality and 
access to data will support more accurate risk planning and contribute to a more conductive environment for risk 
transfer product development in Viet Nam. 
 
Increasing effectiveness of on-going Government resilience programs 
153. 
The project interventions will scale-up an integrated model of change, working in all 28 coastal provinces in 
Viet Nam. The activities will directly complement on-going government investment programs, aiming to creating a 
multiplier effect where government investments are made more sustainable and effective through project co-finance. 
Project actions will directly enhance implementation of national programs on safe housing and national disaster 
preparedness, coastal mangroves and CBDRM.   
 
154. 
The Constitution of Viet Nam, under Article 59 section 3, affirms that the State shall exercise a policy of housing 
development and create conditions so that everyone shall have housing. As third of the population (30million people) 
reside in coastal provinces, there is significant potential for further upscaling, both to equally vulnerable groups or to 
further enhance homes of middle income families. The design can also be tailored as needed to reflect the key 
concerns of other vulnerable areas (e.g. the Mekong delta).    
 
155. 
The GCF project targets 4,000ha of mangroves. The potential for further upscaling is significant given the large 
scale loss of mangroves in Viet Nam - from 408,500ha 1943 to only 59,760ha in 2008.  Evidence-base best practices 
will be made available to other countries. Timor-Leste for example is also facing challenges in maintaining its mangrove 
areas due to rapid coastal development and can benefit from the knowledge generated by this project. 
 
156. 
Target provinces have been selected as being at particularly high risk to sea level, storm surge and/or 
mangrove loss. Using existing maps of CBDRM coverage as a base, GCF resources will be used to ensure that more 
than 95% of all coastal communes in 28 provinces have CBDRM plans. These plans include priorities for investments 
to adapt to climate change and build resilience. As the ensuring integration of priority actions outlined in the plans into 
the annual socio-economic development plan and budget is one of the key steps of CBDRM plan development, this 
coverage density will also significantly influence annual provincial planning processes along the entire coast of Viet 
Nam. The risk assessments as part of the CBDRM process can be applied for various purposes, the methodology will 
be disseminated through the CBDRM programme to reach the target 6000 communes, and more beyond the GCF 
project duration.   
 
Promoting access to quality data to strengthen planning and private sector product development 
157. 
Improving the quality and accessibility of data can have a transformative effect on risk management planning 
and practice in Viet Nam. Decision making regarding investment planning and adaptation project prioritization currently 
does not benefit from probabilistic risk analysis either in terms of likelihood or in terms of financial exposure. In addition 
to enhancing implementation of projects already under implementation up to 2020, early provision of improved risk 
data to all coastal and delta provinces can catalyse the Government to replicate this integrated approach in the design 
of its 2020-2025 planning cycle. 
 
158. 
Solid historical extreme event data and other climate related risk information is also the engine for private 
sector risk transfer product development. GCF resources will generate and make accessible data and tools such as 
risk maps and financial models to support more accurate decision making in climate change adaptation at all levels.   
 
159. 
Strengthened systems for collecting commune level data on disaster loss and damage will also greatly 
enhance long term datasets that are also used in generating IPCC and other national analysis.    
 
160. 
In numerical terms this transformation can be summarized as: 
• 
All 28 coastal provinces of Viet Nam will have up-to date, comparable risk maps that are able to account for 
risks such as storm surge as well as potential long term climate change impacts (currently no provinces have 
such maps, and where data is available at provincial level it is not comparable).

=== PAGE 37 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 62 
 
 
 
E 
• 
Average success rates for coastal mangrove regeneration in coastal areas will be increased from an average 
of 50% to more than 80% and capacity to technically execute this standard will be transferred from a the current 
handful of successful pilot project provinces to provincial staff from all coastal provinces; 
• 
Government flood resistant housing projects will for the first time be integrated in wider resilience building 
efforts, and will differentiate between extensive and super-typhoon/ storm surge risk, directly applying lessons 
learned from the Philippines post-Tacloban experience.  Future generations of housing projects will include 
analysis of improved risk maps, as well as CBDRM practices in planning and executions. 
 
161. 
Finally, in all coastal provinces, lessons learned, as well as potential project gaps will be directly analyzed 
during annual budget planning processes (during Step 5 of the CBDRM process) resulting in likely increases in regular 
investments for resilience building, and key Governments standards, plans and policies will be upgraded.   
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning 
162. 
At the commune level, local residents and officials will for the first time have an opportunity to share and learn 
about the climate change risks in their communes, combining participatory local knowledge based CBDRA processes 
with data from scientifically robust information packs containing up-to-date climate change and risk data. Communes 
will also be able to learn about safe housing options, and the benefits of mangrove regeneration in reducing storm 
surge risk and strengthening ecosystems.  Community capacity to translate learning in action will be enhanced through 
support to influence provincial annual budget processes, and through documentation of good practice regularly 
throughout the project. 
 
163. 
At the provincial level, provincial technical capacity will be directly enhanced in relation to all three project 
outputs.  Cumulatively this will help replicate lessons learned from successful coastal pilot projects more widely, as 
well as directly increasing application in land use and other planning processes. 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
164. 
Output 3 will increase access to enhanced climate, loss and damage data for private and public sector 
application.   
 
165. 
In order for this information to be convincing to policy makers, hazard impacts also need to be able to be 
expressed in financial terms that can estimate the value of current and future assets at risk. To do this requires 
analysing historical loss and damage data to better understand its current impacts on an economy, and then building 
the capacity to model this for likely future climate change related impacts. Viet Nam has recognised the need for this 
information, but efforts to support improved financial modelling of climate change risk are fragmented and largely 
under-developed. The long term impact of this gap on development potential is significant. The ability to manage 
financial risk of low probability, high impact events has been identified as perhaps the largest difference between low 
and middle income countries’ adaptation capabilities.   
 
166. 
In order to help make sure data is provided in a format and means that is useful for the private sector, and to 
increase Government understanding of how it can create incentives for risk manage product in the future, the project 
will also support dialogue between the private sector and relevant national and provincial government actors.  This will 
include technical dialogue with the private sector on improving the application and accessibility of hazard and loss and 
damage data. Industry wide consultations on current barriers and solutions for increasing private sector risk sharing 
and transfer engagement in managing climate is in Viet Nam will also be supported. 
 
167. 
In order to unlock the public and private sector investment into the risk reduction solid data on historical loss, 
and downscaled climate impact data are required. These are currently inaccessible outside of government, or of 
insufficient quality in coastal Viet Nam. Investments in this output therefore directly contribute to creating enabling 
conditions in which the public and private sector can invest in risk reduction efforts more systematically.   
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies

=== PAGE 38 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 62 
 
 
 
E 
168. 
The project specifically aims to enhance the implementation of existing government plans and programs, and 
each output has a specific technical capacity building built in. In addition, each output also includes a specific policy 
strengthening element, which will support the government with technical inputs to enhance or upgrade official policy 
documents and directions.   
 
169. 
Improved risk mapping for provinces is critical for upgrading climate-responsive planning in Viet Nam. 
Improved quality data generated will also directly enhance the quality of future climate projections and IPCC inputs.  
 
170. 
Scaling up mangrove regeneration is a key priority of the government in the draft INDC for Viet Nam in part 
due to the considerable mitigation and adaptation co-benefits achieved. Improved standards and cost norms for 
applying approved technologies will enhance the ability of the government to meet key targets to increase forest 
coverage in storm impacted areas. 
 
171. 
Strengthening community participation at commune level, and piloting the integration of national CBDRM 
efforts with other national programs also presents considerable potential for using these commune level groups as 
vehicles for awareness raising green growth, energy efficiency and other areas. Within the Government, potential to 
include specific additional activities in safer housing programs that could address the energy efficiency, potential solar 
power or other green growth related needs of poor households will also be considered during policy support in the 
drafting of the next round of national programs.   
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential 
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive development impact 
172. 
Project objectives have been designed to build directly build on and strengthen the implementation of existing 
government projects and plans and to raise the skills of existing government staff and community leaders. These 
factors will significantly increase the long term contribution of interventions. The project will also contribute to 
sustainable development through other co-benefits summarized below: 
 
Economic benefits  
- 
Improved planning integrating climate risk information, benefiting 30,000,000 coastal residents 
- 
Reduced disaster losses in key sectors including agriculture and housing in coastal and delta communes 
- 
Increased accuracy of climate data reduces economic uncertainty and increases the economic feasibility of 
risk management products and services 
- 
Financial plan in place for the government to manage financial risks from major coastal disaster (in excess of 
3% of GDP) 
- 
Increase in access to affordable climate risk insurance products for coastal and delta populations 
 
Social Benefits  
- 
Safe housing for 20,000 people, in high risk, low income households 
- 
Improved access to safe housing for 500,000 people, particularly in high risk, low income households 
- 
The total population of 3,865,100 people in the target coastal provinces will benefit from the protection offered 
by healthy and robust mangrove areas. 
- 
Reduced injury and loss of life due to extreme climate disasters 
- 
Strengthened inclusive planning in target communes that ensure representation from vulnerable groups 
including those with disabilities, minority groups, youth and the elderly. 
- 
Improved two-way communication mechanisms and inclusion of resilience building projects in the socio-
economic planning process. 
- 
Enhanced community engagement to protect natural heritage  
 
Environmental Benefits  
- 
Greenhouse gas reductions of 1,860,720 tCO2 over 20 years though rehabilitation of 4,000 hectares of coastal 
mangroves 
- 
Protection of biodiversity in state managed rehabilitated mangroves 
- 
Skills development among local populations for bio-engineering protection

=== PAGE 39 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 62 
 
 
 
E 
- 
Use of environment friendly materials for 4,000 homes, taking account the full risk understanding of the eco-
system of the coastal population 
- 
Improve application of environmental safeguards and environmental assessments, and environmental 
resources in target communes. 
- 
Protection of sea dyke systems by reducing sea wave energy and thus reduction of costs associated with 
maintenance of sea dykes. 
 
Gender Considerations and Benefits 
- 
Commune level CBDRM advisory groups include at least 30% women including in decision making positions 
- 
Loss and damage databases track gender disaggregated data for key disaster related statistics  
- 
Increased role of Viet Nam Women Union in community planning and consultation processes. 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient 
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only) 
173. 
According to Climate Change Vulnerability Index (CCVI), Viet Nam is ranked 23rd of 193 countries and is one 
of 30 “extreme risk” countries. The CCVI evaluates 42 social, economic and environmental factors to assess national 
vulnerabilities across three core areas, including (a) exposure to climate-related natural disasters and sea-level rise; 
(b) human sensitivity, in terms of population patterns, development, natural resources, agricultural dependency and 
conflicts; and (c) future vulnerability considering the adaptive capacity of a country’s government and infrastructure to 
address climate change effects. The countries most at risk are characterized by high levels of poverty, dense 
populations, exposure to climate-related events; and their reliance on flood and drought prone agricultural land. 
 
174. 
With more than 3,260 km of coastal line, approximately 30% of Viet Nam’s population of 90 million people lives 
in Viet Nam’s 28 coastal provinces. These areas are particularly vulnerable to sea level rise and the associated risks 
of salt water intrusion and super storm surge and flooding. Viet Nam’s Second National Communication forecasts a 
57-73cm rise in mean sea levels along the Viet Nam coast by 2100. Without major action, this would inundate 
approximately 30,000km2 equivalent to 9.3% of the total national land surface. Climate projections also point to a likely 
increase in the probability of intense typhoons, or super storms, accompanied by storm surge similar to that which 
devastated the Tacloban area of the Philippines in 2013.  
 
175. 
These trends place coastal and low lying delta areas in Viet Nam at particular risk. At 23%, the poverty rate in 
coastal areas more than twice the national average, in part due to the increasing losses incurred annually from climate 
related disaster impacts.  More than 500,000 people live within 200 meters of the coast. Their homes are most often 
directly impacted by typhoon landfall and storm surge. Increasing numbers of predominantly poor and vulnerable 
people in coastal areas live in unsafe housing, in part due to the rapid urbanisation and persistent poverty. 
 
176. 
Viet Nam experiences an average of 6-8 typhoons annually. During ENSO years typhoons appear to be more 
intense, stronger and with landfall over a wider area. Past observations do not bear out a change in the typhoon pattern 
or in intensity in the Western Pacific/Southeast Asia as a result of climate change but intensification of hurricanes 
(typhoons) has been observed in the Southern Atlantic/Caribbean region. Nevertheless, the possibility of gradual 
intensification of tropical storms and typhoons exists, according to an update of the IPCC’s fourth assessment of 2007, 
also in Southeast Asia. Furthermore, damage potential from tropical storms and typhoons appears to increase as a 
result of increasing population density in exposed areas and higher value economic infrastructure in these areas. The 
Government has placed strong emphasis on structural measures, such as dykes and seawalls. The country has over 
10,600km of 6-9m high river dykes and 2,600km of 3.5-5m high sea dykes that need further expansion and 
reinforcement. The Government has invested considerably in the dyke system and has ambitious plans for the next 
decade to expand upon this. 
 
177. 
Shelter accounts for the highest amount of monetary losses in climate related disasters. Housing is often the 
single largest asset owned by individuals and families. It is also the location where other family-owned assets (tools, 
furniture, stored food, etc.) are concentrated and where many activities fundamental to livelihoods and education occur.

=== PAGE 40 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 62 
 
 
 
E 
Resilient shelters are central to the adaptive capacity of most households. Adaptive capacity is the ability to retain and 
deploy assets to meet emerging needs as conditions change. 
 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
178. 
Adaptation needs are expected to increase significantly as climate change impacts and sea level rise increase.  
There is an urgent need to find cost effective, community driven adaptation mechanisms. According 2015 INDC 
estimates, Viet Nam currently can cover only 30% of the requested funding for existing approved adaptation projects 
annually from existing government revenues and loan portfolios. Currently the gap must be met through ODA or extra 
provincial funding sources, and even when these are taken into account significant funding gaps remain at all levels.  
A 2015 climate change investment review for Viet Nam outlined required unmet investments in the water sector alone 
of US$120m annually (CPEIR 2015).  
 
179. 
Not only do local capital markets lack depth, but risk transfer and risk sharing markets are almost non-existent, 
particularly in rural areas. In effect the Government of Viet Nam directly bears virtually the entire liability for covering 
the costs of climate change related extreme events. In light of Viet Nam’s climate change projections, and current 
national development trends that see heavy investments in infrastructure and services in coastal areas, protecting 
development gains through risk transfer and sharing is an increasing priority. However development of risk transfer 
markets has been significantly impeded by low data accessibility and quality 
 
180. 
Institutionally, Viet Nam has built up a strong institutional capacity and legal framework for disaster risk 
reduction and climate change adaptation. However, implementation capacities limit momentum for upscaling 
implementation, particularly in term of financial and technology and cross-sectorial planning 
 
181. 
GCF funding will support technical capacity building for national and key provincial officials on climate change 
adaptation and on risk mapping and planning. Part of this work will also focus on raising the capacity of Government 
staff with regards to risk and probability assumptions in the context of climate change. This will include identifying the 
impacts and enhanced approaches for risks where recovery/rehabilitation is possible and highlighting impacts for which 
recovery and rehabilitation is not possible and alternative strategies are required. 
 
E.5.  Country Ownership 
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs 
182. 
The project was designed to address specific challenges highlighted as priorities in the country’s key strategic 
plans.   
 
183. 
Through the National Green Growth Strategy 2011-2020, Viet Nam seeks to achieve a low carbon economy 
and to enrich natural capital.  Green Growth is the guiding principal direction towards sustainable economic 
development, and the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and increased capability to absorb greenhouse gas are 
gradually becoming compulsory and important indicators in socio-economic development. In areas which are highly 
vulnerable to climate change, Sustainable urbanization –infrastructure should be adapted to climate change to 
minimize economic losses.  
 
184. 
The Sustainable Development Strategy 2012-2020 states as its general objective that sustainable and effective 
growth must come along with social progress and equality, national resources and environment protection, socio-
political stability, firm protection of independence-sovereignty-unification and territorial integrity of the country.  
Specifically the strategy seeks to reduce the harmful effects of natural disasters, and to actively and effectively respond 
to climate change. This includes the prioritization of resources for poverty reduction and improvement of living 
conditions of people in most disadvantaged areas, as well as support to poor people and households to build houses. 
 
185. 
The National Strategy on Climate Change 2011-2020 seeks to proactively cope with natural disasters and 
monitor climate.  The strategy further details within its mission, mitigating damages caused by natural disasters by:

=== PAGE 41 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 62 
 
 
 
E 
- 
reviewing and designing development planning schemes and standards of construction in the regions regularly 
suffering natural disasters in response to the increase of natural disasters due to climate change 
- 
improving the quality of forests and afforestation, including to turn bare lands and hills green, to effectively 
exploit different kinds of forest to secure and improve resistance against natural disasters, preventing 
desertification, land erosion and degradation, to enhance protection, management and development of 
mangrove forests and flooded ecosystems, and to raise the forest coverage to 45% by 2020. 
 
186. 
The National Strategy on Environment Protection to 2020 with Vision to 2030 details solutions to recover and 
regenerate natural ecosystems, especially mangroves, as well as solutions to increase forest coverage and improve 
forest quality. These include: 
- 
to survey and evaluate deterioration and degradation of specific or representative natural ecosystems, 
especially mangroves, then design the planning schemes for their recovery 
- 
to conduct programmes on investing and mobilizing official development assistance (ODA) sources and other 
resources from economic sectors and organizations at home and abroad for recovering natural ecosystems, 
increasing their resistance against climate change, founding mechanisms for payments of ecosystem services 
towards boosting recovery, regeneration and protection of natural ecosystems 
- 
to localize and protect natural forests, especially mangroves, forests for special use, protective forests, and 
watershed forests, and at the same time preventing deforestation and illegal exploitation 
- 
to continue afforestation and forest protection while securing a sustainable forestry; to closely manage the 
renting of forest land, especially protective and watershed forests 
 
187. 
The National Strategy on biodiversity conservation toward 2020 and vision to 2030: focuses on conserving 
and sustainably managing important forest ecosystems, endangered species and gene sources. The objective of this 
policy is to increase the area of natural ecosystems in the mainland to 9% of the country’s land area; 45% of forest 
cover; 15% of degraded ecosystems area is restored. The objective by 2030 is to achieve 25% of natural ecosystem 
with international and national importance. 
 
188. 
Solution 7 of the Socio-economic Development Plan for the 2011-2015 Period focuses on improving and 
enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency of policies and laws on natural resources and environment protection to 
ensure sustainable development. Importantly, the plan encourages larger social involvement in protecting the 
environment, which is reflected strongly in the community-based approaches of the GCF project. 
 
189. 
While policies are in place and national institutions are strong, missing is the critical inter-ministerial 
collaboration which would ensure risk-informed and climate-resilient development planning. The GCF proposal not 
only addresses multiple challenges, but its integrated approach fosters this needed collaboration. 
 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
190. 
Since it began operations in Viet Nam in 1977, UNDP has contributed significantly to environmental protection 
and climate change responses, especially in facilitating formulation of policies, strategies, laws, coordination and 
information sharing. UNDP possesses a qualified team of experts including international and national experts, helping 
UNDP to deliver a comprehensive approach in the climate change area. 
 
191. 
UNDP is a long-term partner of Viet Nam’s government. UNDP has supported the various related policy 
formulation processes in Viet Nam, including:  
• 
National Target Programme to Respond to Climate Change (NTP-RCC 2008) 
• 
Climate Change Scenarios (2009 and 2011) 
• 
Climate Change Strategy (2012), 
• 
Green Growth Strategy (2012) and Green Growth Action Plans (2014) 
• 
National Strategy for DRM (2007) and its Action Plan 2009 
• 
National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (2012) 
 
192. 
UNDP has built strong relationships with decision-makers, and proven its strengths as an impartial provider of 
technical advice and support.  Priority development areas for Viet Nam serve as the foundation for UNDP action on

=== PAGE 42 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 62 
 
 
 
E 
policy support. UNDP also plays an advisory role in the process of preparation and approval of regulations and relevant 
codes and laws in Viet Nam. UNDP is recognized as an experienced agency in institutional development and capacity 
building, bringing a long-term and institutional and people-centred focus to capacity development. 
 
193. 
With its central role in the UN system, UNDP facilitates a multi-sectoral approach to help the government 
respond to complex issues such as climate change and green growth. UNDP has been instrumental in providing 
technical UNDP has provide technical inputs to the preparation and consultations for a number of key legal frameworks, 
including Biodiversity Law 2008, Energy Efficiency and Energy Conservation Law 2010, Law on Natural Disaster 
Prevention and Control 2012, Law on Environmental Protection 2014 which includes a chapter on climate change and 
green growth, and implementation of Law on Environmental Protection Tax, the Royalties Law concerning natural 
resources management. 
 
194. 
With the characteristics of multilateral organization, UNDP can promote the dissemination of international 
norms and standards, bring technical assistance, experience and good practices to bear in Viet Nam. UNDP has 
demonstrated its long-term commitment to the provision of technical assistance to affect and sustain the institutional 
changes required in realizing tangible improvements in institutional capacity. UNDP has a portfolio of six technical 
assistance projects on climate change with key ministries such as MPI, MARD, MOC and MOIT. UNDP also works 
closely on energy efficiency with MOST and MOT, linking policy makers to a global community of practice in key policy 
issues and providing a platform for sharing lessons and experiences internationally. 
 
195. 
By supporting the four Ministries playing the main role on disaster risk management, climate change and green 
growth issues, UNDP is already in position to help improve capacity in organizational and interdisciplinary coordination,  
and to encourage harmonious approaches toward climate change issues of the government, private sector, donors 
and other organizations.  
 
196. 
UNDP exercises results-based activities and ensures Implementing Partners/Executing Entities are 
adequately equipped with knowledge and skills to achieve expected project activities and outputs. Strengthening and 
expanding analytical work in key sectors and advancing the knowledge-base on disaster risk management and climate 
change within the broader context of sustainable development, UNDP supports networks and research institutions that 
are crucial for prompt advice and technical expert support to the Government of Viet Nam. 
 
197. 
The project will also benefit from the expertise and resources of the on-going UNDP projects with MPI, MARD, 
MONRE and MOC including: 
• 
The MPI Project on “Strengthening Capacity and Institutional Reform for Green Growth and Sustainable 
Development in Viet Nam” (CIGG) 
• 
The MARD Project on “Strengthening Institutional Capacity for Disaster Risk Management in Viet Nam 
Including Climate Change Related Risks” (SCDM Phase II);  
• 
The MONRE-MARD project “Capacity Building for Implementation of the National Climate Change Strategy” 
(CBICS Project);   
• 
The MARD Project on “Promoting Climate Resilient Infrastructure in Northern Mountain Provinces of Viet Nam” 
• 
The MOC Project on “Promoting Energy Efficiency in Commercial and High Rise Residential Building” 
• 
The MOST-MOC Project “Promoting the production and utilisation of non-firebricks in Viet Nam” 
 
198. 
MARD is the executing entity for the project. Given its cross-cutting mandate related to natural disaster 
prevention and control, it is the appropriate ministry to lead this project. MARD plays a strategic coordination role on 
the inter-ministerial Central Committee for Disaster Prevention and Control. MARD has undergone the capacity 
assessment required under UNDP’s national implementation modality (NIM). The assessment considers managerial, 
technical, administrative and financial management capacity. In each category MARD met UNDP requirements.  It 
should be noted that the capacity assessment indicated regular high delivery performance (80%) with a history of 
unqualified audits. UNDP and MARD also have a history of successful collaboration, including the CBDRM programme 
and UN-REDD. 
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders

=== PAGE 43 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 62 
 
 
 
E 
199. 
The proposed project is designed in close with government (both national and provincial), civil society 
organizations, development partners and beneficiaries.  Key consultation meetings include: 
• 
UNDP and MPI, MARD and GCF meeting on concept and proposal design and workplan, 12-16 Jan 2015 
• 
UNDP and MPI concept note screening, 2 Apr 2015 
• 
UNDP and MARD experts concept refinement and proposal development, 7 May 2015  
• 
UNDP ROAP and MARD experts and leader consultation in Bonn early June 2015  
• 
UNDP, MARD and MOC Project Preparation Write-shop 25 Jun 2015  
• 
UNDP, MARD, MOC and MPI Project Document Design Review 10 July 2015 
• 
UNDP, MARD and Provinces consultation and feasibility appraisal workshop 13-14 July 2015  
• 
UNDP, MARD and Provincial Field Mission to Da Nang and Quang Nam 
• 
UNDP Local Project Appraisal Committee meeting (LPAC), (13-16 July 2015) 
 
200. 
The NDA, based at MPI, was also routinely briefed on the progress of the proposal development. 
 
201. 
The proposed GCF project will build on existing initiatives which already engage multiple partners including 
NGOs and INGOs, such as Viet Nam Red Cross, Viet Nam Women’s Union, and Oxfam. During the inception phase 
of the project, UNDP, MARD and MOC will continue to consult with INGOs, NGOs and the private sector to formulate 
a concrete partnerships roadmap and action plan, benefiting from the current good practices and working relationships 
with and the established technical between MARD, MOC and INGOs and NGOs.  
 
202. 
To ensure the views of women were captured, specific efforts were made to consult with women groups, and 
to collect information regarding the impacts of climate change on women, in the design of this project proposal. The 
Viet Nam Women’s Union was specifically consulted at both the national and local level, and field missions took care 
to consult with both women and men regarding lessons learned to date. The project also benefits from important 
lessons learned in previous pilot projects that have specifically aimed to increase the participation of women, senior 
citizens, youth and other vulnerable groups. Feedback and lessons learned from previous project reviews and policy 
reviews have been applied in the design of activities. The application of community based approaches during 
implementation will also ensure that regular communication is maintained throughout implementation with commune 
level representatives, at least 30% of which will be women.  
 
203. 
The project will also draw on the skills and expertise of the academic community. Technical bodies and 
academic institutions including IMHEN (official technical focal point for climate projections), Viet Nam Academy of 
Water Resources (official technical focal point for flood risk and mapping), the Institute for Building Science and 
Technology (IBST) (official technical focal point for building code and housing standards and the Viet Nam Academy 
of Forest Sciences (as technical focal point for  forestry, including site assessment for tree species selection, technical 
measures for restoration of mangroves).will be involved project implementation. Private sector actors, particularly from 
the insurance sector will also be consulted with regards to the strengthening of loss and damage databases. 
 
204. 
At the inception of the project, MARD and MOC will have a number of consultations with NGOs, academia, 
and the private sector to formulate a concrete partnership roadmap and action plan, including its current good practices 
of MARD/MOC and NGO technical working groups. The project will aim to work in partnership in supporting targeted 
provinces in implementation of the project initiatives, monitoring and promotion of the good practices across national 
programmes.  
 
205. 
A stakeholder consultation plan will be developed for the project during the initiation phase. This will consider: 
a) consultations (type and frequency) already undertaken during the design phase, details of the issues 
discussed, including the views of the relevant stakeholders and beneficiaries; 
b) proposed consultations during project implementation regarding to ensure project remains relevant and up-to-
date to impacts of the project at the national, provincial, commune and community level; 
c) details regarding how the consultations will specifically target vulnerable groups such as women, people with 
disabilities, elderly and squatter settlements and what impact the project will have on them in the short, medium 
and long term with details how they were included in the decision making process; 
d) complementarity with related or relevant programmes to maximize the impact of combined resources; 
e) details on how affected parties comments received during consultations have been addressed; and

=== PAGE 44 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 62 
 
 
 
E 
f) 
regular review of plan to ensure new stakeholders are captured in the plan as relevant 
 
206. 
The plan will demonstrate how stakeholder engagement has been an inclusive and continuous process 
throughout the life of a project and what level of corporate responsibility and transparency will occur as part of the 
ongoing process during construction and operation. The plan will outline how it will encourage local stakeholders 
including women to participate in the project, and to empower them to do something practical to address any issues 
that affect their lives.  
 
207. 
The project board further provides a formal structure for MPI, MARD, MOC, MOF, provincial focal points and 
beneficiaries to guide implementation towards a collaborative achievement of the project objective.   
 
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
208. 
The project will directly support scale up of the proven methods and technologies which have received official 
endorsement from the Government of Viet Nam and which are being actively prioritized for scale up and replication.  A 
summary of effectiveness and efficiency data on these approaches is provided below: 
 
209. 
Climate resilient housing:  Base case scenarios for investments in the resilient housing options prioritized 
through the project assume that the frequency and intensity of typhoons will remain similar to the past 25 years. The 
benefit from the climate resilient housing is the avoided damage when there is a typhoon. The housing design 
competition and study Sheltering From a Gathering Storm (see Annex XV) indicates a desirable IRR for new housing 
constructions with typhoon resilient features.  
 
210. 
Mangrove regeneration: The costs of restoring mangrove forests includes propagules/saplings and long-term 
management necessary for high rates of mangrove survival. Regeneration of mangroves will apply a cost norm of 
US$1,500 USD per hectare. Replanting will be considered in a smaller areas if required, applying a cost norm of 
US$6,000 per hectare. The best practices to be applied to mangrove regeneration under this project have had a 
success rate of 80%, a significant improvement from the 50% using other approaches.  
 
211. 
Community based disaster risk management, vulnerability assessment and planning processes 
approved by MARD in 2014. Globally investments in disaster preparedness a have been estimated to be more than 
four times more cost effective than disaster response, while also reducing injury and loss of lives in target areas. 
 
212. 
In terms CO sequestration benefits, a 2011 study of above- and below-ground, including soils capture rates 
for mangroves across a broad zone (spanning 30° of latitude and 73° of longitude) of the Indo-Pacific region found that 
the total carbon storage is very high relative to most forest types, with a mean value of 1,043 and range of 437 to 2,186 
Mg C ha-1 (metric tons of carbon per hectare per year). The SNV study is attached as part of Annex XV (Additional 
Supporting Documents).  Studies in Viet Nam have shown that mature mangroves in similar locations are able to 
absorb in the range of 20-25100 t CO2 per hectare per year, suggesting that annual benefits from the project to be in 
the range of  84,000-105,000 t per year, minus any emissions caused by activities associated with 
replanting/regeneration. (Phuong, 2015)   
    
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only) 
213. 
Co-financing related to the three GCF project outputs are as follows: 
•     Under Output 1, the GCF project will support the additional costs of climate resilience features (US$2,000) to 
4000 houses under the National programme to provide support policies and solutions for poor 
households to build storm and flood resilient houses.  The target 4000 houses will receive support from 
MOC based on the existing house design, estimated at US$2000/house.  Co-financing related to the specific 
4,000 homes targeted by the project is therefore estimated at $8M.   
•     For Output 2 (mangrove regeneration), US$1,406,625 is counted as co-financing from MARD.  This includes 
US$1,226,625 for maintenance costs that will be incurred over the next 20-years for maintenance of

=== PAGE 45 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 62 
 
 
 
E 
regenerated areas.  Approximately US$180,000 is considered in-kind contribution for government staff time 
and premises. 
•     UNDP’s co-financing to Output 3 contributes to improving disaster and climate information and integration in 
to planning.  As such, US$1,600,000 can be considered direct co-financing. 
 
214. 
Please see Annex IV for letters of confirmation. 
 
E.6.3. Financial viability  
215. 
The project relies on grant finance as (a) the proposed interventions will benefit vulnerable families identified 
as poor by the government, (b) strengthens natural defenses proving public value and (c) does not generate revenue 
that lends itself to providing reflows to the GCF.  As the proposed project is non-revenue generating, a financial viability 
assessment is not appropriate. 
 
E.6.4. Application of best practices 
216. 
Design of project elements directly builds on existing successful pilot projects for all outputs as outlined above.  
 
217. 
The approved housing design under output 1 is the result of enhancement to the pilot government housing 
programme, and is reinforced by the Sheltering from a Gathering Storm: Typhoon Resilience in Vietnam, 2014 
(see Annex XV). This report details the pilot housing project in Da Nang, where house designs were enhanced to 
include a mezzanine above the projected flood level to provide protection from flood waters, and reinforced walls and 
roof to withstand greater strength storms and typhoons. Economic analysis is also provided indicating results of the 
quantitative CBA where the returns on investment in typhoon resilient housing are high in some scenarios, meaning 
that investment in typhoon housing can be economically viable. The quantitative CBA results also show that typhoon 
resilient housing exhibits high BCRs in some scenarios, and encourages the government to pursue means to support 
households that agree to undertake appropriate climate resilient housing measures. This type of additional support is 
what is being proposed in the GCF proposal, to cover the incremental costs of additional safety features. 
 
218. 
The Restoration of Coastal Mangrove Forest in Viet Nam Study Report (attached under Annex VIII) 
includes a thorough study of the current mangrove coverage in Viet Nam and related pressures. Importantly, it also 
includes an assessment of previous mangrove regeneration efforts and provides recommendations to improve the 
mangrove regeneration success rate of efforts going forward. The report stresses that robust mangrove forests have 
a diverse structure in both vertical and horizontal sides, as well as in species composition. To ensure successful 
regeneration, the report suggests improvement through tree breeding (nurseries to ensure a certain level of growth 
before planning), site selection and planting methods. These enhancements are captured in the mangrove 
regeneration approach of the GCF project. 
 
219. 
Further, project development has been directly aided by lessons learned and incorporated in the National 
Climate Change and Disaster Prevention and Control Strategies of the Government. In addition, findings of key 
international studies such as the Climate Public Expenditure and Investment Review (CPIER) and as well as the 
recommendation of the 2010 World Bank Study Weathering the Storm: Options for Disaster Risk Financing in Viet 
Nam.  A summary of applicable documents is provided below is available under Annex XIII. 
 
220. 
Also, please see Annex II for the Feasibility Study conducted for this project. 
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only) 
 
(a) Total project financing 
US$12,936,625  
(b) Requested GCF amount  
US$11,053,000

=== PAGE 46 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 62 
 
 
 
E 
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  
1,860,720 tCO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO2eq (d = a / c) 
US$6.95/ tCO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq removed (e = b / c) 
US$6.20/ tCO2eq 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only) 
221. 
Mangroves serve the co-primary adaptation goal of reducing climate-related disasters' impact, 
such as typhoons, storm surges, etc.  Public resources, for maintenance of the regenerated mangrove 
areas, have been committed in the amount of $1,406,625.  This is counted as co-financing from MARD, 
with a supporting letter of co-financing provided in Annex IV.  
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)

=== PAGE 47 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 62 
 
 
 
F 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis 
222. 
The project relies on grant finance as (a) the proposed interventions will benefit vulnerable families identified 
as poor by the government, (b) strengthens natural defenses proving public value and (c) does not generate revenue 
that lends itself to providing reflows to the GCF. As the proposed project is non-revenue generating, a traditional 
financial analysis is not appropriate 
 
223. 
Economic analysis of the proposal, conducted during the design phase, indicates that the expected economic 
internal rate of return is 14.3% for this project which exceeds 10%, the economic opportunity cost of capital. The 
proposed investments are still economically feasible using the minimum value of the mangroves with no VSL and “worst 
case” scenarios of costs increasing by 20% or benefits reducing by 20%. The EIRR under those scenarios are 11.0% 
and 11.6% respectively, which are higher than 10% assumed discount rate. It should be noted that the estimates used 
in the economic analysis are conservative estimates with minimum benefit values used in all the benefit calculations. 
Keeping every other assumption, the same but including the Value of Statistical life in the cost benefit analysis results 
in a discounted present value of about 66,944,868 USD. The economic rate of return under this assumption is 36.6%. 
The details of the economic analysis are presented in Annex XII of this proposal. 
 
224. 
The use of 10% discount rate is based on the nature of the benefits from the project. Normally for environmental 
goods we will like to argue for discount rate lower than the conventional 10% but because of the cost of capital in the 
country we cannot justify using a lower rate. In line with the MOC in Viet Nam and expert opinion, 20 – 25 useful life of 
the houses and mangroves is suggested. To be conservative we use 20 years as the lifespan of the houses and 
mangroves. 
 
225. 
The economic benefits that are valued in the economic analysis of the project are based on the project reducing 
hazards from flooding and storms and typhoons. Economic analysis was prepared for this base case of avoided 
damages as a result of the project. 
 
226. 
Other benefits such as value of improved data on climate, security of lives and property and other social benefits 
due to better housing are not easily quantifiable and in some cases confidence in the values may be lower. The 
implication of ignoring these additional benefits is that the estimates of the economic IRR and NPV will be the lower 
bound and provide conservative estimates of the value of the project. 
 
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
227. 
This section focuses on the two main technical solutions chosen related to the housing and mangrove outputs.  
 
228. 
The house design to be supported by GCF finance stems from lessons learned from the pilot housing 
programme, the project design was also informed by a study from a successful pilot in Da Nang.  The report Sheltering 
from a Gathering Storm: Typhoon Resilience in Vietnam, 2014 (see Annex XV) details the results of analysis and 
housing design competition in Da Nang.  Building off the winning design, the design supported by the project, will 
incorporate essential features, while at the same time keeping it affordable for the beneficiaries which are the poorest 
of Viet Nam, as affordability is an important element for scalability, potential for replication.  
 
229. 
The report also supports building new houses, as opposed to retrofitting an existing house. Per the report the 
lifetime of a new house is 15-20 years, as opposed to 7-10 years for a retrofitted house. Winning house designs included 
those where houses design include a mezzanine above the projected flood level to provide protection from flood waters, 
and reinforced walls and roof to withstand greater strength storms and typhoons. Economic analysis in the report 
indicating results of the quantitative CBA where the returns on investment in typhoon resilient housing are high in some 
scenarios, meaning that investment in typhoon housing can be economically viable. The quantitative CBA results also 
show that typhoon resilient housing exhibits high BCRs in some scenarios, and encourages the government to pursue 
means to support households that agree to undertake appropriate climate resilient housing measures.   
 
230. 
The Restoration of Coastal Mangrove Forest in Viet Nam Study Report, 2012, includes a thorough study 
of the current mangrove coverage in Viet Nam and related pressures. Importantly, it also includes an assessment of

=== PAGE 48 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 62 
 
 
 
F 
previous mangrove regeneration efforts and provides recommendations to improve the mangrove regeneration success 
rate of efforts going forward. The report stresses that robust mangrove forests have a diverse structure in both vertical 
and horizontal sides, as well as in species composition. To ensure successful regeneration, the report suggests 
improvement through tree breeding (nurseries to ensure a certain level of growth before planning), site selection and 
planting methods.  These enhancements are captured in the mangrove regeneration approach of the GCF project, and 
are expected to improve the mangrove regeneration success rate from 50% to 80%. The full report is included in Annex 
VIII. 
 
231. 
The technical feasibility study was also conducted during proposal development. The study can be found in 
Annex II: Feasibility Study. 
 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations 
232. 
This project has completed the UNDP social and environmental screening procedure (see SESP attached as 
Annex VI). This screening was undertaken to ensure this project complies with UNDP’s Social and Environmental 
Standards. UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standards were reviewed by the GCF accreditation panel and deemed 
sufficient to accredit UNDP to submit low and medium risk projects. The overall social and environmental risk category 
for this project is Moderate, as highlighted below if the recommended mitigation measures are undertaken. Specific 
project risks are listed in Section G below. Appropriate mitigation measures are included within the following section. 
 
233. 
The project will have a number of environmental impacts, which will be managed and impacts limited. During 
mangrove planting, it will be necessary to undertake earth works to re-stabilize areas where aquaculture facilities have 
been established. The earth works will move sediment that, if not properly contained, may enter the marine 
environment. To ensure that the sediment is not mobilized through either wind, or more specifically, through water 
movement, an erosion control sediment plan will be prepared. The plan will contain aspects including but not limited to 
the installation of sediment curtains to reduce sediment movement and the covering of sediment where practicable. 
 
234. 
Any sediment movement may also expose acid sulfate soils within the mangrove areas. Acid sulphate soils 
and/or potential acid sulphate soils occur in areas of mangrove and are known to occur in large areas of the coastal 
delta in Viet Nam 26. Deposits of acid sulphate soils are commonly found less than five meters above sea level, 
particularly in low-lying coastal areas which is where the interventions will occur. Mangroves, salt marshes, floodplains, 
swamps, wetlands, estuaries and brackish or tidal lakes are ideal areas for acidic sulphate soils formation and therefore 
there is the potential for it to observe in the project’s location. Controls would potentially be required for the management 
of acid sulphate soils and/or potential acid sulphate soils due to their locations of the projects within mangrove areas. 
The presence of acid sulphate soils may not be obvious on the soil surface as they are often buried beneath layers of 
more recently deposited soils and sediments of alluvial or Aeolian origin. These soils contain iron sulphide minerals 
(predominantly as the mineral pyrite) or their oxidation products. In an undisturbed state below the water table, acid 
sulphate soils are benign. However if the soils are drained, excavated or exposed to air by a lowering of the water table, 
the sulphides react with oxygen to form sulphuric acid. The release of this sulphuric acid from the soil can in turn release 
iron, aluminium and other heavy metals (particularly arsenic) within the soil. Once mobilized, the acid and metals can 
create a variety of adverse impacts including killing vegetation, seeping into and acidifying groundwater and water 
bodies, killing fish and other aquatic organisms and degrading concrete and steel structures to the point of failure.  Prior 
to any excavation, sediments will be tested for their presence of acid sulphate soils and/or potential acid sulphate soils.  
If the analysis proves positive, the sediment can be treated by a range of techniques including but not limited to liming 
the sediment. Reference will be made to appropriate standards and guidelines27. Every effort will be made to ensure 
there is no direct or residual impact following treatment. 
                                                             
26 Tri LQ, van Mensvoort MEF (2004) Decision trees for farm management on acid sulfate soils, Mekong Delta, Viet Nam. Soil Research 
42, 671–684; Minh, L.Q. Tuong, T.P. van Mensvoort, M.E.F., Boumaa, J., (1997) Contamination of surface water as affected by land use in 
acid sulfate soils in the Mekong River Delta, Viet Nam, Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment 61 (1) 19-27 
27 For example, refer to Ahern, C.R., Ahern, M.R. and Powell, B. (1998) Guidelines for Sampling and Analysis of Lowland Acid Sulfate Soils 
(ASS) in Queensland QASSIT, Department of Natural Resources, Resource Sciences Centre, Indooroopilly; Ahern, C.R., McElnea, A.E. and 
Sullivan, L.A. (2004) Acid Sulfate Soils Laboratory Methods Guidelines. In Queensland Acid Sulfate Soils Manual. Department of Natural 
Resources, Mines and Energy, Indooroopilly, Queensland, Australia; and Dear, S.E., Moore, N.G., Dobos, S.K., Watling, K.M. and Ahern, C.R. 
(2002). Soil Management Guidelines. In Queensland Acid Sulfate Soil Technical Manual. Department of Natural Resources and Mines, 
Indooroopilly, Queensland, Australia.

=== PAGE 49 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 62 
 
 
 
F 
 
235. 
The programme may also produce waste associated with the construction of new houses, though the quantities 
are unlikely to cause a significant environmental impact.  All waste such as glass, damaged concrete and metal sheeting 
will be stored in an appropriate manner to reduce the impacts on the environment. Additional waste will also be 
generated from the construction of new homes.  Where possible, materials should be prefabricated and cut to size prior 
to being moved to the relevant communities. 
 
236. 
Overall, it is expected that the program will have some environmental impacts although these can be mitigated 
effectively through appropriate management measures. The program will have significant environmental benefits in the 
short to long term through the improvement of water quality, coastal protection, the absorption of greenhouse gas 
emissions and most importantly, through providing communities with climate resilient houses. 
 
237. 
There are limited social impacts associated with the project. 
 
238. 
Sites for house construction, receiving GCF support, will be informed by risk assessments undertaken prior to 
site selection. In cases where risk assessments indicate that the proposed site would be unsafe, existing government 
programmes will support relocation. The GCF project will not support house construction on unsafe sites.   
 
239. 
Related to mangrove regeneration, there is the limited possibility that the project could result in the 
displacement of people’s livelihoods if careful planning is not undertaken. There will be a reduction in the availability of 
land and aquatic environments through the rehabilitation and planting of mangroves. Careful planning and stakeholder 
consultations will be undertaken prior to the site selection for planting to ensure that any temporary interruption to 
livelihoods (e.g. relocation of aquaculture) is addressed by existing government programmes benefiting the poor or by 
other means. In such cases, a livelihood restoration plan will be developed to ensure households have been provided 
financial means equal to their existing livelihoods income during any interruption. To the extent possible, the CBDRM 
mechanism will be used to engage and compensate communities to undertake propagation, planting and maintenance 
of the mangroves, thereby providing a social benefit to the community. While the project may impact socially in the 
short term, the project will overall improve the livelihoods of people working in and around the mangroves and increase 
their income potential. Further, the mangroves will act as a buffer and therefore reduce the potential loss of lives and 
assets resulting from climate change induced events.  
 
240. 
In 2012, UNDP, UNWomen, Oxfam and UNISDR developed a policy brief to look at gender equity issues in 
climate change adaptation and disasters. (See http://www.un.org.vn/en/publications/doc_details/268-policy-brief-
gender-equality-in-climate-change-adaptation-and-disaster.html).  Key recommendations from this analysis have been 
included in the design of project activities at all levels, especially: 
• 
UN agencies should be engaged actively to continue to provide technical assistance to the government and 
other stakeholders to promote gender mainstreaming in CCA/DRR related policies and programmes 
• 
CCA/DRR actions at all levels should be developed in a participatory way, involving both men and women of 
all age groups and different backgrounds using the CBDRM approach. 
• 
Ensure that the collection and collation of sex-disaggregated data and related gender information from the 
local level, specifically damage and needs assessments post climate or weather related disasters, reaches 
the national level, is disseminated widely and is publically accessible, and is used to inform, monitor, and 
evaluate new policies and programmes. 
 
241. 
Under the 3 project outputs, specific gender equality policies and practices as recommended in the gender 
analysis/policy brief paper will be applied. To realize this, the project will apply 2 approaches in promoting gender 
equality:  
• 
Ensuring gender considerations are captured in enhancements to policies 
•     Engaging women through the community-based programme activities (i.e. risk assessments, mangroves 
regeneration/monitoring, housing) 
 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement

=== PAGE 50 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 62 
 
 
 
F 
242. 
The financial management and procurement of this project will follow UNDP financial rules and regulations 
available here: https://info.undp.org/global/documents/frm/Financial-Rules-and-Regulations_E.pdf 
 
243. 
Further guidance is outlined in the financial resources management section of the UNDP Programme and 
Operations Policies and Procedures available at https://info.undp.org/global/popp/frm/Pages/introduction.aspx 
 
244. 
UNDP has comprehensive procurement policies in place as outlined in the ‘Contracts and Procurement’ section 
of UNDP’s Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP).  The policies outline formal procurement 
standards and guidelines across each phase of the procurement process, and they apply to all procurements in UNDP.  
See here:  https://info.undp.org/global/popp/cap/Pages/Introduction.aspx 
 
245. 
The project will be implemented following the National Implementation Modality (NIM) following NIM guidelines 
available here: 
https://info.undp.org/global/documents/_layouts/WopiFrame.aspx?sourcedoc=/global/documents/frm/National%20Imp
lementation%20by%20the%20Government%20of%20UNDP%20Projects.docx&action=default&DefaultItemOpen=1 
 
246. 
UNDP will ascertain the national capacities of the Implementing Partner/Executing Entity by undertaking an 
evaluation of capacity following the Framework for Cash Transfers to Implementing Partners/Executing Entities (part of 
the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers - HACT). 
 
247. 
All projects will be audited following the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted above and applicable audit 
guidelines and policies.   
248. 
The NIM Guidelines are a formal part of UNDP’s policies and procedures, as set out in the UNDP Programme 
and 
Operations 
Policies 
and 
Procedures 
(POPP) 
which 
are 
available 
here: 
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/Pages/default.aspx.  The NIM Guidelines were corporately developed and adopted by 
UNDP, and are fully compliant with UNDP’s procurement and financial management rules and regulations. 
249. 
The NIM Guidelines are a formal part of UNDP’s policies and procedures, as set out in the UNDP Programme 
and 
Operations 
Policies 
and 
Procedures 
(POPP) 
which 
are 
available 
here: 
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/Pages/default.aspx.  The NIM Guidelines were corporately developed and adopted by 
UNDP, and are fully compliant with UNDP’s procurement and financial management rules and regulations. 
 
250. 
The national executing entity is MARD - also referred to as the national ‘Implementing Partner’ in UNDP 
terminology - is required to implement the project in compliance with UNDP rules and regulations, policies and 
procedures (including the NIM Guidelines).  In legal terms, this is ensured through the national Government’s signature 
of the UNDP Standard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA), together with a UNDP project document which will be 
signed by the Implementing Partner to govern the use of the funds.  Both of these documents require compliance.  Prior 
to signature of the project document, all national Implementing Partners need to have undergone a Harmonized 
Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) assessment by UNDP to assess capacities to implement the project.  During 
implementation, UNDP will provide oversight and quality assurance in accordance with its policies and procedures, and 
any specific requirements in the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) and project confirmation to be agreed with the 
GCF. This may include, but is not limited to, monitoring missions, spot checks, facilitation and participation in project 
board meetings, quarterly progress and annual implementation reviews, and audits at project level or at Implementing 
partner level on the resources received from UNDP. 
 
251. 
The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) framework consists of four processes: (1) macro 
assessments; (2) micro assessments; (3) cash transfers and disbursements; and (4) assurance activities. Assurance 
activities include planning, periodic on-site reviews (spot checks), programmatic monitoring, scheduled audits and 
special audits. During micro-assessment, there can weaknesses identified for which actions are required to addresses 
the gaps. When a spot check finds that the gaps are not addressed it will mean that the level of assurance activities 
will have to remain higher and modalities of engaging with that implementing partner will have to be reviewed if 
necessary. 
All 
details 
are 
available 
here: 
https://undg.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/2014-UNDG-HACT-
Framework-English-FINAL.pdf.

=== PAGE 51 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 62 
 
 
 
F 
 
252. 
The project will be audited in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures on audits, informed by and 
together with any specific requirements agreed in the AMA currently being negotiated with the GCF. According to the 
current audit policies, UNDP will be appointing the auditors. In UNDP scheduled audits are performed during the 
programme cycle as per UNDP assurance/audit plans, on the basis of the implementing partner's risk rating and 
UNDP’s guidelines. A scheduled audit is used to determine whether the funds transferred to the implementing partner 
were used for the appropriate purpose and in accordance with the work plan. A scheduled audit can consist of a financial 
audit or an internal control audit. 
 
253. 
GCF resources will be provided to the implementing partner, less any agreed cost recovery amount. Under 
UNDP’s national implementation modality, UNDP advances cash funds on a quarterly basis to the implementing partner 
(executing entity) for the implementation of agreed and approved programme activities, in accordance with UNDP 
standard policies and the NIM Guidelines. The implementing partner reports back expenditure via a financial report on 
quarterly basis to UNDP.  Any additional requirements will be as in accordance with the AMA as and when it is agreed.

=== PAGE 52 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 62 
 
 
G 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures 
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Capacity of MARD to absorb and to deliver as planned, 
given other pressures, including management and 
delivery 
of 
other 
programmes 
and 
projects, 
inexperienced staff and insufficient equipment. 
Technical and 
operational 
Low 
(<5% 
of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Probability of risk is low due to mitigation measures: 
• 
Close integration of project with on-going priorities.  
• 
Delegation of project activities to co-Implementing Partner/Executing Entities, who will work directly with 
provincial partners.  
Capacity support to partner by UNDP (see NIM description in section F.4.) 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability 
of 
risk 
occurring 
Complexity in coordination and communication: many 
of the activities will involve more than one partner, 
which require regular coordination and frequent 
communication.   
Technical and 
operational 
Low 
(<5% 
of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Probability of risk is low due to mitigation measures: 
• 
Roles and responsibilities between partners clearly specified in matrix, with lead partner responsible for budget 
and coordination/communication with other partners. Regular progress meetings held with Senior Level 
officials to ensure any challenges are addressed in a timely manner. 
• 
Project Officer in PMU specifically responsible for Project implementation, coordination and M&ENPD and 
UNDP will monitor the Project implementation and if necessary will provide technical assistance at cost to 
improve coordination/ communication.  
Monthly coordination meeting with all national project coordinators organized by PMU. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability 
of 
risk 
occurring 
Ineffective implementation of M&E, including reporting. 
 
Technical and 
operational 
Low 
(<5% 
of 
project value) 
Low 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary 
254. 
As this proposal builds on the successes of existing programs, and benefits from the lessons learned from 
previous efforts, its design has been able to reduce exposure to risks. In addition, UNDP’s relationship with government 
partner agencies is well established, with financial and programme monitoring systems in place to provide on-going 
technical and other oversight. As such, risks for the project are considered mainly low or moderate. In addition, the 
project has been formulated based on consultations at national and provincial level, and project design has been 
reviewed by stakeholders at all level, including a sample of community representatives, ensuing buy-in. That 
notwithstanding, a number of potential risks have been detailed below along with mitigation measures.

=== PAGE 53 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 62 
 
 
G 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Probability of risk is low due to mitigation measures: 
• 
At the start of the project, tailored orientation sessions and training for all national and sub-national staff 
involved in M&E will be organized 
• 
Project Officer in PMU specifically responsible for project M&E providing day-to-day guidance and technical 
support 
Sufficient budget and budget source for M&E will be agreed at the start of the project 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability 
of 
risk 
occurring 
Low survival rates of mangroves due to factors 
including community deforestation, pollution or other 
factors 
Social 
and 
environmental 
Medium 
(5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Probability of risk is low due to mitigation measures: 
Approaches will replicate successfully diversified approaches and will be implemented using a community based 
methodology that will ensure clear consultation. This includes establishment of CBDRM committees involved at all 
stages of the project. Technical site verification will assess potential pollution risk in advance, and community groups 
may in some cases wish to undertake advocacy or action to reduce risk, or suggest alternative sites to reduce pollution 
exposure. 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability 
of 
risk 
occurring 
Lack of participation of women and other vulnerable 
groups in project design and implementation 
Social 
and 
environmental 
Low 
(<5% 
of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Probability of risk is low due to mitigation measures: 
Replication of CBDRM methodologies that require at least 30% participation of women at all levels, and actively require 
participation from vulnerable groups and people of all ages. Formal monitoring and promotion of sex and age 
disaggregated data. 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability 
of 
risk 
occurring 
Grant for housing does not result in a completed storm-
resilient construction or houses fall into disrepair 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium 
(5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Probability of risk is low due to mitigation measures: 
While the incidence is very low, there are a small number of cases where house construction was started but never 
completed. The GCF project approach will follow the risk mitigation measures of the government’s housing programme 
- 70% of the grant is provided at the completion of the foundation, and the remaining 30% upon completion of the 
house frame meeting design requirements.   
 
The housing designs to be applied through the project have been developed to incur low on-going maintenance costs.  
Designs features also aim to ensure that the more vulnerable structural elements, such as roofs and corner bracings 
are reinforced during construction, reducing potential repair costs. (Due to their concrete construction, annual 
maintenance costs are often lower than in thatch and bamboo construction which requires significant annual care and

=== PAGE 54 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 62 
 
 
G 
investment).  In addition, the project will also disseminate information on how to prepare for storms to reduce potential 
damage based on existing MOC materials (i.e. securing items, use of sandbags, etc.). In the event that a house should 
be damaged during a storm despite these efforts, households will be eligible for limited compensation for repairs 
through existing disaster response assistance schemes operating at the provincial level. 
Selected Risk Factor 7 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability 
of 
risk 
occurring 
Earthworks related to mangrove restoration has any 
adverse impacts on the biodiversity (flora and fauna) of 
the area. 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium 
(5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
There is the potential for sediment movement during planting of the mangroves.  To ensure that the sediment is not 
mobilized through either wind or more specifically water movement, it will be necessary to prepare an erosion control 
sediment plan and install silt curtains to restrict sediment movement.  The plan shall contain aspects including but not 
limited to the installation of sediment curtains to reduce sediment movement and the covering of sediment where 
practicable. 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon 
Please describe other potential issues which will be monitored as “emerging risks” during the life of the projects (i.e., 
issues that have not yet raised to the level of “risk factor” but which will need monitoring).  This could include issues 
related to external stakeholders such as project beneficiaries or the pool of potential contractors. 
 * Please expand this sub-section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.

=== PAGE 55 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 62 
 
 
 
H 
H.1. Logic Framework.  
 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level28 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Increased climate-resilient 
sustainable development 
The project through an integrated approach with ensure more climate-resilient homes, 
strengthen natural defenses through the regeneration of mangroves, and improve planning 
through the integration of climate risk information 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term  
(if applicable) 
Final 
Fund-level impacts 
A3.0 Increased resilience 
of intrastructure and the 
built environment to climate 
change 
3.1 Number and value 
of physical asset made 
more resilient to climate 
variability and change, 
considering human 
benefits 
Site visits, 
progress 
reports by 
executing 
entity, coastal 
mapping by 
communities 
4,000 
houses 
not 
meeting 
safety/ 
resilience 
criteria 
establish
ed by 
governm
ent 
2,000 
houses 
valued at 
4,000,000 
USD ($) 
4,000 
houses 
valued at 
8,000,000 
USD($) 
Government housing 
programme, 
targeting a total of 
26,500 houses 
continues as 
planned. 
M4.0 Reduced emissions 
from land use, 
reforestation, reduced 
deforestation, and through 
sustainable forest 
management and 
conservation and 
enhancement of forest 
carbon stocks 
4.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent 
(tCO2eq) reduced or 
avoided (including 
increased removals) as 
a result of Fund-
funded 
projects/programmes   
Site visits, 
reports 
0 
Estimate 
282,590 
tCO2eq 
Estimate 
565,180 
tCO2eq 
Extreme weather 
event does not 
destroy fragile 
seedlings. 
(Measures will be 
taken to protect 
mangroves in early 
growth stages, e.g. 
bamboo fencing to 
protect from storm 
surges) 
 
 
                                                             
28 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks available at the 
following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement): 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf

=== PAGE 56 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 62 
 
 
 
H 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verificati
on (MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term (if 
applicable)  
Final 
Project/programme 
outcomes 
Outcomes that contribute to Fund-level impacts 
9.0 Improved management 
of land or forest areas 
contributing to emissions 
reductions 
9.1 Hectares of land 
or forests under 
improved and 
effective management 
that contributes to 
CO2 emission 
reductions 
Site visits, 
progress 
reports by 
executing 
entity 
0 
2,000ha 
4,000ha 
Extreme weather 
event does not 
destroy fragile 
seedlings. 
(Measures will be 
taken to protect 
mangroves in 
early growth 
stages, e.g. 
bamboo fencing 
to protect from 
storm surges) 
A6.0 Increased generation 
and use of climate 
information in decision-
making 
6.2. Use of climate 
information 
products/services in 
decision-making in 
climate-sensitive 
sectors 
Reports 
Climate 
products 
integratin
g risk 
informati
on not 
regularly 
available  
2 
(enhanced risk 
maps)  
5  
(enhancem
ent to 
policies, 
tailored 
climate risk 
information 
for various 
stakeholder
s) 
Data collection 
efforts in first 
years of project 
are successful 
Project/programme 
outputs 
Outputs that contribute to outcomes 
1. Storm and flood resilient 
design features added to 
4,000 new houses on safe 
sites, benefiting 20,000  
poor and highly disaster-
exposed people in 100 
communes 
 
Number of 
households provided 
with resilient homes 
(disaggregated by 
gender) 
 
 
Results of 
commune 
selection 
process, 
site visits, 
progress 
reports by 
executing 
entity, 
communit
y 
monitoring 
4,000 
houses 
not 
meeting 
safety/ 
resilience 
criteria 
establish
ed by 
governm
ent 
2,000 
households  
 
4,000 
households  
 
Government 
housing program, 
targeting a total of 
26,500 houses, 
continues as 
planned. 
2.  Regeneration of 4,000 
hectares of coastal 
mangrove storm surge 
buffer zones using 
successful evidence-based 
approaches 
Hectares of land or 
forests under 
improved and 
effective 
management that 
contributes disaster 
risk reduction, as well 
Site visits, 
progress 
reports by 
executing 
entity 
0 
2,000ha 
4,000ha 
Extreme weather 
event does not 
destroy fragile 
seedlings. 
(Measures will be 
taken to protect 
mangroves in

=== PAGE 57 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 62 
 
 
 
H 
                                                             
29 Across the 3 outputs the project various workshops and consultations, these are estimated below and will be further defined in the project 
initiation phase. At commune level, the project will support to deliver approximately 650 trainings and consultations with the local communities 
and vulnerable groups. The actual consultation should be more as part of the Government co-financing training and consultation processes.  At 
provincial and national level, the project will support to deliver approximately 65 core trainings and policy workshops provinces and national 
government agencies to serve the transformation agenda of the GCF project. Aside from this, there are various technical workshops / 
consultations and writeshops that will also be organized to facilitate the deliberations of the project designs, interventions, reviews and drawing 
lessons. 
as to CO2 emission 
reductions 
early growth 
stages, e.g. 
bamboo fencing 
to protect from 
storm surges) 
3. Increase access to 
enhanced climate, loss and 
damage data for private 
and public sector 
application 
Number of disaster 
database 
established/supported 
and number of 
climate 
policy/regulatory 
frameworks 
supported  
Reports 
Climate 
products 
integratin
g risk 
informati
on not 
regularly 
available 
2 
(enhanced risk 
maps)  
5  
(enhancem
ent to 
policies, 
tailored 
climate risk 
information 
for various 
stakeholder
s) 
Data collection 
efforts in first 
years of project 
are successful 
Activities 
Description 
Inputs 
Description29 
1.1 Grant support for cost 
of additional flood/storm 
resilient features to 4,000 
houses 
 
Activity 1.1 focuses on the 
additional cost of climate-resilient 
safety feature to house 
construction under the government 
housing programme. Importantly, 
site selection will be linked to risk 
assessments conducted through 
the CBDRM programme and DMC 
surge maps to ensure safe siting 
for the houses. Training on safe 
housing will be provided through 
the CBDRM programme to extend 
the knowledge to other 
communities.  
1.1.1. Guided by MOC, 
identify project sites against 
vulnerability criteria for project 
intervention, for approval by 
the Project Board as 
necessary 
1.1.2. (Commune selects 
individual dwellings within 
commune for grant support 
based on poverty index 
established by government 
and storm resilience of 
existing dwelling).  Inform 
commune selection of grant 
recipients by cross-checking 
against CBDRM risk 
assessments to ensure 
construction grants do not 
support building in high risk 
areas.  (Risk assessments to 
be conducted where they are 
lacking, see Activity 1.2). 
1.1.3.  Collate available data, 
including CBDRM risk 
assessment and surge maps, 
into information packs to 
inform safe site verification 
(complementary to Output 2). 
1.1.4. Grant delivery for 
house construction, for 
incremental cost of additional 
safety measures.  Lump sum 
Consultations at provincial, 
commune and community levels 
Investments in additional cost for 
climate-resilient safety features, 
for 4,000 houses 
Training activities to 
communities on safe house 
design 
Training activities to support 
capacity strengthening for 
provincial officials 
Technical expertise to 
strengthen legal and policy 
framework

=== PAGE 58 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 62 
 
 
 
H 
based on agreed safer home 
design for maximum of 
$2,000 per house will be 
transferred to MOF. 
Distribution to the recipient 
will follow MOC housing 
programme grants 
mechanism - grants are 
provided to home-owner, 
home-owner then uses funds 
to procure materials and 
labor. 
1.1.5. For especially 
vulnerable grant recipients, 
such as female-heads of 
household, disabled or 
elderly, support to identify 
additional/potential means of 
support for construction, such 
as youth organizations 
1.1.6.  Support  policy and 
legal framework/regulations 
that govern these houses 
supported – both in terms of 
maintenance, insurance 
(relates to output 3) 
Activity 1.2. - Community-
based climate and disaster 
risk mapping and planning 
 
Activity 1.2 focuses on conducting 
risk assessments where they are 
currently lacking. The CBDRM 
programme methodologies will be 
used and up-scaled to areas 
prioritized by the government 
housing programme and of 
relevance to the GCF project. 
1.2.1. Establish community 
committee incorporating both 
local government and a 
cross-section of residents, 
ensuring the engagement of 
women, to complete a 
CBDRM risk assessment   
1.2.2. Training programme 
(100) for selected 
commune/village to conduct 
risk assessments, using 
existing high quality 
topography maps for baseline 
and monitoring purposes, 
building on CBDRM 
programme 
1.2.3. Conduct risk 
assessments following 
CBDRA guidelines 
1.2.4. Augment existing 
training provided by 
Department of Construction 
(DoC) on house design, with 
risk information and potential 
for avoided damage/loss  
1.2.5. Training made 
available to  adjacent 
communes and provinces 
Community consultations 
 
Training activities for 
communities on CBDRA 
 
Technical expertise to enhance 
government housing programme 
Activity 1.3 - Knowledge 
products, developed based 
on lessons learned, for 
Activity 1.3 ensures that the best 
practices from these enhanced 
measures, and any lessons learned 
from implementation, are shared to 
1.3.1. Documentation of 
project progress, highlighting 
where applicable/possible, 
resilience of structures 
Reports and communications 
materials

=== PAGE 59 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 62 
 
 
 
H 
policy makers and 
communities  
 
inform future programming in 
housing, as well as land use and 
infrastructure development.  Data 
generated under this output will 
also be included in central 
databases to inform broader 
planning.   
compared to similar previous 
weather events/natural 
hazards 
1.3.2. Development of policy 
briefs based on risk 
assessment and project 
successes, to inform land 
use, construction and 
development planning 
1.3.3. Support to the design 
of the next phases of the 
government housing 
programme (e.g. Northern 
provinces, Mekong delta) 
integrating evidence and best 
practices of GCF 
implementation 
1.3.4. Systematic logging and 
synthesis of data from 
information packs for 
inclusion in central risk 
repository to inform broader 
planning (complementary to 
Output 2)  
1.3.5.Best practices 
workshops/writeshops in 3 
regions.  Training-of-trainers 
in 3 regions, provincial 
trainings 
1.3.6. Public awareness 
campaign on safe housing 
technologies linking 
storm/flood-resilient 
structures to avoided 
damage/loss 
Technical expertise for 
policy/programming support 
 
Public awareness activities 
Activity 2.1–Regeneration 
or replanting of 4,000 
hectares of mangroves in 
coastal areas vulnerable to 
climate change 
 
Applying best practices, Activity 2.1 
focuses on regeneration and 
replanting mangroves in degraded 
areas. Awareness raising activities 
will ensure communities 
understand the importance of 
maintaining restored mangroves 
sites for protecting communities 
from climate change events. 
2.1.1. Guided by MARD, 
verify sites against 
vulnerability and feasibility 
criteria for project intervention 
(including planned 
infrastructure development 
projects and mangrove 
rehabilitation efforts by 
government and partners), for 
approval by the Project Board 
as necessary 
2.1.2. Provide additional 
training and outreach for the 
25 community group 
representatives on the 
benefits and means for 
regenerating mangroves 
tailored to the local context 
2.1.3. Technical assessment 
(e.g. soil analysis) of sites to 
gauge complexity, identify 
best means of rehabilitation, 
and related costs 
Consultations at provincial, 
commune and community levels 
Studies to assess best approach 
to mangrove rehabilitation 
Training activities to 
communities on safe mangrove 
nurseries,  regeneration/planting 
Training activities to support 
capacity strengthening for 
provincial officials 
Technical expertise to 
strengthen legal and policy 
framework  
Technical expertise for 
policy/programming support

=== PAGE 60 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 62 
 
 
 
H 
2.1.4. Using existing 
guidelines and best practices 
for improved mangrove 
rehabilitation, led by MARD 
and in consultation with 
academia and partners 
specializing in field as 
necessary, ensure species 
selection and replantation 
techniques are appropriate 
for the site 
2.1.5. For areas where 
aquaculture poses a threat to 
mangroves, support in the 
design and relocation of 
pond, providing temporary 
livelihoods support where 
needed 
2.1.6. Based on CBDRM 
plan, consultations with 
communities ensuring 
engagement of women, to 
define roles in rehabilitation, 
maintenance and monitoring 
of mangrove areas 
2.1.7. Starting with 2-3 sites, 
rehabilitate mangrove area 
using locally produced 
seedlings and install 
necessary infrastructure for 
their protection (e.g. locally 
sourced bamboo support or 
fencing), engaging 
communities in tree breeding 
(nurseries) and planting to the 
extent possible 
2.1.9. Cost assessment of 
rehabilitation at potential sites 
for next implementation 
phase (i.e. cost of 
rehabilitation will vary site to 
site depending on site 
difficulty and soil quality) 
2.1.10. Document best 
practices and lessons learned 
to inform subsequent phases 
of project implementation, as 
well as the CBDRM 
programme. 
Activity 2.2 – Community-
based programme on 
mangrove rehabilitation, 
maintenance and 
monitoring for target 
communities 
 
  
 
 
Activity 2.2. focuses on engaging 
the community through the CBDRM 
programme to monitor and report 
on the progress of mangrove 
rehabilitation efforts, to ensure that 
unforeseen issues or pressures are 
immediately addressed. 
2.2.1. Training programme for 
25 selected commune/village 
to conduct coastal mapping, 
using existing high quality 
topography maps for baseline 
and monitoring purposes 
2.2.2. Collate available data, 
including CBDRM risk 
assessment and surge maps, 
Training to communities on 
coastal mapping 
 
Technical expertise to develop 
information packs tailored to 
communities on risks 
 
Training to communities on 
monitoring and reporting 
progress of rehabilitated areas

=== PAGE 61 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 62 
 
 
 
H 
into information packs to 
inform safe site verification  
(complementary to Output 1) 
2.2.3. Complete community 
based risk and vulnerability 
assessment for the 
communes using existing 
methodologies approved 
MARD, materials produced 
for the 1002 program, and 
including analysis of risk pack 
data (complementary to 
Output 1) 
2.2.4. Training programme 
(25) for rehabilitation and 
regular maintenance of 
mangrove areas for 
community based 
management of mangroves 
(mangrove management will 
be integrated and costed into 
CBDRM plans) 
2.2.5. Community based 
monitoring to assess success 
of mangrove rehabilitation 
efforts, as well as for broader 
planning purposes 
2.2.6. Documentation and 
compilation of project 
progress by commune and 
district level, to further inform 
project implementation 
 
 
Activity 2.3.- Knowledge 
products, developed based 
on lessons learned, for 
policy makers and 
communities  
 
 
Activity 2.3 ensures that the best 
practices from these enhanced 
measures, and any lessons learned 
from implementation, are shared to 
inform policies on protected areas 
and related preservation 
programming.  
 
2.3.1 Documentation of 
project achievements, best 
practices and lessons 
learned, highlighting social 
and environmental benefits of 
mangrove rehabilitation  
2.3.2. 5 roundtables for 
government consultants and 
contractors, 
provincial/national specialists 
to validate best practices 
Development of policy briefs 
to inform coastal resilience 
planning 
2.3.3. Systematic logging and 
synthesis of data from 
information packs for 
inclusion in central risk 
repository to inform broader 
planning (complementary to 
Output 1) 
2.3.4. Public awareness 
campaign linking the 
protection of mangroves to 
documented social and 
Reports and communications 
materials 
 
Technical expertise for 
policy/programming support 
 
Public awareness activities

=== PAGE 62 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 62 
 
 
 
H 
environmental benefits of 
project intervention 
Activity 3.1 – Disaster 
database updated and risk 
data repository established, 
with mechanisms 
established for 
sharing/disseminating 
information 
 
 
 
Activity 3.1 focuses on enhancing 
the quantity and quality of Viet 
Nam’s disaster/loss information, 
thereby improving its reliability.  
The activity also improves 
mechanism to share data with 
stakeholders for use in planning. 
3.1.1. Establish Technical 
Advisory Group of experts 
representing various interests 
(e.g. environment, 
infrastructure, academia, 
private sector, insurance 
sector) to provide advice on 
upgrading systems to support 
development of improved risk 
sharing products for medium 
and long term planning, 10 
consultations once 
established. 
3.1.2. 3 workshops to 
establish methodology for 
data tracking, including 
repository and facilities for 
long term maintenance of 
data 
3.1.3. Work with key 
academic institutions and 
research organisations to 
compile risk information for 
target provinces that can be 
provided to communes to 
inform community based 
planning  
3.1.4. Training (520) to 
complete and compile 
community based disaster 
and vulnerability risk 
assessments, enhancing the 
established CBDRM 
methodology in target 
communes as necessary and 
collate results into existing 
1002 programme M&E 
systems as baseline data  
3.1.4. Replicate methodology 
of collecting disaster and loss 
data to communes outside 
the CBDRM programme 
3.1.5. Collate commune level 
historical data on extreme 
climate events loss and 
damage, being collected 
under the 1002 programme 
but not currently available to 
risk modellers 
3.1.6. Upgrade existing loss 
and damage databases in 
Viet Nam building on existing 
national disaster tracking data 
sets to enable linking of 
commune level risk data with 
national systems 
Consultations with stakeholders 
 
Technical expertise

=== PAGE 63 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 62 
 
 
 
H 
3.1.7. Launch improved 
government risk data 
repository accessible to 
planners and financial 
institutions to support 
analysis and modelling by the 
private sector and other 
stakeholders 
Activity 3.2 – Policy support 
for planning/line ministry 
staff at the national and 
sub-national levels to apply 
disaster/loss information to 
inform climate resilient 
planning  
 
 
 
Activity 3.2 links the risk 
information collected and 
documented through the GCF 
project to broader planning.  To 
ensure that information is 
understand and ready to be applied 
to planning, the activity will develop 
climate information products 
tailored to the needs of various 
stakeholders (following 
consultations), including the private 
sector and insurance sector.  This 
information would not only protect 
their investment, but also 
incentivize investment in climate 
change or disaster preventative 
measures with wide beneficial 
potential. 
3.2.1. Facilitate inter-
ministerial dialogue, to 
assess climate, disaster, and 
loss and damage information 
needs for development of 
tailored products for risk-
informed climate-resilient 
planning 
3.2.2. 10 roundtables on 
standardization of existing 
risk assessment guidelines; 
development of 
comprehensive risk 
assessment for Viet Nam; 
Government risk data 
repository accessible to 
planners and financial 
institutions to support 
analysis and modelling by the 
private sector and other 
stakeholders 
3.2.3. Design products 
tailored to needs expressed 
by stakeholders, especially 
insurance providers, 
integrating climate and 
disaster data to inform 
planning  
3.2.4. Design and deliver 12 
trainings on risk-informed and 
climate-resilient planning in 
different sectors, integrating 
climate information, 
disaster/loss data, cost-
benefit analysis, and financial 
modelling of climate and 
disaster impacts and 
response measures 
Consultations with stakeholders  
 
Workshops 
 
Technical expertise to develop 
tailored products 
 
12 training activities to integrate 
climate risk information into 
planning, other sectors 
Activity 3.3 – Analysis of 
risk transfer mechanisms 
for insurance, including for 
cases of large scale coastal 
climate related disaster 
(loss of more than 3% 
GDP)  
   
 
Activity 3.3 considers the projected 
risk of a major climate change 
event and puts in place a plan to 
mitigate the financial burden of 
potential losses.   
3.3.1. Facilitate dialogue 
between the government and 
insurance sector to research 
opportunities to increase 
access to insurance related 
products in high risk coastal 
areas  
3.3.2. Feasibility studies on 
innovative financial schemes 
and non-grant de-risking 
mechanisms to improve 
access to government 
financial preparedness and 
Technical expertise

=== PAGE 64 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 62 
 
 
 
H 
 
response capacity (e.g. 
catastrophe bonds) 
3.3.3. Develop improved 
financial loss models for Viet 
Nam to estimate economic 
exposure to climate events,10 
roundtables 
3.3.4. Provide technical and 
coordination inputs to enable 
the government to develop a 
plan for managing the 
financial risks of a major 
climate related disaster 
affecting a coastal area (such 
as super-typhoon or similar 
event), 3 workshops 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
255. 
Project-level monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in compliance with the UNDP POPP, the UNDP 
Evaluation Policy.   
 
Oversight and monitoring responsibilities: 
256. 
The primary responsibility for day-today project monitoring and implementation rests with the Project Manager. 
The Project Manager will develop annual work plans to ensure the efficient implementation of the project. The Project 
Manager will inform the Project Board and the UNDP Country Office of any delays or difficulties during implementation, 
including the implementation of the M&E plan, so that the appropriate support and corrective measures can be adopted. 
The Project Manager will also ensure that all project staff maintain a high level of transparency, responsibility and 
accountability in monitoring and reporting project results.   
 
257. 
The UNDP Country Office will support the Project Manager as needed, including through annual supervision 
missions. The UNDP Country Office is responsible for complying with UNDP project-level M&E requirements as outlined 
in the UNDP POPP. Additional M&E and implementation quality assurance and troubleshooting support will be provided 
by the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor as needed. The project target groups and stakeholders including the NDA Focal 
Point will be involved as much as possible in project-level M&E.   
 
258. 
A project inception workshop will be held after the UNDP project document has been signed by all relevant parties 
to:  (a) re-orient project stakeholders to the project strategy and discuss any changes in the overall context that influence 
project implementation; (b) discuss the roles and responsibilities of the project team, including reporting and 
communication lines and conflict resolution mechanisms; (c) review the results framework and discuss reporting, 
monitoring and evaluation roles and responsibilities and finalize the M&E plan; (d) review financial reporting procedures 
and mandatory requirements, and agree on the arrangements for the annual audit; (e) plan and schedule Project Board 
meetings and finalize the first year annual work plan. The Project Manager will prepare the inception report no later than 
one month after the inception workshop. The final inception report will be cleared by the UNDP Country Office and the 
UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project Board.    
 
259. 
The Project Manager, the UNDP Country Office, and the UNDP Regional Technical Advisor will provide objective 
input to the annual Project Implementation Report (PIR) for each year of project implementation. The Project Manager 
will ensure that the indicators included in the project results framework are monitored annually well in advance of the PIR 
submission deadline and will objectively report progress in the Development Objective tab of the PIR. The annual PIR 
will be shared with the project board and other stakeholders. The UNDP Country Office will coordinate the input of the 
NDA Focal Point and other stakeholders to the PIR. The quality rating of the previous year’s PIR will be used to inform 
the preparation of the next PIR. The final project PIR along with the terminal evaluation report and corresponding 
management response will serve as the final project report package.

=== PAGE 65 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 62 
 
 
 
H 
 
260. 
An independent mid-term review process will be undertaken and the findings and responses outlined in the 
management response will be incorporated as recommendations for enhanced implementation during the final half of the 
project’s duration. The terms of reference, the review process and the final MTR report will follow the standard templates 
and guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center. The final MTR report will be cleared by the UNDP 
Country Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project Board. The final MTR 
report will be available in English. 
 
Additional GCF evaluation requirements:   
261. 
An independent terminal evaluation (TE) will take place no later than three months prior to operational closure of 
the project. The terms of reference, the review process and the final TE report will follow the standard templates and 
guidance available on the UNDP Evaluation Resource Center. The final TE report will be cleared by the UNDP Country 
Office and the UNDP Regional Technical Adviser, and will be approved by the Project Board. The TE report will be 
available in English.   
 
262. 
The UNDP Country Office will include the planned project terminal evaluation in the UNDP Country Office 
evaluation plan, and will upload the final terminal evaluation report in English and the management response to the public 
UNDP Evaluation Resource Centre (ERC) (http://erc.undp.org). Once uploaded to the ERC, the UNDP Independent 
Evaluation Office will undertake a quality assessment and validate the findings and ratings in the TE report, and rate the 
quality of the TE report.   
 
263. 
The UNDP Country Office will retain all M&E records for this project for up to seven years after project financial 
closure in order to support ex-post evaluations. 
 
264. 
A detailed M&E budget, monitoring plan and evaluation plan will be included in the UNDP project document. 
 
265. 
UNDP will perform monitoring and reporting throughout the reporting period in accordance with the AMA and 
Funded Activity Agreement (FAA). UNDP has country presence and capacity to perform such functions. In the event of 
any additional post-implementation obligations over and above the AMA, UNDP will discuss and agree these with the 
GCF Secretariat in the final year of the project and will prepare a post-implementation monitoring plan and budget for 
approval by the GCF Board as necessary.

=== PAGE 66 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 62 
 
 
 
I 
 
 
I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal 
☒ 
NDA No-objection Letter  Annex I 
☒ 
Feasibility Study  Annex II 
☒ 
Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements Annex III 
Not applicable. As the proposed project is non-revenue generating, a traditional financial analysis is not 
appropriate.  
☒ 
Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co-financing commitment Annex IV 
☒ 
Project/Programme Confirmation/Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement 
schedule, etc.) Annex Va  
☒ 
Project/Programme Confirmation/Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown, disbursement 
schedule, etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement, Annex I Annex Vb 
☒ 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  and Environmental and Social Management Plan 
             (ESMP)  Annex VIa and Annex VIb 
☒ 
Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations Annex VII 
☒ 
Evaluation Report of the baseline project Annex VIII 
☒ 
Map indicating the location of the project/programme  Annex IX 
☒ 
Timetable of project/programme implementation Annex X  
 
☒ 
 Project/Programme confirmation Annex XI 
 
Additional Information 
☒ 
Economic Analysis (Summary) Annex XIIa  
☒ 
Economic Analysis (xls format) Annex XIIb  
☒ 
Additional Background Details Annex XIII  
☒ 
Response to GCF Comments on Concept Note Annex XIVa  
☒ 
Response to GCF Comments on Proposal Annex XIVb 
☒ 
Additional Supporting Documents Annex XV

=== PAGE 67 ===
GFC/B.13/16/Add.05 
 
 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority

=== PAGE 68 ===
GFC/B.13/16/Add.05 
 
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Basic project/programme information 
Project/programme title 
Improving the resilience of vulnerable coastal communities to 
climate change related impacts in Viet Nam 
Accredited entity 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
Environmental and social report disclosure information 
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website 
2016-04-29 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Vietnamese 
Link to disclosure 
http://www.vn.undp.org/content/vietnam/en/home/library/envir
onment_climate/vietnam-funding-proposal.html  
Other link(s) 
http://
