=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: Sunny Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 11 for Word
producer: Adobe PDF Library 11.0
creationDate: D:20160607153134+09'00'
modDate: D:20160609110254+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum  
Funding proposal package for FP012 
GCF/B.13/16/Add.04 
8 June 2016 
Meeting of the Board 
28 – 30 June 2016 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 12(e) 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following three parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled “Africa Hydromet Program: Phase 1 - Mali Country Project”
submitted by World Bank;
b) A no-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point; and
c)
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure.
The documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity, and national designated 
authority or focal point, respectively.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.13/16/Add.04 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point 
                 Environmental and social report(s) disclosure

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme Title: Africa Hydromet Program – Strengthening Climate Resilience
in Sub-Saharan Africa: Mali Country Project 
Country/Region: Mali (Sub-Saharan Africa) 
Accredited Entity: The World Bank

=== PAGE 4 ===
Contents 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
Section C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
Section F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
Section G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
Section H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
Annexes are available separately. 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
•
Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all
other sections, including the Appraisal Summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to other project documents
such as project appraisal document.
•
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected not to exceed 50.
Please submit the completed form to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
File name: 
“FP-WBG-151207-Revised-160425”

=== PAGE 5 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 72 
 
A 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / programme title 
Africa Hydromet Program – Strengthening Climate Resilience 
in Sub-Saharan Africa: Mali Country Project 
A.1.2. Project or programme 
Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region                     
Mali 
A.1.4. National designated authority (ies) 
Environment and Sustainable Development Agency (AEDD) 
A.1.5. Accredited entity 
The World Bank 
A.1.5.a. Access modality 
☐  Direct 
☒  International 
A.1.6. Executing entity 
Directorate-General for Civil Protection (Government of Mali) 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total investment, million 
USD) 
☐  Micro (≤10) 
☐  Medium (50<x≤250)  
☒  Small (10<x≤50)  
☐  Large (>250) 
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus 
☐  Mitigation 
☒  Adaptation ☐  Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission 
          Date of last submission 
December 7, 2015  
April 25, 2016 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details 
Contact person, position 
Christoph Pusch, Practice Leader, Urban and Disaster Risk 
Management, Africa Region 
Prashant Singh, Senior DRM Specialist, GSURR, World Bank. 
Organization 
The World Bank 
Email address 
cpusch@worldbank.org; prashant@worldbank.org 
Telephone number 
+1 202 352 2193; +1 202 460 6178 
Mailing address 
J8-075, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW Washington DC 
20433 USA 
 
 
 
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)  
Reduced emissions from: 
☐ 
Energy access and power generation  
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.)   
☐ 
Low emission transport  
(E.g. high-speed rail, rapid bus system, etc.)   
☐ 
Buildings, cities and industries and appliances  
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)   
☐ 
Forestry and land use  
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.) 
 
Increased resilience of: 
☒ 
Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.) 
☒ 
Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.) 
☐ 
Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.) 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
☐

=== PAGE 6 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 72 
 
A 
 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words) 
Please provide a brief description of the proposed project/programme, including the objectives and primary measurable 
benefits (see investment criteria in section E). The detailed description can be elaborated in section C. 
 
 
Mali is vulnerable to several climate related hazards, including flooding and drought, is already experiencing the impacts of 
climate change and urgently needs additional concessional support for strengthening the scientific base for generating 
climate and weather information to inform climate-resilient development pathways. 
 
The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the adaptive capacity and climate resilience of vulnerable 
communities and the economy of Mali. This will be achieved by developing the capacity of national hydro-meteorological 
and warning services, which will in turn support adaptation planning for public and private sector users.  
 
Mali already experiences extreme weather and climate variability, resulting in high exposure to floods and droughts. The 
impacts of climate change are projected to increase both the frequency and severity of these events. Improved weather and 
climate information is required from the national level down to the household level so that government, communities and 
the private sector can better plan for and adapt to these projected changes in climate. Hydromet and early warning services 
act as a key enabler for a broad range of adaptation decisions, ranging from the agriculture sector, infrastructure, disaster 
risk management, and others. For example, projected changes in climate are expected to result in increased rainfall over 
shorter time spans for some areas of Mali. Improved hydromet and early warning services would allow agencies to better 
monitor, prepare for and respond to extreme rainfall events and flooding, thus building adaptive capacity and reducing the 
vulnerability of communities. In areas of infrastructure development, hydromet information will inform the resilient design of 
relevant works such as bridges, culverts, and erosion protection. In terms of agriculture and food security, reliable hydromet 
information assists farmers in deciding which agricultural technologies and adaptation mechanisms may be most useful in 
responding to weather variability and climate change. Private companies and businesses also need and rely on the 
hydromet data to make investment decisions related to climate risk mitigation for their operations.  
 
By ensuring delivery of services to communities, the project will benefit highly vulnerable groups, including the 80% of 
country’s population whose livelihoods are dependent on predominantly rain-fed agriculture and about 5.3 million people 
directly exposed to drought or flooding. 
 
The project will consist of the following components:  
1 - Capacity building and institutional development 
This will include: (i) training and capacity building programs for agencies’ staff and management, (ii) enhancing 
institutional and regulatory frameworks, and (iii) providing support for detailed design and system integration of project 
activities. 
2 - Improvement of hydromet and early warning infrastructure 
This will include (i) expanding and upgrading hydromet observation networks, (ii) enhancing data collection & 
transmission, forecasting and decision support systems, and (iii) strengthening preparedness and emergency response 
facilities and operations.   
3 - Enhancement of service delivery and warnings to communities 
This will include (i) establishing a national framework of climate services, (ii) improving flood and drought forecasting 
and warnings, (iii) developing new products for sector specific needs (agriculture, health, energy, water resources 
management, disaster risk management, etc.), (iv) strengthening “last mile” connectivity to ensure appropriate 
understanding and use of information, and (v) mobilization and sensitization of community and establishing effective 
feedback mechanisms for communities at risk. 
4 - Project management  
This component will include support to the project management unit providing assistance to executing entities and 
ensure fiduciary compliance. 
 
Primary benefits include: 
- 
Increased generation and use of climate information in decision making for adaptation planning

=== PAGE 7 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 72 
 
A 
- 
Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks 
- 
Strengthened awareness of climate threats and risk-reduction processes 
- 
Increased food security 
 
The executing entity of the project will be the Directorate General of Civil Protection (DGPC), which will manage the project 
in close collaboration with and in support of Mali Météo (MMA), National Directorate of Hydraulics (DNH), and Food 
Security Early Warning System (SAP). Extensive consultations were held with the Government of Mali and users of 
hydromet information and warning services in preparing this project proposal. It is fully in line with national strategies such 
as the Strategic Growth and Poverty Reduction Framework (CSCRP), the NAPA, the National Climate Change Policy 
(PNCC), and the draft National Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction.  
 
This project is prepared under the Africa Hydromet Framework Program, which is jointly developed by the World 
Meteorological Organization, the African Development Bank and the World Bank Group. Currently, the World Bank and 
African Development Bank (Clim-Dev) are finalizing the joint work program on this account. Action has also commenced 
between the World Bank and WMO in terms of the Memorandum of Understanding between the two entities.  
 
The Program seeks to improve hydromet and early warning capacity and strengthen networks through open data and 
information sharing in Sub-Saharan Africa. This approach will enable the Program to maximize economies of scale and 
regional integration, apart from promoting south-south cooperation to ensure transformational change and longer-term 
sustainability to enhance climate adaptation and climate-resilient development. For streamlined implementation, vulnerable 
countries in climate sensitive zones in Sub-Saharan Africa, such as the Sahel and the Zambezi River Basin will be selected 
for targeted project support under the Program. The countries will be selected in terms of their vulnerability and readiness, 
and also on the basis of the scope of leveraging ongoing efforts by governments and their development partners. Individual 
funding proposals under the Program will be submitted on a project by project basis. This funding proposal is the first 
project under the Program. 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone 
Expected approval from accredited entity’s Board (if 
applicable) 
28/06/2016 
Expected financial close (if applicable) 
31/12/2016 
Estimated implementation start and end date 
Start: 01/01/2017 
End:  31/12/2020 
Project/programme lifespan 
4 years 0 months

=== PAGE 8 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 72 
 
B 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme 
Please provide: 
• 
an integrated financial model in Section I (Annexes) that includes a projection covering the period from financial 
closing through final maturity of the proposed GCF financing with detailed assumptions and rationale; and a 
sensitivity analysis of critical elements of the project/programme 
 
The proposed financing instrument is grant and therefore projection from financial closing through final maturity 
is not applicable.  
 
• 
a description of how the choice of financial instrument(s) will overcome barriers and achieve project objectives, 
and leverage public and/or private finance 
 
The proposed Grant financing is adequate for the development of public basic services supporting the safety of 
citizens and protection of livelihoods against natural hazards and climate variability – and would catalyse in the 
longer term the gradual development of value-added services to directly support climate-resilient development 
planning and investments, with some economic return.  
 
• 
Indicative breakdown of cost estimates for total project costs and GCF financing by sub-component: 
 
Component 
Sub-component (if applicable) 
Amount  
(for entire 
project)  
(USD, Million) 
GCF funding 
amount 
(USD, Million) 
Component 1 - 
Capacity building 
and institutional 
development 
1.1 – Training and capacity building programs 
2.50 
2.50 
1.2 – Enhancing institutional and regulatory frameworks 
0.60 
0.60 
1.3 – Detailed design and system integration of project 
activities 
2.00 
2.00 
Component 2 - 
Improvement of 
hydromet and 
early warning 
infrastructure 
2.1 – Expanding and upgrading hydromet observation 
networks 
5.20 
(includes Gov 
counterpart) 
4.50 
2.2 – Enhancing data collection & transmission, 
forecasting and decision support systems 
1.80 
(includes Gov 
counterpart) 
1.50 
2.3 – Strengthening preparedness and emergency 
response facilities and operations 
7.50 
(includes Gov 
counterpart and 
GFDRR co-
financing) 
5.15 
Component 3 - 
Enhancement of 
service delivery 
and warnings to 
communities  
3.1 – Enhanced service delivery, including: (i) 
establishing national framework of climate services, (ii) 
improving flood and drought forecasting and warnings, 
and (iii) developing new products for sector specific 
needs 
2.50 
(includes Gov 
counterpart) 
2.00 
3.2 – Improved early warning and community 
preparedness, including: (i) strengthening “last mile” 
connectivity to ensure appropriate understanding and 
use of information, and (ii) mobilization and sensitization 
of community and establishing effective feedback 
mechanisms for communities at risk 
3.50 
(includes Gov 
counterpart) 
3.00 
Component 4 – Project Management 
1.55 
(includes Gov 
counterpart) 
1.50 
Total project financing 
29.50 
22.75

=== PAGE 9 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 72 
 
B 
• 
Indicative breakdown of cost estimates for GCF financing by component and implementing partner – in million 
US$): 
 
Row Labels 
DGPC 
DNH 
Mali-
Météo 
SAP 
Total 
A - Capacity building and 
institutional development 
1.67 
0.59 
1.86 
0.98 
5.10 
B - Improvement of 
hydromet and early 
warning infrastructure 
1.98 
2.61 
4.90 
1.66 
11.15 
C - Enhancement of 
service delivery and 
warnings to communities 
1.90 
0.84 
1.57 
0.69 
5.00 
D - Project Management 
1.50 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.50 
Total 
7.04 
4.04 
8.34 
3.33 
22.75 
 
 
Detailed disaggregated breakdown of these aggregate categories of expenditures is available in the feasibility 
study. 
 
Co-financing sources 
 
Co-financing is secured in the amount of US$4.5 million as follows: 
 
1. US$2.5 million from the World Bank (GFDRR), and  
2. US$2 million from the Government of Mali. 
 
Co-financing commitments are reflected respectively in Annexes 10 (Mali Government, signed by the Minister of 
Transports, in charge for Meteorology) and 11 (signed by GFDRR Manager).  
 
World Bank - GFDRR grant funding will support strengthening of emergency preparedness and response facilities and 
operations in order to support and enhance the overall climate resilience of vulnerable populations. 
 
World Bank will strongly encourage and strive to make the government agree to allocate sufficient funds for the staff, 
investment and operational budgets of Mali-Météo (from an annual budget of about US$4.5 million in 2015), DNH 
(annual budget of about US$1.2 million in 2015), DGPC (annual budget of about US$1 million in 2015) and CSA/SAP 
(annual budget of about US$900,000 in 2015). During the mission in November, 2015, the Government has already 
confirmed an ongoing large recruitment plan for civil servants (a total of about 500 in the next 3 years), and indicated a 
commitment to increase overall three separate budget lines for investment, operation and staff across the fours 
institutions. 
 
The total US$2 million co-financing represents 6.8% of the total annual budget of these entities over the 4-year 
implementation period, signifying the salaries and overheads of the staff working on the implementation of the project. It 
will contribute to installation, operation and maintenance of equipment, as well as to cover staff time for development of 
institutional development and service delivery. The tentative budget breakdown of this counterpart funding is as below: 
 
- 
US$1,000,000 from Mali-Météo; 
- 
US$400,000 from DNH; 
- 
US$300,000 from DGPC; 
- 
US$300,000 from CSA/SAP

=== PAGE 10 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 72 
 
B 
 
• 
Indicative breakdown of cost/budget (expressed in US$ million) by expenditure type and sub-component, 
excluding fees 
(Sub-)Component 
Total 
GCF 
funding 
Of 
which
: Staff 
Of 
which: 
Individ
ual 
Consul
tants 
Of 
which: 
Trainin
g 
Of 
which: 
Servic
es 
(Firms) 
Of 
which: 
Travels 
and 
field 
visits 
Of 
which: 
Goods 
Of 
which: 
Works 
1.1 – Training & capacity building 
programs 
2.50 
0.01 
0.09 
2.40 
 
 
 
 
1.2 – Enhancing institutional & 
regulatory frameworks 
0.60 
0.01 
 
0.20 
0.39 
 
 
 
1.3 – Detailed design & system 
integration of project activities 
2.00 
0.01 
0.40 
 
1.59 
 
 
 
2.1 – Expanding & upgrading 
hydromet observation networks 
4.50 
 
 
0.55 
0.65 
0.15 
3.15 
 
2.2 – Enhancing data, forecasting & 
decision support systems 
1.50 
0.01 
0.08 
0.20 
0.21 
0.15 
0.85 
 
2.3 – Strengthening preparedness & 
emergency response facilities & 
operations 
5.15 
0.01 
0.10 
0.20 
0.14 
 
4.70 
 
3.1 – Enhanced service delivery 
2.00 
0.01 
0.06 
0.40 
0.36 
 
1.17 
 
3.2 – Improved early warning & 
community preparedness 
3.00 
0.01 
0.10 
0.60 
0.56 
0.30 
1.43 
 
4 – Project Management (DGPC) 
1.50 
0.02 
0.18 
0.30 
0.30 
0.30 
0.40 
 
Total GCF financing to Mali 
22.75 
0.09 
1.01 
4.85 
4.20 
0.90 
11.70 
0.00 
 
 
• 
An indicative breakdown of cost/budget (expressed in US$ million) by expenditure type (project staff and 
consultants, travel, goods, works, services, etc. and excluding fees) and disbursement schedule in 
project/programme confirmation (term sheet) as included in section I, Annexes. 
 
 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
TOTAL 
Staff 
0.02 
0.02 
0.03 
0.02 
0.09 
Individual Consultants 
0.20 
0.30 
0.31 
0.20 
1.01 
Training 
0.80 
2.60 
1.25 
0.20 
4.85 
Services (Firms) 
0.20 
1.60 
1.60 
0.80 
4.20 
Travels and field visits 
0.20 
0.30 
0.20 
0.20 
0.90 
Goods 
1.20 
4.60 
4.30 
1.60 
11.70 
Works 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
TOTAL 
2.62 
9.42 
7.69 
3.02 
22.75

=== PAGE 11 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 72 
 
B 
B.2. Project Financing Information (Excluding Accredited Entities’ Fee) 
 
Financial Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing 
(a) = (b) + (c) 
27.25 
million USD ($) 
 
(b) GCF 
financing to 
recipient 
(i) Senior Loans 
(ii) Subordinated Loans 
(iii) Equity 
(iv) Guarantees 
(v) Reimbursable grants * 
(vi) Grants * 
 
 
 
 
 
22.75 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
million USD ($) 
(  )  years 
(  )  years 
 
 
 
 
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR 
 
 
 
* Please provide economic and financial justification in section F.1 for the concessionality that GCF is expected to 
provide, particularly in the case of grants. Please specify difference in tenor and price between GCF financing and 
that of accredited entities. Please note that the level of concessionality should correspond to the level of the 
project/programme’s expected performance against the investment criteria indicated in section E. 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi) 
22.75 
million USD ($) 
 
(c) Co-
financing to 
recipient 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Name of 
Institution 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Grant 
Grant 
Options 
Options 
2.0  
2.5 
…………… 
…………… 
million USD ($) 
million USD ($) 
Options 
Options 
Govt of Mali 
World Bank 
……………… 
……………… 
 
 
(  )  years 
(  )  years 
 
 
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Lead financing institution: World Bank/GFDRR. 
* Please provide a confirmation letter or a letter of commitment in section I issued by the co-financing institution. 
The availability of grant financing managed by the World Bank has been discussed and agreed with senior 
management, and with the competent authorities, including Mali’s national designated authority.  
(d) Financial 
terms 
between 
GCF and AE 
(if applicable) 
In cases where the accredited entity (AE) deploys the GCF financing directly to the recipient, (i.e. the GCF financing 
passes directly from the GCF to the recipient through the AE) or if the AE is the recipient itself, in the proposed 
financial instrument and terms as described in part (b), this subsection can be skipped. 
If there is a financial arrangement between the GCF and the AE, which entails a financial instrument and/or financial 
terms separate from the ones described in part (b), please fill out the table below to specify the proposed instrument 
and terms between the GCF and the AE. 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
 
 
      
(  )  years 
(   ) %

=== PAGE 12 ===
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 72 
 
B 
Please provide a justification for the difference in the financial instrument and/or terms between what is provided by 
the AE to the recipient and what is requested from the GCF to the AE. 
Not Applicable 
B.3. Financial Markets Overview (if applicable) 
How market price or expected commercial rate return was (non-concessional) determined? 
Not applicable 
 
Please provide an overview of the size of total banking assets, debt capital markets and equity capital markets which 
could be tapped to finance the proposed project/programme. 
Not applicable 
 
Please provide an overview of market rates (i.e. 1-year T-Bill, 5-year government bond, 5-year corporate bond (specify 
credit rating) and 5-year syndicate loan. 
Not applicable 
 
Provide examples or information on comparable transactions.  
Not applicable

=== PAGE 13 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 72 
 
C 
Please fill out applicable sub-sections and provide additional information if necessary, as these requirements may vary 
depending on the nature of the project / programme. 
C.1. Strategic Context 
Please describe relevant national, sub-national, regional, global, political, and/or economic factors that help to 
contextualize the proposal, including existing national and sector policies and strategies. 
 
Sub-Saharan Africa – Regional Context 
Africa accounts for a very small fraction of greenhouse gases’ emissions, but is bearing the brunt of a disproportionate 
share of the effects of climate variability and volatility. Sub-Saharan Africa is a rapidly developing region of over 800 
million people, with 49 countries, and great ecological, climatic and cultural diversity. Its population is projected to 
approach 1.5 billion by 2050. The region is confronted with a range of climate risks that could have far-reaching 
repercussions for its societies and economies. Even if warming is limited below 2°C, there are very substantial risks 
and projected damages, and as warming increases these are only expected to grow further. Sub-Saharan Africa is 
particularly dependent on agriculture for food, income, and employment, almost all of it rain-fed. Heat and drought 
would also result in severe losses of livestock and associated impacts on rural communities. Rapid urbanization in Sub-
Saharan Africa is another driver of climate risk. It is projected that 56% of its population will live in cities by 2050, 
introducing a new aspect to the climate risk profile of Sub Saharan Africa. Huge natural resources, such as water, are 
turning into climate and disaster risks due to want to proper harnessing, which, in turn, depends on open data, its 
analysis and utilization in concrete sector investments to fight poverty and boost prosperity, thereby building climate 
resilience in the medium term. For example, the climate and disaster risks of Africa largely emanate from ‘too much’ or 
‘too little’ water, but only 10% of the hydroelectric potential of Africa has been tapped so far – the lowest in any 
continent. In Sub-Saharan Africa, the Sahel and the Zambezi River Basin are among the most vulnerable ‘hotspots’ 
from the climate and disaster risk management perspective. 
 
Instability and fragility in the Sahel are driven by land pressures from rapid population growth; high demographics; 
environmental degradation; climate volatility in countries already prone to desertification, drought, and flash floods; poor 
basic infrastructure in power and especially water; hunger and malnutrition; and a lack of economic opportunity, 
particularly for young women and men. These factors have created a regional ‘fragility trap’. This complex development 
syndrome has spurred the Africa Hydromet Framework Program, which is jointly developed by the World Meteorological 
Organization, the African Development Bank and the World Bank Group. It seeks to improve hydromet and early warning 
capacity and strengthen networks through open data and information sharing in Sub-Saharan Africa. This approach will 
enable the program to maximize economies of scale and regional integration. The first investment of the program aims 
to augment the efforts by supporting climate resilience building in Mali, one of the worst affected Sahel countries battling 
the impact of climate variability. 
 
Country Context - Mali 
Background 
Mali is a sparsely populated, predominantly dry country with a highly undiversified 
economy. The country has a land area of 1,241,248 sq km, representing 4.2% of the 
total area of Africa. It has a total population estimated at 14.5 million people, with 
approximately 63% living in rural areas. In addition to the capital city of Bamako, the 
country is divided into eight administrative regions. The northern regions of Gao, Kidal, 
and Timbuktu represent two-thirds of the entire country’s area, but host only 10% of the 
country’s population. The more populated southern area features the Niger and Senegal 
Rivers. Thus, delivery of hydro-meteorological and warning services to this large, 
sparsely populated territory involves severe challenges, with risks related to geographic 
inequity and low social cohesion.  
 
In recent decades, Mali’s economy has experienced mostly steady growth in the country’s GDP, however, the recent 
socio-political crisis in early 2012 set the country back to fragile and highly vulnerable conditions. In 2012, there was a 
military coup and occupation of the northern regions by rebel and criminal groups. In the context of the food, political

=== PAGE 14 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 72 
 
C 
and security crisis, Mali’s economy contracted in 2012 with a negative growth rate of -1.2%1. The causes of the conflict 
are diverse and multi-layered and can be traced to a breakdown in the social contract, growing competition over 
resources (public funds as well as illicit rents), weak institutions, inequality and underlying social tensions. These 
drivers are exacerbated by climate change and population growth, which have put people’s livelihoods under stress, as 
well as increasing access to arms, and maintaining persistently-high levels of youth unemployment. In May 2015, a 
peace accord was signed by the government and several militia and rebel factions to end the conflict in the north of the 
country. The peace agreement has created the minimum conditions for the Malian authorities to address the challenges 
of poverty reduction including in the North, however implementation remains challenging as the security situation in 
northern areas remains volatile. Details of how political and security issues have been integrated into the project design 
and particularly on the monitoring of the implementation, operations and maintenance of equipment and sustainability 
of project outcomes have been addressed in Section G1 on risks. 
 
Economic growth in the country has been positive in aggregate terms, however, two features of Mali’s growth merit 
highlighting: (1) the country’s high population growth rates have translated in low economic growth rates in per capita 
GDP, and (2) economic growth has not been accompanied by increases in the number of jobs in the formal sector2. 
Poverty remains high, with just over half (50.6%) of the population living on less than $1.90 a day and the country 
ranking 176th on the 2015 Human Development Index. About 90% of poor people live in rural areas, relying on rain-fed 
agriculture and agro-pastoralism to make a living. Such households are highly vulnerable to shocks such as drought, 
which can significantly erode their productive assets and output (livestock, crop production, amongst others). 
Successive droughts and conflict in the country’s northern region have also contributed to the rapid expansion of Mali’s 
urban population, with urban growth rates of 4.7% (2010). 
 
Climate and Disaster Risk Profile 
Mali is exposed to a number of climate related hazards, but is particularly vulnerable to droughts, floods and locust 
invasion. From 1980 to 2014, more than 7 million people were affected by 28 drought and flood events. On average, 
these result in an annual economic impact of approximately US$140 million. Two thirds of Mali’s land area is classified 
as desert or semi-desert, and the country is one of the most drought-prone in the world. Annual precipitation ranges 
from over 1000 mm per year in the southern Sudano-Guinean area to less than 200 mm per year in the northern 
Saharan area3. There is high inter-annual variability in rainfall, and recurrent dry years have become increasingly 
frequent since 1968. The main flood-prone areas are located in urban areas and along the Inner Niger Delta (64 000 sq 
km). More than 1.5 million fishermen, rice farmers and herdsmen depend on annual flooding for their livelihoods. 
Depending on the amount of rainfall, however, flood levels can vary significantly. High floods can result in casualties 
and extensive damages to physical assets such as roads, housing, crops and livestock, while low floods can cause very 
low production of rice and fish. The 2013 floods also highlighted the increasing vulnerability of Mali’s urban areas to 
floods. In the capital of Bamako, torrential rains and inadequate drainage infrastructure provoked flash floods and 
resulted in 37 casualties as well as in the displacement of more than 20,0004. Thus, early warning for flood events is 
critical for protecting both the lives and livelihoods of the region’s inhabitants. 
 
                                                          
1 Konaté, A., & Diarra, B. (2014). African Economic Outlook: Mali. AfDB, OECD, UNDP. 
2 Bastagli, F., & Toulmin, C. (2014). Mali: Economic Factors Behind the Crisis. European Union. 
3 Nicholson, S. E., Kim, J., & Hoopingarner, J. (1988). Atlas of African Rainfall and its Inter-annual Variability. Tallahasse, FL: 
Department of Meteorology, Florida State University. 
4 UNOCHA. (2013). 2013 Rainy Season Overview: West and Central Africa.

=== PAGE 15 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 72 
 
C 
 
Figure 1: Exposure to Drought and Flood Hazards Across Mali5 
 
Natural disasters (drought, flood and locust infestations), as well as other factors including limited arable land, 
environmental degradation, and fluctuating commodity prices have led to numerous food security and health challenges 
in Mali. This is particularly the case for vulnerable rural households dependent on subsistence farming and livestock 
herding. Following the 2011 drought and the subsequent loss of harvest, grain prices in 2011-2012 significantly 
increased in Mali, reaching price levels that were 80 to 100% above average during the lean season6. The escalation of 
conflict in 2012 also exacerbated the devastating impacts of food shortages in the country. Children are the most 
impacted and at risk from food shortages as early childhood malnutrition greatly increases the risk of death, and can 
lead to irreversible mental and physical impairment. According to the last Demographic and Health Survey in Mali, 
Global Acute Malnutrition among children under 5 was reported at 15%7. In March 2014, 3.7 million people were 
estimated in moderate and severe food insecurity with 1.5 million in immediate need of food assistance. 
 
Existing National and Sector Policies and Strategies  
The Government of Mali recognizes that strengthening the country’s economic growth and addressing poverty 
reduction in a meaningful manner will require addressing climate and disaster risk. The Strategic Framework for Growth 
and Poverty Reduction (CSCRP 2012-2017), adopted by the Council of Ministers of Mali on 28 December 2011, is the 
reference document for the formulation and implementation of economic and social policies. The framework specifically 
identifies flood and drought hazards and the resulting food insecurity as significant barriers to addressing poverty 
reduction in the country. Mainstreaming climate change adaptation also has a prominent place thought the framework. 
Following the political and security crisis of 2012-2013, the CSCRP was supplemented by the Plan for the Sustainable 
Recovery of Mali (PRED 2013-2014) and the Government Action Plan (PAG 2013-2018). As part of its goal to 
strengthen economic growth in the country, one of the stated measures of the PAG is to develop and implement a plan 
to reduce the risk of flood and other natural hazards. 
 
Disaster Risk Management Framework 
Established in 1998, the Directorate General of Civil Protection (DGPC) acts as the Permanent Secretariat of the 
National Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction and has as its primary mandate to “develop elements of the National Civil 
Protection Policy and ensure its implementation”. While the DGPC is the focal point for disaster risk management, 
several other agencies have an active role, including: Mali Metéo, the National Directorate of Hydraulics (DNH), the 
Environment and Sustainable Development Agency (AEDD), the National Center for the Fight against Locust (CNLCP), 
the Food Security Early Warning System of the Commissariat for Food Security (CSA/SAP), the National Directorate for 
Housing and Urban Development (DNUH), and the National Directorate of Land Use Planning (DNAT). A draft National 
                                                          
5 The World Bank Group. (2011). Mali Climate Risk and Adaptation Country Profile. 
6 World Food Program. (2012). Mali: Market Analysis Update, December 2012.  
7 World Food Program. (2015). World Food Program: Mali Country Overview.

=== PAGE 16 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 72 
 
C 
Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction has been prepared, which articulates the need to identify, assess and monitor 
disaster risks and enhance early warning systems as one its five priority areas. Similarly, a Bill has been prepared 
which would clarify roles and responsibility of stakeholders for prevention and emergency response. 
 
Climate Change Framework 
Complementary to disaster risk management, Mali has also adopted a climate change framework to guide risk 
reduction and resilience building activities. It is signatory to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) and the Kyoto Protocol. In 2007, Mali put in place a National Adaptation Programme of Action 
(NAPA) to identify its urgent and immediate needs for adaptation, and is currently in the process of formulating a 
National Adaptation Plan (NAP) for medium- and long-term adaptation planning. Mali has strengthened its institutional 
framework and policy instruments so that various ministries, agencies, and partner organizations can effectively 
contribute to climate change adaptation and mitigation. The AEDD was founded in 2010, and is responsible for 
coordinating national environmental policy and performing the function of national secretariat on climate change. AEDD 
supported the development of the National Climate Change Policy (PNCC), the National Climate Change Strategy 
(SNCC), and the Action Plan for Implementation (PANC), which were adopted in July 2011. To maximize its ability to 
finance its national priorities, the Government of Mali developed a national climate fund to combine financing from 
bilateral and multilateral sources as well as from the public and private sectors. With an initial contribution from Sweden 
in 2013, the Mali Climate Fund is one of the first national climate funds operational on the African Continent. The option 
of using the Mali Climate Fund to manage the proposed project was discussed as an option with the NDA, the WB and 
implementing partners, however it was considered that the Fund’s capacity was not adequate for implementing a 
project of such technical and institutionally complex nature.  
 
Strategy Engagements with the World Bank  
In addition to such National Policies and Strategies, building resilience to disaster and climate risks has long been an 
area of strategic engagement between the World Bank and the Government of Mali. As part of the crosscutting theme 
"Peace and Security,” disaster risk management was stated as a strategic pillar and crosscutting priority in the Growth 
and Poverty Reduction Strategy Framework (GPRSF, 2007-2011), developed by the World Bank and the Government 
of Mali. The exposure of the Malian economy to external shocks, including natural disasters, was also raised in the 
World Bank Country Assistance Strategy to Mali (CAS 2008-2011). However, no specific action was planned in this 
regard. Building resilience is one of the key objectives identified in the Country Partnership Framework (CPF), a 
strategy for engagement between the World Bank and the Government of Mali during the period of 2016-2019. The 
CPF identifies vulnerability to climate risks as a key constraint to poverty reduction and highlights the need to 
strengthen safety nets and improve risk management mechanisms. It also specifies that World Bank interventions on 
climate change will aim to alleviate negative climatic shocks and indirectly increase resilience for the vulnerable. 
 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
Describe the baseline scenario (i.e. emissions baseline, climate vulnerability baseline, key barriers, challenges and/or 
policies) and the outcomes and the impact that the project/programme will aim to achieve in improving the baseline 
scenario. 
 
Baseline Scenario 
Mali’s physical conditions along with factors of social, economic, political, and environmental vulnerability leave the 
country at risk to several climate related hazards; most notably droughts, floods and locust invasion. While these 
hazards are a natural occurrence in the country, they nevertheless pose serious constraints on development and food 
security. Crop failure is common and current food crop production is unable to adequately provide for local needs due 
to persistent threats from droughts, floods and pest invasions. Mali’s poorest and most vulnerable populations are 
predominantly farmers and agro-pastoralists who practice dryland subsistence farming to feed their families, and 
contend with a poor and increasingly degraded resource base as well as limited access to basic services. Climate 
change is expected to exacerbate the impacts of flood and droughts, as these hazards are likely to become more 
intense and severe. And with more than 80% of Mali’s population dependent on predominantly rainfed agriculture for 
their livelihood, the country is extremely vulnerable to the impacts of climate change.

=== PAGE 17 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 72 
 
C 
Climate change effects are increasingly felt in Mali, in the form of higher temperatures, reduced precipitation and a 
moving desertification front. Records from Mali Metéo indicate that the country has become hotter and drier over the 
last several decades. Since 1960, temperatures have increased by 0.7°C across most of the country, with typical rates 
of warming greater than 0.15°C per decade8. Sahelian rainfall is characterized by high variability on inter-annual and 
inter-decadal timescales. Rainfall in Mali declined rapidly between 1950 and the mid-1980s, partially recovered in the 
1990s, then declined slightly in the 2000s. While long-term trends may be difficult to identify within his type of variability, 
records from 1960-2005 show that overall annual precipitation trends are decreasing slightly, with a significant 
reduction in the wettest months (July and August), and a slight increase at the beginning of the rainy season (May)9. 
The persistent drought in 1970 has resulted in fairly significant rainfall deficits and a continuous shift of the isohyets to 
the South. The average flow of the Niger River, which reached 1300 m3/s in 1978, was only 895 m3/s in 2002.  
 
Projections in future climate change are expected to increase inter-annual variability and the occurrence of extreme 
climatic events. According to climate scenarios developed for Mali, the average annual temperature is likely to increase 
between 1.2 to 3.6°C by the 2060s, and between 1.8 to 5.9°C by the 2090s10. The number of hot days and hot nights 
are projected to increase across Mali by 23-40% by 2060, and this rate of increase is projected to be more rapid in the 
South11. Projected mean annual changes in rainfall are less certain; however, values tend to increase in the South of 
the country (indicating an increase in heavy rainfall events), and decrease in the North12. More frequent El Niño events 
could also increase the frequency and intensity of droughts across Mali. Mali has been and will continue to be exposed 
to an uncertain and inadequate rainfall; however, it simultaneously faces an increasing frequency of floods. Water 
resources and agriculture are among the most vulnerable sectors to climate change, with projected overall yields 
decline (maize, rice river, cotton, millet / sorghum), exacerbating concerns of food security in the country.  
A national platform of various agencies across Mali support climate related disaster risks. Baseline conditions for each 
of the relevant agencies are described below. 
• 
Mali Metéo has the mandate to provide reliable and timely weather, and climate information and appropriate 
services to public and private users from various socio-economic sectors. Currently, their network of 
meteorological observations includes: 19 synoptic stations, 4 weather radars, 54 agro-meteorological stations, 
214 rainfall observation stations, 2 systems to receive Meteosat Second Generation satellite images (under the 
support of the WMO, EUMETSAT, and AGRHYMET). However, technical discussions with Mali Metéo revealed 
the overall poor status of the agency’s main observation infrastructure; significant needs for institutional 
strengthening; and capacity building needs for its staff. More specifically, the spatial resolution, number of 
monitored parameters and reliability of land-based synoptic, climate and agro-meteorological stations are 
inadequate to address users’ needs. Many observation systems such as upper air, lightning detection and 
meteorological radars are not functioning or used for weather forecasting. Field visits showed that 
communication systems are unreliable and slow with frequent power outages. Observation systems in the 
North of the country are believed to have been completely destroyed during the recent military conflict. 
 
Mali Metéo produces a limited range of services such as basic weather forecasts with 24 hours lead time. 
However the information produced is of low accuracy and reliability. At the same time, Mali Metéo clients 
(Ministry of Agriculture, farmers etc.) have expressed great need for improved agro-meteorological services 
such as bulletins and seasonal outlooks. Mali Metéo does not operate 24/7, even during the rainy season. 
There is an on-going process of transferring weather forecasting responsibilities from the regional aviation 
institution ASECNA, to Mali Metéo, but so far there is no institutional clarity on which agency issues severe 
weather forecasts and warnings in the country. There is also a significant need to recruit new staff to replace 
senior technical and administrative staff approaching retirement age. Training and re-training of existing staff is 
also another priority.  
 
• 
The National Directorate of Hydraulics (DNH) is part of the Ministry of Energy and Water (MEE), and is 
responsible for water resource management and regulation in Mali. In relation to hydrology, DNH is responsible 
for the collection, storage and analysis of hydrometric data. Such data is currently based on a network of 100 
                                                          
8 http://api.commissiemer.nl/docs/os/i71/i7152/climate_change_profile_mali.pdf 
9 Butt TA, McCarl BA, Angerer J, Dyke PT, Stuth JW (2005) The economic and food security implications of climate change in Mali. 
Clim Chang 68:355–378 
10 http://api.commissiemer.nl/docs/os/i71/i7152/climate_change_profile_mali.pdf 
11 http://sdwebx.worldbank.org/climateportalb/doc/GFDRRCountryProfiles/wb_gfdrr_climate_change_country_profile_for_MLI.pdf 
(Note that hot nights/days are defined by the temperature exceeded on 10% of days/ nights in current climate of that region and 
season.) 
12 http://api.commissiemer.nl/docs/os/i71/i7152/climate_change_profile_mali.pdf

=== PAGE 18 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 72 
 
C 
stations on the Niger and Senegal Rivers, divided into three categories based on the size of the targeted use of 
information. The stations are equipped with telemetric instruments and provide near-real-time data to 
transboundary river basin authorities. However, the majority of the telemetric equipment is not operational, and 
water levels are mostly reported manually on a daily basis, with issues related to precision of instruments and 
rating curves (the relation between observed water levels and discharges is often outdated or imprecise). The 
frequency of observations at reference stations is twice per day, while readings at other stations are taken only 
once per day. The transmission of data is done by radio or telephone to Bamako. Overall, the monitoring 
network is too sparse and most stations are not properly functioning or abandoned; data collection and 
transmission is poor. Instruments and equipment for discharge measurements are scarce and not often 
calibrated. The payments of field observers are so low that some are believed to forge measurements rather 
than actually making them. There is limited hydrological and hydraulic modeling or flood forecasting capability 
in the country. Also, there is limited operational data exchange with Mali Metéo, which can contribute to the 
development of such products.  
 
• 
Food security and nutrition monitoring is carried out by the Early Warning System (SAP) of the Food Security 
Commissariat (CSA). SAP is responsible for the continuous monitoring of situation regarding food production 
and availability, determining areas at risk, and identifying vulnerable populations. SAP coordinates information 
obtained from over 20 members of its network, including both regional agencies and some international 
organizations and NGOs. Data collection involves rainfall, crop evaluation, livestock, market prices, migration of 
populations, their habitats and food stocks, as well as their health status. Information is collected from 
administrative and technical departments, civil society and local elected officials from municipal level to district 
capitals as well as regional capitals at national level. For example, meteorological data is provided from Mali 
Metéo. Assessments of pasture, agriculture, and climate are provided in a monthly food security bulletin, which 
provides information on food security outlooks and alerts, as well as response planning efforts. Major gaps in 
how SAP currently operates include: (i) lack of inclusion of urban and peri-urban areas, (ii) inadequate 
information management systems, and (iii) ineffective communication of early warning and actions directly to 
the affected population. Improved efficiency of SAP requires the development of enhanced tools to manage 
data and more efficient use of climate data to provide a more precise basis for analysis.   
 
• 
The Directorate General of Civil Protection (DGPC) is attached to the Ministry of Security and Civil 
Protection, and is the coordinating body for disaster risk reduction, including emergency preparedness, 
response and longer-term prevention activities. It is responsible for issuing early warning to populations at risk, 
supporting communities to prepare and respond to warnings, sharing lessons learned from past disasters, and 
ensuring inter-ministerial coordination for mainstreaming disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation 
among sector-specific and crosscutting activities. The strengthening of technical (meteorological, hydrological, 
and food security) services brings major benefits in terms of life saving and resilience if civil protection services 
are engaged in the process. In the past several years, with financial support from development partners such 
as UNDP, the World Bank, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and the EU, the 
DGPC has developed an institutional and legislative framework for disaster risk reduction in Mali, developed a 
communication strategy and integrated disaster risk management into primary and secondary school curricula, 
and initiated vulnerability and risk mapping exercises. 
 
Despite the strong DGPC and sectoral actors’ commitment and the significant progress made by the country, 
major challenges remain to be addressed. The DGPC’s current profile could not allow for effective 
implementation of its coordination mandate, advocacy, and facilitation of interventions as well as sectoral actors 
involved in disaster risk management. Its current organization and human resources are primarily oriented 
towards relief operations. Civil protection services also lack critical infrastructure (incident coordination room, 
data management systems) to be able to work with their focal points from different ministries to prevent, 
prepare for or respond to a disaster. They also need basic institutional capacity development (training of staff, 
hiring of disaster risk management specialists) as well as equipment to pursue their mandate. 
 
Key Barriers Addressed by the Project 
As climate change begins to manifest itself and populations/communities become more exposed to increased climate 
variability including more frequent and intense extreme weather, the need to address climate risks is becoming urgent 
in Mali. Unattended climate risks become disaster risks, threatening economies and populations. While the government 
is currently supporting several baseline activities, there does remain significant barriers, which prevent the development

=== PAGE 19 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 72 
 
C 
and dissemination of climate and early warning information and the capacity to use this information for local planning. 
The Project will address the following barriers and challenges:  
 
1. Poor meteorological and hydrological observation networks and inefficient information exchange. Lack of 
adequate weather and climate data limits the ability of Government not only to provide life-saving warning and 
preparedness activities, but also to integrate climate considerations into development planning efforts and 
reduce the vulnerability of communities over the long term. In Mali, the spatial resolution of stations is poor, 
many observation systems are not functioning, and data communication systems are unreliable and slow. 
Observation infrastructures need to be strengthened urgently to provide the local climate information, which is 
required for various applications. 
 
2. Limited range of products, services and decision-making tools for climate-resilient development across sectors. 
Current users of meteorological and hydrological information need to improve their products such that more 
effective warning information can be provided to communities at risk, including for flash flood events. In 
addition, the use of meteorological and hydrological information needs to expand beyond existing agencies, 
and information needs to be tailored to decision makers across a wider series of sectors, such as agriculture, 
health, energy, water resources management, natural disaster prevention. Effective management of climate 
variability and change requires that climate information be used effectively in planning and that climate risk be 
incorporated routinely into development decisions.  
 
3. Limited financial, technical and institutional capacity. This hinders agencies such as Mali Metéo, DNH, SAP and 
the DGPC to fulfill their core mandates. There is limited hydrological and hydraulic modeling, flood forecasting 
and other climate and weather modeling capability in the country. There is also a need to strengthen 
institutional arrangements and regulatory frameworks and develop standard operating procedures for the 
agencies involved in managing risk from climate related hazards. And while more than 140 socio-economic 
studies have demonstrated that the benefit to cost ratio of investing in hydromet is high13, with returns of 1:3 to 
1:15, the initial investment costs are high and agencies have limited financial resources.  
 
4. Limited transmission of information and warning to the population. Information and alerts are not adapted to the 
day-to-day needs of the population (both in terms of content, format and timing). Mechanisms for the translation 
of flood forecasts into early warning information for critical public response and for activating action at 
community levels are not well established.  
 
Gaps in the early warning infrastructure/network in Mali range from poor meteorological and hydrological observation 
networks, limited technical capacity within agencies to conduct necessary hydrological and hydraulic modeling, flood 
forecasting and other climate and weather modeling, a limited range of information products to end users, and lack of 
connectivity with affected populations to ensure two-way communication between communities and institutions so that 
warning information can be provided to meet the day to day needs of the population and institutions can appropriately 
incorporate local knowledge within overall systems. Supported by the development of a National Framework for Climate 
Services with sectoral Working Groups, decision support systems for food security and hydromet services will be 
developed and/or improved. In regards to food security, Mali already has an Early Warning System (SAP) that helps 
Government understand the vulnerabilities and target its response. However, improvements are needed to incorporate 
urban and peri-urban areas, more efficiently manage weather and climate information and effectively communicate 
warning and recommendations for early actions directly to the responsible institutions, civil society and affected 
population. Regarding hydromet services, a decision support system is required to develop early warning capacities for 
flooding and extreme weather events.  
 
The outcomes of the project are expected to contribute to strategic mobilization of resources in advance of climate 
related disasters, enabling effective risk reduction support to vulnerable populations. Improved hydromet services will 
also significantly contribute to the enhanced productivity in weather sensitive socio-economic sectors such as 
agriculture, health, energy, transport and water resources management. 
 
                                                          
13 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/1972Valuing%20Weather%20and%20Climate%20Change.pdf

=== PAGE 20 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 72 
 
C 
Synergies with Ongoing Initiatives 
In Mali, there are a number of ongoing projects and programs addressing various aspects of climate and disaster risks 
that can be capitalized by the proposed Project. It is therefore critical that donors act in a coordinated manner, in order 
to maximize opportunities and synergize activities. For this purpose, consultations have been held with several donor 
partners throughout the development of the project. Below is a list of ongoing initiatives that development partners are 
involved in. It is worth noting that while many of the activities are helping to build adaptive capacity, none of the existing 
initiatives specifically target the improvement of hydro-meteorological information and warning systems with end to end 
connectivity, starting from building capacity at the national level to providing end user services. The initiative by UNDP 
will target preparedness at the municipal level and will rely upon this proposed Project for provision of forecast and 
warnings. It will be important for donors to coordinate throughout the project cycle so that stations are installed in areas 
where there is the most need and value added to provide required information for warning systems essential to reduce 
the vulnerability of communities. While not specifically targeting hydro-met services, other adaptation initiatives such as 
the EU’s policy reform of the National Food Security, USAID’s institutional strengthening project, and GIZ’s technical 
assistance to support climate risk mainstreaming will all help to improve the baseline conditions and readiness for 
agencies to successfully implement the hydro-met Project. The combination of this proposed project with ongoing 
initiatives will allow the use of scientific information to reduce climate risks to both the population and productive 
sectors. Major ongoing projects are described below: 
 
Development 
Partner 
Ongoing Initiative 
Synergies identified 
European 
Union (EU) 
The EU is currently supporting the establishment of 
a regional system for food security monitoring (ECO-
AGRIS) hosted by the Permanent Interstate 
Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS, 
€18 million); as well as the MESA program for 
monitoring environment and security in Africa, with a 
budget of €37 million for the African continent. Since 
2011, the EU has also been supporting the reform of 
National Food Security (NDS) system in Mali, guided 
by diagnostic work that was finalized in January 
2014. In this context, the EU will support the 
development of a national food security policy, as 
well as food crisis prevention tools (food 
distributions, cash transfers and others), which 
annually represent a cost of about CFA 100 billion 
from development partners and CFA 15 billion from 
the Government of Mali.  
A meeting was held on November 12 with Sylvie 
Fontaine (sylvie.fontaine@eeas.europa.eu), EU 
representative in charge of aid and international 
cooperation with the development, rural, environment 
and food security unit of the EU representation in 
Bamako. 
 
The EU-supported development of a national food 
security policy is instrumental to ensure optimal use of 
meteorological and climate information  
USAID 
USAID is: i) supporting an institutional strengthening 
project for Mali Metéo, aimed at providing 
sustainable financing for the newly formed 
autonomous public entity, ii) providing technical 
assistance to improve climate data, including the 
establishment of rainfall estimates over the entire 
country through a combination of station data and 
satellite estimates (in partnership with the 
International Research Institute for Climate and 
Society,(IRI), and iii) supporting the development of 
a decision making tool for farmers using agro-
meteorological information, in conjunction with Mali 
Metéo and the International Crops Research Institute 
for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT). 
A meeting was held on November 10 with USAID 
representatives Aminata Diarra (adiarra@usaid.gov) in 
charge of the environment and natural resources 
program and Jeff Ratcliffe (jratcliffe@maliccaaa.com), 
project director at Chemonics (implementing the project 
on behalf of USAID).  
The USAID project has been prepared in close 
consultation with the World Bank, and coordination 
started as early as 2013 when the institutional diagnosis 
of Mali-Météo was under analysis. The support from 
USAID for development of a long-term business plan is 
a small TA which will assist in targeting sustainable 
production of marketable services responding to specific 
user needs. The proposed project will start from this 
proposed business plan and enhance it with additional 
information related to public users’ requirements and 
public financing. The development of a decision making 
tool for farmers using agro-meteorological information 
relies heavily on expected strengthened capacity of 
Mali-Météo at the central level to provide customized 
services for farmers and herders in the Mopti region.

=== PAGE 21 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 72 
 
C 
 
United Nations 
Development 
Programme 
(UNDP) 
Though a GEF funded project (US$9,000,000), 
UNDP will be supporting disaster prevention and 
preparedness for major risks (mainly floods) across 
seven municipalities (three in Bamako, two in Mopti 
and two in Kayes). In addition, with funding of about 
€1.3 million from the ASNaCC project, UNDP will be 
supporting the installation of meteorological stations 
with Mali Metéo.  
A meeting was held on November 12 with UNDP 
representatives Abdoulaye Bayoko 
(abdoulaye.bayoko@undp.org), climate change 
specialist and program advisor, and Moustapha Diallo, 
disaster risk management specialist 
(moustapha.diallo@undp.org). UNDP project targets 
last-mile delivery of early warning information to 
selected communities, and therefore relies upon 
strengthening of central capacities to monitor extreme 
weather and hydrological events in order to serve the 
communities at-risk. This was reaffirmed in subsequent 
meeting with Pradeep Kurukulsuriya 
(Pradeep.kurukulsuriya@undp.org) and Bonizella 
Biagini (Bonizella.Biagini@undp.org) on April 18, 2016 
in Washington DC. 
German 
Cooperation 
(GIZ) 
With approximately €1.5 million per year over five 
years, GIZ will be providing technical assistance to 
support the implementation of the National Strategy 
on Climate Change (ASNaCC) and the Innovative 
Project Planning for Adaptation to Climate Change 
(PICP). This will include supporting: i) the NAP 
process: ii) mainstreaming risk considerations into 
environmental and social impacts assessments, 
sectoral development planning and with the private 
sector, and iii) the implementation of the Mali 
Climate Fund. 
A meeting was held on November 13 with GIZ 
representatives Solveig Schindler 
(solveig.schindler@giz.de), technical advisor on climate 
change adaptation and Hartmut Behrend 
(hartmut.behrend@giz.de), in charge of contracts and 
cooperation.  
The meeting confirmed the critical need for enhanced 
hydro-meteorological products and services in order to 
provide a baseline and to better anticipate weather, 
hydrology and climate for the upcoming decades.  
World 
Meteorological 
Organization 
(WMO) 
WMO will be providing technical expertise to develop 
a national framework for climate services in Mali to 
better understand the needs of different user groups 
(under the umbrella of the Global Framework for 
Climate Services – GFCS initiative).  
The WB team is in contact with Filipe Domingos Freires 
Lúcio, Director of the Global Framework for Climate 
Services (GFCS) Office in the World Meteorological 
Organization (flucio@wmo.int).  
The proposed project would directly provide resources 
and expertise in order to implement the concept 
proposed in the Mali National Framework for Climate 
Services, which was initially developed in consultation 
between the WB team and WMO consultant () in 2013-
2014.  
French Dev. 
Cooperation 
(AFD), Civil 
Security, IRD) 
For nearly 10 years, and until October 2015, the 
French Development Agency (AfD) has provided 
funding to the Integrated Water Resource 
Management 2 (IWRM 2) project, with the objective 
to support the Niger Basin Authority (NBA) with 
hydrological data collection, analysis and modeling 
to monitor water resources along the Niger River.  
The French Civil Security provides training for Malian 
civil protection officers (first aid, road rescue, fire 
prevention, operational management and emergency 
command) through the project Support to Civil 
Protection in Africa (APCA).  
With funding from the Mali Fund for Korean Green 
Growth (KGGTF) managed by the World Bank, IRD 
piloting an innovative method for the estimation of 
rainfall based on cellular networks (Rain Cell Africa), 
which will support develop of public-private 
partnerships between Mali-Météo and Orange 
cellphone operator. In addition, IRD has worked on 
estimates of water resource problems in small 
basins, rainfall-runoff modeling and the impact of 
human activities on soil and changing hydrological 
regimes. 
The Mali activity financed by the Korean Green Growth 
Trust Fund (KGGTF) is managed by the World Bank. 
The WB team was in discussion remotely (email and 
phone) with the research consortium (Marielle Gosset, 
marielle.gosset@ird.fr, Frédéric Cazenave, 
frederic.cazenave@ird.fr, François Zougmoré, 
zougmore@univ-ouaga.bf).  
The piloting of an innovative method for the estimation 
of rainfall based on cellular networks (Rain Cell Africa) 
is a critical opportunity for Mali-Météo to develop 
capacities related to real-time provision of spatially 
distributed rainfall maps. If this technology could 
become operational during project implementation, it 
would provide immediate benefits for early warning in 
urban areas affected by urban flooding. The TTL for the 
IRD project (supported by WB) and for the proposal is 
the same person.

=== PAGE 22 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 72 
 
C 
African 
Development 
Bank (AfDB) 
The AfDB supports (i) since 2014, the establishment 
of a regional water observatory, the Water 
Resources Coordination Unit of the Economic 
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and 
(ii) the Institutional Support Project to the African 
Climate Institutions (ISACIP), for USD 30 million, to 
strengthen the capacity of African Climate 
Institutions to generate climate information and to 
allow their wide dissemination to end users. 
The team interacted with Justus Joseph Kabyemera, 
Coordinator of the ClimDev Africa Special Fund 
(j.kabyemera@afdb.org) and the discussion confirmed 
the value-added of collaboration. AfDB provides about 
US$1 million to Mali-Metéo to procure meteorological 
equipment, and the sustainability of such equipment 
depends upon the proposed project.  
 
The proposal was developed in close consultation with partners involved in hydro-meteorology, climate adaptation, food security 
and disaster risk management in Mali. This was done in order to ensure that there are no overlaps and duplication of efforts by 
different development partners. 
 
As an example, the USAID-supported project provides about US$850,000 of technical assistance to support the development of an 
institutional 10-year business plan for Mali-Météo in order to improve cost recovery, financial management and communication, 
This business plan will provide directions for modernization, towards a performing and sustainable meteorological service. However 
recommendations would remain unfunded if the GCF funding does not materialize.  
 
Another example is the WMO-supported development of a National Framework for Climate Services (NFCS). This activity also 
provide strategic directions in order to involve the users (and potential users) of hydro-meteorological institutions in the design of 
future products and services; these directions have a great potential to guide the successful implementation of the proposed 
project, but would remain unfunded unless GCF funding materializes.  
 
WMO, USAID and other partners are relying extensively upon GCF funding for hydro-meteorological products and services to 
become available. For example USAID, UNDP, Caritas and GIZ support projects for delivery of hydro-meteorological products and 
services, including warnings, to communities at-risk. The success of these synergetic projects also depends upon the Project to 
enable delivery of enhanced hydro-meteorological products and services including flood warning services to vulnerable 
populations. 
 
C.3. Project / Programme Description 
Describe the main activities and the planned measures of the project/programme according to each of its 
components14.  
 
The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the adaptive capacity and climate resilience of the vulnerable 
communities and economy of Mali. This will be achieved by developing the capacity of national hydro-meteorological 
and warning services, which will in turn support adaptation planning for public and private sector users. 
 
Project Contribution to Climate Adaptation 
 
Enhanced hydro-meteorological information and standard operating procedures linking hydromet information with early 
response is a critical contribution to preparedness and climate adaptation. Strengthening of hydro-meteorological 
services has been recently confirmed as an integral part of the World Bank climate adaptation agenda, specifically in 
the Africa Climate Business Plan (http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2015/11/30/090224b0837b0f0d/1_0/Rendered/PDF/
Accelerating0c0limate0business0plan.pdf) presented in Paris at the COP21. Improving hydromet services is a key 
contribution to adaptation and a critical requirement for i) adapting water resources for irrigated agriculture, hydro power 
and an improved water supply ii) adapting planning for health services iii) providing access to safe air and road 
transportation and iv) reducing the economic and social impacts of floods, drought and other extreme weather events.  
 
Specifically, Mali already experiences extreme weather and climate variability, resulting in high exposure to floods and 
droughts. The impacts of climate change are projected to increase both the frequency and severity of these events. 
Improved weather and climate information is required from the national level down to the household level so that 
government, communities and the private sector can better plan for and adapt to these projected changes in climate. 
Improved hydromet and early warning services would allow vulnerable communities, supported by the national 
                                                          
14 GCF Funding only.

=== PAGE 23 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 72 
 
C 
institutions, to better monitor, prepare for and respond to droughts, as well as extreme rainfall events and flooding. In 
areas of infrastructure development, hydromet information will also inform adaptation in the form of the resilient design 
and positioning of works such as bridges, culverts, and erosion protection. In terms of agriculture and food security, 
reliable hydromet information assists farmers in deciding upon optimal sowing and harvest dates, the types of crops 
and seeds used, and technologies available to reduce the impacts of adverse weather and climate variability and 
change. Private companies and businesses also need and rely on the hydromet data for adaptation decisions. 
 
Project Scope and Coverage 
 
The proposed project has a national coverage and will rely upon and strengthen existing delivery mechanisms from 
agro-meteorology, food security, civil protection and humanitarian contingency planning. Criteria for identification of the 
optimal hydrological and meteorological networks include user group requirements (which reflect the potential use and 
potential value of the information generated), availability of climate series at specific locations (stations should be setup 
in locations where historical data is available if this location matches with current user requirements), as well as 
potential for interpolation using remote sensing techniques. Tentative optimal networks have been identified and maps 
are provided in Annex 7. Precise location of equipment and investments is yet to be confirmed by the in-depth analysis 
of user requirements and status of equipment, which will be carried out during the first phase of the project.  
 
Types of Works and Equipment 
 
The requirements in terms of works and equipment have been identified during project preparation as an optimal fit 
between responding to anticipated requirements of the users and keeping the technology as simple as possible to 
ensure resistance to extreme climate conditions, and reducing as much as possible operation and maintenance cost 
with minimal technical complexity. For example, the project will not finance radars or upper-air monitoring equipment 
which would results into excessive operation costs.  
 
Works include new premises (on public-owned land) for 
- 
National Operational Center for Crisis Monitoring, Activation and Management Center (COVACC) and  
- 
Food Security Early Warning System (SAP).  
 
Equipment anticipated to be procured include: 
- 
Surface meteorological and lighting detection network (AWSs, agromet stations, rain gauges, lightning 
detectors, standard equipment, power supply, telecoms for filed stations, etc.)  
- 
Tools, spare parts and instruments for equipment repair and calibration 
- 
Communication equipment (mostly SMS and GPRS technologies) for real-time and near-real-time collection of 
information and data access; 
- 
Specialized vehicles and equipment for field work (data collection, calibration, maintenance and repairs) and for 
emergency response including flood management and search and rescue 
- 
Computers, tablets, printers and software for field data collection, remote sensing, GIS, Numerical Weather 
Prediction (NWP), database management and development of user applications 
 
The design of the system dully considers the value chain of hydromet services and aims at strengthening end-to-end 
hydromet systems from observation networks, data management systems, forecasting systems to service delivery. The 
design of the observation networks will consider automation and telemetry systems and be significantly enhanced by 
installing (i) surface meteorological and lighting detection network (Automatic Weather Stations (AWSs), agro-met 
stations, rain gauges, lightning detectors, standard equipment, power supply, telecoms for filed stations, etc.), 
(ii) automatic hydrological stations (data collection platforms, automatic stage recorders) and specialized hydrological 
equipment (Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler, bathymetric instruments, sediment measurement instruments, current 
meters, boats) for rivers and small flood-prone watersheds (including urban). The data obtained from the enhanced 
observation networks will be quality assured by establishing (iii) calibration facility and will feed into the (iv) data 
management and forecasting systems, where modernizing Information and Communications Technology (ICT) 
infrastructure is at its core.  
 
The project aims at improving lead time and accuracy of weather, climate and hydrological forecasts and developing 
and improving basic and specialized information products in an efficient and effective manner by leveraging regional 
and global resources, for example, by participating in WMO Severe Weather Forecasting and Demonstration Project 
(SWFDP), introducing Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) and developing forecast accuracy verification system. Mali

=== PAGE 24 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 72 
 
C 
Météo and DNH will jointly develop flood and drought forecasting. Development, dissemination and utilization of climate 
information products will be particularly emphasized under the National Framework for Climate Services, which 
empowers demand driven climate services for sectoral users as well as end-users down to the community. The 
seamless operation and cooperation among key agencies involved (Mali Météo DNH, DGPC and SAP) will be ensured 
and streamlined by developing and operationalizing Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), establishing information 
exchange platform and reinforcing National Operational Center for Crisis Monitoring, Activation and Management 
(COVACC) infrastructure.  
 
The observation network includes a vast majority of manual sensors which are not powered, and a small number of 
automatic sensors (only when needed for rapid-onset hazards) powered with solar panels. One option being considered 
is to link the energy source of the hydromet station to that of community drinking water stations, where solar power is 
used to pump the water. These facilities are closely protected by the community, so the energy source would be more 
secure. 
 
Beneficiaries and Users 
 
Mali’s agrometeorological advisory program was established to address food insecurity linked to droughts in the late 
1970s and early 1980s, focused on rain-fed millet, sorghum, peanuts, cotton, and maize. Current rates of use by 
farmers of agrometeorological advisories are still very low (less than 20% of farmers in villages participating in the 
program). Further women’s rate of use of the advisories is still lower than that of men, and often there is no participation 
in the agrometeorological programs by women. The Project will dramatically enlarge the number of users from 
hydromet services, enhancing use of hydromet information by rain-fed farmers (women and men), and extending it to 
livestock herders (with support from the Sahel Regional Pastoralism project effective in Mali since Nov 2015), to food 
insecure households (with support from the reformed national food security mechanism adopted in Dec 2015) as well 
as to populations vulnerable to flooding (with support from the national risk reduction strategy and national emergency 
response planning (ORSEC) adopted by the Government in Dec, 2015). 
 
Field data collection in Mali is already participatory, with contributions from civil servants, individual contractors, 
voluntary farmers and paid observers. A large proportion of the equipment has not been replaced since the 1960’s. The 
project will modernize the equipment (with some degree of automation) while still relying upon ownership and 
participation of communities (mostly farmers) and civil servants (teachers, agronomists) for vulnerability monitoring, 
gauge reading (important for verification purposes even with automatic stations), protection of equipment and 
monitoring of reliability of the equipment . 
 
Climate Information Flow 
 
Field data collection in Mali is participatory, with contributions from voluntary farmers and community observers (today 
mostly using radio and telephone). The information flow for warning dissemination has recently been clarified (in the 
National Disaster Risk Reduction Strategy and National Emergency Response Plan adopted on December 28th, 2015). 
The hydrological and meteorological services are officially mandated to collect data with participation from users 
(farmers for agro-meteorological data, observers for hydrological data). The project would allow great improvement in 
the quality and availability of data over the territory, with verification, validation and interpolation techniques based upon 
remote sensing and data management. In addition, the project would make the information and services available to 
decision makers, which include the Food Security Commissariat and Civil Protection Authorities (national level), Préfets 
(Department admin 2 level) and mayors (admin 3 level). While the mayor is ultimately responsible for security of 
citizens, the emergency preparedness and response capacities of local governments are still very limited and most 
preparedness and emergency response capacities are at the admin2 (Préfet) and central levels. The technology used 
today is still archaic (phone, radio) and would be strongly enhanced with the project (cloud geospatial decision support 
tool accessible through multiple technologies including traditional communicators, radio, telephone, SMS, smartphones 
and internet).The early warning and hydromet information would be disseminated through multiple technologies 
including traditional communicators, radio, telephone, SMS, smartphones and internet. It is not expected to rely upon 
Internet. As an example, most automatic weather stations would be using GPRS (cellphone network) for data 
concentration, and early warning information would be disseminated through multiple technologies including traditional 
communicators, radio, telephone, SMS, smartphones and internet, where feasible. 
 
Knowledge Products Anticipated

=== PAGE 25 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 72 
 
C 
The project will improve availability and accuracy of existing products including (i) agro-climatic reference tables, for 
planning agricultural activities such as: mobilization, field clearing, and the use of different varieties of seeds and 
pesticides, etc., based on the hydrological reports and daily weather forecasts; (ii) advices on the right time to begin the 
planting season, with the help of planting forecast tables, daily rainfall figures, hydrological reports, and daily weather 
forecasts; (iii) outbreak of certain crop diseases, especially mildew (warning based on rainfall, temperature, and 
humidity); (iv) crop water balance computations at the end of each dekad (10-day period); (v) probability that the rainfall 
for the next 10 days will be equal to or greater than the climatological plant water demand for that specific 10-day 
period; (vi) climatological crop calendar; (vii) climatological sowing dates; (viii) dry and wet spells and (iv) food security 
bulletins identifying food insecure households. In addition, the project will enable to production of shorter-term 
meteorological and hydrological services including (i) flood warnings (fluvial and pluvial) and (ii) extreme weather 
warnings. Users are in parallel (i) institutions (food security mechanism, civil protection, local governments, officially in 
charge for issuance of warnings), (ii) media and traditional communicators (responsible to support warning 
dissemination) and (iii) vulnerable populations (rain-fed farmers, irrigated farmers, livestock herders, fishermen, fluvial 
transporters, households). Uptake for new services will be ensured through existing (thus strengthened) agro-
meteorological, livestock, food security and civil protection networks and committees.  
 
Indigenous Knowledge 
 
The practices of agriculture and pastoralism in the Sahel are largely centered on uncertainty of biophysical conditions: 
uncertainty about when the rainy season will start, uncertainty about the quantity of rainfall, as well as its geographic 
and temporal distribution during the season, and uncertainty about pest and diseases pressure on crops. Indigenous 
knowledge is already used in several ways in Mali in both formalized and informal manners. Mali Metéo together with 
the Multi-Disciplinal Working Group (GTP) produces 10-day agro-meteorological bulletins with active engagement of 
farmers, whereby they take part in reading gauges and interpret information to help with the forecasting process. In 
some municipalities, farmers employ a cropping strategy that creates an opportunity for mid-season adjustment based 
on real-time environmental observations. Indigenous knowledge will continue to be a priority in the Project, which has a 
strong focus on community engagement, particularly in Component 3. Strengthening last mile connectivity includes 
mobilization and sensitization of the community, and importantly, establishing effective feedback mechanisms for 
communities at risk. Given this design, warning systems will not only disseminate information to appropriate users, but 
also allow input from farmers and vulnerable communities into climate service delivery. Importantly, the Project will 
ensure that climate services reach women and other socially and economically marginalized groups. 
 
Capacity Building 
 
The design of the project has been informed by previous smaller single-purpose projects in Mali, which have 
successfully invested in capacity building without achieving a paradigm shift. In addition to select high-level individual 
training provided abroad for key experts and engineers (hydrologists, meteorologists), most training activities are 
planned to be delivered in-country, as joint activities bringing together service providers and their users. In addition, 
training is also planned as field “on-the-job” training sessions, taking advantage of all available national, regional and 
international expertise. Each activity will be considered as a training opportunity, and firms hired to provide guidance on 
institutional development, equipment, software and hardware will all contribute to training of staff with a sustainable 
approach. The planning of activities will ensure regular support to trainees all along the duration of the project 
 
Lessons Learned from Mali Agro-Meteorological Program (1981-2011) 
The USAID assessment of Mali Agro-Meteorological Advisory Program points out a number of recommendations 
drawing from lessons learned with the ongoing program, including: 
- 
strengthening climate services need to start with strengthening the capacity of service providers to collect, 
process, and disseminate climate data and information 
- 
project and program designs must dig deeper into what climate information users need and why, but effort to 
address these needs must also be tempered by scientific and technological constraints that shape the quality of 
the available information 
- 
whether users find the information delivered by climate services useful and actionable depends on how that 
information aligns with the decisions they make; 
- 
Some users are more likely to benefit from climate services than others; 
- 
The wide disparities between men and women’s use of the advisories points to the importance of both 
understanding livelihoods activities and decisions and the enabling environment for climate services use.

=== PAGE 26 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 72 
 
C 
This project will strive to internalize and build upon the lessons from the Mali Agro-Meteorological program in order to 
cover and correct the identified deficiencies and weaknesses of earlier programs through improved design and 
implementation of the project components. 
 
Security and Vandalism 
 
There is a risk that the project is affected by conflict and vandalism. Tight security procedures will therefore be put in 
place by DGPC, to ensure the security of staff working on this project.  
 
In order to prevent vandalism and damage to project assets, fences will be erected around hydromet stations to prevent 
access. Very often it is the solar panels that are stolen from hydromet equipment, one option being considered is to link 
the energy source of the hydromet station to that of community drinking water stations, where solar power is used to 
pump the water. These facilities are closely protected by the community, so the energy source would be more secure. 
Awareness raising and training of local communities about the importance of these hydromet stations, will be part of 
component 3, so that the community appreciates the value of the infrastructure to enhance their own wellbeing. 
 
All equipment procured under the project will be included in the national inventory. As it is the case for all government-
owned equipment operated by government employees in Mali, the equipment will be covered under self-underwriting 
option by the Government. In addition, further insurance avenues will be explored with implementing partners.  
 
Component Description 
The project will consist of the following four components: 
 
Component 1 - Capacity building and institutional development 
This will include: 
(i) 
Training and capacity building programs for agencies’ staff and management: Develop and implement a 
capacity building, training and education program including: (i) personnel training and retraining; and (ii) 
professional orientation for senior staff. Modalities of training would include in-situ training, education at 
universities, study tours, distance learning program and training in WMO regional and other relevant 
training centers. Areas of technical training will include at least basic meteorology, hydrology & ICT, 
maintenance and operation of newly acquired equipment, information and communication technology, data 
processing, analysis & management, geographical information systems and remote sensing. Targeted 
training programs will also be developed for specific agency needs, such as simulation exercises for the 
DGPC, forecasting models for Mali Metéo and DNH, and food security and livelihood impact analysis 
methodologies for SAP. Twinning arrangements with developed hydro-meteorological services and South-
South cooperation will be a key aspect of the training and capacity building program, with countries facing 
similar weather hazards as those in Mali and with advanced level of expertise to share. The design of the 
project has been informed by previous smaller single-purpose projects in Mali, which have successfully 
invested in capacity building without achieving a paradigm shift. In addition to select high-level individual 
training provided abroad for key experts and engineers (hydrologists, meteorologists), most training 
activities are planned to be delivered in-country, as joint activities bringing together service providers and 
their users. In addition, training is also planned as field “on-the-job” training sessions, taking advantage of 
all available national, regional and international expertise. Each activity will be considered as a training 
opportunity, and firms hired to provide guidance on institutional development, equipment, software and 
hardware will all contribute to training of staff with a sustainable approach. The planning of activities will 
ensure regular support to trainees all along the duration of the project. 
 
(ii) 
Enhancing institutional and regulatory frameworks: Strengthen institutions of hydro-meteorology, food 
security and civil protection through institutional development and strategic planning, and development of 
adequate legal and regulatory frameworks, including development of Standard Operating Procedures to 
ensure early action in relation with early warnings.  
 
(iii) 
Providing support for system integration of project activities: This activity includes developing detailed project 
design, ensuring integration and interoperability of systems and providing implementation support including 
development of technical specifications/tender documents.

=== PAGE 27 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 72 
 
C 
 
Component 2 – Improvement of hydromet and early warning infrastructure 
This will include: 
(i) 
Expanding and upgrading hydromet observation networks: This activity will support expanding and upgrading 
the surface meteorological network (Automatic Weather Stations, rain gauges, lightning detectors, standard 
equipment, power supply, telecoms for field stations, etc.), the agro-meteorological network, hydrological 
stations (automatic stage recorders) and specialized hydrological equipment (Acoustic Doppler Current 
Profiler, bathymetric instruments, sediment measurement instruments, current meters, boat) for rivers and 
small flood-prone watersheds. 
 
(ii) 
Enhancing data collection & transmission, forecasting and decision support systems: Upgrading data 
collection and communication equipment and devices, data storage and management systems, and 
computers and software for remote sensing, as well as software and customized tools for GIS and modelling 
and forecasting.  
 
(iii) 
Strengthening preparedness and emergency response facilities and operations: To enable agencies to carry 
out their operational mandates for disaster preparedness and response, this activity will include the design, 
building and equipment for a national Operational Center for Crisis Monitoring, Activation and Management to 
withstand all disaster scenarios; the design, building and equipment of national office for SAP, specialized 
emergency vehicles and search and rescue equipment.  
 
Component 3 - Enhancement of service delivery and warnings to communities 
This will include  
(i) 
Establishing a national framework for climate services: To broaden and strengthen stakeholder engagement 
and provide a platform for the exchange of knowledge and climate information needs, which will guide the 
improvement of services by DGPC, SAP, DNH and Mali Metéo, this activity will support the development of a 
National Framework for Climate Services with sectoral Working Groups. South-South cooperation with 
countries like Indonesia having successfully established a national framework for climate services could be 
used to share best practices and help Malian civil servants establish regular contacts for guidance with 
foreign nationals that designed, implemented and followed up on the framework. The activity will also develop 
a digital library of climate-relevant information for priority climate sensitive sectors. An information exchange 
platform will be developed between key Government stakeholders (DGPC, SAP, DNH, and Mali Metéo) to 
enhance disaster risk assessment, preparedness and crisis management.  
 
(ii) 
Improving flood and drought forecasting and warnings: The objective of this activity is to improve the lead 
time and accuracy of weather, climate and hydrological forecasts and develop timely and actionable warning 
services through improved numerical weather prediction, flood modelling and weather forecasting, including 
participation in WMO Severe Weather Forecasting Demonstration Project (SWFDP), and development of 
impact based warnings. Forecast accuracy verification system will be developed and operationalized. The 
activity will also include field campaigns for validation of stage/discharge rating curves and collection of 
topographic data. 
 
(iii) 
Developing new products for sector specific needs: This activity supports the development of specialized 
weather, climate and hydrological products and services tailored to sector specific needs (agriculture, health, 
energy, transport, water resources management, disaster risk management, etc.). The emphasis is placed on 
the user driven process to define new services and the activity will also institutionalize a mechanism to 
provide user feedback.  
 
(iv) 
Strengthening “last mile” connectivity to ensure appropriate understanding and use of information: Enhancing 
end-to-end early warning systems reaching down to the municipal and community level. Strengthening last 
mile connectivity includes mobilization and sensitization of the community, and importantly, establishing 
effective feedback mechanisms for communities at risk (detailed below). Given this design, warning systems 
will not only disseminate information to appropriate users, but also allow input from farmers and vulnerable 
communities into climate service delivery. The activity will engage the end user community and implement 
training activities (workshops, roundtables, etc.) for major users. A communication strategy will be developed

=== PAGE 28 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 72 
 
C 
within the first year of the project start and implemented to support the dissemination of products to end users 
(bulletins, forecasts, warnings and advisories).  
 
(v) 
Mobilization and sensitization of communities at risk: Indigenous knowledge is already used in several ways 
in Mali in both formalized and informal manners. Mali Metéo together with the Multi-Disciplinal Working Group 
(GTP) produces 10-day agro-meteorological bulletins with active engagement of farmers, whereby they take 
part in reading gauges and interpret information to help with the forecasting process. In some municipalities, 
farmers employ a cropping strategy that creates an opportunity for mid-season adjustment based on real-time 
environmental observations. Indigenous knowledge will continue to be a priority in the Project, which has a 
strong focus on community engagement Community capacity building and gender and youth group 
sensitization will take place through workshops, operational training and drills involving populations at risk, 
local governments and other relevant stakeholders. SOPs, warning protocols and signals will be developed 
and agreed with community members in pilot areas. The activity will also support the integration of disaster 
and climate risk management into school and university curricula. Community preparedness and climate 
readiness will be informed by municipal multi-hazard risk assessments for targeted high risk areas. 
 
(vi) 
Service Delivery enhancement through community collaboration: The Mali agro-meteorological system is 
considered a best practice in Africa with regards to collaboration between Mali-Météo and the Ministry of 
Agriculture, and with regards to participation of voluntary farmers in the data collection and knowledge 
dissemination. The project would strengthen the agro-meteorological services, while in parallel support similar 
approaches for warnings related to extreme events (rainfall, pluvial flooding, fluvial flooding, storms, wildland 
fire, etc.). In addition to traditional training, workshop and roundtables, the project will support (i) operational 
drills with communities’ at-risk, (ii) on-the-job training involving operational agro-/hydro-meteorologists, 
observers as well as end-users and (iii) municipal multi-hazard risk assessments based upon combination of 
scientific and participatory methods. 
 
Component 4 - Project management  
This component will include support for all four entities for project coordination, monitoring and evaluation, reporting, 
financial management, procurement and environmental and social safeguards, technical and financial audits, 
development of project implementation manuals, and communication materials.   
 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor (Executing Entity) 
Describe the quality of the management team, overall strategy and financial profile of the Sponsor (Executing Entity) 
and how it will support the project/programme in terms of equity investment, management, operations, production and 
marketing. 
 
The Directorate General of Civil Protection (DGPC) is attached to the Ministry of Security and Civil Protection, and is 
the coordinating body for emergency preparedness and response as well as disaster and climate risk adaptation and 
prevention activities. It is responsible for issuing early warning to populations at risk, supporting communities to prepare 
and respond to warnings, sharing lessons learned from past disasters, and ensuring inter-ministerial coordination for 
mainstreaming disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation. 
 
The DGPC is a public service targeting populations of Mali vulnerable to anthropogenic and climate risks, and 
organized at the central level with the following units: 
- 
Prevention and adaptation 
- 
Early warning and emergency response 
- 
Administration and financial management 
- 
Civil protection school 
- 
Communication 
- 
Internal audit 
 
DGPC is a public service contribution to the resilience of the people of Mali, and does not have a strategy for equity 
investment, production and marketing. However, its capacities for project management and inter-ministerial operations 
is strong and have been strengthened through a recently completed World Bank project (March 2012 - June 2015).

=== PAGE 29 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 72 
 
C 
DGPC has an annual budget of about US$1 million for investment and operation, and is supported in addition by 1,172 
civil servants. An additional batch of 500 civil protection officers are currently being recruited to support the 
implementation of the disaster risk reduction and climate adaptation strategy adopted by the Government on December 
28th, 2015.  
 
The project will be executed through a Grant Agreement between the World Bank and the Government of Mali, which 
will detail all project management arrangements to be complied with by DGPC. 
 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
Describe the market for the product(s) or services including the historical data and forecasts. 
 
The hydromet and climate data, information, forecasts, warnings and other products are provided by as a “public good”, 
because of their public safety value and cross-cutting socio-economic benefits. 
 
At the same time, there is a strong demand for the products and services from improved hydromet services, particularly 
in the civil aviation, transport, tourism, energy, agriculture, water resources management and health sectors. These 
products and services are critical to (i) providing early warning to reduce the economic and social impacts of floods, 
drought and other adverse weather events; (ii) developing water resources for agriculture, hydropower and water supply; 
and (iii) informing safer air, marine and road transportation. Improved hydromet services will enhance governance by 
providing information for making and implementing evidence based, accountable decisions, including those related to 
adaptation to climate change.  
 
However, selective commodification of the products and services of this Project for the profit-making sectors has been 
envisaged only for the subsequent stage when hydromet services have graduated into more advanced self-sustaining 
business models. Options to strengthen sustainability include partial cost recovery from institutional end users, public-
private partnership to strengthen the revenue base of hydromet services and residual budget support from beneficiary 
governments for O&M, including human resources. 
 
 
Describe the competitive environment including the list of competitors with market shares and customer base and key 
differentiating factors (if applicable). 
 
Hydro-meteorological and warning services are regulated official public services and have no significant competition 
today in Mali.  
 
 
Provide pricing structures, price controls, subsidies available and government involvement (if any). 
 
The Government of Mali, as other governments, supports hydro-meteorological and warning services from the national 
budget, including from taxes collected by the civil aviation authority. While basic services contributing to the safety of 
lives and livelihoods should remain exchanged and disseminated free of charge, some value-added services could be 
developed on a commercial basis with pricing structures and price controls determined so as to contribute to the O&M 
of the hydro-meteorological services. However, it is not expected to be achieved through this project. It can be 
considered feasible in the longer-run, however, as Mali Metéo already sells long-term climate data series to businesses 
interested in long-term rainfall patterns for example. 
 
In addition to revenues from the sale of services to the private sector, the respective government departments and 
agency, may also be able be subsidized by other government users, such as is the case for Mali Metéo earning a 
percentage of all airport taxes, since air-traffic control uses Mali Metéo forecasting services. 
 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable)

=== PAGE 30 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 72 
 
C 
Provide details of government licenses or permits required for implementing and operating the project/programme, the 
issuing authority, and the date of issue or expected date of issue. 
 
The Government of Mali will execute the Project and will issue all licenses or permits if required. The only permit 
anticipated to be required is an environmental permit. The World Bank mission in November 2015 has an explicit 
understanding with the government that this will be issued by the institution in charge of environmental and social 
safeguards (DNAPCN) under the Ministry of Environment), following due process.  
 
The Grant Agreement will be established with Standard Conditions for Grants made by the World Bank out of Various 
Funds dated July 31, 2010 (“Standard Conditions”, available as Annex 15) and with reference to the World Bank 
Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption (January 2011, Annex 16), the World Bank 
Disbursement Guidelines (May 2006, Annex 17), the World Bank Guidelines on Selection and Employment of 
Consultants (January 2011, Annex 18), the World Bank Guidelines on Procurement of Goods, Works and Non-
Consulting Services (January 2011, Annex 19), including the guidance on Anti Money Laundering and Combating 
Financing of Terrorism.  
 
Describe applicable taxes and foreign exchange regulations. 
 
Investment operations for hardware and infrastructure are envisaged for government execution under the Project. As 
such, the Government itself will remain the beneficiary and proponent of such investment programs, which require the 
procurement of goods, services and works. Government of Mali will waive applicable taxes and provide foreign 
exchange concessions to such publicly funded Project investments. 
 
Provide details on insurance policies related to project/programme. 
 
Not applicable. 
 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements 
Please describe in detail the governance structure of the project/programme, including but not limited to the 
organization structure, roles and responsibilities of the project/programme management unit, steering committee, 
executing entities and so on, as well as the flow of funds structure.  Also describe which of these structures are 
already in place and which are still pending. For the pending ones, please specify the requirements to establish 
them. 
 
The Director-General for Civil Protection will coordinate project implementation, with support from technical staff 
from all four entities supported by the project. The Administration and Accounting Unit (DAC) of the DGPC will 
support fiduciary aspects, and the Operational Unit (DOSA) will support technical and safeguards aspects. The 
Project will be managed by civil servants and with support from external consultants, including for procurement 
and safeguards. More detailed breakdown of responsibilities is provided in section F4. The World Bank, as the 
GCF-accredited entity, will oversee appropriate implementation of the Project, in line with World Bank procedures 
standards and requirements in the AMA/FAA to be agreed with the GCF. The DGPC acts as the chair of the 
National Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction, which brings together relevant government and non-governmental 
actors that play a role in disaster risk management in the country. This platform will be used as a consultative 
body throughout the design and implementation of the Project to ensure that the needs of both the central 
Government, the Municipalities and civil society users are taken into account. The platform also includes a formal 
inter-ministerial coordination body, chaired by the Prime Minister and consisting of ministers across all relevant 
ministries, which can also be used to ensure enhanced inter-governmental coordination and information sharing.

=== PAGE 31 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 72 
 
C 
 
 
All activities will be directly executed by the DGPC under the direct supervision from the World Bank. DNH, Mali-
Météo and CSA/SAP will participate in the project implementation by providing resources for operation, 
maintenance and investment, providing staff to support project implementation, developing terms of reference 
and participating in selection committees for procurement. However, DGPC is alone responsible for project 
implementation and reporting. This model has been successfully tested in 2012-2015 for the implementation of 
the Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate Adaptation project, which included 7 partner institutions. DGPC, Mali-
Météo, DNH and SAP were all EE and IPs (with similar setup) for the World Bank - GFDRR-supported project between 
2012 and 2015. The project was successfully implemented with satisfactory collaboration and data sharing for effective 
mainstreaming of climate change in national and sector planning and coordination in information sharing and project 
implementation. This will also be reflected in the subsidiary agreements with the Implementing Partner Mali – Metéo. 
 
The Recipient will carry out the Project in accordance with the provisions and requirements set forth or referred 
to in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM), which will be developed consistent with the provisions of the 
Grant Agreement. Most recipient-executed projects in Mali use country systems coupled with a dedicated 
software for financial management, and follow Bank procedures for procurement, audits and safeguards, and 
monitoring and evaluation.  
 
The core project team will include (i) a project coordinator (civil servant: Director-General of Civil Protection) to 
oversee activities and track financial and operational project performance; (ii) an assistant to the project 
coordinator (civil servant) to support implementation and ensure smooth coordination on a day to day basis; (iii) a 
procurement specialist (civil servant); (iv) a financial management specialist (civil servant); (v) a procurement 
consultant; (vi) a safeguard consultant; (vii) a monitoring and evaluation consultant; (viii) an internal auditor (civil 
servant) and (ix) an external auditor (firm). The core team will be supported by experts from DGPC, SAP, DNH 
and Mali-Météo, and will have the capacity to recruit experts for short term consultancies, in order to implement 
activities with good understanding of technical and local contexts.  
 
A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established, with representation from all four entities (DGPC, SAP, 
DNH, and Mali-Metéo). The AEDD will also be invited on the Committee. The PSC will meet on a regular basis to 
oversee and coordinate project implementation and report on progress. The Project Steering Committee will have 
responsibility for internal controls over the project. The World Bank will participate as an observer in the PSC 
meetings and provide guidance as needed. 
 
The Recipient will carry out the Project in accordance with the provisions and requirements set forth or referred 
to in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM), which will be developed consistent with the provisions of the 
Grant Agreement (see Standard Conditions as Annex 14).  
 
The PCU will be (i) staffed by civil servants and consultants from DGPC: procurement specialists, 
financial management specialist, safeguard specialist, and a monitoring and evaluation specialist; and 
(ii) supported by key senior technical staff from relevant entities. 
National Steering Committee (NSC)
chaired by a representative from the Ministry in charge of Civil Protection, comprises representatives 
from DGPC, SAP (Food Security Commissariat), Mali-Météo (Ministry in charge of Transportation) and 
DNH (Ministry in charge for Energy and Water)
DNH
DGPC
Project 
Coordination 
Unit
Mali-Météo
SAP

=== PAGE 32 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 72 
 
C 
To date, most recipient-executed projects in Mali use country systems coupled with a dedicated software for 
financial management, and follow Bank procedures for procurement, audits, safeguards, and monitoring and 
evaluation. 
 
The option of using the Mali Climate Fund to manage the proposed project was discussed as an option with the NDA, 
the WB and implementing partners, however it was considered that the Fund’s capacity was not adequate for 
implementing a project of such technical and institutionally complex nature.  
 
 
 
Project Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
 
As detailed in Annex 14 Section 2.06, the DGPC on behalf of the Government of Mali will: (a) ensure the 
maintenance of policies and procedures adequate to enable it to monitor and evaluate on an ongoing basis, in 
accordance with indicators acceptable to the World Bank, the progress of the Project and the achievement of its 
objectives; and (b) if so required in accordance with the provisions of the Grant Agreement: (i) (A) ensure the 
preparation and delivery to the World Bank of one or more project reports (“Project Reports”), in form and 
substance satisfactory to the World Bank, integrating the results of such monitoring and evaluation activities and 
setting out measures recommended by the Recipient to ensure the continued efficient and effective execution of 
the Project, and to achieve the Project’s objectives; each Project Report to cover the period specified in the 
Grant Agreement and to be furnished to the World Bank not later than the date specified for that purpose in the 
Grant Agreement; and (B) afford the World Bank a reasonable opportunity to exchange views with the Recipient 
on such report, and thereafter implement such recommended measures, taking into account the World Bank’s 
views on the matter; and (ii) ensure the preparation and delivery to the World Bank, not later than the date 
specified for that purpose in the Grant Agreement, of one or more completion reports (“Completion Reports”): (A) 
of such scope and in such detail as the World Bank shall reasonably request, on the execution of the Project, the 
performance by the Recipient and the World Bank of their respective obligations under the Grant Agreement and 
the accomplishment of the purposes of the Grant; and (B) a plan designed to ensure the sustainability of the 
Project’s achievements. 
 
Financial Management; Financial Statements; Audits 
 
As detailed in Annex 14 Section 2.07, the DGPC on behalf of the Government of Mali will ensure that: (a) a 
financial management system is maintained and financial statements (“Financial Statements”) are prepared in 
accordance with consistently applied accounting standards acceptable to the World Bank, both in a manner 
adequate to reflect the operations, resources and expenditures related to the Project; (b) if so required in 
accordance with the provisions of the Grant Agreement: (i) the Financial Statements are periodically audited by 
independent auditors acceptable to the World Bank, in accordance with consistently applied auditing standards 
acceptable to the World Bank; and (ii) the Financial Statements, as so audited, are furnished to the World Bank 
not later than the date specified in the Grant Agreement for that purpose, together with such other information 
concerning the audited Financial Statements and such auditors, as the World Bank may from time to time 
reasonably request; and (c) the Financial Statements audited pursuant to paragraph (b) of this Section are made 
publicly available in a timely fashion and in a manner acceptable to the World Bank. 
 
Operation and Maintenance 
 
In accordance with section 2.04 of Annex 14, all beneficiary agencies on behalf of the Government of Mali shall 
ensure that: (a) except as the World Bank shall otherwise agree, all goods, works and services financed out of 
the proceeds of the Grant are used exclusively for the purposes of the Project; and (b) all facilities relevant to the 
Project are at all times properly operated and maintained and all necessary repairs and renewals of such 
facilities are made promptly as needed. 
 
Sensors of hydro-meteorological instruments (except those of barometers) are installed outdoors, and are 
exposed to rain, wind and sunshine. Regular maintenance is therefore necessary to achieve stable operation and

=== PAGE 33 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 72 
 
C 
obtain accurate data. Rain gauges, for example, sometimes become clogged with leaves or dirt, and defective 
contacts of connectors, water infiltration, strong winds or lightning is likely to cause damage to instruments. In 
addition to regular maintenance, special maintenance also needs to be carried out after extreme weather events.   
Even if an observation environment is favorable at the time of initial installation, changes such as the growth of 
trees and weeds may change the observation conditions. Accordingly, necessary maintenance such as trimming 
and mowing during regular inspections should be carried out as appropriate. An instrument maintenance 
schedule for regular inspections and part replacement will be drawn up in consideration of the inspection 
procedures recommended by the manufacturers.  
 
A detailed operations and maintenance plan will be developed by the Government of Mali as part of the project 
implementation manual which will be a condition of effectiveness for the Grant. The maintenance for hydro-
meteorological equipment will comply with WMO recommendations available in the Guide to Meteorological 
Instruments and Methods of Observation (publication WMO #8). The manual will be reviewed by the World Bank 
to ensure financial and technical feasibility and sustainability, and will be updated according to the detailed 
technical specifications of equipment as it becomes available. The only Condition of effectiveness anticipated for 
the Grant will be the adoption of a project implementation manual, and this is not expected to delay 
implementation since DGPC has already implemented a project with similar implementation arrangements and is 
able to develop this manual before effectiveness. The Conditions of effectiveness and dated covenants 
guarantee compliance with all WB conditions and guidelines, and are proposed by WB legal department. 
 
Each of the four recipient entities will be responsible for operation and maintenance of equipment, works and 
systems under their area of competence. For the purposes of the economic model, a high cost for O&M was used 
(15% of project costs) in order to ensure long-term sustainability and viability of the modernization.  
 
While there is potential in the future for Mali-Météo to commercialize and sell some of its services to users to 
recover costs, as mentioned in the proposal, this is not expected to be directly achieved during the life of this 
project. In the context of the preparation of this project, operation and maintenance is fully covered from public 
financing from key benefiting ministries (transportation, water, energy, food security, civil protection).  
 
List of Main Contracts Anticipated 
 
A simplified procurement plan listing key expected contracts has been prepared and provided as Annex 9. This 
document lists contracts for recruitment of services, equipment and works. Works are considered as essential to 
the effective delivery of development objectives of the project, and integral part of the project, however none are 
expected to be funded by the GCF. Please note that according to the classification of documents protocol of 
the World Bank, this is a confidential document and cannot be made public. 
 
The Grant Agreement is the only legal agreement anticipated to be established between the World Bank and the 
Government of Mali for the implementation of the project. This Grant Agreement will include as annexes the 
World Bank Standard Conditions for Grants (July 2010, Annex 15), the World Bank Guidelines on Preventing and 
Combating Fraud and Corruption (January 2011, Annex 16), the World Bank Disbursement Guidelines (May 
2006, Annex 17), the World Bank Guidelines on Selection and Employment of Consultants (January 2011, Annex 
18), the World Bank Guidelines on Procurement of Goods, Works and Non-Consulting Services (January 2011, 
Annex 19), and the Anti Money Laundering and Combating Financing of Terrorism guidelines. 
 
The Government of Mali will also enter into one subsidiary Agreement, satisfactory to the World Bank, with the 
Mali Metéo official national meteorological agency, which is a public technical and scientific service with legal 
personality and financial autonomy under the Ministry of Transport and supported by the State Subsidiary 
Budget. As the other Implementing Partners are government departments, no separate Implementation 
Agreements between the Executing Entity and Implementing Partners would be required.

=== PAGE 34 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 72 
 
C 
C.8. TIMETABLE OF PROJECT/PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
Please provide a project/programme implementation timetable in section I (Annexes). The table below is for illustrative purposes. If the table format 
below is used, please refer to the activities as numbered in Section H. In the case of outputs, please mark when all the required activities will be 
completed. 
 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
TASK 
Q
3 
Q
4 
Q
1 
Q
2 
Q
3 
Q
4 
Q
1 
Q
2 
Q
3 
Q
4 
Q
1 
Q
2 
Q
3 
Q
4 
Q
1 
Q
2 
Component 1 
Capacity building and institutional development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) Training and capacity building programs for agencies’ staff and 
management 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
(ii) Enhancing institutional and regulatory frameworks 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) Providing support for system integration of project activities 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Component 2 
Improvement of hydromet and early warning infrastructure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) Expanding and upgrading hydromet observation networks 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
(ii) Enhancing data collection & transmission, forecasting and 
decision support systems 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
(iii) Strengthening preparedness and emergency response facilities 
and operations 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
Component 3 
Enhancement of service delivery and warnings to communities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) Establishing a national framework for climate services 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
(ii) Improving flood and drought forecasting and warnings 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
(iii) Developing new products for sector specific needs 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
(iv) Strengthening “last mile” connectivity to ensure appropriate 
understanding and use of information 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
(v) Mobilization and sensitization of communities at risk 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Component D 
Project Management 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X

=== PAGE 35 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 72 
 
 
 D 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement 
 
 
Please specify why the GCF involvement is critical for the project/programme, in consideration of other alternatives. 
GCF support for the Mali Hydromet Modernization and Strengthening Project under the Africa Hydromet Program is 
crucial. Most NMHSs in Africa are unable to meet the basic needs for weather and climate information. Less than 20 
percent of Sub-Saharan African countries are capable of providing reliable hydromet services to their people and 
economies. A recent WMO survey shows that 54 percent of the surface and 71 percent of the upper air weather 
stations in Africa did not report data. Only 10 NMHSs in Africa provide adequate forecast and warning services. The 
investment needs for system-wide modernization of hydromet services in Sub-Saharan Africa are substantial, and also 
at the core of building climate adaptation capacity as well as climate-resilient development. 
Funding from governments and development partners is insufficient. In addition, it pays limited attention to the system 
architecture and sustainability aspects of NMHSs. Meeting operating and maintaining costs remains a challenge, 
despite the benefits provided by hydromet and early warning services. Even as the cost benefit ratio of investing in 
hydromet services is between 1:3 and 1:15 in different contexts, providing sufficient resources over a number of years, 
necessary for effecting transformative change, is difficult for most African governments. 
 
Coordination, sustainability and ‘last mile connectivity’ are major challenges in the optimal performance of NMHSs and 
EWSs. In some cases, projects provide equipment, which cannot be utilized and/or maintained because of lack of 
trained staff and/or operating budget.  Often, the support is small-scale and has a project-approach, while the 
financing must be substantial and have a systems-approach to be transformative. 
 
Mali is facing the impacts of climate change. With projected increases in climate variability, and desertification, it is one 
of the most vulnerable countries in the world to future impacts. It is therefore imperative that the country takes urgent 
action to cope with shocks and stresses such as drought, flooding and food security.  
 
Without GCF involvement, the Government of Mali cannot take adequate steps to help vulnerable communities and 
the economy adapt to climate-related disaster risks. GCF involvement is critical to ensure programmatic continuity and 
adequacy of support to Mali for hydromet strengthening. Investment needs for system-wide modernization of hydromet 
services in Mali are significant. As a least developed country, the financial needs in Mali are significant. The 
Government is struggling to set aside resources from its stretched national budget. Even as the cost benefit of 
investing in hydromet services is high, providing sufficient resources over a number of years is difficult for this least 
developed country. Because funding is insufficient, it pays limited attention to the system architecture and 
sustainability aspects of national systems. Investments in climate information and early warning will have life-saving 
impacts, and provide economic benefits through increased productivity and reduced losses.   
 
As the Project will yield adaptation benefits that reduce the impacts of floods and droughts (including secondary 
impacts on food security) on vulnerable populations, it is fully in line with GCF’s objective to invest in climate resilient 
development and to help vulnerable societies adapt to the impacts of climate change. With a focus on strengthening 
hydromet services, institutional capacity building and end user connectivity, the Project will enable durable systemic 
change with a potential for scalability and replicability.  
 
The Project builds upon Mali’s experience in implementing climate-related disaster risk management projects in the 
past. The strategies and policies, such as NAPA, the national climate change strategy, and the national disaster risk 
management strategy, underscore the need for hydromet strengthening. By reducing economic losses and increasing 
productivity, the Project will directly support climate resilient development. Investment in hydromet services is a “no 
regret” climate adaptation investment, particularly for a vulnerable LDC like Mali. 
 
D.2. Exit Strategy

=== PAGE 36 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 72 
 
 
 D 
Please explain how the project/programme sustainability will be ensured in the long run, after the project/programme is 
implemented with support from the GCF and other sources, taking into consideration the long-term financial viability 
demonstrated in E.6.3. This should include a description of strategies for longer term maintenance of physical assets 
(if applicable). 
 
Note: Hydromet is a technology-intensive and human-resource intensive sector, which continues to evolve 
very rapidly and, therefore, a total exit is not feasible to be strategized in the short or medium-term. 
 
 
In order to ensure sustainability after the life of the Project and to make a smooth exit, interventions will emphasize 
three key critical aspects learned from past investments.  
  
(i) Strengthened Institutional capacity  
• 
The Project will strengthen institutional capacity of national agencies to ensure sustainable policy making, as 
well as strategic and budget planning, which will go a long way towards efficient and effective management, 
as well as elevating agency relevance.   
• 
Technical assistance and capacity building will see an intensive phase during Project implementation, which 
will require substantial resource deployment. After the peak, it is expected that technical assistance and 
capacity building needs will plateau out to a low equilibrium, which will be sustainable through normal public 
sector allocation by the Government, supported, if necessary, through development assistance channels from 
development partners. 
• 
Major policy-institutional support for enabling environment generation will be a one-time investment. It is not a 
recurring charge, and does not require an exit strategy. 
 
(ii) Ensure cost effectiveness of the system and operations and maintenance of the system  
• 
Cost effectiveness will be partly realized through improved cooperation between government agencies, 
stakeholders and users. The Project will ensure a commitment from the participating relevant national 
institutions to cooperate and collaborate with each other and to open data regime leading to efficiency and 
better service delivery. 
• 
It is also important to note that investment operations will cover the capital cost of equipment and 
infrastructure as one-time costs. There is no inherent dependence in this component, and exit is relatively 
easy and straightforward. 
 
(iii) Create end user demands and put in place a user feedback mechanism to ensure the provision of sustained 
service that meets user demands. 
• 
The Project will help to improve service delivery to key national and sub-national stakeholders, thus creating 
additional demand and facilitating increased budget support. 
• 
The Project will institutionalize a user feedback mechanism in the service development cycle to ensure the 
hydromet service continues to evolve as user demands change, which will contribute to long-term 
sustainability through keeping the relevance of hydromet services.  
• 
The Project will engage community and sectoral users from the onset of the project design. One of the main 
interventions will be joint training activity with user groups to strengthen user’s capacity to utilize hydromet 
information products for decision-making and also to increase NMHS’s understanding of user requirements.   
 
(iv) Ensure financial sustainability through improved business models and services. 
• 
The Project will improve business models and services to reach critical size and quality to attract private interest 
and investments towards the development of specialized user-based needs. Agencies have already identified

=== PAGE 37 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 72 
 
 
 D 
new markets for services as well as potential clients for hydro-meteorological services, information and analysis. 
With the help of the Project it is expected agencies will become able to meet part of this demand. 
• 
The agencies benefiting from the Project will comply with a covenant to build sustainable, long-term business 
models from the reliable operation of strengthened hydromet systems in order to meet the costs of operation 
and maintenance of the services from their internal revenues and through national budget support. O&M, 
including maintaining qualified staff for operation, will be an agreed function, which will meet such costs from 
its own revenues, and/or through innovative financing mechanisms such as private sector engagement or 
public private participation, and/or through pricing of the hydromet products for profit-generating sectors, both 
public and private. More importantly, this Project will help to improve service delivery to key national and sub-
national stakeholders, thus creating additional demand and facilitating increased budget support. 
• 
The World Bank would encourage the Government, through existing country and policy dialogue, to allocate 
sufficient resources for operation and maintenance of the hydro-meteorological and warning services in Mali.  
 
USAID is currently starting to explore, through the engagement of an individual consultant, avenues for developing a 
long-term (10-year) cost recovery strategy and business plan for Mali-Météo. There is indeed high demand for Mali-
Météo products and services from the general public, the government and the private sector. While some user groups 
are not prepared to pay for Mali-Météo weather and advisory services, costs can be recovered from subsidies for 
provision of public services (food security, early warning) and from commercial revenues (aviation, infrastructure design, 
insurance, etc.). USAID engagement will provide a preliminary market analysis of who can pay how much for which 
services. Mali-Météo is not the only meteorological service in Africa that has become an autonomous services delivery 
agency for weather information and analysis. In 1999, the Tanzania Meteorological Agency (TMA) has gone through 
much the same history as Mali-Météo. The Tanzanian government assessment of the impact of “semi-independent 
public institutions that are designed to operate at arm’s length from their parent Ministries” shows that services improved, 
staff became more professional, and state subsidies increased because government confidence in the agencies led to 
more business.

=== PAGE 38 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 72 
 
 E 
In this section, the accredited entity is expected to provide a brief description of the expected performance of the 
proposed project/programme against each of the Fund’s six investment criteria. Activity-specific sub-criteria and 
indicative assessment factors, which can be found in the Fund’s Investment Framework, should be addressed where 
relevant and applicable. This section should tie into any request for concessionality made in section B.2. 
 
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas 
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential 
Specify the mitigation and/or adaptation impact, taking into account the relevant and applicable sub-criteria and 
assessment factors in the Fund’s investment framework.  
 
Most benefits from the proposed project result from the delivery of services, Component C, and can only be realized 
with appropriate institutional strengthening (Component A) and acquisition of specialized equipment and 
infrastructure (Component B). The benefits below are therefore considered impacts from the integrated approach of 
the project, and have not been segregated by component. The economic analysis has been performed over a 10-
year period, which is spanning over the project lifetime and taking into account the investment is institutionally 
sustainable, economically viable, and technically feasible and has string social, environmental and economic co-
benefits. 
 
Expected total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries, (reduced vulnerability or increased resilience); 
number of beneficiaries relative to total population (PMF-A Core 1), particularly the most vulnerable groups: 
While improved hydromet and early warning services will potentially benefit all population, in particular, about 5.3 
million people who are vulnerable to one or more hydro-meteorological hazard in Mali, it is considered that about half 
of this vulnerable population, or 2.7 million people, will be direct beneficiaries of improved or new early warning 
services by the end of the Project. In addition to the direct beneficiaries which are either directly targeted by the food 
security early warning services, the agro-meteorological program and the civil protection flood early warning 
systems, indirect beneficiaries will have access to enhanced hydro-meteorological information which they will be able 
to take advantage on a voluntary basis.  
 
Benefits would span across the following areas: i) receiving advice from agro-meteorological information systems 
about the optimal date for cropping, the most profitable crops, how to avoid crop losses from drought, pests and 
diseases, as well as yield and post-yield conservation techniques; ii) being identified more accurately as vulnerable 
through the food security and nutrition warning system, and subsequently receive support in terms of cash, vouchers, 
free food or subsidized food; or (iii) receiving flood warnings along with various types of support, ranging from 
preventive evacuation, and protection of livelihoods from flooding damages, to emergency rescue and humanitarian 
support.  
 
Mali’s agrometeorological advisory program was established to address food insecurity linked to droughts in the late 
1970s and early 1980s, focused on rain-fed millet, sorghum, peanuts, cotton, and maize. None of the communities 
are currently covered already by sufficient quality warnings and climate information. Current rates of use by farmers 
of agrometeorological advisories are still very low (less than 20% of farmers in villages participating in the program) 
and current resolution, anticipation and precision of the agro-meteorological services are not sufficient. Early warning 
for flooding do not exist yet.  
 
The Project will dramatically enlarge the number of users from hydromet services, enhancing use of hydromet 
information by rain-fed farmers (women and men), and extending it to livestock herders (with support from the Sahel 
Regional Pastoralism project effective in Mali since Nov 2015), to food insecure households (with support from the 
reformed national food security mechanism adopted since Jan 2016 and supported by a large number of partners) as 
well as to populations vulnerable to flooding (with support from the new national risk reduction strategy and national 
emergency response planning (ORSEC) adopted by the Government in Dec, 2015).

=== PAGE 39 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 72 
 
 E 
Field data collection in Mali is already participatory, with contributions from civil servants, individual contractors, 
voluntary farmers and paid observers. A large proportion of the equipment has not been replaced since the 1960’s. 
The project will modernize the equipment (with some degree of automation) while still relying upon ownership and 
participation of communities (mostly farmers) and civil servants (teachers, agronomists) for vulnerability monitoring, 
gauge reading (important for verification purposes even with automatic stations), protection of equipment and 
monitoring of reliability of the equipment 
 
Since 2011, the food insecure population varies between 3 and 4.5 million (up to 30% of the population). This 
population receives about $150-250 million of food, cash vouchers and cash-for-work assistance per year, out of 
which about $30-50 million is from the Government. In addition, about 2.3 million people live in flood-prone areas and 
are expected to be able to leverage more optimal benefits from the floods, while reducing related damages and 
losses, in relation with enhanced rainfall monitoring, hydrological forecasting and early warning under the Project.  
 
Details about how number of expected beneficiaries have been estimated by regions, by activity, and by gender and 
social disaggregation are available in the feasibility study (Annex 2). The section title 3.4.1. Social Benefits to User 
Groups specifically identifies the climate sensitivity, requirements for hydro-meteorological information and expected 
benefits for different user groups. The poorest and most climate sensitive groups are typically among (i) food 
insecure households; (ii) rain fed crop producers; (iii) small livestock herders; (iv) artisanal fishermen; (v) artisanal 
miners and (vi) urban and peri-urban flood-prone dwellers. The users will be supported for optimal use of improved 
hydromet services for resilience through strengthening the capacity of existing delivery mechanisms including civil 
protection (primarily targeting flood-prone households in urban areas) and food security early warning system 
(primarily targeting poorest households in rural areas). 
 
The targeting methodology to reach the poorest and most vulnerable segments of the population will be adapted 
from the ongoing food security national surveys (conducted annually) combined with rigorous targeting 
methodologies used by social protection and safety net projects in Mali (supported by EU and World Bank). 
 
Expected strengthening of institutional and regulatory systems for climate-responsive planning and 
development (PMF- A 5.0 and related indicator(s)): The Project will place emphasis and resources towards the 
servicing of communities through institutional and regulatory systems. This will be achieved by focusing on the 
transformation of ‘last-mile’ community early warning systems. The Project will also support capacity development at 
the government and community levels for local level risk communication, disaster preparedness, response and 
recovery planning. This will entail support for the development and implementation of standard operating procedures, 
contingency plans (for evacuation or food storage for instance), and community risk maps for targeted flood-prone 
communities. 
 
Expected increase in generation and use of climate information in decision-making (PMF- A 6.0 and related 
indicator(s)): Hydromet data can be regarded as a currently underutilized public good, but with the potential of being 
used more effectively for decision making, both at a country and regional levels. Examples could include services 
that improve decisions for resiliency in the short- and long-term, such as early warning systems for climate related 
disaster risk management, area planning, and provision of services critical for sustaining economic growth (e.g. 
information for civil aviation or offshore oil production).  
 
Expected strengthening of adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks (PMF- A 7.0 and related 
indicator(s)), focusing particularly on the most vulnerable population groups and applying a gender-
sensitive approach: The Project will have a strong focus on reducing community vulnerability. This will be achieved 
by focusing on the transformation of ‘last-mile’ community early warning systems, so that these systems have the 
absorptive capacity, communication means and dissemination outreach to much more efficiently relay the more 
systematic and reliable information produced by hydro-meteorological services supported under the Project. In order 
to effectively reduce community vulnerabilities, the Project will take the pathway of “gradual but certain” institutional 
reform and capacity development initiatives at various inter-government and community levels, and will target in 
priority most vulnerable groups including women. Accordingly, the Project will aim to start small but retain a strong 
focus on actual delivery of results that can be gradually scaled up. In addition, there are large benefits from having a 
long record of hydro-meteorological data. Rainfall data is an input into the modeling work needed to design

=== PAGE 40 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 72 
 
 E 
infrastructure, develop preparedness plans, prioritize investments and propose weather insurance products. River 
flow data is needed to design and estimate the benefits from irrigation systems or hydropower plants in a resilient 
and sustainable manner. In addition, all forms of climate data help improve the calibration and validation of long-term 
climate models. The knowledge and information generated by the hydro-meteorological services supported by the 
Project will get used in decision-making under both frameworks of the Mali 2015 Food Security Mechanism Reform 
and upcoming Mali 2016 Disaster Risk Reduction Strategy and Law. 
 
Expected strengthening of awareness of climate threats and risk-reduction processes (PMF- A 8.0 and 
related indicator(s)): The Civil Protection, Food Security and Agriculture stakeholders (government, NGOs, other 
civil society) undertake regular public awareness raising activities with communities in flood-prone areas to enhance 
preparedness in anticipation for rainy seasons and optimize yields in relation with climate variability. Many NGOs 
undertake public awareness raising actions as part of their disaster risk management community-focused projects. 
Despite efforts across the spectrum, public awareness campaigns of all hazards in priority risk areas are not yet 
systematically undertaken and would be supported by the project in order to enhance benefits from using hydro-
meteorological information. 
 
When applicable, specify the degree to which the project avoids lock-in of long-lived, climate-vulnerable 
infrastructure. 
 
Not applicable – however the infrastructure (three buildings and some hydro-meteorological stations) and equipment 
will be designed in order to sustain all hazards including storms and flooding.  
 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below. 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Expected tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation 
only) 
Annual 
Not applicable 
Lifetime 
Not applicable 
• 
Expected total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries, disaggregated by 
gender (reduced vulnerability or 
increased resilience);  
• 
Number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population, disaggregated by gender 
(adaptation only) 
Total 
5.3 million beneficiaries out of which: 
- 2.7 million direct (male and female) 
- 2.6 million indirect (male and female) 
Percentage 
(%) 
DIRECT: 
18% of total population 
50% of vulnerable population 
INDIRECT: 
17% of total population 
50% of vulnerable population 
GENDER: 
50% male, 50% female

=== PAGE 41 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 72 
 
 E 
Other 
relevant 
indicators 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Mid-term 
Target 
Final  
target 
Assumptions 
1.1 Change in expected 
losses of lives and 
economic assets (US$) 
due to the impact of 
extreme climate-related 
disasters in the 
geographic area of the 
GCF intervention 
Estimate from 
DGPC and 
CSA/SAP 
n/a 
Baseline -
1% 
Baseline -
5% 
Expected losses 
are modeled, not 
observed, to allow 
for year-to-year 
comparability.  
2.2 Number of food-
secure households (in 
areas/periods at risk of 
climate change impacts) 
Estimate from 
CSA/SAP 
2 million 
2.05 million 
2.2 million 
Food security 
reform is 
implemented and 
information 
provided by 
hydro-
meteorological 
services is 
informing 
decisions 
3.1 Number and value of 
physical assets made 
more resilient to climate 
variability and change, 
considering human 
benefits 
Estimate from 
NPDRR and 
SAP 
US$0 
0 people 
US$35 
million 
1.5 million 
people 
US$100 
million 
5.3 million 
people 
Investment 
projects use 
information 
provided by 
hydro-
meteorological 
services 
5.1 Degree of integration/ 
mainstreaming of climate 
change in national and 
sector planning and 
coordination in information 
sharing and project 
implementation 
Assessment 
from DRR 
National 
Platform 
Regulatory 
documents 
are 
inadequate 
or 
insufficient 
 
Appropriate 
regulatory 
documents 
are in place 
Collaboration 
arrangements are 
in place via the 
National Platform 
for institutional 
coordination 
6.1 Evidence that climate 
data is collected, analyzed 
and applied to decision-
making in climate-
sensitive sectors at critical 
times by the government, 
private sector and 
men/women 
Scorecards from 
MMA and DNH 
0 
1 public 
sector 
services 
(food 
security, 
civil 
protection) 
2 public 
sector 
services 
(food 
security, 
civil 
protection) 
SOPs in place 
between Metéo, 
hydro, civil 
protection and 
food security 
6.2 Perception of men, 
women, vulnerable 
populations, and 
emergency response 
agencies of the timeliness, 
content and reach of early 
warning systems 
Surveys by 
DGPC and SAP 
TBD 
 
Baseline + 
20% 
The surveys will 
be conducted with 
samples exposed 
to both food 
security and flood 
risks 
7.1 Use by vulnerable 
households, communities, 
businesses and public-
sector services of Fund-
supported tools to 
respond to climate change 
and variability 
Estimate from 
MMA/AMIS 
0 
0.5 million 
farmers 
2 million 
farmers 
The agro-
meteorological 
information 
service (AMIS) 
continues to 
provide services 
to farmers 
7.2: Number of males and 
females reached by 
Estimate from 
DGPC and SAP 
1 million 
males 
1.5 million 
males 
2.6 million 
males 
The legal 
framework for 
issuance of flood

=== PAGE 42 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 72 
 
 E 
climate-related early 
warning systems 
1 million 
females 
1.5 million 
females 
2.7 million 
females 
warnings gets 
adopted 
8.1: Number of males and 
females made aware of 
climate threats and related 
appropriate responses 
Estimate from 
AMIS, SAP and 
DGPC 
1 million 
males 
1 million 
females 
1.5 million 
males 
1.5 million 
females 
2.6 million 
males 
2.7 million 
females 
Partnership in 
place between the 
National Platform, 
media and civil 
society 
 
 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale) 
Describe how the proposed project/programme expected contributions to global low-carbon and/or climate-resilient 
development pathways could be scaled-up and replicated including a description of the steps necessary to 
accomplish it. 
 
In 2010, the African Union (AU) and the WMO established the African Ministerial Conference on Meteorology 
(AMCOMET) to highlight the importance of the national hydro-meteorological services for risk reduction and climate 
change adaptation and called for substantial investments and transformational support to reinforce their service 
delivery. The Integrated African Strategy on Meteorology formulated by AMCOMET in 2012 specifically calls to 
“strengthen and sustain National Meteorological Services by providing them with all necessary resources and 
adequate institutional frameworks to enable them to fully perform their roles as a fundamental component of the 
national development infrastructure of our countries and of the continent and a contributor to security and sustainable 
development, particularly poverty reduction efforts, climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction”. The Africa 
Hydromet Framework Program, a joint partnership of WMO, the African Development Bank and the World Bank, 
responds to this call by providing support at scale to national meteorological and hydrological services (NMHSs) in 
Africa. The proposed Mali Project represents the first investment of this Project, envisioned to scale up across 
several other countries in the region.  
 
Strengthening the NMHSs at scale will have a transformative impact on managing climate and weather risks in the 
immediate future, facilitate growth in key climate sensitive sectors and enable a better understanding of long-term 
climate change impacts. In the past, many projects have provided support to hydromet services with piecemeal 
approaches with size of investments too small to have a transformative impact. Experience from financing hydro-
meteorological services around the globe has shown that hydro-meteorological services should be strengthened in a 
holistic manner, supporting monitoring infrastructure, IT network infrastructure, as well as forecasting and service 
delivery at the same time.  
 
The Mali Project will therefore provide funding at scale to “turn around” the NMHSs. The Project aims to achieve 
sustainable budget allocations and operation models to secure their operation. The Project will support Mali in 
strengthening the institutional set up of the NMHSs and incorporating the services provided to aviation. Supporting 
Mali to transform and strengthen its policies and legislation related to NMHSs and disaster preparedness and early 
warning will be an important building block of the Africa Hydromet Framework Program and will contribute to 
sustaining the support to the national hydro-meteorological services.  
 
The Project will furthermore close the loop between the national hydro-meteorological services and user 
communities of weather and climate services, such as farmers, women, hydro-power operators and others. The Mali 
Project will put communities and stakeholders first to enable short and long-term adaptation planning of households, 
farmers, communities, as well as local and national government. This will include the identification of forecasting 
services needed by local communities, identification of the right ways of communicating (e.g. with regard to 
language, culture, technology) forecasts and information with beneficiaries, establishing a feedback mechanism,

=== PAGE 43 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 72 
 
 E 
piloting and product development jointly with beneficiaries as well as discussion on cost recovery. The Project will 
furthermore identify appropriate ways of involving communities in weather and climate monitoring, e.g. as voluntary 
gauge readers and provide direct incentives for mobile money payments.  
 
The Project also aims to involve the private sector. In several countries, this has already been successfully tested, 
e.g. MTN Ghana cell phone provider involved providing services on weather information to farmers in Ghana. The 
Project will build upon these lessons learnt and will establish partnerships with local private sector players, such as 
cell phone providers, IT firms or insurance companies.  
 
Strategy for Scaling-up and Replication: This initial activity strategically focuses on Mali, which has significant 
climate-related risks – drought and floods respectively. Though this initial investment could have encompassed a 
wider range of countries and types of risks, the Project currently has a narrower and more concentrated focus on one 
countries and fewer risks in order to allow a thorough testing of the systemic reforms of hydromet systems proposed 
to be implemented. Following the successful implementation of this first investment in Mali, the Project will be in a 
robust position to be replicated across other countries and to other types of climate-related risks, far beyond its initial 
scope. This will be achieved by establishing hydromet networks through open data and information sharing. This 
approach will enable the Project to realize and maximize economies of scale and regional integration.  
 
Key Partnerships for Project Broadening and Scaling-up: This scaling up will also be facilitated and supported by 
key partnerships. The WMO and GFCS, for example, are major partners in looking to scale up support to hydro-met 
services. The WMO’s members and regional centers are already working alongside the World Bank in supporting 
and strengthening the NMHSs across the region and they will feature heavily in expanding this Project to other 
countries. AfDB is also an important partner of WBG and WMO in the rollout of the Africa Regional Hydromet 
Program. The Africa Hydromet Framework Program has obvious operational synergies with the Climate Risk Early 
Warning System (CREWS) initiative supported by the governments of Australia, Canada, France, Germany, 
Luxembourg and The Netherlands, which will complement the outputs and outcomes of the Program and projects 
under it. 
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning 
Describe how the project/programme contributes to the creation or strengthening of knowledge, collective learning 
processes, or institutions. 
 
All project components are largely aimed at strengthening knowledge, collective learning processes and institutions. 
In recognition of the fact that sustainable change does not only requires the modernization of hydromet 
instrumentation, a significant proportion of the Project is targeted at building institutional capacity, cross-institutional 
support, and connectivity with end user services. Modernization of the observation networks will enhance generation 
and use of collective knowledge through weather and climate data analysis, as well as forecasting and decision 
support infrastructure. Capacity building, training and education programs will be developed and implemented across 
all of the recipient agencies, with a focus on ensuring knowledge transfer across the workforce and down to 
successors. The Project will promote coordination and knowledge sharing among the hydromet agencies and line 
ministries through the proposed interventions to develop tailored products for specific use. Additional efforts to 
institutionalize learning and build adaptive capacity will be completed by integrating disaster and climate risk 
management into the school and university curricula and training. 
 
A critical aspect of the Project is to ensure end user connectivity so that community members most vulnerable to 
climate and disaster risks benefit from the improved weather and climate data. In this regard, specialized information 
products will be developed to improve warning and response capacity for flood, drought and issues of food 
insecurity. At the municipal level, risk assessments and analysis will be completed to support the development of 
communal-level disaster risk management plans and priorities.  
 
Given the potential for scaling up through the larger Africa Hydromet Framework Program, for which the Mali Project 
represents the first investment, knowledge from the Project will contribute to cross-learning at regional and global 
levels. Continuous monitoring and evaluation throughout the duration of the Project will support the sharing of

=== PAGE 44 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 72 
 
 E 
lessons learned and best practices. In this regard, the monitoring and evaluation plan (described in Section H), will 
not only support adaptive project management but also contribute to collective learning for other countries in the 
region that aim to strengthen their climate information and services. 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
Describe how proposed measures will create conditions that are conducive to effective and sustained participation of 
private and public sector actors in low-carbon and/or resilient development that go beyond the program. 
Describe how the proposal contributes to innovation, market development and transformation. Examples include: 
• 
Introducing and demonstrating a new market or a new technology in a country or a region 
• 
Using innovative funding scheme such as initial public offerings and/or bond markets for projects/programme 
 
The Project will directly contribute to the creation of an enabling environment for more informed policy making for 
resilient development. While many of the public entities already have several baseline activities in regards to climate 
information and early warning, these existing projects need to be harmonized and scaled up for lasting impact. In order 
to ensure effective and sustained participation, the Project has a strong focus on institutional strengthening and 
capacity building, as well as improvements in services. Hydromet services are critical for providing information that 
supports economic development across many sectors, including disaster risk reduction and management, water, 
agriculture, transport, energy, public health and aviation safety and security. The Project will therefore aim to build 
cooperation across agencies to connect national hydromet services with expertise, data, and forecasting products. 
Such measures will ensure that the resilient development benefits extend beyond the life of the Project. 
 
In terms of innovation and market development, the Project will lay the foundation for a subsequent stage when 
hydromet services will have graduated into more advanced sustaining business models. One of the main objectives 
of the Project is to give momentum to the hydromet sector so it reaches critical size and quality to attract private 
interest and investments towards the development of specialized user-based needs. For example, with its new legal 
status created in 2012, Mali Metéo is required and empowered to raise its own financial resources from both the 
public and private sectors. However, the current state of inadequate monitoring networks and limited internal 
capacity severely limits its ability to provide basic information and analysis to both public and private users 
demanding and willing to pay for increasingly sophisticated weather and climate services. While the agency has 
already identified new markets for services as well as clients willing to pay for weather information and analysis, it is 
currently unable to meet these demands. The Project will therefore play a timely role to increase capacity, develop 
end user products and enhance service delivery to a wide spectrum of audiences.  
 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
Describe how the project/programme strengthens the national / local regulatory or legal frameworks to systematically 
drive investment in low-emission technologies or activities, promote development of additional low-emission policies, 
and/or improve climate-responsive planning and development. 
 
The Project supports the implementation and operationalization of several key national policies, including the NAPA, 
the National Climate Change Policy (PNCC), the National Climate Change Strategy (SNCC), and the draft National 
Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction. In all of these policies, strengthening climate information and warning services 
is stated as a priority area required to improve climate-responsive planning and development. The Project includes 
specific components to augment the review and reform of regulatory frameworks, policies and SOPs for several of 
the national agencies. Through development of an information exchange platform between key government 
stakeholders (DGPC, SAP, DNH, and Mali Metéo), the Project will enhance coordination for disaster risk 
assessment, preparedness and crisis management. With project components that span across both the disaster risk 
reduction and climate change agendas, the Project will also strengthen synergies across these domains for long-
term sustainability of project activities.   
 
In addition to such national-level activities, the Project will support local regulatory frameworks to improve climate 
responsive planning and development. Municipal level risk assessment and analysis will identify specific

=== PAGE 45 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 72 
 
 E 
vulnerabilities at the local level and support the development of communal-level disaster risk management plans and 
priorities. Building upon the risk knowledge at the local level will allow communities to better prepare for and adapt to 
climate change.     
 
 
 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential 
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive development impact 
 
Economic Co-benefits 
Significant economic gains are anticipated through implementation of this Project in Mali, both from reduced losses 
and enhanced productivity, particularly in agriculture. From a user perspective, the Project would provide an 
opportunity to substantially improve key services. Those include: i) the country’s early warning system, which 
currently does not issue any official severe weather or flood warnings, and thus leaves enormous scope for reducing 
the loss of lives, livelihoods and assets; ii) seasonal forecasts and planting and harvesting advisories to enhance the 
productivity of farmers; and iii) the food security system, which although already functioning, could also be improved 
substantially.   
 
Based on these improvements in the forecasting and early warning services, the main benefits that this economic 
analysis include:   
 
a) The reduction of economic losses caused by floods was calculated to be US$2.6 million annually, over 
10 years. This was based on the assumption that early warning systems provided by the DGPC would give 
households additional lead time to evacuate and move main household assets (cars, motorbikes, televisions, 
etc.) to higher ground, therefore reducing flood losses by 5%. Due to very little and unreliable data on 
previous flood loss events, this estimate was derived from other studies, such as Schröter, et al. 2008, who 
based on a survey of early warning system users estimate that a twelve hour lead time provides a potential 
60% reduction in damage, while a one hour lead time could reduce flood losses by 20%. Since this project 
will not uniformly increase early warning system lead times throughout the country down to the local level, 
and may not be perfectly accurate, a conservative estimate of 5% was selected for the purposes of this 
calculation. Average annual flood losses (US$52 million) was calculated based on a combined average of 
two data sources: (i) average annual losses reported by the Government between 2005 and 2012 (US$60 
million) and (ii) average annual losses estimated by UNISDR using probabilistic method based upon 
Government estimates between 2005 and 2014 (US$45 million).    
 
b) Reduced drought losses, combined with increased agricultural productivity, were calculated to total 
US$19.5 million annually. This was based on the assumption that improved seasonal forecasting, agro-
meteorological information systems and enhanced food security early warning system would improve farmer 
productivity and reduce crop losses. Since crop loss data was not available, the calculation was made on 
existing agricultural production to say that the combined increase in farmer efficiency, as well as the reduced 
agricultural losses due to droughts, would increase the overall national agricultural output by at least 0.5%. 
This estimation is based on a study by Hallegatte (2012), which employed a benefit-transfer approach to 
develop estimates of the benefits and costs of improving met/hydro information and early warning systems in 
developing countries. In terms of productivity increase, Hallegatte determined that in Europe, weather 
forecasts have led to value-added gains of between 0.1% and 1.0% in weather-sensitive sectors. The mid-
point of this estimate was therefore applied to Mali for the agriculture sector, which can be considered quite 
conservative, since (a) Hallegatte’s estimation does not include avoided losses, only productivity gains, and 
(b) since Mali is starting from a very under-developed early warning system, small improvements to the 
system could have far more significant impacts, than in developed countries. World Bank data, which 
estimated the value of agricultural production as US$3.9 billion in 2012, was used for this calculation.

=== PAGE 46 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 72 
 
 E 
c) The increase in efficiency of humanitarian food relief interventions, due to enhanced preparedness and 
accuracy of targeting, was calculated to amount to US$0.7 million per year, over 10 years. The assumption 
was that the efficiency of such operations would be augmented by 0.5%, including avoiding wastage, due to 
enhanced accuracy of food security targeting system, combined with increased coordination and 
prepositioning of food relief assets. The government’s estimated food security needs for 2015 at US$142 
million, both in terms of government reserves and international donor support, was used as the baseline. 
Consistent figures for such food security aid needs cannot be traced back over the years to get an average, 
but previous years have also seen very high humanitarian and food aid being provided to Mali. According to 
AidData.org the average humanitarian and food aid that went to Mali was 200 million between 2011 and 
2013, and since not all of the humanitarian aid provided will have been for food relief, the figure of 142 
seems appropriate. This is also the case when comparing to other data related to losses in previous drought 
years, such as 2011, where losses were estimated at US$ 150 to 200 million; while the 2004/5 drought 
resulted in US$ 380-480 million (16.4% productivity reduction). Food aid is provided to Mali even in years 
without major droughts, which is why an increase in efficiency of only 0.5% was chosen. 
 
Other economic co-benefits were identified, but could not be quantified due to their more indirect causality: 
• 
With hydropower producing about half of the country’s electricity, efficiency gains in production can be 
anticipated due to river flow forecasting information, resulting in improved management and operation of 
hydropower dams  
• 
More efficient water resources management will support irrigated agriculture, water supply, watershed 
management, including support to environmental flows, erosion control, etc.   
• 
Potential for improved hydromet information and modeling to inform infrastructure design, such as roads.  
• 
Hydromet services provide data and products that contribute to the safety of aviation and the economical 
operation of the sector, both nationally and internationally. The measurements and forecasts of conditions en 
route and at, or on the approach to, terminal aerodromes are useful for minimizing aircraft operating costs.  
 
Cost-Benefit Analysis 
By comparing the costs and benefits of the Project, over time an understanding of the relative value of the planned 
investments can be generated. While cost-benefit analysis provides a useful process and resultant metrics to help 
steer investment decision-making, it should however not be the only factor considered.  
 
While the implementation phase of the Project is 4 years, for this analysis, it is assumed that the project impact is 15 
years. This is based on the assumption that equipment such as computers and tablets would have an average life of 
3-4 years, vehicles and hydromet stations would have an average life of 7-10 years, while new buildings would have 
a much longer life-span, in the range of 30-40 years. An average of 15 years is therefore appropriate. Operations 
and maintenance (O&M) costs are assumed at 15% of project investments. O&M costs thus increase linearly over 
the first 4 years as cumulative project investments are made, reaching a constant 15% of total capital costs during 
years 5-15. Benefits in terms of reduced disaster damages and increased production are assumed to increase 
linearly starting from year 2, reaching a constant maximum for years 5-15.  
 
Since Mali’s GDP growth rate has been on average 4.5% in the past decade, a discount rate of 5% is used to 
calculate the Net Present Value (NPV). This is justified by the fact that although there is high potential for future 
growth in the country, there are also high risks caused by potential climatic, political and price shocks. A 5% discount 
rate represents an understanding that future costs and benefits are relatively important in comparison to the current 
situation – concurrent with concerns regarding climate change.  
 
The NPV, which is the difference between the discounted total benefits and cost, was calculated to be US$124.4 
million, with a discount rate of 5%. This represents a benefit-cost ratio of 1 to 5. The Internal Rate of Return (IRR), 
which is the discount rate that zeroes out the NPV, or the interest rate that makes the NPV of all cash flows equal to 
0, was calculated to be 65%.  
 
Since it is impossible to accurately predict future per capita consumption growth, a sensitivity analysis was 
conducted to illustrate the benefits of the Project at lower and higher rates of return. At a discount rate of 10%, NPV

=== PAGE 47 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 72 
 
 E 
is equal to US$78.9 million, and with a discount rate of 15%, NPV equals US$51.6 million. This demonstrates that 
the Project would be viable even with much higher discount rates.  
 
Additional sensitivity analysis was carried out, as illustrated in the table below. The below analysis demonstrates that 
even with both a decrease in benefits by 20%, combined with an increase in operations and maintenance (O&M) 
costs by 20%, the internal rate of return remains high (60%). And even when combining this with the highest (15 
percent) discount rate, the Net Present Value exceeds the costs of the project by 34%, demonstrating a benefit-cost 
ratio of 1.3 to 1. Keeping in mind that not all benefits could be accurately quantified, this still presents a compelling 
case to invest in this project.  
Sensitivity Analysis: 
 
NPV (0%) 
NPV (5%) 
NPV (10%) 
NPV (15%) 
IRR 
Baseline 
$203.60 
$124.39 
$78.88 
$51.55 
65% 
20 % decrease in benefits  
$148.88 
$89.29 
$55.23 
$34.90 
49.64% 
20 % increase in O&M costs 
$194.60 
$118.62 
$74.99 
$48.81 
62% 
20% decrease in benefits & 
20% increase in O&M costs 
$139.88 
$83.52 
$51.34 
$32.16 
47% 
 
Social Co-benefits  
The potential lives saved thanks to the strengthening of early warning systems due to this Project is potentially 
significant. Recent weather and climate-related disasters have resulted in a heavy burden of fatalities in Mali. On 
average, there are 27 annual fatalities due to floods, which would likely be diminished through improved end-to-end 
early warning systems. Data on deaths from droughts is limited, and cannot be fully disaggregated from other causes 
of death. However, it is very likely that strengthened seasonal forecasting and agro-meteorological information 
systems would strengthen the productivity of farmers and therefore reduce the number of people which are food 
insecure in the country and risk starvation (this number is currently 1.5 million people). Improved food security will in 
turn improve nutritional status of children, and indirectly enhance access to education.  
 
Temperature and rainfall conditions influence the spread of communicable diseases. Outbreaks of certain diseases, 
such as meningitis and malaria, that are highly sensitive to weather conditions can be better tackled and mitigated 
with enhanced hydromet information services. 
 
The strengthened capacities of communities and linkages to sub-national systems can empower and enhance 
decision-making among community members. Communication channels established through the proposed Project 
can be used for other aspects of community life, and thereby improving quality of life. For instance, ICT/mobile 
platforms can be used for health and market services. Community radios can also be used for arranging medical 
evacuations. The flood early warning systems will provide downstream communities with information that may in the 
past not have been forthcoming due to district disputes. With this knowledge, communities can take proactive steps 
to ensuring the protection of their assets through moving their belongings, animals etc. to higher ground. This has a 
significant social benefit as it allows residents to be aware of the actions they need to take and builds resilience 
within the communities. Furthermore, it also provides a sense of community if individuals are able to help others 
during these events. 
 
Environmental Co-benefits  
NMHSs provide forecasts and warnings of floods, water levels and discharge within river basins, and watersheds. 
These products are critical for safeguarding the environment, and for efficient management of water resources as a 
contribution to sustainable development. Once farmers are more aware of impending events such as droughts and 
floods, they can undertake alternative farming practices that will potentially use less water for any irrigated crops. 
Farmers will be able to store water and not degrade the environment to get them through drought events. 
Furthermore, with additional knowledge, farmers can better plan their activities, which will result in a reduction of

=== PAGE 48 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 72 
 
 E 
sediment loss (and any nutrients that may be used on their crops) into riverine environment. This will have 
environmental benefits to those living downstream as well as to the water quality. 
 
Hydromet services often contribute to air and water quality management by maintaining water and air quality 
monitoring network in collaboration with environmental agencies, research institutions and universities. Moreover 
basic meteorological data is an integral part of air and water quality management and provides the technological 
basis for better watershed management, erosion control, river bank protection and ecosystem preservation. 
Hydromet data is also an integral part to the long-term monitoring of basic indicators of the state of the environment. 
It is also critical for addressing major global environmental issues, including climate change. 
 
Gender-sensitive Development Impact  
As women are disproportionately impacted by severe weather and climate conditions, improvements in forecasting 
and early warning will help minimize the negative impacts on women. Moreover, women and their participation are 
critical to effectively managing climate and disaster risks in a gender-sensitive manner. The National Federation of 
Women's Organizations Collectives of Mali (FENACOF) is a key stakeholder in the National Platform for Disaster 
Risk Reduction. They were included as a key stakeholder in consultation workshops for the preparation of this 
project proposal, and will continue to be consulted throughout the design and implementation of this Project.  
 
In agriculture, women are represented along the entire value chain and yet, they lack necessary resources, such as 
access, control, and property of land as well as production methods. The predominantly masculine labor migration 
influences household structures and, in many cases, increases women’s burdens. In general, women in Mali are 
responsible for small livestock keeping, fish processing, and sale of processed food. These activities are mostly not 
given much credit nor accounted for; yet they are vital to tackling food insecurity. At the same time, they are 
vulnerable to climate change effects because of their high dependence on resources. 
 
People-centered community-based early warning systems will directly address women’s vulnerabilities and exposure 
to disaster risk. Women are often the caretakers and homemakers and have limited access to resources to protect 
their lives and property. During community-sensitization as well as design and implementation, women beneficiaries 
will be targeted for their engagement and ownership of the community-based early warning systems. 
 
 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient 
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only) 
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups, and elaborate how the 
project/programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and 
groups, overall income level, etc.). 
 
Poverty and climate change vulnerability are strongly correlated. The poor have fewer resources and receive less 
support from family, community, the financial system and social safety nets to prevent, absorb and adapt to climate 
change shocks. Poverty remains high in Mali today, with over half (50.6%) of the population living on less than $1.90 
a day. Prior to the political and security crisis of 2012, Mali had been successfully reducing its poverty level, 
decreasing from 60% to 51% between 2000 and 2010. The Gini coefficient also dropped during the same period from 
0.40 to 0.33 and malnutrition rates improved. In the wake of the 2012 crisis, however, Mali is today one of the 
poorest countries in the world, ranked 176th on the 2015 Human Development Index. About 90% of poor people live 
in rural areas, relying on rain-fed agriculture and agro-pastoralism to make a living. Such households are highly 
vulnerable to shocks such as drought, which can significantly erode their productive assets and output (livestock, 
crop production, amongst others).  
 
Mali is exposed to a number of weather and climate related hazards, but is particularly vulnerable to droughts, floods 
and locust invasion. The Sahelian climate presents high variability, with sequences of drought and intense rainfall.

=== PAGE 49 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 72 
 
 E 
Two thirds of Mali’s land area is classified as desert or semi-desert, thus the country is one of the most drought-
prone in the world. Physical vulnerability is accentuated by socioeconomic and environmental factors, mainly: (i) the 
dependence on rain-fed agriculture; (ii) a high rate of poverty and a low Human Development Index; (iii) people 
settling in flood plains due to weak urban planning and land use planning; and (iv) environmental degradation and 
soil deterioration. Furthermore, population displacement as a result of both natural hazard induced disasters and 
conflict have had significant impacts on food security. From 1980 to 2014, more than 7 million people were affected 
by 28 drought and flood events. More than 3.5 million people were affected by the drought event of 2011. Floods are 
also increasingly taking place in both urban and rural areas. In August 2013, torrential rains provoked flash floods in 
the capital Bamako, resulting in 37 casualties and displacing more than 20,000. On average, flood and drought result 
in an annual economic impact of approximately US$140 million. Such impacts are expected to worsen with projected 
climate changes and the increasing severity and intensity of flood and droughts in the country.  
 
In terms of food security, children are most impacted, with Global Acute Malnutrition among children under 5 reported 
as 15% according to the last Demographic and Health Survey in Mali. In March 2014, 3.7 million people were 
estimated to be in moderate and severe food insecurity, with 1.5 million in immediate need of food assistance.  While 
the Government is currently supporting several baseline activities, there remains significant institutional, 
technological, informational and financial barriers, which prevent the development and dissemination of climate and 
early warning information and the capacity to use this information for local planning.  
 
Weather, climate and hydrologic monitoring and forecasting are essential to inform decision making for climate 
resilience and provide critical inputs to early warning systems for flood, droughts and food security. Improved access 
and utilization of hydromet information and early warning can greatly reduce the climate related disaster risks through 
an increase community preparedness for response and recovery. The outcomes of the project are expected to 
contribute to strategic mobilization of resources in advance of climate related disasters, enabling targeted support to 
most vulnerable communities and stronger coordination and cooperation in disaster management for drought and 
flood events. Improved hydromet services will also significantly contribute to the enhanced productivity in weather 
sensitive socio-economic sectors such as agriculture, health, energy and water resources management. 
 
 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
• 
Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
• 
Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payment gap that prevents from 
addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market) 
• 
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity. 
 
Mali has a total population estimated at 14.5 million people, predominantly rural, with an average annual population 
growth rate of about 3.4 percent. The average population density is 11 people per km2 (ranging from 2 inhabitants 
per km2 in the North to 25 inhabitants per km2 in central and southern areas). The country is divided into five main 
ecosystems, presenting a wide range of agro-ecological environments (roughly estimated at 40). General economic 
trends are moderately good, and despite a difficult international environment in 2008, macroeconomic stability has 
been maintained (for instance, between 1999 and 2009, GDP increased from US$2.6 billion to US$ 9billion) till the 
socio-political crisis of March 2012, and cross-border trade data show that Mali performed better than the average for 
Sub-Saharan Africa in most indicators. However, the relatively good economic performance has not translated into 
improved human development outcomes. Poverty is more prevalent in rural areas (57.6%) where most people 
continue to derive their livelihoods from agriculture and livestock, and food insecurity and malnutrition are high. The 
recent socio-political crisis in early 2012 set Mali back to fragile and highly vulnerable conditions. Population growth 
and the migration of population southward resulted in increased pressure on the remaining land, water and forest 
resources. The high population density in these high potential agro-pastoral areas has increased the threat of natural 
resource degradation. 
 
There are substantial funding needs, as the Government does not have the resources to support disaster risk 
management, hydromet forecasting and early warning systems, and therefore requires external donor support to

=== PAGE 50 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 72 
 
 E 
enhance disaster and climate resilience. As climate change begins to manifest itself and as populations and 
communities become more exposed to increased climate variability, the need to address climate risks is becoming 
urgent in Mali. This is particularly the case for vulnerable rural households dependent on subsistence farming and 
livestock herding.  
 
While the Government of Mali has been developing platforms for climate and disaster risk management over the past 
several years, there remains significant needs to strengthen institutional and implementation capacity across Mali 
Metéo, DNH, SAP, and the DGPC. There are substantial hydromet system modernization needs in order to increase 
the accuracy and timeliness of forecasting and modeling services. The capacity of Mali Metéo is inadequate for the 
provision of forecasting and warning services related to extreme weather and climate events. Currently the country 
does not issue official severe weather or flood warnings, which leaves significant potential for diminishing the loss of 
lives, livelihoods and assets. Similarly, seasonal forecasts and planting and harvesting advisories could be 
significantly improved to enhance the productivity of farmers. A food security system in the country does exist, and 
while it functional, it could also be improved significantly, and expanded to the growing urban areas of the country. 
Despite the strong DGPC and sectoral actors’ commitment, major challenges remain to be addressed in terms of 
disaster risk management and civil protection. The DGPC’s current organization and human resources are primarily 
oriented towards relief operations, rather than risk reduction. They need strong support to lead and implement more 
conceptual, multi-sectoral and systemic visions and approaches. There also exists challenges in coordination and 
collaboration, with difficulties in collecting and sharing data between ministries, agencies and organizations.  
 
E.5.  Country Ownership 
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs 
Please describe how the project/programme contributes to country’s identified priorities for low-emission and climate-
resilient development, and the degree to which the activity is supported by a country’s enabling policy and 
institutional framework, or includes policy or institutional changes. 
 
By signing and ratifying the UNFCCC, Mali has committed to the adoption and implementation of policies and 
measures to adapt to climate change and to manage existing climate risks. Mali is also a signatory to the Hyogo 
framework of Action 2005–2015 and its successor, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030. 
The proposed Project is well aligned with national priorities and measures identified in the CSCRP (2012-2017), the 
NAPA, the national climate change strategy and the draft disaster risk management strategy. Many of the priority 
areas defined in these relevant policies and plans can thus be operationalized.  
 
The Summary of the costs assessment for mitigation and adaptation needs in the area of Climate Change in Mali. 
The Mali Vulnerability and Needs Assessment15 confirms the 19 projects identified in the 2007 NAPA as relevant 
national development priorities, including provision of agro-meteorological services for rural populations and 
development of monitoring and warning services for flooding and extreme weather events.  
  
The Government of Mali recognizes that strengthening the country’s economic growth and addressing poverty 
reduction in a meaningful manner will require addressing climate and disaster risk. The CSCRP adopted by the 
Council of Ministers of Mali on 28 December 2011 is the reference document for the formulation and implementation 
of economic and social policies. The framework specifically identifies flood and drought hazards and the resulting 
food insecurity as significant barriers to addressing poverty reduction in the country. Mainstreaming climate change 
also has a prominent place within the framework. Following the political and security crisis of 2012, the CSCRP was 
supplemented by the Plan for the Sustainable Recovery of Mali (PRED, 2013-2014) and the Government Action Plan 
(PAG, 2013-2018). As part of its goal to strengthen economic growth in the country, one of the stated measures of 
the PAG is to develop and implement a plan to reduce the risk of flood and other natural hazards. 
                                                          
15 https://unfccc.int/files/adaptation/application/pdf/malineedsenglish.pdf

=== PAGE 51 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 72 
 
 E 
 
The government of Mali submitted its Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) in September 2015, 
which includes action for both climate change mitigation and adaptation. In terms of mitigation, the country commits 
to reducing emissions to an average reduction of 27% across sectors by 2030 in comparison to a business-as-usual 
scenario. This is conditional upon international support, although around 40% of this can be met unconditionally.  
 
The INDC also emphasized that adaptation actions are crucial to Mali’s vision for building a green economy and 
climate resilient country. Specifically it describes the importance of the continuation and intensification of ongoing 
programs and priority areas described in Mali’s statement at the Global Climate Summit in 2014 and in the country’s 
NAPA. The need to build capacity for and ensure appropriate usage of meteorological products and 
information is re-iterated as one of the priorities to enhance the resilience of vulnerable communities. The 
total cost to meet all adaptation needs for the period 2015 – 2020 is estimated at US $ 1.062 Billion. 
 
In 2007, Mali put in place a NAPA to identify its urgent and immediate needs for adaptation. One of the priority 
projects identified in the NAPA consisted of the need to improve climate and weather information and early warning 
systems, including for food security. With support from donor partners, the AEDD is also in the process of formulating 
a NAP to complement the short-term focus of NAPAs and consider medium- and long-term adaptation needs. In 
2011, the national climate change policy (PNCC), the national climate change strategy (SNCC), and the action plan 
for implementation (PANC) were adopted. The SNCC identifies reinforcing national capacity and strengthening 
climate information and monitoring services as some if its national strategic areas for action. Specifically, it identifies 
gaps in hydrological and climate monitoring systems, expertise in modeling and weather forecasting, and needs to 
strengthen early warning systems. 
 
Complementary to the climate change policy framework is the disaster risk management strategy. The draft National 
Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction identifies as one of its five priority areas, the need to identify, assess and 
monitor disaster risks and enhance early warning systems. Specifically this is described as strengthening the 
effectiveness of hazard monitoring and warning systems, coordinating existing warning systems for different hazards, 
improving the quality of information and hazard analysis, particularly in relation to flood and drought, and improving 
weather and climate forecasting capabilities for decision making.   
 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
Please describe experience and track record of the accredited entity and executing entities with respect to the 
activities that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme. 
 
The World Bank, as the GCF-accredited entity, will oversee appropriate implementation of the Project, in line with 
World Bank, procedures and standards, and in addition with any specific requirements in the AMA to be agreed with 
the GCF. The Project will be implemented and executed by the Government of Mali, namely by the DGPC, SAP of 
the Food Security Commission (CSA), DNH, and Mali Metéo. The AEDD, as the designated authority of the GCF, is 
supportive of this Project and for the entities identified to implement these activities.  
 
The project will be executed by the Government of Mali. Having implemented a small World Bank trust-funded 
operation, the coordination unit of the DGPC at the Ministry of Security and Civil Protection is familiar with World 
Bank procedures and standards. Some additional capacity support will be required to manage this proposed larger 
Project. The DGPC will oversee the financial management aspects of the Project, including the preparation of the 
financial statements and quarterly Interim Financial Reports, monitoring financial transactions on the Project’s 
accounts, and making the necessary arrangements for the annual financial audit of the Project. 
 
E.5.3. Engagement with NDAs, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders

=== PAGE 52 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 72 
 
 E 
Please provide a full description of the steps taken to ensure country ownership, including the engagement with 
NDAs on the funding proposal and the no-objection letter. Please also specify the multi-stakeholder engagement 
plan and the consultations that were conducted when this proposal was developed.  
 
The GCF project has been endorsed by the National Designated Authority of Mali, as evidenced by the No-objection 
letter dated December 2nd, 2015, and signed by Mr. Aboubacar Diabate, Director General, The Environment and 
Sustainable Development Agency. 
 
The proposed Project builds on over five years of World Bank engagement with the Government of Mali to take 
actions towards building resilience to climate and disaster risks. This started in 2010 with the negotiation and 
endorsement of the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) Country Program for Mali, which 
benefitted from strong relations established between the World Bank country office and national agencies involved in 
disaster risk management, including sustainable development, food security, fight against locusts, urban and land 
use planning, and meteorological and hydrological agencies. The preparation of the joint Country Program generated 
a strong momentum across stakeholders and helped to improve coordination and information sharing among the 
Government agencies as well as with donors. Under the first phase of the GFDRR Country Program, a US$1.4 
million project on Disaster Risk Management and Climate Adaptation became effective in March 2012. It was 
implemented by the DGPC and successfully completed in June 2015.  
 
More recently, extensive consultations have been held with the national agencies involved in disaster risk 
management and climate change adaptation to determine the country’s priority needs in these areas and potential 
next steps. In January 2014, a one-day ‘national’ workshop was organized at the World Bank Office in Bamako. The 
workshop brought together the providers of hydro-meteorological and disaster risk management services, users, 
international development partners and NGOs. A common understanding was reached with the national agencies 
regarding their priority investments and synergies with other ongoing development programs. In September 2014, a 
sub-regional consultation workshop was organized by CILSS to discuss how to increase the resilience of Sahel 
countries to extreme weather events and climate variability and change. The workshop brought together participants 
from the World Bank, the Agro-Hydro-Meteorological Technical Center of the Permanent Interstate Committee for 
Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS/AGRHYMET), the Sahel and Sahara Observatory (OSS), the African Centre of 
Meteorological Applications for Development (ACMAD) and national meteorological, hydrological, hydrogeological, 
food security and disaster risk management agencies from six countries (Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, 
Senegal and Chad). Representation of women was ensured through participation of a gender focal point from each 
of the countries.   
 
A series of consultations with the NDA – the AEDD – were conducted to gather feedback and obtain buy-in on the 
proposal. Active participation by the NDA also facilitated the consultation process with other national agencies 
involved in disaster risk management and climate change adaptation. Joint discussions were held with the AEDD, 
Mali Metéo, the DNH, SAP and DGPC in November 2015. The objectives of the meetings were to discuss, review 
and finalize the project objective, components and implementation arrangements. All agencies involved, including 
AEDD, requested that project management be entrusted to the DGPC, the agency that successfully implemented the 
GFDRR funded project that closed in June 2015.  
 
In November 2015, the DGPC hosted a workshop with users of hydro-meteorological and warning services to ensure 
participation of Civil Society Organizations in the development of the Project. Participants included representatives 
from the National Framework for Climate Services (CNSC), the National Federation of Women's Organizations 
Collectives of Mali (FENACOF), the Network of Traditional Communicators (RECOTRAD) and the Youth Union of the 
West African Economic and Monetary Union (UJUEMOA). Workshop findings highlighted that the quality of hydro-
meteorological data collected in Mali is currently insufficient to meet specific user needs, including the institutions and 
people involved in areas such as: i) early warning for food security and nutrition; ii) early warning for extreme events 
(heavy rains, urban floods, winds, etc.); iii) implementation of contingency plans and relief distribution planning; iv) 
livestock; v) rainfed and irrigated agriculture; vi) management of dams; vii) design of infrastructure; viii) land use 
planning; ix) public health; x) sanitation; xi) drinking water supply; xii) navigation; xiii) and fishing. In some cases,

=== PAGE 53 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 72 
 
 E 
data exists but is not provided to potential users in a timely manner. And while national services are investing in data 
collection, the use of such information to provide various public services is operating far below its potential. The 
Project should therefore focus not only on modernizing data collection infrastructure but also on management and 
access to information systems for optimal utilization. These consultative and fact-finding works have underpinned the 
design considerations of the proposed Project. 
 
Since a number of projects and technical and financial partners support the structures in charge of meteorology, 
hydrology and early warning in Mali, the proposal has been developed using a coordinated approach. It is critical to 
enhance donor coordination not only to avoid duplication but also to maximize opportunities to synergize activities. 
For this reason, development partners have been included in discussions and consultations throughout the past 
several years since the Project was initiated. This has consisted of meetings with the EU, USAID, UNDP, GIZ, WMO, 
the Institute for Research and Development (IRD), the French Development Agency, African Development Bank and 
Bamako University. A detailed list of planned and ongoing projects is described in Section C.2 Baseline scenario.  
 
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, 
including addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers; providing the least concessionality; and without crowding 
out private and other public investment. 
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness, taking into account the total project financing and the mitigation/ 
adaptation impact that the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate 
benchmark. For mitigation, please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the cost per tCO2eq). 
The proposed GCF grant does not impact the national public debt of the country and will be instrumental to 
increasing the resilience of communities to extremes and climate variability.  
 
Targeted institutions are public services providing public goods and services. The private market in Mali is not 
developed to compete with the public sector for provision of such public goods. Yet, a number of goods and services 
within the Project will be strengthened using the services provided by the private sector and will be acquired within 
the context of the capacity building process (e.g., models, training, equipment, etc.). The initiative has been 
envisaged as a public service that will have benefits in multiple development sectors to build overall climate 
resilience, there is no risk of the investment crowding out private investments. 
 
Strengthening hydromet services has indeed been considered cost effective in many cases. Recent overview of the 
socio-economic studies have clearly indicated that the benefit to cost ratio of investing in hydromet is high, with 
returns of 3:1 to 15:1. It’s important to note that achieving benefits with hydro-meteorological services requires a 
minimum level of capacities, which can only be achieved in relation with a sizeable and multi-year investment 
program. The benefit to cost ratio of investments in hydro-meteorological services overpasses 1 only when these 
investments are enough to secure improvements critical for delivery of customized services responding to the 
requirements of different user groups from different sectors. A more detailed analysis of expected benefit to cost ratio 
of the proposed project is provided in section E.6.3.  
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only) 
Please provide the co-financing ratio (total amount of co-financing divided by the Fund’s investment in the 
project/programme) and/or the potential to catalyze indirect/long-term low emission investment. 
 
Please make a reference to E.6.5 (core indicator for the expected volume of finance to be leveraged). 
 
Not Applicable

=== PAGE 54 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 72 
 
 E 
 
E.6.3. Financial viability  
Please specify the expected economic and financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support, based on the 
analysis conducted in F.1. 
Please describe financial viability in the long run beyond the Fund intervention. 
Please describe the GCF’s financial exit strategy in case of private sector operations (e.g. IPOs, trade sales, etc.). 
 
By comparing the costs and benefits of the Project, over time an understanding of the relative value of the planned 
investments can be generated. While cost-benefit analysis provides a useful process and resultant metrics to help 
steer investment decision-making, it should however not be the only factor considered.  
 
While the implementation phase of the Project is 4 years, for this analysis, it is assumed that the project impact is 15 
years. This is based on the assumption that equipment such as computers and tablets would have an average life of 
3-4 years, vehicles and hydromet stations would have an average life of 7-10 years, while new buildings would have 
a much longer life-span, in the range of 30-40 years. An average of 15 years is appropriate. Operations and 
maintenance (O&M) costs are assumed at 15% of project investments. O&M costs thus increase linearly over the 
first 4 years as cumulative project investments are made, reaching a constant 15% of total capital costs during years 
5-15. Benefits in terms of reduced disaster damages and increased production are assumed to increase linearly 
starting from year 2, reaching a constant maximum for years 5-15.  
 
Since Mali’s GDP growth rate has been on average 4.5% in the past decade, a discount rate of 5% is used to 
calculate the Net Present Value (NPV). This is justified by the fact that although there is high potential for future 
growth in the country, there are also high risks caused by potential climatic, political and price shocks. A 5% discount 
rate represents an understanding that future costs and benefits are relatively important in comparison to the current 
situation – concurrent with concerns regarding climate change.  
 
The NPV, which is the difference between the discounted total benefits and cost, was calculated to be US$124.4 
million, with a discount rate of 5%. This represents a benefit-cost ratio of 1 to 5. The Internal Rate of Return (IRR), 
which is the discount rate that zeroes out the NPV, or the interest rate that makes the NPV of all cash flows equal to 
0, was calculated to be 65%.  
 
Since it is impossible to accurately predict future per capita consumption growth, a sensitivity analysis was conducted 
to illustrate the benefits of the Project at lower and higher rates of return. At a discount rate of 10%, NPV is equal to 
US$78.9 million, and with a discount rate of 15%, NPV equals US$51.6 million. This demonstrates that the Project 
would be viable even with much higher discount rates.  
 
E.6.4. Application of best practices

=== PAGE 55 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 72 
 
 E 
Please explain how best available technologies and practices are considered and applied. If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices. 
 
The proposed Project constitutes a scaling up and consolidation of hydro-meteorological modernization approaches 
that have been tested by client countries with World Bank operations over the last 20 years (1995-2015).  A recent 
World Bank portfolio review of hydromet projects and/or project components shows that weather and climate 
information services have changed dramatically in the last 15 years. Hydromet programs implemented with a 
systems approach (involving institutional development, infrastructure and service delivery for multiple sectors) have 
been found more successful.  
 
Russia hydromet modernization is a good example of the systems approach. The project’s objective was to increase 
the accuracy of forecasts provided to the Russian people and economy by modernizing key elements of the technical 
base and strengthening Roshydromet’s institutional arrangements. The project began in 2005 and ended in 2013. At 
US$173 million, it was the World Bank’s largest hydromet modernization project. The project was a success, leading 
to: a) increased lead time and accuracy of global and regional forecasts; b) improved data collection and 
transmission; c) drastic reduction of response time for requests of archived data, and; d) Increased reliability of 
seasonal flow forecasts in the pilot river basins. A recent World Bank publication16 lists the key lessons from the 
experience with modernizing NMHSs: a) taking an inclusive end-to-end approach that is transformative; b) giving 
NMHSs the authority to issue or directly support issuance of warnings; c) wherever possible, avoid waiting until the 
NMHSs are obsolete to undertake modernization, because this approach makes the job more costly and complex; 
and d) engaging staff and external stakeholders to provide better public weather, climate, and water services.  
 
Moreover, a recent review of World Hydrological Cycle Observing System (WHYCOS) stresses the need for a holistic 
approach to strengthen national hydrological services (NHSs) by focusing on sustainable outcomes (such as the 
provision of flood forecasts and warnings) and not solely on outputs (such as the acquisition and distribution of 
hydrological data)17. Otherwise, long-term support is difficult to maintain. 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
 
                                                          
16 Weather and Climate Resilience: Effective Preparedness through National Meteorological and Hydrological Services, Tsirkunov 
and Rogers, World Bank, 2013. 
17 Pilon and Asefa 2011.

=== PAGE 56 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 72 
 
 E 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only) 
 
(a) Total project financing 
US$_______  
(b) Requested GCF amount  
US$_______  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  
_______ tCO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO2eq (d = a / c) 
US$_______ / tCO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq removed (e = b / c) 
US$_______ / tCO2eq 
 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators (d) and (e) above. 
Not applicable 
 
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in a 
comparable context.   
Not applicable 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only) 
Describe the detailed methodology used for calculating the indicators above. 
Not applicable 
Please describe how the indicator values compare to the appropriate benchmarks established in a 
comparable context.   
Not applicable 
 
Other relevant indicators (e.g. estimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme)

=== PAGE 57 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 72 
 
 F 
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme appraisal document.  
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis 
Please provide the narrative and rationale for the detailed economic and financial analysis (including the financial 
model, taking into consideration the information provided in section E.6.3).BASED ON THE ABOVE ANALYSIS, PLEASE 
PROVIDE ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL JUSTIFICATION (BOTH QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE) FOR THE CONCESSIONALITY 
THAT GCF PROVIDES, WITH A REFERENCE TO THE FINANCIAL STRUCTURE PROPOSED IN SECTION B.2. 
 
Investment in hydromet services is rapidly becoming a priority “low regret” climate adaptation investment18, 
particularly in countries like Mali that are climate vulnerable. While methodologies to assess the economic benefits of 
hydromet investments are still evolving, the literature suggests that such activities can be extremely beneficial in 
terms of averting losses associated with climate hazards and enhancing the productivity of climate-dependent sectors 
such as agriculture, water resources management, hydropower, and transport.  
 
A hydro-meteorological value chain shows that value, in economic and social terms, starts with observation of climate 
through to decision-making and outcomes. As such, the value of an accurate, timely and relevant forecast can only 
be realized if a beneficial value is achieved at the end of the process. Often, it is assumed that by merely improving 
observation – through enhanced technologies for example – an end economic value will be secured.  
 
Figure 2: Simplified Hydro-Meteorological and Early Warning Systems Value Chain 
 
Studies have found high returns on investment in hydromet. Hallegatte (2012)19 estimated the potential benefits of 
upgrading all developing countries’ hydro-meteorological information production and early warning capacities to 
developed-country standards. Benefit-cost ratios between 4 and 36 were calculated. Country specific analyses find 
benefit-cost ratios across a similar range: 
• 
China: benefit-cost ratio of 35-40 for 1994-199620 
• 
US: benefit-ratio of 6 for forecasting21 
• 
Russia: benefit-cost ratio of 4.5-1022 
• 
Kyrgyz Republic: benefit-cost ratio of 223 
• 
Tajikistan: benefit-cost ratio of 2.224 
• 
Ethiopia: benefit-cost ratios range from 3 to 625 
 
                                                          
18 IPCC (2012): Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation. Special Report, WG I & 
II, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, and New York, NY, USA, pp. 582. 
19 Hallegatte, Stéphane, 2012. A Cost Effective Solution to Reduce Disaster Losses in Developing. Countries: Hydro-Meteorological 
Services, Early Warning, and Evacuation, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper #6058. 
20 Guocai, Z and H. Wang, 2003. Evaluating the Value of Meteorological Services in China. WMO Bulletin 53(4): 383-7. 
21 Rogers and Tsirkunov, 2010. Costs and Benefits of Early Warning Systems. Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. 
ISDR and World Bank. 
22 World Bank, 2005. Russia National Hydromet Modernization Project. Project Appraisal Document. 
23 World Bank, 2009. Improving Weather, Climate and Hydrological Services Delivery in Central Asia. Kyrgyz Republic, Republic of 
Tajikistan and Turkmenistan. 
24 Ibid. 
25 World Meteorological Organization, 2015; Valuing Weather and Climate: Economic Assessment of Hydromet Services. 
CLIMATE
water & 
weather
Monitoring 
Observation
Modelling 
Forecasting
Dissemination & 
Communication
Early Warning
Decision/ 
Action
Outcomes
VALUES
economic 
& social

=== PAGE 58 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 72 
 
 F 
Identified Benefits 
In Mali, significant gains are anticipated to be made through this Project, both from reduced losses and enhanced 
productivity, particularly in agriculture. Mali is starting from a very low base. From the hydromet information 
production standpoint, the majority of river and weather stations are manually operated and do not provide accurate 
readings. The Project will significantly increase the number of automated weather and hydraulic stations operating in 
the country, thereby having a major impact on the accuracy of weather and flood forecasting capacity. The Project will 
also enhance collaboration between the respective hydrology and meteorology agencies, which is currently very 
limited.  
 
From a user perspective, the Project would provide an opportunity to substantially improve key services. Those 
include: i) the country’s early warning system, which currently does not issue any official severe weather or flood 
warnings, and thus leaves enormous scope for diminishing the loss of lives, livelihoods and assets; ii) seasonal 
forecasts and planting and harvesting advisories to enhance the productivity of farmers; and iii) the food security alert 
and targeting system could also be further improved.   
 
Based on these improvements in the forecasting and early warning services, the main benefits that this economic 
analysis focuses on are: (a) reduction in economic losses caused by floods; (b) reduction in drought losses and 
increased agricultural productivity; and (c) increased efficiency of civil protection and humanitarian interventions due 
to enhanced preparedness and accuracy of targeting.  
 
The reduction in deaths was not included in the cost-benefit analysis, due to the obvious limitations in valuing human 
lives. Other factors that were considered, but not quantified, include environmental destruction, disease and social 
stress, due to the difficulty of valuing total benefits accruing over time after the investments are performed. In 
addition, some more marginal development benefits, such as the improved efficiency of air-traffic control and the 
increased efficiency of hydropower operations due to improved weather forecasting accuracy, were not included, 
since there is no direct link to the aviation or energy sector in the Project. Therefore, the valued benefits are 
considered very conservative and could increase several folds based on the intensity of future events. 
 
The potential lives saved thanks to the strengthening of early warning systems due to this Project is potentially 
significant. Recent weather and climate-related disasters have resulted in a heavy burden of fatalities in Mali. On 
average there are 27 annual fatalities due to floods, which would likely be diminished through improved end-to-end 
early warning systems. Data on deaths from droughts is limited, and cannot be fully disaggregated from other causes 
of death. However, it is very likely that strengthened seasonal forecasting and agro-meteorological information 
systems would strengthen the productivity of farmers and therefore reduce the 1.5 million people that are currently 
food insecure in the country and risk starvation.26  
 
Due to limited data availability, a number of assumptions and proxy indicators had to be designed in order to perform 
the analysis. The main benefits are explained below, along with the main assumptions of the Project.  
 
a. The reduction of economic losses caused by floods was calculated to be US$2.6 million annually, over 10 years. 
This was based on the assumption that early warning systems provided by the DGPC would give households 
with additional lead time needed to evacuate and move main household belongings (such as cars, motorbikes, 
televisions, etc.) to higher ground, therefore reducing flood losses by 5%. Average flood losses (US$52 million) 
was calculated based on the combined average of two data sources: (i) losses reported by government (US$60 
million), and (ii) losses estimated by UNISDR using probabilistic method (US$45 million).27   
 
b. Reduced drought losses, combined with increased agricultural productivity, were calculated to total US$19.5 
million annually. This was based on the expectation that an improved seasonal forecasting and agro-
meteorological information systems to farmers provided by Mali Metéo, combined with enhanced food security 
early warning system provided by SAP, would enhance farmers’ productivity and reduce crop losses. Since crop 
loss data was not available, the calculation was made on existing agricultural production to say that the 
                                                          
26 World Food Program: https://www.wfp.org/countries/mali 
27 http://www.preventionweb.net/countries/mli/data/

=== PAGE 59 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 72 
 
 F 
combined increase in farmer efficiency, as well as the reduced agricultural losses due to droughts, would 
increase overall national agricultural output by at least 0.5%. World Bank data, which estimated that the value of 
agricultural production in 2012 was US$3.9 billion, was used for this calculation. 
 
c. The increase in efficiency of humanitarian food relief interventions, due to enhanced preparedness and accuracy 
of targeting, was calculated to amount to US$0.7 million per year, over 10 years. The assumption was that the 
efficiency of such operations would be augmented by 0.5%, including avoiding wastage, due to enhanced 
accuracy of food security targeting system, combined with increased coordination and prepositioning of food 
relief assets. The government’s estimated food security needs for 2015 at US$142 million, both in terms of 
government reserves and international donor support, was used as the baseline.  
 
Cost-Benefit Analysis 
By comparing the costs and benefits of the Project, over time an understanding of the relative value of the planned 
investments can be generated. While cost-benefit analysis provides a useful process and resultant metrics to help 
steer investment decision-making, it should however not be the only factor considered.  
 
While the implementation phase of the Project is 4 years, for this analysis, it is assumed that the project impact is 15 
years. This is based on the assumption that equipment such as computers and tablets would have an average life of 
3-4 years, vehicles and hydromet stations would have an average life of 7-10 years, while new buildings would have 
a much longer life-span, in the range of 30-40 years. An average of 15 years is therefore appropriate. Operations and 
maintenance (O&M) costs are assumed at 15% of project investments. O&M costs thus increase linearly over the first 
4 years as cumulative project investments are made, reaching a constant 15% of total capital costs during years 5-15. 
Benefits in terms of reduced disaster damages and increased production are assumed to increase linearly starting 
from year 2, reaching a constant maximum for years 5-15.  
 
Since Mali’s GDP growth rate has been on average 4.5% in the past decade, a discount rate of 5% is used to 
calculate the Net Present Value (NPV). This is justified by the fact that although there is high potential for future 
growth in the country, there are also high risks caused by potential climatic, political and price shocks. A 5% discount 
rate represents an understanding that future costs and benefits are relatively important in comparison to the current 
situation – concurrent with concerns regarding climate change.  
 
The NPV, which is the difference between the discounted total benefits and cost, was calculated to be US$124.4 
million, with a discount rate of 5%. This represents a benefit-cost ratio of 1 to 5. The Internal Rate of Return (IRR), 
which is the discount rate that zeroes out the NPV, or the interest rate that makes the NPV of all cash flows equal to 
0, was calculated to be 65%.  
 
Since it is impossible to accurately predict future per capita consumption growth, a sensitivity analysis was conducted 
to illustrate the benefits of the Project at lower and higher rates of return. At a discount rate of 10%, NPV is equal to 
US$78.9 million, and with a discount rate of 15%, NPV equals US$51.6 million. This demonstrates that the Project 
would be viable even with much higher discount rates.  
 
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
Please provide an assessment from the technical perspective. If a particular technological solution has been chosen, 
describe why it is the most appropriate for this project/programme. 
Technical evaluations of hydro-meteorological and food security services were conducted in 2014 respectively by 
USAID and the EU. Hydro-meteorological services are at a crossroads, and urgently need an updated long-term 
business strategy and action plan for capturing and effectively meeting the demand for services from public and 
private sector clients. Even though the Government of Mali at this time cannot cover the entire recurrent and capital 
improvement costs of these strategic public services’ agencies and departments, it remains strongly engaged and 
very supportive. Food security services are undergoing a critical reform, and modernization of the food security early 
warning system with an enhanced use of hydro-meteorological information can potentially optimize the use of about

=== PAGE 60 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 72 
 
 F 
US$230 million of food aid annually. Flood warning services are not operational in Mali. However, the pipeline 
strategy and law on disaster risk reduction provides potential for quick demonstration of benefits for populations and 
productive sectors. 
  
A recent World Bank portfolio review of hydromet projects and/or project components shows that the potential to 
deliver hydro-meteorological services has increased dramatically over the last 15 years, with huge associated 
potential benefits in various sectors. Forecasting capacities are growing rapidly with enhanced lead time and spatial 
resolution, with considerable potential economic benefits.  
 
In general, assessment of World Bank hydromet projects shows that a systems approach (with a mix of institutional 
strengthening, infrastructure and service delivery) is needed for successful outcomes. A recent World Bank 
publication28 lists the key lessons from the experience with modernizing NMHSs: a) taking an inclusive end-to-end 
approach that is transformative; b) giving NMHSs the authority to issue or directly support issuance of warnings; c) 
wherever possible, avoid waiting until the NMHSs are obsolete to undertake modernization, because this approach 
makes the job more costly and complex; and d) engaging staff and external stakeholders to provide better public 
weather, climate, and hydrological services.  
 
The proposed mix of institutional strengthening, investment and support to service delivery among the four institutions 
responsible for meteorology, hydrology, food security, as well as early warning and flood early (rapid) warning comes 
from a careful analysis of needs and potential benefits from an end user perspective. A number of innovations in 
information and knowledge management would ensure realization of benefits through the delivery of value-added 
public services relevant to two priority areas, namely food security and civil protection.  
 
The technology proposed for infrastructure, equipment and information management systems responds to the 
following priorities: a) low O&M costs; b) robust design fit for purpose to withstand power outages and unreliable 
communication systems dependent on grid electricity and internet; and c) resistance to specific Sahelian climate. 
 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations 
Describe the main outcome of the environment and social impact assessment. Specify the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan, and how the project/programme will avoid or mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g. 
preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with the Fund’s Environmental and Social Safeguard 
(ESS) standard. Also describe how the gender aspect is considered in accordance with the Fund’s Gender Policy and 
Action Plan.  
Environmental and social impacts were assessed and widely consulted with stakeholders in Mali – including women 
groups – and are reflected in a draft Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a draft 
Resettlement Policy Framework developed by the Government for similar activities. These two documents are 
summarized in an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) attached as Annex to this proposal. The 
Project is considered a social and environmental “category B” project with potentially low to medium impacts.  
 
The Project’s environmental impacts are not of significant importance or irreversible. The potential minor negative 
environmental and social impacts of the Project could result mainly from certain physical interventions associated with 
the construction of new weather and water monitoring stations. For example, the installation of water level recorders 
may include some punctual and very short-term disturbance of the river slopes and sediments during construction. 
The water level recorders itself will not have any impact on the hydraulic regime of the stream nor have any impact on 
the aquatic ecosystems. Access to sites, including access roads will be very limited and will be remediated during 
construction.  
 
                                                          
28 Weather and Climate Resilience: Effective Preparedness through National Meteorological and Hydrological Services, Tsirkunov 
and Rogers, World Bank, 2013.

=== PAGE 61 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 72 
 
 F 
To mitigate risks and negative impacts, the Government has prepared a draft Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) as well as a draft Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for activities envisaged under this 
project. The documents, summarized in the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), provide guidance 
and measures with clear roles and responsibilities, along with capacity strengthening measures for effective 
implementation and monitoring (Please refer to Annex V). This plan has been consulted with stakeholders in Mali 
during preparation. It also provides cost outlays and a timetable for preventing and mitigating potential impacts. In 
particular, the draft ESMF: i) provides steps for screening all potential sites for the installation of hydromet equipment; 
and ii) outlines procedures for preparing, reviewing, clearing, disclosing and monitoring infrastructure-specific 
assessments, if deemed necessary. As a condition, it has been agreed that no civil works will commence without 
proper compliance with the above procedures. 
 
Since social impacts will be limited to the installation and operation of hydro-meteorological stations, it is very unlikely 
that formal or informal access of people to land will be restrained through the Project. However, even if they are 
limited in time and space, the Project will carefully address any impacts on access to resources due to the 
rehabilitation and installation of weather stations and river gauges. The draft Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
includes the guidelines and procedures for compensation and/or resettlement in the event that future activities under 
the Project should require land acquisition, involuntary resettlement or cause restriction of access to livelihoods or 
assets and resources. It is, however, very unlikely that the Project will involve any land acquisition and / or involuntary 
resettlement for the installation of hydromet stations or related services. 
 
The national legal framework for environmental management in Mali specifies the roles and responsibilities of 
government ministries, departments, and agencies, as well as other stakeholders. While environmental management 
and outcome improved somewhat in recent years, institutional and technical capacity for environmental management 
still needs to be strengthened at many levels.  
 
The project team will ensure the provision of technical support to develop and improve understanding of the GCF’s 
safeguard polices and the effective implementation of the World Bank’s environmental and social safeguard 
guidelines. The World Bank supervision teams will include environmental and social safeguard experts. Regular 
monitoring reports (two per year) on the implementation of environmental and social safeguards provisions will be 
provided to the World Bank for approval. These reports will be verified during project supervision missions, which will 
include environmental and social safeguard experts. At the national level, the DGPC, executing entity, will be in 
charge of the monitoring and evaluation of safeguards. 
 
Gender Considerations 
Men and women are often differently affected by climate change, extreme weather and climate events, whereas women 
have higher disaster mortality then men. According to UNFPA women are 14 times more likely to be killed by disasters 
then men. In Mali the gender gap is particularly higher than Sub-Saharan Africa’s average, which is characterized by 
high fertility rates (6.3 birth per women), high illiteracy rates (66% versus 51 % for men), and particularly in rural areas 
a low net primary enrolment of girls (14% versus 55% for boys). Physical vulnerability, but also social and financial vary 
according to entitlement, agency, and opportunities given to men and women, boys and girls. Gender specific 
vulnerability to climate shocks and disasters can be understood under three major axes: (i) production and reproduction 
responsibilities; (ii) gender based and other forms of violence; and (iii) lack of agency.  
- Production related vulnerability is among others often related to the dependency of women on natural resources (e.g. 
fuel wood access) and role of women in small scale subsistence agriculture, work and income in informal sectors, 
insecure or limited access to land as well as insurance products and services. Gender norms also influence the skills, 
strategies, and survival mechanisms such as food intake. Livestock, typically owned by women and youth, is sold first 
in hard times.  
- Violence is a universal phenomenon, however, it tends to spike in the context of natural disasters. Domestic violence, 
early and forced marriage; gender based violence (GBV) tend to increase in times of insecurity and when social 
structures experience failures. 
- Lack of agency related vulnerability refers to the understanding and perceiving of risks as well as coping and response 
strategies. Gender imbalance in level of education and literacy, limited rights and political representation, limited access 
to social infrastructure. Limited rights and low social status for women limits their knowledge of risks.

=== PAGE 62 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 72 
 
 F 
Hydro-met services and effective early warning systems can play an important role to reduce the vulnerability of women 
to climate change and extreme weather and climate events leading to gender equity. The project is therefore committed 
to a gender sensitive development. The project will implement, monitor and constantly improve its gender actions in 
line with the national policies of Mali. The project’s gender actions are informed by the existing World Bank gender 
assessments in Mali (Mali – Poverty and Gender Notes, 2013; Strategic Gender Assessment, 2006), which will be 
updated during project preparation. It will make concrete recommendations for ensuring active participation of women 
and vulnerable groups during project design and implementation. Examples of relevant user needs include for example 
providing hydro-meteorological series and forecasting for women farmers communities, small women owned business 
as well as involving schools in hydro-met monitoring.  
 
In preparation of the project, a gender focused assessment of hydro-met information user needs was conducted in the 
Sahel countries focusing notably on the three major axes of gender related vulnerability for key livelihood groups – 
livestock herders, farmers, fishing and artisanal mining. Similarly on the disaster preparedness site, actions will be 
undertaken to ensure early warning messages to women as well as vulnerable groups including disabled are well 
targeted. A Gender Action Plan will be formulated and monitored. The Gender Action Plan will be implemented 
according to the following timeline – for a tentative approval in June and start in August - which can be adjusted based 
on the actual project approval and start date: 
 
  
Aug 
Sept 
Oct 
Nov 
Bridging Knowledge Gaps 
  
  
  
  
Finalizing Gender Action Plan 
  
  
  
  
Setting M&E indicators 
  
  
  
  
 
 
The project will support Mali Metéo, DNH and DGPC to target and communicate weather forecasts and climate outlooks 
to the specific needs of women. This can for example be activities, which ensure that weather and climate information 
is communicated through dedicated communication channels, which are relevant for women and men, and that the 
forecast information is relevant for women user groups enabling them to get a more resilient product from wood lots or 
household gardens. Similarly, the project would support the government to better target their disaster response to the 
particular needs of women in line with their national policies. This could for example be the identification of flood 
shelters, which are safe and secure for women or that contingency plans and women specific simulation exercises 
include relevant gender actions. The project will thereby maximize the reach of early warning systems and minimize 
the potential negative impact of disasters on women. 
 
The project will implement the following gender actions throughout the entire project cycle: 
i. 
Update the socio-economic and gender assessment, building upon the existing World Bank gender 
assessments during the initial phase of the project including a baseline survey to (a.) determine how the project 
can best respond to the needs of women and men of the specific climate change issue, (b.) identify gender 
dynamics to achieve the project goals, (c) identify and design project actions, (d) monitor gender actions and 
number of beneficiaries gender disaggregated, (e) select output, outcome and impact indicators, and (f) guide 
project institutional arrangements. 
ii. 
Regularly monitor gender actions through a Gender Action Plan, including the number of beneficiaries gender 
disaggregated as well as gender sensitive project output, outcome and impact indicators. The number of 
gender-disaggregated beneficiaries is targeted at 50% women beneficiaries across all six beneficiary countries. 
To effectively keep track of gender related both qualitative and quantitative surveys of beneficiaries (gender 
disaggregated) will be conducted annually. This gender action plan is currently being formulated and will be 
consulted and completed before signature of the grant agreement.

=== PAGE 63 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 72 
 
 F 
iii. 
Conduct gender actions and support the government to implement the gender action plan. Gender actions may 
include a large number activities stipulated above, including, but not limited to, working with women user groups 
to identify and develop suitable weather and climate services design risk assessments, prepare gender 
sensitive early warning systems or design specific gender sensitive flood shelters for communities. 
iv. 
Ensure women participation in community based planning committees, e.g. related to community based 
contingency planning; 
v. 
In the project implementation unit a gender and social development specialist will support monitoring and 
implementing gender actions throughout the project. Capacity building on monitoring and implementation of 
gender actions and indicators for all project staff will ensure a high level of awareness and quality of monitoring.  
vi. 
Establish a project grievance redress mechanism allowing access of women to report gender related issues 
and the project taking action accordingly ensuring gender equity. 
 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement 
Describe the project/programme’s financial management and procurement, including financial accounting, 
disbursement methods and auditing. 
The Grant Agreement will be established between the World Bank and the Government of Mali with Standard 
Conditions for Grants made by the World Bank out of Various Funds dated July 31, 2010 (“Standard Conditions”). 
The World Bank, as the GCF-accredited entity, will oversee appropriate implementation of the Project, in line with 
World Bank procedures standards and requirements in the AMA/FAA to be agreed with the GCF. 
 
The coordination unit of the DGPC at the Ministry of Security and Civil Protection previously implemented a World 
Bank operation of a smaller scale. However, although the unit has experience in following World Bank procurement 
procedures, capacity support is required to manage a larger project. 
  
Financial Management 
The DGPC Director-General, coordinator of the project, will oversee the financial management aspects of the Project, 
including the preparation of the financial statements and quarterly Interim Unaudited Financial Reports, monitoring 
financial transactions on the Project’s accounts and making the necessary arrangements for the annual financial audit 
of the Project. The overall financial management risk is low. 
 
DGPC has satisfactorily implemented a World Bank-funded project from 2012 until June 2015, involving exact 
same partners (meteo, hydro, food security). The financial management institutional capacity has been 
assessed on an ongoing basis (with reports every 6 months), and strengthened with (i) acquisition of a 
dedicated software (TomPro), (ii) training of staff for financial analysis, accounting and archiving and 
(iii) development of a financial management manual which takes into account Bank’s Financial Management 
guidelines.  
 
Given the large amount of transactions anticipated to be processed compared to average, it is anticipated that the 
Grant Agreement will state the following as financial covenants: 
a) Opening a designated account in a in a financial institution acceptable to the Bank; 
b) Implementing separate and adequate financial accounting system including record keeping of financial 
transactions, funds received and paid; 
c) Producing interim financial reports on a quarterly basis; 
d) If needed, updating of the current manual of procedures in order to take in account the grant specificities; 
e) Recruit a part-time Chief Financial Officer providing training services as well as support to the team with flexible 
workforce in order to address variable workloads; 
f) Recruiting an external auditor based on ToR acceptable to the Bank not later than four months after effectiveness;  
g) Maintaining of a financial management system including records, accounts and preparation of related financial 
statements in accordance with accounting standards acceptable to the Bank;

=== PAGE 64 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 72 
 
 F 
h) The Financial Statements will be audited in accordance with international auditing standards. The Audited 
Financial Statements for each period shall be furnished to the Association not later than six (6) months after the end 
of the project fiscal year; 
i) The Recipient shall prepare and furnish to the Association not later than 45 days after the end of each calendar 
quarter, interim un-audited financial reports for the Project, in form and substance satisfactory to the Association. 
 
This is summarized in the financial management action plan as follows: 
No 
Action 
Deadline 
1 
Open a designated account in a financial institution 
acceptable to the Bank 
Not later than one month after effectiveness 
2 
Upgrade of the current manual so as to take into account 
the grant specificities (if needed) 
Not later than two months after effectiveness 
3 
Recruit a part-time Chief Financial Officer providing training 
services as well as support to the team 
Not later than two months after effectiveness 
4 
Recruit an external auditor 
Not later than two months after effectiveness 
 
The following measures will help strengthen capacity in this area, including having: i) the Administrative and 
Accounting Unit (DAC) and a dedicated accountant from the Ministry of Security and Civil Protection trained on Bank 
procedures; ii) the DAC and accountant supported by an experienced consultant; iii) a Project Implementation Manual 
developed to provide detailed guidance on World Bank budgeting, accounting and financial procedures. 
 
Disbursement will be transaction-based. Subject to satisfactory assessment of the quality of Interim Financial Reports 
12 months after effectiveness, the Project could shift to the report-based disbursement method. The Designated 
Account (DA) will be maintained in a commercial bank. All supporting documents will be provided for Statement of 
Expenditures (SOEs) for all transactions submitted to the World Bank prior review. The others will be retained at the 
DGPC and be made available for periodic reviews by the World Bank’s missions and external auditors.  
 
The budgeting process will be clearly defined in the Financial Management Manual and the budget will be adopted 
before the beginning of the year and monitored through the project accounting software. Project accounts will be 
maintained and supported with appropriate records and procedures to track commitments and to safeguard assets. 
Annual financial statements will be prepared by the DAC.  
 
The DGPC will elaborate a Project Implementation Manual before effectiveness, including accounting administrative 
and financial procedures. The manual will need to be cleared by the Bank (FM, procurement and safeguard 
departments as well as the Task Team Leader) and officially adopted by the Government The Manual will ensure 
roles and responsibilities are clearly defined and adequate internal controls are in place for the preparation, approval 
and recording of transactions as well as segregation of duties, to ensure compliance with all WB conditions and 
guidelines. The Manual will be subject to updates as needed. The Internal Controller of the Ministry of Finance will 
carry out ex-ante review during project implementation. In addition, the Project will consider the Controle Général des 
Services Publics (CGSP) to carry out internal auditing twice a year (or on other agreed periodicity) based on Terms of 
Reference acceptable to the Bank. The only Condition of effectiveness anticipated for the Grant will be the adoption 
of a project implementation manual, and this is not expected to delay implementation since DGPC has already 
implemented a project with similar implementation arrangements and is able to develop this manual before 
effectiveness. The Conditions of effectiveness and dated covenants guarantee compliance with all WB conditions and 
guidelines, and are proposed by WB legal department. 
 
Interim Unaudited Financial Reports would be prepared on a quarterly basis. The Interim Financial Reports will 
include sources and uses of funds by project expenditures classification. They will also include a comparison of 
budgeted and actual project expenditures (commitment and disbursement) to date and for the quarter. The DGPC will 
submit the Interim Financial Reports to the Bank within 45 days following the end the calendar quarter.

=== PAGE 65 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 72 
 
 F 
The Financial Agreement will require the submission of Audited Financial Statements from the DGPC to the World 
Bank within six months after each year-end. An external auditor acceptable to the World Bank will be recruited. The 
external auditor will prepare a Management Letter to provide observations, comments, and recommendations for 
improvements in accounting records, systems, controls and compliance with financial covenants in the Financial 
Agreement. 
 
Reimbursement of advances will be conditioned to compliance with conditions and guidelines including: Standard 
Conditions for Grants made by the World Bank out of Various Funds dated July 31, 2010 (“Standard Conditions”, 
available as Annex 15) and with reference to the World Bank Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and 
Corruption (January 2011, Annex 16), the World Bank Disbursement Guidelines (May 2006, Annex 17), the World 
Bank Guidelines on Selection and Employment of Consultants (January 2011, Annex 18), the World Bank Guidelines 
on Procurement of Goods, Works and Non-Consulting Services (January 2011, Annex 19), including the guidance on 
Anti Money Laundering and Combating Financing of Terrorism. Non-compliance with any of these conditions and 
guidelines could not only jeopardize the proposed project, but could also freeze disbursement for the entire portfolio 
of the World Bank, which is over US$800 million. The Minister of Finance, Governor of the World Bank, is fully 
committed to ensure full compliance of all projects supervised by the World Bank. 
 
Procurement 
The DGPC has adequate procurement capacity to carry out procurement under the Project. The main procurement 
risks relate to the fact that DGPC staff lack experience with large Bank-funded operations, and have only dealt with 
smaller World Bank administered grants. To strengthen the DGPC’s capacity on World Bank procedures, a 
procurement training program will be carried out during the life of the Project. In addition, the DGPC will hire a 
procurement consultant with qualifications and terms of reference satisfactory to the Bank, who will provide both 
support and training services to the civil servants. The overall procurement risk is low. 
 
Recommendations to further strengthen procurement capacity and accountability include: i) develop procurement 
codes and manuals for National Competitive Bidding Procedures; ii) prepare a procurement plan for the Project; iii) 
separate evaluation and grant committees for contract awards; iv) establish an archiving system independent from 
the DGPC conventional system to enable prompt access to documents; v) train at least two people to the use of 
Bank’s procedures; and iv) submit the first two contracts in each procurement category for prior review. 
 
THESE RECOMMENDATIONS WILL BE OVERSEEN BY THE WORLD BANK AS PART OF THE SUPERVISION OF THE PROJECT 
TO ENSURE EFFECTIVE IMPLEMENTATION.

=== PAGE 66 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 72 
 G 
 
 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures 
Please describe financial, technical and operational, social and environmental and other risks that might prevent the 
project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the proposed risk mitigation measures. 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
 
Environmental and Social Safety Related Risks  
 
Social and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
The Project’s environmental and social impacts are not of significant importance or irreversible. The potential minor 
negative environmental and social impacts of the Project could result mainly from certain physical interventions 
associated with the construction of new weather and water monitoring stations and two buildings on Government-
owned land. It is also very unlikely that formal or informal access of people to land will be restrained through the 
Project. To mitigate small risk of negative impacts, the Project will adopt an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF), which provides guidance and measures with clear roles and responsibilities, along with 
capacity strengthening measures for effective implementation and monitoring, as well as a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) so that the Project can carefully address the unlikely impact on access to resources due to the 
rehabilitation and installation of weather stations and river gauges. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
 
Lack of Adequate Institutional Capacity for 
Implementation 
Technical and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary 
Please provide a summary of main risk factors. Detailed description of risk factors and mitigation measures can be 
elaborated in G.2. 
The risks identified below include key policy, institutional, and implementation risks. These risks include: (1) 
environmental and social safety related risks; (2) lack of adequate institutional capacity for implementation; (3) 
constraints in financial management capabilities; and (4) limited procurement experience with World Bank projects 
and (5) security and vandalism. Though some of these risks are rated moderate to high, strong mitigation measures 
will be established to ensure that they do not interfere with the successful implementation of the Project. Ongoing 
dialogue with the government and intermittent workshops as well as training will also be arranged in order to make 
sure that the Project is implemented in a risk-informed manner and meets client demands and needs. 
 
In relation with security concerns, conflict in the North of the country will be a challenge for project implementation. 
However, since there are no rivers and very no significant agricultural production in the North, this will not affect the 
project significantly, as very few stations will be needed in the North. Simple meteorological data could be obtained 
through alternative sources such as remote sensing calibrated with historical datasets. Security of staff is taken very 
seriously by government. The main project management entity is the Directorate General for Civil Protection, which 
has well trained security personnel, with appropriate experience and the necessary equipment required to protect 
the project staff and assets.

=== PAGE 67 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 72 
 G 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigants lower the probability of risk 
occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
The four entities (MALI METÉO, DNH, SAP AND DGPC) require additional capacity for effective implementation and 
coordination. Despite strong commitment and the significant progress made by the country, institutional challenges 
remain to be addressed. DGPC’s current capacity remains focused on disaster relief operations, and they require 
additional support and training to develop the capacity to promote disaster preparedness and early warning, as well 
as coordination for disaster risk management. Capacity building is a significant part of project design, to mitigate this 
risk, across all four project components – via capacity building, trainings, workshops, modernization of key equipment, 
and enhancement of service delivery. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
 
Constraints in Financial Management Capabilities 
 
Financial 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigants lower the probability of risk 
occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
In order to ensure provision of quality and timely budget reports and annual financial statements, effectiveness of 
external audits, and legislative scrutiny of the annual budget law, the DGPC and an accountant from the Ministry will 
be supported by an experienced consultant. Additional targeted training and consultant support will be provided to 
strengthen the financial management capacity of the government. A project implementation manual will be developed 
to provide detailed guidance on World Bank budgeting, accounting and financial procedures. 
 
Reimbursement of advances will be conditioned to compliance with conditions and guidelines including: Standard 
Conditions for Grants made by the World Bank out of Various Funds dated July 31, 2010 (“Standard Conditions”, 
available as Annex 15) and with reference to the World Bank Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and 
Corruption (January 2011, Annex 16), the World Bank Disbursement Guidelines (May 2006, Annex 17), the World 
Bank Guidelines on Selection and Employment of Consultants (January 2011, Annex 18), the World Bank Guidelines 
on Procurement of Goods, Works and Non-Consulting Services (January 2011, Annex 19), including the guidance on 
Anti Money Laundering and Combating Financing of Terrorism. Non-compliance with any of these conditions and 
guidelines could not only jeopardize the proposed project, but could also freeze disbursement for the entire portfolio 
of the World Bank, which is over US$800 million.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
 
Limited Procurement Experience with World Bank 
Projects 
 
Financial 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?

=== PAGE 68 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 72 
 G 
In general, the DGPC has adequate procurement capacity to carry out procurement under the Project. The main 
procurement risks relate to the fact that DGPC staff lack experience with large Bank-funded operations, and have only 
dealt with smaller World Bank administered grants. To strengthen the DGPC’s capacity on World Bank procedures, a 
procurement training program will be carried out during the life of the Project.  In addition, the DGPC will hire a 
procurement consultant with qualifications and terms of reference satisfactory to the Bank. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of impact 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
 
Security and Vandalism  
 
Social and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the 
probability of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
 
There is a risk that the project is affected by conflict and vandalism. Tight security procedures will therefore be put in 
place by DGPC, to ensure the security of staff working on this project.  
 
In order to prevent vandalism and damage to project assets, fences will be erected around hydromet stations to prevent 
access. Very often it is the solar panels that are stolen from hydromet equipment, one option being considered by the 
team, is to link the energy source of the hydromet station to that of community drinking water stations, where solar 
power is used to pump the water. These facilities are closely protected by the community, so the energy source would 
be more secure. Awareness raising and training of local communities about the importance of these hydromet stations, 
will be part of component 3, so that the community appreciates the value of the infrastructure to enhance their own 
wellbeing. 
 
All equipment procured under the project will be included in the national inventory. As it is the case for all government-
owned equipment operated by government employees in Mali, the equipment will be covered under self-underwriting 
option by the Government. In addition, further insurance avenues will be explored with implementing partners.  
 
In relation with security concerns, conflict in the North of the country will be a challenge for project implementation. 
However, since there are no rivers and very no significant agricultural production in the North, this will not affect the 
project significantly, as very few stations will be needed in the North. Simple meteorological data could be obtained 
through alternative sources such as remote sensing calibrated with historical datasets. Security of staff is taken very 
seriously by government. The main project management entity is the Directorate General for Civil Protection, which 
has well trained security personnel, with appropriate experience and the necessary equipment required to protect 
the project staff and assets. 
 
Other Potential Risks in the Horizon 
Please describe other potential issues which will be monitored as “emerging risks” during the life of the projects (i.e., 
issues that have not yet raised to the level of “risk factor” but which will need monitoring).  This could include issues 
related to external stakeholders such as project beneficiaries or the pool of potential contractors. 
 
All risks are reflected in the section above 
 
* Please expand this sub-section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.

=== PAGE 69 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 72 
 
 H 
H.1. Logic Framework.  
 
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework under 
the Results Management Framework. 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level29 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Increased climate-resilient 
sustainable development 
The underlying paradigm shift for the proposed project is based on a systematic causal chain 
of inputs, outputs, intermediate outcomes, final project outcomes and long term project 
impact. The fundamental elements and key indicators of this causal chain are as follows: 
 
Output Level: The improvement and modernization of its hydromet systems and services, 
using technological breakthroughs in the industry over the years, will enable Mali to provide 
communities, national, regional and international users with adapted, accurate and timely 
weather, climate and hydrological information. The expected output level results include:  
• 
Enhanced hydro-meteorological observing, monitoring and impact forecasting 
services; 
• 
Enhanced food security early warning system; 
• 
New flood early warning services; 
• 
Enhanced civil protection response capacities; 
 
Intermediate Outcome Level: Taking advantage of these improvements, Météo-Mali, DNH, 
DGPC and SAP will more systematically and efficiently consider the demands of 
stakeholders at all levels of the country and adapt their products accordingly. 
• 
Increased generation and use of climate information in decision making; 
• 
Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks; 
• 
Strengthened awareness of climate threats and risk reduction processes; 
 
Outcome Level: Strengthened and modernized hydro-meteorological institutions and 
services will increase the use of timely and accurate weather, climate and hydrological 
information in decision making of the government, communities, civil society and private 
sector in Mali and thereby strengthen their awareness and adaptive capacity. This will be 
achieved by focusing on the transformation of ‘last-leg’ early warning systems, so that these 
systems have the absorptive capacity, communication means and dissemination outreach to 
much more efficiently relay the more systematic and reliable information produced under the 
program. 
 
Impact Level: Strengthened and modernized hydro-meteorological services in Mali will 
increase the resilience and enhance the livelihoods of groups, communities and regions 
vulnerable to climate risks, increase their wellbeing, food and water security and contribute 
to a more climate resilient infrastructure. The project development impacts will be rather 
“gradual-but-certain” and build upon improved service delivery capacity, institutional reforms, 
capacity development and last mile connectivity. This also constitutes another past lesson 
being applied to the design of the program’s theory of change, which is that the reforms 
introduced under the program will have to be progressively but substantively institutionalized 
during the life of the project for them to retain their impact and benefits beyond the project. 
Accordingly, the project aims to start small but retain a strong focus on actual delivery of 
results that can be gradually scaled up, rather than starting too big which would risk diluting 
the potential impacts under the proposed project. 
                                                          
29 Information on the Fund’s expected results and indicators can be found in its Performance Measurement Frameworks available at the 
following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement): 
http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf

=== PAGE 70 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 72 
 
 H 
 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term  
(if 
applicable) 
Final 
Fund-level impacts 
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and enhanced 
livelihoods of the most 
vulnerable people, 
communities and 
regions 
1.1 Change in 
expected losses of 
lives and economic 
assets (US$) due to 
the impact of 
extreme climate-
related disasters in 
the geographic area 
of the GCF 
intervention 
Estimate 
from DGPC 
and 
CSA/SAP 
TBD in 
Dec 
2016 
Baseline 
-1% 
Baseline 
-5% 
Expected losses 
are modeled, not 
observed, to allow 
for year-to-year 
comparability.  
A2.0 Increased 
resilience of health and 
well-being, and food and 
water security 
2.2 Number of food-
secure households 
(in areas/periods at 
risk of climate 
change impacts) 
Estimate 
from 
CSA/SAP 
2 million 
2.05 
million 
2.2 
million 
Food security 
reform is 
implemented and 
information 
provided by hydro-
meteorological 
services is 
informing 
decisions 
A3.0 Increased 
resilience of 
intrastructure and the 
built environment to 
climate change 
3.1 Number and 
value of physical 
assets made more 
resilient to climate 
variability and 
change, considering 
human benefits 
Estimate 
from 
NPDRR and 
SAP 
US$0 
0 people 
US$35 
million 
1.5 
million 
people 
US$100 
million 
5.3 
million 
people 
Investment 
projects use 
information 
provided by hydro-
meteorological 
services 
 
 
 
 
 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
(if 
applicable)  
Final 
Project outcomes 
M5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and regulatory 
systems 
5.1: Institutional and 
regulatory systems that 
improve incentives for 
Assessment 
from DRR 
Regulato
ry 
documen
 
Regulator
y 
documen
Collaboration 
arrangements are in 
place via the

=== PAGE 71 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 72 
 
 H 
climate resilience and 
their effective 
implementation 
National 
Platform 
ts are 
inadequa
te or 
insufficie
nt 
ts are 
adequate 
or 
sufficient 
National Platform for 
institutional 
coordination 
A6.0 Increased generation 
and use of climate 
information in decision-
making 
6.1 Use of climate 
information 
products/services in 
decision-making in 
climate-sensitive 
sectors 
Scorecards 
from MMA 
and DNH 
0 
1 public 
sector 
services 
(food 
security, 
or civil 
protectio
n) 
2 public 
sector 
services 
(food 
security, 
and civil 
protectio
n) 
SOPs are in place 
between Metéo, 
hydro, civil 
protection and food 
security 
6.2 Perception of men, 
women, vulnerable 
populations, and 
emergency response 
agencies of the 
timeliness, content and 
reach of early warning 
systems 
Surveys by 
DGPC and 
SAP, with 
consideration 
for poorest 
and most 
climate-
sensitive user 
groups 
TBD 
 
Baseline 
+ 20% 
The surveys will be 
conducted with 
samples exposed to 
both food security 
and flood risks 
A7.0 Strengthened 
adaptive capacity and 
reduced exposure to 
climate risks 
7.1  Use by vulnerable 
households, 
communities, 
businesses and public-
sector services of 
Fund-supported tools, 
instruments, strategies 
and activities to 
respond to climate 
change and variability 
Estimate from 
Mali-Météo 
0 
0.5 
million 
farmers 
2 million 
farmers,  
househol
ds, 
communit
ies, 
business
es and 
public-
sector 
services 
The agro-
meteorological 
information service 
(AMIS) continues to 
provide services to 
farmers and 
additional delivery 
mechanisms are 
developed for other 
climate-sensitive 
sectors (urban 
management, water 
supply, irrigation, 
hydropower, health, 
etc.) 
7.2:  Number of males 
and females reached 
by [or total geographic 
coverage of] climate-
related early warning 
systems and other risk 
reduction measures 
established/ 
strengthened 
Aggregate 
from DGPC 
and SAP 
1 million 
males 
1 million 
females 
1.5 
million 
males 
1.5 
million 
females 
2.6 
million 
males 
2.7 
million 
females 
The legal framework 
for issuance of flood 
warnings gets 
adopted 
A8.0 Strengthened 
awareness of climate 
threats and risk-reduction 
processes 
8.1: Number of males 
and females made 
aware of climate 
threats and related 
appropriate responses 
Aggregate 
from Mali-
Météo, DNH, 
SAP and 
DGPC 
1 million 
males 
1 million 
females 
1.5 
million 
males 
1.5 
million 
females 
2.6 
million 
males 
2.7 
million 
females 
Partnership in place 
between the 
National Platform, 
media and civil 
society 
Project outputs 
Outputs that contribute to outcomes 
1. Enhanced hydro-
meteorological observing, 
End users' combined 
satisfaction rate and 
behavior change in 
Survey with 
user groups 
under 
Baseline 
Baseline 
* 1.1 
Baseline 
* 1.5 
The targeting of user 
groups will evolve as 
customized services

=== PAGE 72 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 72 
 
 H 
monitoring, and impact 
forecasting services 
relation with improved 
hydromet information 
services 
National 
Framework 
for Climate 
Services 
get delivered to 
additional groups.  
2. Enhanced food security 
early warning 
Number of well-
equipped agro-
meteorological stations 
Agro-
meteorologica
l advisory 
program 
0 
0 
14 
Existing “Local 
Agromet Assistance 
Groups” would need 
to be maintained and 
strengthened 
3. New flood early warning 
services 
Number of urban 
municipalities covered 
with flood early warning 
system 
DGPC 
0 
0 
15 
Some additional 
flood forecasting and 
early warning 
services will be 
delivered at regional 
and national level 
4. Enhanced civil protection 
response capacities 
Number of Municipal 
Civil Protection 
Committees with 
capacities to use the 
customized flood early 
warning interface and 
engage in early 
preparedness and 
response activities 
DGPC 
0 
0 
10 
The final number of 
local and community 
response capacities 
depends upon 
support provided by 
other project (GEF, 
Caritas, USAID, etc;) 
Activities 
Description 
Inputs 
Description 
1.1 Training and capacity 
building programs 
Development and 
implementation of 
capacity building, 
training and education 
program including: (i) 
personnel training and 
retraining; and (ii) 
professional orientation 
for senior staff 
1.1.1.In-situ training, education at 
universities, study tours, distance learning 
program and training in WMO regional 
and relevant training centers 
1.1.2.Technical training including at least 
basic meteorology, hydrology & ICT, 
maintenance and operation of newly 
acquired equipment, ICT, data 
processing, analysis & management, 
geographical information systems and 
remote sensing 
1.1.3.Simulation exercises for the DGPC, 
forecasting models for Mali Metéo and 
DNH, and food security and livelihood 
impact analysis methodologies for SAP 
Personnel training and 
retraining, professional 
orientation for senior staff, 
and targeted trainings for 
specific agency needs 
1.2 Enhancing institutional 
and regulatory frameworks 
Strengthening of 
institutions of hydro-
meteorology, food 
security and civil 
protection  
1.2.1. Development of Standard Operating 
Procedures to ensure early action in 
relation with early warnings 
1.2.2. Development or improvement of 
medium-term and long-term institutional 
business models and strategic planning 
frameworks 
Institutional development 
and strategic planning, and 
development of adequate 
legal and regulatory 
frameworks 
2.1 Expanding and 
upgrading hydromet 
observation networks 
Expansion and 
upgrading of the surface 
of meteorological 
network, the agro-
meteorological network, 
hydrological stations and 
specialized hydrological 
equipment for rivers and 
2.1.1. Expansion and upgrading of the 
surface meteorological network: 
Automatic Weather Stations, rain gauges, 
lightning detectors, standard equipment, 
power supply, telecoms for field stations; 
2.1.2 Expansion and upgrading of the 
agro-meteorological network: automatic 
stage recorders 
Expansion and upgrading 
of the surface 
meteorological network, 
agro-meteorological 
network, hydrological 
stations and specialized 
hydrological equipment for 
rivers and small flood-prone 
watersheds through the

=== PAGE 73 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 72 
 
 H 
small flood-prone 
watersheds 
2.1.3. Expansion and upgrading of 
hydrological stations and specialized 
hydrological equipment for rivers and 
small flood-prone watersheds : Acoustic 
Doppler Current Profiler, bathymetric 
instruments, sediment measurement 
instruments, current meters, and boats 
buying of new field 
equipment and 
refurbishment or renovation 
of existing ones 
2.2 Enhancing data 
collection & transmission, 
forecasting and decision 
support systems 
Modernization of data 
collection infrastructure, 
management and access 
to information systems 
for optimal utilization 
2.2.1 Upgrade of data collection and 
communication equipment and devices 
2.2.2. Upgrade of data storage and 
management systems 
2.2.3. Upgrade of computers and software 
for remote sensing 
2.2.4. Upgrade of software and 
customized tools for GIS and modelling 
and forecasting 
Modernization of data 
collection infrastructure, 
management and access to 
information systems for 
optimal utilization 
2.3 Strengthening 
preparedness and 
emergency response 
facilities and operations 
Enabling of agencies to 
carry out their 
operational mandates for  
disaster preparedness 
and response 
2.3.1. Design, building and equipment of a 
national Operational Center for Crisis 
Monitoring, Activation and Management to 
withstand all disaster scenarios;  
2.3.2. Design, building and equipment of a 
national office for SAP, specialized 
emergency vehicles and search and 
rescue equipment 
Design, building and 
equipment of emergency 
response units within 
existing institutions 
3.1 Enhancing of service 
delivery capacities 
The enhancement of 
service delivery 
capacities will include (i) 
establishing a national 
framework of climate 
services, (ii) improving 
flood and drought 
forecasting and 
warnings, and (iii) 
developing new products 
for sector specific needs 
3.1.1. Support to the development of a 
National Framework for Climate Services 
with sectoral working groups 
3.1.2. Development of a digital library of 
climate-relevant information for priority 
climate sensitive sectors 
3.1.3. Development of an information 
exchange between key Government 
stakeholders to enhance disaster risk 
assessment, preparedness and crisis 
management 
3.1.4 Support to participation in WMO 
Severe Weather Forecasting 
Demonstration Project (SWFDP) 
3.1.5. Development of impact based 
warnings and of a forecast accuracy 
verification system 
3.1.6. Development of field campaigns for 
validation of stage/discharge rating curves 
and collection of topographic data 
3.1.7. Development of specialized 
weather, climate and hydrological 
products and services tailored to sector 
specific needs (agriculture, health, energy, 
transport, water resources management, 
disaster risk management, etc.) 
3.1.8.Institutionalizat of a mechanism to 
provide user feedback 
Establishment of a national 
framework of climate 
services; Improvement of 
the lead time and accuracy 
of weather, climate and 
hydrological forecasts and 
development of timely and 
actionable warning services 
through improved numerical 
weather prediction, flood 
modelling and weather 
forecasting; Development 
of specialized weather, 
climate and hydrological 
products and services with 
an emphasis on the user 
driven process to define 
new services 
3.2 Improved early warning 
and community 
preparedness 
The improved early 
warning and community 
preparedness will 
include: (i) strengthening 
“last mile” connectivity to 
ensure appropriate 
3.2.1. Engagement of the end user 
community with the implementation of 
training activities, workshops and 
roundtables for major users 
3.2.2 Development and implementation of 
a communication strategy to support the 
Mobilization and 
sensitization the 
community, and 
establishment of an 
effective feedback 
mechanisms for

=== PAGE 74 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 72 
 
 H 
 
understanding and use 
of information, and (ii) 
mobilization and 
sensitization of 
community and 
establishing effective 
feedback mechanisms 
for communities at risk 
dissemination of products to end users via 
combination of modern and traditional 
communication methods (bulletins, 
forecasts, warnings and advisories) 
3.2.3. Workshops, operational training, 
on-the-job training and drills involving 
populations at risk, local governments, 
hydro-meteorologists and other relevant 
stakeholders 
3.2.4. Development of SOPs, warning 
protocols and signals in agreement with 
community members in pilot areas 
3.2.5. Conduct of municipal multi-hazard 
risk assessments (combination of 
scientific and participatory methods) for 
targeted high risk areas 
communities at risk; 
Community engagement, 
capacity building and 
gender and youth group 
sensitization as well as 
support to the integration of 
disaster and climate risk 
management into school 
and university curricula 
4 Project management 
 
4.1 Gender action plan  
4.2 Communication strategy for user 
beneficiaries 
 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
Besides the arrangements (e.g. Semi-annual performance reports) laid out in AMA, please provide project/programme 
specific institutional setting and implementation arrangements for monitoring and reporting and evaluation. Please indicate 
how the interim/mid-term and final evaluations will be organized, including the timing. 
 
As with all World Bank Investment Project Financing, a detailed results monitoring framework will be developed to assess 
progress towards the Project Development Objective (PDO) through key indicators; while intermediate indicators will monitor 
the progress of each component over the life of the Project. The detailed methodology for calculating indicators will be 
provided in the Monitoring and Evaluation Manual that will be developed by the Government of Mali.  
 
Project progress will be monitored by the Project monitoring and evaluation team based on official data sources monitored 
directly by Mali Metéo, DNH, SAP and the DGPC, with the assistance of the national platform for disaster risk management 
and guidance from the PSC. In addition, a number of individual evaluations will gauge progress towards the PDO, assess the 
impact of the Project on the beneficiaries, assess the quality of the work carried out its different components, and evaluate 
overall project efficiency. 
 
The Grant Agreement will detail the reporting requirement of the Government of Mali vis-à-vis the World Bank in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 2.06 of the Standard Conditions and on the basis of the indicators acceptable to the World 
Bank. Each Project Report shall cover the period of one calendar semester, and shall be furnished to the World Bank not 
later than one month after the end of the period covered by such report. The Mid-Term and Completion Reports shall be 
furnished to the World Bank no later than six months after the Mid-Term / Closing Date. The indicative timeline as reflected 
in the Project Term Sheet is as follows: 
Milestones  
Expected Dates  
Start of Project Implementation  
01/01/2017  
Interim Evaluation  
31/07/2019  
Project Completion  
31/12/2020  
Final Evaluation  
01/07/2021 
 
PLEASE PROVIDE METHODOLOGIES FOR MONITORING AND REPORTING OF THE KEY OUTCOMES OF THE PROJECT/PROGRAMME. 
 
Supervision, carried out on a regular basis by World Bank teams, will entail routine quality checks at various stages of 
implementation. Periodic monitoring will include process reviews/audits, reporting of outputs and maintaining updated 
records. Broad thematic areas that will be supervised and monitored include the following: (i) Social and Environmental

=== PAGE 75 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 72 
 
 H 
 
Monitoring, (ii) Regular Quality Supervision & Certification, (iii) Periodic Physical Progress Monitoring & Third-Party Quality 
Audit, and (iv) Results Monitoring and Evaluation.  
 
Additionally, there will be a project management milestone chart to ensure administrative and implementation related 
activities are completed on schedule. The project implementation units may also explore the installation and use of a more 
systematic Critical Path Method (CPM)- based software for the physical and financial progress monitoring of various sub-
components and sub-projects within. 
 
Finally, Annual Performance Reports will be duly prepared and shared in a manner compliant with the provisions of the 
Accreditation Master Agreement and the Monitoring and Accountability Framework of GCF.

=== PAGE 76 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 72 
 
 I 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents. 
 
I. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS FOR FUNDING PROPOSAL 
☒ 
Annex 1 - NDA No-objection Letter 
☒ 
Annex 2 - Feasibility Study 
☒ 
Annex 3 - Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format, if  
 
applicable)  
☒ 
Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co-financing commitment (If applicable) 
☒ 
Annex 4 - Project/Programme Confirmation/Term Sheet (including cost/budget breakdown,  
 
 
disbursement schedule, etc.) – see the Accreditation Master Agreement, Annex I 
☒ 
Annex 5 - Environmental and Social Management Framework 
☐ 
Annex 6 - Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations (If applicable) 
☐ 
Evaluation Report of the baseline project (If applicable) 
☒ 
Annex 7 - Map indicating the location of the project/programme 
☒ 
Annex 8 - Timetable of project/programme implementation

=== PAGE 77 ===
GFC/B.13/16/Add.04 
 
 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority

=== PAGE 78 ===
GFC/B.13/16/Add.04 
 
 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Basic project/programme information 
Project/program
me title 
Africa Hydromet Program: Phase 1 - Mali Country Project 
Accredited entity 
World Bank 
Environmental 
and social 
safeguards (ESS) 
category 
Category B 
Environmental and social report disclosure information  
Date of disclosure 
on accredited 
entity’s website 
2016-05-24 
Language(s) of 
disclosure 
English and French 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2016/05/2640309
1/mali-first-phase-africa-hydromet-program-environmental-
assessment-environmental-social-management-framework 
French (original): 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2016/05/2639924
1/mali-first-phase-climate-resilience-sub-saharan-africa-
environmental-assessment-cadre-de-gestion-environnementale-
sociale  
Other link(s)
