=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.5
title: 
author: Sunny Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Microsoft® Word 2013
producer: Microsoft® Word 2013
creationDate: D:20151026124240+09'00'
modDate: D:20151027144734+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
*  The agenda item number will be determined when the final sequence of items in the provisional agenda is 
confirmed by the Co-Chairs. 
 This document is revised and replaces the previously published document as per the request of Acumen. 
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum 
Funding Proposal Summary for FP005 
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
26 October 2015 
Meeting of the Board 
2 – 5 November 2015 
Livingstone, Republic of Zambia 
Provisional agenda item 14* 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following two parts: 
(a) 
A funding proposal summary entitled “KawiSafi Ventures Fund” submitted by Acumen 
containing summary information on the programme; and 
(b) 
No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s). 
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national 
designated authority(is) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to GCF Interim Information 
Disclosure Practice, the funding proposal entitled “KawiSafi Ventures Fund” submitted by 
Acumen is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board Members and 
Alternate Board Members  to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged 
or commercially sensitive information of the entity.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Summary of the funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity                                                                
 
No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 3 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 1 
 
 
I. 
Brief Programme information 
1.1 
Programme Executive Summary 
Acumen is raising a new impact fund, KawiSafi Ventures Fund (the “Fund”), that will seek to catalyze a 
thriving off-grid solar ecosystem in East Africa, demonstrating that nations can leapfrog fossil-fuel grids to 
clean energy. The fund will be comprised of portfolio companies in the clean energy sector in East Africa that 
provide overlapping impact with primarily the climate change mitigation objectives of the GCF, but also will 
have overlapping impact with the adaptation goals of the GCF. The Fund will initially focus on Rwanda and 
Kenya, but may also expand to other East African countries such as Uganda throughout the life of the Fund. 
We are requesting $20M of equity capital from GCF that will be invested in the Fund and $5M of grant capital 
to be used for specific technical assistance purposes subject to an upgrade of Acumen’s accreditation status to 
allow it to receive grant capital from GCF detailed in the sections below. Acumen will seek to upgrade 
Acumen’s accreditation status.  
 
Acumen is targeting a $100M total size for the Fund and expect that GCF’s anchoring investment will help 
to catalyze the remaining investment capital into the Fund. Acumen will invest at least $5M and up to $7M 
into the Fund and Acumen has also secured several verbal commitments from a group of individual investors 
for the Fund. Acumen is targeting a first close of $40M by the end of the year, providing a strong foundation to 
raise the remaining balance of the Fund in a second close.  
 
This Fund would be one of the first, if not the first, of its kind in the sense that it is a climate change 
focused fund that is targeting an ecosystem approach to investing in small-medium enterprises (“SMEs”) that 
serve bottom-of-the-pyramid (“BoP”) customers. The Fund will seek to bring off-grid solar power and clean 
energy products and services to a target of 15 million people in East Africa and will attempt to demonstrate a 
blueprint to a clean-energy future that can be followed by other nations. The Fund expects that its investment 
capital will be leveraged roughly 6:1 as the companies it will invest in will require additional investment 
capital from co-investors and will also receive targeted technical assistance funding for specific business and 
impact related purposes. Within the impact investing industry, it is the industry standard to account for lives 
impacted based on the total lives reached by the company, not just lives that are attributed to the portion of 
capital and single investor invested. More detail on the calculation and rationale for lives impacted is included 
in sections below.  
 
The Fund will seek to invest in 10 – 15 companies. 60-70% of investments will be in businesses that have 
proven solutions to bring energy access to the masses such as solar lanterns, solar home systems and solar 
mini-grids, while 30-40% will be invested to build-out parts of the eco-system, which are weak or missing. 
Examples of investments in the latter category include consumer financing vehicles, mobile payment and 
remote monitoring / meter technologies, and working capital facilities.  
 
The Fund is unique in that social impact is built into the operations and incentive structure of the Fund. 
The Fund Manager will only achieve a share of the Fund’s profits if both a financial hurdle rate and Impact 
Target have been achieved. If the Fund achieves the financial hurdle rate but only a portion of the Impact 
Target, the Fund Manager’s share in profits will be adjusted downward in proportion to the percentage of the 
Impact Target achieved.  
 
The Fund will track multiple social impact metrics of the portfolio companies and report those to the GCF 
and the Fund’s Investors. Acumen will report on the number of lives impacted, number of 
individuals/households with improved energy products, poverty levels of the households that have been 
reached, gender impact of its investments, and number of tons of CO2 reduced. The Fund may also report on 
other metrics as it sees fit.

=== PAGE 4 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 2 
 
 
II. 
Financing / Cost Information 
2.1 
Description of Financial Elements of the Programme 
Early stage enterprises require equity capital to finance growth until positive cash flow is achieved, 
whereby they can attract debt capital. This Fund will provide both equity and debt capital to companies based 
on their individual capital requirements. The long-term life of the Fund, 12 years with two 1 year extensions, 
provides the time these innovative, early stage companies to develop, iterate, refine, and build financially 
viable business models that have scaled social impact. The companies the Fund will invest in will be 
addressing the needs of off-grid households, which are typically rural, low-income and difficult to reach. Thus, 
the type of long-term investment capital that the Fund is required to invest in these enterprises as traditional 
investors are weary of the risks and relatively long-time it takes to build companies and achieve a financial 
return. 
 
The Fund will invest in 10-15 enterprises. Acumen will conduct detailed diligence on all relevant aspects 
of each investment, including the cost structure of each enterprise and the financial viability of each 
enterprise. As such, the underlying cost components of each investee company will be detailed in specific 
investment memoranda for those investments.  
 
Acumen expects that the majority, if not all, of its investments will be denominated in US dollars or EUR. 
Given the economies in which Acumen’s investments will be operating, and the cost to hedge currencies of 
those economies, Acumen may not be able to secure a hedge for investments. In order to protect against 
fluctuations in the value of local currencies, the Fund expects that the vast majority, if not all, of its 
investments will be US-dollar denominated or EUR denominated investments. The Fund will put a cap of 20% 
on investments that are not US dollar or EUR denominated.  
 
Technical Assistance Facility (“TAF”) 
 
Acumen is seeking to raise a $10M Technical Assistance Facility (“TAF”) that will be funded by grant 
capital. Acumen anticipates that the funders of the TAF will be a mix of private and public institutions. The 
purpose of the TAF is to augment the Fund’s investment strategy of building profitable, scaling, and socially 
responsible businesses that serve BoP markets and provide a financial return to the Fund and its investors. 
Acumen has more than a decade of experience investing in early stage investments that serve BoP markets 
and understands the increased level of social and financial resources required by such companies to scale, 
reach profitability, and track and monitor social impact metrics. The TAF will identify and address the core 
needs of portfolio companies that will enable their scale and financial viability.  
 
It is contemplated that the TAF will be governed by a Technical Assistance Committee (“TAC”). The 
structure and governing policies of the TAC are currently under development. The TAC will seek to engage 
with relevant stakeholders when making decisions related to uses of capital in the TA facility. Engagement 
with local and appropriate stakeholders in the context of skills training and any interventions related to the 
capital ring-fenced for consumer protection will be especially important.  
 
The table below summarizes the potential uses of TAF funds and more details around the potential uses 
are included below the table. TAF resources will not be used for capital expenditures.

=== PAGE 5 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 3 
 
 
  
Facility 
Allocation 
USD 
Funding from GCF for consumer protections in case any of the 
solar companies become insolvent and/or declare bankruptcy 
30% 
$3,000,000 
Business Development Services (BDS) and Management / 
Employee Training 
25% 
$2,500,000 
Funding from GCF for gender specific interventions 
20% 
$2,000,000 
Impact Monitoring, Evaluation and Annual Assessments and ESG 
Audits 
15% 
$1,500,000 
Other (TA Audit Fees / Legal Fees / Corp Governance 
Improvements) 
10% 
$1,000,000 
Total 
100% 
$10,000,000 
 
The following are potential uses of TAF funds: 
1. Funding from GCF for consumer protections in case any of the solar companies become insolvent 
and/or declare bankruptcy. Potential uses may include the following items: 
a. 
Capital to service installed solar home systems in the event a solar company goes bankrupt, 
most likely through partnership with an existing service provider 
b. Capital to facilitate an acquisition of / partnership with a defunct company by a viable 
company so that consumers will still receive after-sales support 
c. 
Mechanism to provide some level of monetary value to consumers for their purchased 
products in the event of a company bankruptcy and the products can no longer be serviced 
 
2. Business development support and employee training which will increase company efficiencies and 
augment portfolio companies’ ability to pursue growth strategies: 
a. 
Improve financial controls (i.e. upgrade accounting system) 
b. MIS review and upgrades 
c. 
Market studies to better understand consumer behavior  
d. Market Feedback Survey to assist with product development 
e. 
Develop plans to transfer proven business models across different markets 
f. 
Conduct feasibility studies to increase market access 
g. 
Implement operational review to improve production process or reduce costs  
h. Improve distribution platforms 
i. 
Build capacity to provide high-quality after sales-support to ensure products function 
properly and customers have a positive experiences 
j. 
Executive recruitment services  
k. Enable access to industry experts across different markets to advise company management 
l. 
Expand current management skills for company expansion and growth 
 
3. Funding from GCF for gender specific interventions. Potential uses of this funding could include the 
following: 
a. 
Provide training to women to become solar technicians, sales agents and other related job 
opportunities of companies working in the off-grid energy sector 
b. Provide market education and consumer awareness to women about the positive health and 
safety effects of replacing kerosene usage with solar products at the household level 
c. 
Work with women-focused MFIs and savings groups to create demand for and access to 
clean energy products 
 
4. Corporate governance improvements: 
a. 
Improve transparency and corporate governance structures 
b. Appoint experienced practitioners/advisers at the board or management level

=== PAGE 6 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 4 
 
 
5.  Investment impact monitoring and evaluation frameworks: 
a. 
Monthly tracking of core output-level data on lives impacted and jobs created or supported  
b. Data on poverty level of customers based on Progress out of Poverty Index, or similar 
relevant measure  
c. 
Develop the collection plan of outcome-based data with the company, complemented by 
independent observational-based surveying  
d. Support for improved company data management systems for impact tracking, including use 
of mobile technology and cloud-based data management  
e. 
Annual progress reports on impact 
2.2 
Project Financing Information 
Target Programme Size 
Share of GCF Participation 
USD 100 million for equity investment 
USD 10 million for a Technical Assistance Facility 
(Grant) 
USD 20 million for equity investment 
USD 5 million for a Technical Assistance Facility 
 
2.3 
Financial Market Overview 
The Fund is unique in that social impact is built into the operations and incentive structure of the Fund. 
The Fund Manager will only achieve a share of the Fund’s profits if both a financial hurdle rate and Impact 
target have been achieved. If the Fund achieves the financial hurdle rate but only a portion of the Impact 
Target, the Fund Manager’s share in profits will be adjusted downward in proportion to the percentage of the 
Impact Target achieved.  
 
The Fund will seek to exit its investments within a 5-7 year timeframe. Given the relatively early state of 
the impact investing sector, and more specifically venture capital and impact investments in off-grid markets 
in East Africa, there are limited relevant and comparable data points from other funds that could provide 
comparable data points for expected financial returns. The Fund’s expected financial return is developed 
from Acumen’s history of investing in these markets, its projected financial return of its current investment 
fund (ACM I), its focus on the solar energy sector in East Africa, and it understanding of the business and 
macroeconomic (i.e. currency) risks of the investments it intends to make from this Fund. The Fund will 
utilize equity, equity-like, convertible debt, and self-liquidating investment structures in the investments it 
makes. 
 
The Fund will initially focus on investments in Rwanda and Kenya, and may also expand its activities to 
Uganda, Each country has different total banking assets, debt capital markets and equity capital markets 
sizes. Please let us know if you need more specific information from us.

=== PAGE 7 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 5 
 
 
Country 
1-year T-Bill 
5-year rate 
10-year rate 
Kenya 
10.808%1 
13.193%2 
13.31%3 
Uganda 
16.3694 
16.8335 
17.6936 
Rwanda 
5.5007 
12.008 
13.009 
 
Due to the nature of private investing vehicles, it is difficult to ascertain the expected and realized returns 
of other funds that are comparable to this Fund. Further, this Fund would be one of the first, if not the first, of 
its kind in the sense that it is a climate change focused fund that is targeting investments in SMEs that serve 
low-income populations. The expected return on this proposed fund is higher than that of ACM I, Acumen’s 
first fund, because this new fund will be entirely composed of energy investments in East Africa, which we 
believe have a better overall financial return profile than 1) other sectors such as agriculture, health, and 
education and 2) other geographical regions. 
III. 
Detailed Programme Description 
3.1 
Strategic Context 
Rwanda 
In Rwanda, over 70 percent of the population (~8.5M people) live off the grid, and the current best 
estimate is that cutting that figure to 30 percent will cost between $700 million and $1 billion per year for the 
next several years. This cost, which amounts to 10 to15 percent of the GDP, will still leave 3.5 million people 
in the dark. Moreover, the government’s current best plan reluctantly calls for 50 percent of the desperately 
needed new power generation to be sourced from fossil fuels. 
 
On the other hand, Rwanda has unique advantages in that the country has: 1) Abundant, undeveloped 
renewable natural resources, including solar and hydropower, 2) A progressive government that has focused 
sharply on reducing the non-electrified proportion of its population from 70 to 30 percent, and 3) more than 
half of the power infrastructure planned for 2018 is not yet financed or under construction, so the generation 
source is not yet locked in. 
 
Households that do not have electricity rely on kerosene lanterns and candles to meet their lighting 
needs. But these sources of light are dangerous, low quality and expensive. Customers pay $1 a week for 
kerosene for lighting, and $1 more for phone charging. In Rwanda, electricity costs are among the highest in 
the world, and higher than neighboring countries in region, with grid-connected users paying 
roughly$0.20/kWh compared to $0.12 in U.S. (high tariffs, heavily subsidized). In addition to high costs, 
power supply is unreliable. Rwanda sees the high cost and insufficient and unreliable supply as the number 
one barrier to stronger business and industrial growth. 
 
The Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA) is the non-sectorial institution mandated to 
facilitate coordination and oversight of the implementation of national environmental policy and subsequent 
                                                                
1 www.centralbank.go.ke 
2 www.centralbank.go.ke 
3 http://www.tradingeconomics.com 
4 http://www.africanbondmarkets.org/ 
5 Bank of Uganda 
6 http://www.africanbondmarkets.org/ 
7 http://www.africanbondmarkets.org/ 
8 National Bank of Rwanda 
9 National Bank of Rwanda

=== PAGE 8 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 6 
 
 
legislation. REMA has a key role to play towards the achievement of the national goal of sustainable 
development as set out in the National Development Vision 2020. 
 
The protection and management of the environment are among the pillars of Vision 2020. The objective 
of the Government is that by 2020, it will have built a nation in which pressure on natural resources, 
particularly on land, water, biomass and biodiversity, has significantly been reduced and the process of 
environmental pollution and degradation has been reversed. 
 
The environment is also one of the first priorities identified by the Poverty Reduction Strategy in Rwanda 
and is among the leading fundamental programs selected within agriculture transformation and rural 
development. The Poverty Reduction Strategy recommends actions in the energy sector by promoting the 
rational use of wood and the promotion of alternative sources of energy.  
 
Rwanda depends heavily on imported oil to run diesel generator power plants— one key reason 
Rwanda’s electricity cost is high relative to the region. Power plant fuel imports represent a large share of the 
total national import burden. Oil price volatility has an immediate impact on Rwanda’s ability to fund other 
budget priorities. Supply security and strategic reserves are low.The government is keenly aware of this, and 
is actively seeking to reduce its dependence on oil, and replace high cost diesel and fuel oil generation with 
lower cost renewable sources. 
 
Rwanda has a number of agencies and policies dedicated to promoting renewable energy sources for off-
grid communitites. The overall energy planning process is driven by the government and supported by 
international donor organizations (e.g., World Bank, AfDB, DFID, EU). EWSA implements most programs. 
Recent examples include: 
 
Capital Access for Renewable Energy (CARE2): Global Village Energy Partnership (GVEP). GVEP 
project manager Herbert Nyagas. GVEP Funded. 
 
Increase Rural Energy Access in Rwanda through Public Private Partnership (IREA RPPP)10 
(2008-2013): Contracts with private sector to install/operate PV systems for schools, health centers; 
350 institutions electrified. EU funded.  
 
Prepaid Energy: Rent-to-Own solar systems Off-Grid11 (2014-current): EWSA and Mobisol 
provide energy solution to the rural poor. EU Funded. 
 
Electricity Roll-Out Action Program II (EARP)12(2013-2018): the 13 African Development Bank 
funded. 
 
Results-Based Financing Program (2014)—Financing solar lighting and village grids; private firms 
paid by Urwego Opportunity Bank upon results. EnDev funded. 
 
Policies and Plans to Support Off-Grid Power 
Several other policy intentions and plans are laid out in the Energy Sector Strategic Plan: 
 
 
Tax reform to reduce consumption of kerosene and increase use of solar: Goal is to phase out 
kerosene use through affordable solar alternatives. Currently kerosene is the only fuel exempt from 
excise duty. The government plans to study impact of phasing out kerosene “subsidy,” and to 
reintroduce excise duty on kerosene and promote solar solutions instead.  
 
 
                                                                
10 http://database.energyfacilitymonitoring.eu/acpeu/project/4331/. 
11 http://database.energyfacilitymonitoring.eu/acpeu/project/4616/. 
12 http://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Project-and-Operations/Rwanda%20-
%20Scaling%20Up%20Energy%20Access%20Project%20-%20Appraisal%20Report.pdf. 
13 The 2013-2018 Energy Sector Strategic Plan (June 2013) call out off-grid in two key sections: 3.3.1 EARP Program and 
Off-Grid Solutions and 3.3.1.2 Off Grid Solutions.

=== PAGE 9 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 7 
 
 
 
Piloting innovative partnerships to increase rural access: Innovative public-private partnerships 
to be tested, including for deployment of solar home systems or solar/hybrid mini-grids in the 
medium-term. Goal is to attract funding from FONERWA and other climate and renewable energy 
financing from development partners. Intend pilots to be accompanied by awareness campaigns to 
support market development and be rigorously evaluated to determine impact.  
 
 
Facilitate private sector off-grid activities: The private sector is expected to deliver the majority of 
off-grid electricity to end-consumers. Along with the development of an off-grid strategy and 
innovative PPPs, GoR plans to continue to improve the legal and regulatory framework to support the 
private sector. Depending on the outcomes of the off-grid strategy, this will include increasing 
consumer awareness.  
 
 
Rooftop Solar Installations: Small rooftop solar installations ($50- $500 depending on the 
appliances they power) are a priority, delivered by the private sector. Government willing to support 
the industry by sharing information, helping define a deployment approach, educating the local 
population, and testing innovative solutions.  
 
 
Mini-grid and SPDs - Simplify licensing and stimulate small-scale (off-grid) power 
distributors: The GoR’s simplified licensing framework is being revised, based on experience with 
private sector pilots, to make the regulatory environment clearer and more facilitating to SPDs. GoR 
intends to examine eventual inclusion of SPDs and mini-grids into the grid as the grid expands, but 
doesn’t have a plan or policy today. To ensure affordability and accountability, community-based 
consultations to deliver informed decision-making on energy technologies are to take place and be 
documented as part of the required Environmental Impact Assessment and license application 
process. EARP will publish electrification plans in the public domain, which will be valid for a period 
of 3 years. This will make it clearer to both consumers and private developers where potential for 
off-grid activities exists.  
 
 
Off-grid hydro projects: Off-grid hydro projects will be encouraged through mini-grids where 
economically feasible and the least-cost option. This will be done by establishing enabling regulatory 
frameworks and licensing that promote mini-grids; consumer education and awareness of off-grid 
energy solutions; and providing training and financial incentives to rural communities to operate 
micro hydro systems.   
 
Guiding Policy Documents 
 
Vision 2020 (2000): Outlines vision to fundamentally transform Rwanda into a middle-income 
country by 2020.  
 
Medium-Term Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy for 2013-2018 
(EDPRS-II): High-level guidance on energy sector development to provide appropriate, reliable, 
affordable energy that will enable Rwanda to become a middle-income country by 2020.  
 
Rwanda Energy Policy (2015): Provides high-level direction on long-term goals, priorities and 
approaches needed in the sector. 
 
Energy Sector Strategic Plan (ESSP) (2013-2017): Focused action plan measuring short-term 
progress towards longer-term goals and objectives. Updated annually, with sub-sector Action Plans 
for seven areas including solar. 
 
National Energy Strategy (2008-2020): Objectives for the development of renewable energy and 
energy efficiency are included in the strategy. 
 
Green Growth and Climate Resilient Strategy (2011): Launched at COP17 with a vision for 
Rwanda to be a developed climate-resilient, low-carbon economy by 2050 with economic growth and 
poverty reduction.

=== PAGE 10 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 8 
 
 
Anticipated Policy & Regulatory Developments 
 
The development of a regulatory framework for renewable energy is considered integral to the 
National Energy Policy. This is still being developed and is expected to be finalized soon. 
 
The planned off-grid policy is likely to include provisions for maintenance and support, “anti-
obsolescence” and eco-sustainability (recycling and disposal). 
 
EWSA will attempt to transition away from operational subsidies and become a financially 
independent grid utility. 
 
Law on Public-Private Partnership (PPP) in final draft, pending approval by Cabinet 
 
Consolidation and integration of various laws and regulations into a unified national energy code 
 
Kenya 
In Kenya, only 20% of the population is connected to the grid, leaving 35M people without access to 
affordable and reliable electricity. This lack of grid connectivity hinders the productivity as it limits daily 
activities such as schoolwork, household chores, and business at night or in the early morning. Given the slow 
rates of electrification coupled with high population growth, the grid supply versus demand crises will only 
be exacerbated. 92% of rural households rely on kerosene for lighting but it is expensive and takes up a huge 
proportion of family budgets14. Rural Kenyan households spend around 26% of their income on lighting, or 
roughly $.42 per day on kerosene fuel at a far higher rate per hour of lighting than if the same was provided 
by the grid.  
 
 
The Environment and Policy Management Component under the Natural Resource Management 
Programme (NRMP) supports the Government of Kenya in the implementation of the first medium-term plan 
(2008-2012) in general and, particularly, in relation to strategies and goals for environmental planning and 
governance. 
 
The mandate of the Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources (MEMR) is to “to protect, conserve 
and manage the environment and mineral resources through sustainable exploitation for socio-economic and 
political development” and its mission is “to promote, conserve, protect, monitor and sustainably manage the 
environment and mineral resources for national development”.  
 
MEMR produced a strategic plan for climate change, entitled “National Climate Change Action Plan 2013-
2017”. Excerpts from the plan that show how the Fund’s activities fit within the plan are below.  
 
Kenya Vision 2030 – the long-term development blueprint for the country – aims to transform Kenya into 
“a newly industrialising, middle-income country providing a high quality of life to all its citizens in a clean and 
secure environment.” A low carbon climate resilient development pathway, as set out in this National Climate 
Change Action Plan (NCCAP), can help meet Vision 2030’s goals through actions that address both sustainable 
development and climate change. This pathway can also help the Government achieve the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs) and other internationally agreed development goals without compromising the 
environment and the natural resource base. 
 
The Government and other stakeholders are implementing many interventions that have direct and/or 
indirect relevance to climate change adaptation and mitigation. The interventions cover a wide range of 
sectors including: agriculture, water, energy and infrastructure. Examples include: 
 
Agriculture: promoting irrigated agriculture, promoting conservation agriculture, value addition to 
agricultural products, developing weather indexed crop insurance schemes, support for community-
based adaptation including provision of climate information to farmers, enhanced financial and 
technical support to drought resistant crops. 
 
Energy: promoting the use of alternative energy including geothermal, wind, solar and mini hydro 
power generation; and the promotion of improved cook stoves. 
                                                                
14 SolarAid Kenya Country Report 2014.

=== PAGE 11 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 9 
 
 
 
Vision 2030 – Kenya’s long-term development blueprint – aims to transform Kenya into a newly 
industrializing middle-income country by 2030. As Kenya moves to achieve its development aspirations, 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions will rise. This mitigation assessment, available in detail in the Mitigation 
Analysis Reports, concludes that transitioning to a low-carbon development pathway would ensure that the 
country’s contribution to global emissions remains low and, importantly, deliver other important benefits: 
 
 
International climate finance – Nesting low carbon development within Vision 2030 and Kenya’s 
development planning process means that development partners can ensure their climate-related 
investments align with Government of Kenya priorities. International climate finance for low carbon 
development options can potentially be obtained through bilateral and multilateral support, the 
Green Climate Fund, the emerging NAMA and REDD+ mechanisms or the carbon markets. 
 
Kenya’s low-carbon development opportunities  
 
a) Energy:  
The analysis of low-carbon development options in the energy sector considered two categories: 1) 
electricity supply; and 2) energy demand – including options such as energy efficiency and fuel switching.  
In terms of electricity supply, the installed capacity in Kenya in 2011 was 1,411 megawatts. Generation 
was dominated by hydroelectricity, geothermal power and medium-speed diesel, which respectively 
accounted for 49, 29 and 21 per cent of electricity sent to the national grid. Rapidly increasing demand for 
electricity and fluctuating hydroelectric output have led to an increase in diesel-based generation in recent 
years. In addition, there has been a strong focus on expanding geothermal power, which is considered a key 
enabler for Kenya’s economic growth. Although geothermal is the most promising renewable energy source, 
Kenya also has excellent bioenergy, solar, wind and hydro resources for the supply of electricity. 
 
Uganda 
The electrification rate of Uganda ranges from roughly 10% - 18%, depending on various sources.15 While 
electrification has reached almost 43% of the urban households, rural electrification is still very low at 4%. 
Only 0.4% of the population has access to modern cooking fuel and almost 86% still rely on fuel wood for 
cooking.16 An average Ugandan household spends between USD 4 and 10 per month on kerosene for lighting 
and between USD 1 and 2 per month on phone charging.17  
 
The primary energy sources consist of biomass, imported oil products and hydro. Total installed 
electricity capacity (2010) is 539.5 MW (Thermal 31.5%, Hydroelectric 65.4% and Biomass (bagasse) 3.1%). 
With droughts severely affecting the water levels in Lake Victoria and River Nile, Uganda’s overdependence 
on large scale hydro power may prove problematic.18 
 
Renewable energy generation and potential: 
An estimated 200MW of Solar PV electrical capacity exist. There is also significant potential for Solar 
cooking with a large number of the population living in well insolate areas. There is hydropower potential for 
3000MW in the country but only less than 10% has been exploited. There is as estimated geothermal 
resource potential of 450MW and feasibility studies are recommended to promote its development. Wind 
power is insufficient for large-scale power generation but possible uses include water pumping and small-
                                                                
15 http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.ZS; https://hivos.org/sites/default/files/uganda_profile.pdf. 
16 https://hivos.org/sites/default/files/uganda_profile.pdf. 
17 http://www.barefootpower.com/index.php/social-impact/74-impact-in-uganda. 
18 https://hivos.org/sites/default/files/uganda_profile.pdf; Renewable Energy Country Profiles (IRENA 2010), Policy and 
regulation review (REEEP), Uganda Gap Analysis (SEFA).

=== PAGE 12 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 10 
 
 
scale power generation in mountainous areas. There is also identified potential for biomass cogeneration 
from agricultural waste and the existing ‘peat’ resource.19 
 
The Rural Electrification Agency is working to connect over 500,000 new customers to the main or 
independent grids, or to solar PV systems over 2013-22. The goal: universal access by 2035. Uganda has been 
a renewable energy fledgling to date but the government hopes that its ‘GET FiT’ program will help change 
this. It aims to fast-track some 15-20 small renewable projects a year, through a results-based top-up on 
Uganda’s existing feedin tariff, as well as grant funding for solar PV projects.20 
 
The Renewable Energy Policy 2007- 2017 (REP) was approved in 2007 following Government’s 
commitment through NEP 2002 to the development and utilization of renewable energy resources and 
technologies. The overall policy goal is ‘’to increase the use of modern renewable energy from the current 4% 
to 61% of the total energy consumption by the year 2017’’. The objectives include increasing access to 
modern, affordable and reliable energy services as a contribution to poverty eradication. This comprises 
general public access to electricity and enhancing the modernisation of biomass conversion technologies. REP 
also established a Standardised Power Purchase Agreement and Feed-in Tariffs for renewable energy 
generation projects.21 
 
Excerpts from Uganda National Climate Change Policy 
Energy: Sectoral Context and Challenges: 
 
Uganda depends predominantly on biomass energy—mainly from firewood and charcoal 
 
The country also depends on hydropower for electricity 
 
Electricity shortages in the recent past caused an energy crisis that led to an increase in thermal 
electricity generation 
 
However, the country’s energy demand is increasing. With climate change, the situation is likely to 
worsen, as extreme events like frequent and prolonged droughts lead to a reduction of water levels 
in dams and reservoirs, thereby reducing hydropower production potential 
 
To address these challenges, the GoU will pursue the following policy priority. Specific strategies for tackling 
this sectoral policy priority will include the following: 
 
Promote and participate in water resource regulation so as to ensure the availability of water for 
hydropower production Promote and participate in water catchment protection as part of 
hydroelectric power infrastructure development 
 
Diversify energy sources by promoting the use of alternative renewable energy sources (such as 
solar, biomass, mini-hydro, geothermal and wind) that are less sensitive to climate change 
 
Promote energy-efficient firewood cook stoves and solar and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) cookers 
 
Conduct research to determine the potential impacts of climate change elements like rainstorms on 
the country’s power supply chain 
 
 
                                                                
19 https://hivos.org/sites/default/files/uganda_profile.pdf; Renewable Energy Country Profiles (IRENA 2010), Policy and 
regulation review (REEEP), Uganda Gap Analysis (SEFA). 
20 http://global-climatescope.org/en/country/uganda/#/details. 
21 https://hivos.org/sites/default/files/uganda_profile.pdf; Renewable Energy Country Profiles (IRENA 2010), Policy and 
regulation review (REEEP), Uganda Gap Analysis (SEFA).

=== PAGE 13 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 11 
 
 
3.2 
Programme Objective Against Baseline 
[Baseline Scenario] 
The United Nations Sustainable Development Goals identify electricity as essential to eradicating poverty. 
The goal of the Sustainable Development Goals is to ensure universal access to affordable, reliable, and 
modern energy services to all by 2030.  
 
More than 1.5 billion people lack access to electricity, most relying on kerosene lanterns and candles for 
their lighting needs. But these sources of light are dangerous, low quality and expensive. Customers pay $1 a 
week for kerosene for lighting, and $1 or more for phone charging. Burning of kerosene also creates 
significant Indoor Air Pollution, which is very harmful to people’s health.  
 
Kerosene lamps produce carbon dioxide (CO2). It is estimated that each kerosene lantern with a weekly 
fuel consumption of one liter of kerosene produces 0.1 tons of CO2 each year. In general, fuel-based lighting in 
the developing world is a source of 244 million tons of CO2 emissions to the atmosphere each year. This 
amounts to 58% of the CO2 emissions from residential electric lighting.22 
 
The portfolio will seek to address the challenges of lack of electricity and high kerosene use through 
affordable household clean energy products and services, such as solar powered lanterns, solar home systems 
and mini-grids to connect those currently without access to electricity. Due to the rapidly declining price in 
solar technology, specifically the cost of solar panels over the last two decades, solar products are cost 
competitive with traditional fuels, such as kerosene and diesel. For cheaper products, such as lanterns that 
cost between $5 - $40, consumers can buy these products with cash upfront and receive a payback period of 
just a few months as they no longer need to pay a $1 a week ($4 per month) for kerosene. For more expensive 
systems, such as a $150 solar home system that provides 3 lights, a phone charger, and a radio, the cost of the 
solar home system is still cost competitive to kerosene over time, but often the consumer needs to pay for the 
product over time because they don’t have enough money to pay for the entire system upfront. In these 
instance, companies charge a down-payment at point of purchase, but then users make payments on a weekly 
or as needed basis for usually 12 – 36 months (depending on the size of the system), until they have paid for 
the system. Different models exists where either the customer takes ownership of the system or the customer 
continues to pay for the energy provided as a service.  
 
[Goal and anticipated outcome against the baseline scenario] 
The main goal of this project is to create an energy access and climate change focused fund that serves 
low income populations in East Africa and attempts to bring off-grid solar power to 15 million people in East 
Africa. The Fund believes that its investment capital could be leveraged on a roughly 6:1 basis as the 
companies it invests in will require, and attract, investment capital from co-investors and grant capital for 
specific technical assistance initiatives. This Fund seeks to create a blueprint for a clean-energy future that 
can be followed by other nations and that could attract billions of dollar of private capital. Key to this is to 
prove that off-grid solar can power a region to full economic development, and is therefore is not a temporary 
solution while the grid is expanded, but rather a permanent model for providing meaning levels of productive 
power to off-grid communities. The social enterprises Acumen will invest in will be providing critical goods 
and services to the poor in order to address the unfortunate baseline scenario described above, providing 
safe-reliable electricity and decreasing kerosene use. 
 
The Fund will aim to bring clean and renewable energy products and services to off-grid populations and 
also to reduce CO2 emissions through the displacement of kerosene used at the household level. The Fund 
will report on multiple impact metrics, including the following three categories. 
                                                                
22 http://www.lightsforlife.org/need.

=== PAGE 14 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 12 
 
 
Lives Impacted: Target of 15 million lives reached 
- 
The Fund expects that its investment capital will be leveraged roughly 6:1 as the companies it will 
invest in will require additional investment capital from co-investors and will also receive targeted 
technical assistance funding for specific business and impact related purposes. Within the impact 
investing industry, it is the industry standard to account for lives impacted based on the total lives 
reached by the company, not just lives that are attributed to the portion of capital and single investor 
invested. 
- 
The analysis below provides a high-level summary of how the target of 15 million lives could be 
achieved through investments in illustrative companies and their scale.  The analysis assumes that 
the companies grow at 30% year.  We know that some existing companies are growing at 100% per 
year, but would expect that growth to decrease over time. The Fund may invest in these types of 
companies after they have operated for a few years, so the Fund would not be able to claim credit for 
all lives impacted, however this analysis is just to provide a rough example of how a portfolio of 4 
solar home system companies and other enabling companies could reach 15 million lives. 
 
 
 
CO2 Emission Reductions: Target of 1.5 million tonnes of CO2 reduced 
- 
Details of this target are provided in the sections below 
 
Gender Impact 
- 
Acumen is currently finalizing its formal Gender Policy, which it will submit to the GCF in the coming 
week. 
- 
The Fund will develop specific metrics to track and report on related to gender impact of its 
investments. The summary of the intended reporting related to gender impact is as follows: 
 
- 
The Fund will invest in companies that bring clean, solar energy to households and thus will benefit 
women as they are part of the household and will benefit from any displacement of kerosene. The 
Fund will use surveys and market research to report on how many women are reached from its 
investments.  
Acumen has seen evidence from previous investments that women are often employed as sales 
agents or other employees of clean energy companies. The Fund will report on the number of women 
employed by its portfolio companies. 
The Technical Assistance facility will have dedicated funds for gender specific initiatives, such as training 
women solar technicians and creating increased awareness about the benefits of clean energy products at the 
household level, thus creating direct impact on women. The fund will report on the number of women 
technicians trained / employed. 
 
 
Units Sold from Year 3 - Year 8
Assumes Annual Growth of 30.0%
8 Year Holding Period
Operational
3 Yrs. Cumulative
Forecasted Growth
Cumulative
Company
Yrs
Units
Lives
Yr 3
Yr 4
Yr 5
Yr 6
Yr 7
Yr 8
Units
Lives
Company A
3
200,000
1,000,000
100,000
130,000
169,000
219,700
285,610
371,293
1,375,603
6,878,015
Company B
3
120,000
600,000
60,000
78,000
101,400
131,820
171,366
222,776
825,362
4,126,809
Company C
3
30,000
150,000
15,000
19,500
25,350
32,955
42,842
55,694
206,340
1,031,702
Company D
3
30,000
150,000
15,000
19,500
25,350
32,955
42,842
55,694
206,340
1,031,702
Totals
2,613,646
13,068,229
Others*
386,354
1,931,772
Target
3,000,000
15,000,000
* Includes mini-grids and enabling companies, such as mobile payment providers and remote monitoring / metering devices that enable products and grids to reach people.

=== PAGE 15 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 13 
 
 
3.3 
Programme Description 
The Fund intends to target solutions that provide access to clean, safe and affordable energy for those 
living at the BoP. The Fund will invest in approximately 10-15 companies, with in investment range of 
approximately $2M - $10M per portfolio company. In accordance with Acumen’s accreditation, the Fund will 
not invest greater than $10 million in one portfolio company and will ensure that investments fall within ESS 
Category C of companies that have minimal or no adverse environmental and/or social risk and/or impacts. 
We estimate that approximately 60-70% of investments will be in businesses that have proven solutions to 
bring energy access to the masses such as solar lanterns, solar home systems and solar mini-grids, while 30-
40% will be invested to build-out parts of the eco-system, which are weak or missing. Examples of 
investments in the latter category include consumer financing vehicles, mobile payment and remote 
monitoring / meter technologies, and working capital facilities.  
3.4 
Background Information on Programme Sponsors 
Acumen was launched in 2001 and has been investing for the past 13 years. Acumen’s initial focus was on 
funding health care technology start-ups that could provide widespread benefits to BoP populations, such as 
(a) a low-cost hearing aid; (b) an inexpensive electromagnetic immunosensor for early detection of diseases; 
and (c) a handheld device for gathering and disseminating health information quickly and affordably. As 
Acumen grew, it searched for global innovations that could offer a voice to low-income communities and 
encouraged the market to develop businesses offering a broader array of critical goods and services to low-
income communities. The first two years of operations taught Acumen the limitations of funding healthcare 
technology start-ups, in particular the challenges of effective and cost-efficient distribution of products to BoP 
populations. 
From 2002-2003, Acumen enhanced several core investment processes, including: (a) formalizing a due 
diligence process to vet financial viability and projected social impact; (b) organizing investments into 
thematic portfolios (e.g., healthcare, energy and agriculture); (c) implementing a metrics reporting system to 
help portfolio companies focus on financial and social goals while allowing Acumen to learn from their 
performance; and (d) shifting away from providing grants toward debt and equity investments. Underlying 
this final change was a recognition that debt and equity investments, combined with hands-on management 
assistance from Acumen, represent a more effective use of resources than grant making. By 2004, Acumen 
had identified suitable business opportunities in India, Pakistan, Tanzania, Kenya, South Africa and Egypt and 
had completed investments in an organic products company, a telemedicine venture with a renowned eye 
hospital, a microfinance operation, an anti-malarial bed net manufacturer, a network of personal digital 
assistants (PDAs) for disease monitoring, a low-income housing development, an HIV/AIDS treatment service 
and a health care franchise network. 
In 2006, Acumen began preparing for the next five years of growth by deepening and solidifying 
investment processes while expanding local bases of support. Recognizing that it needed local knowledge and 
local experience to build deal flow and to best support portfolio companies, Acumen committed to an on-the-
ground presence in each of its target investment geographies, leading to more decentralized operations and 
the opening of offices in Karachi, Pakistan and Hyderabad, India (subsequently moved to Mumbai). These 
new offices introduced increasingly viable investment opportunities for Acumen in existing business 
enterprises serving low-income customers. In 2007, Acumen followed suit in East Africa, launching another 
regional office in Nairobi, Kenya. Acumen continued to expand its sector and geographic focus in subsequent 
years, launching an energy portfolio in 2007, an agriculture portfolio in 2008, an education portfolio in 2011, 
and a West Africa office in 2011.  
In 2009, Acumen closed ACM I, a $15.9 million private equity fund that invests in small- and medium-
sized enterprises that operate in the healthcare, energy, agriculture, education, housing, and water and 
sanitation sectors and have social impact missions consistent with that of Acumen. The key difference

=== PAGE 16 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 14 
 
 
between ACM I and Acumen’s philanthropically backed investments is that ACM I targeted enterprises which 
were later-stage in the lifecycle of a business, and which thus presented a relatively lower-risk investment 
with increased potential for financial return. 
ACM I’s investment strategy was consistent with Acumen’s charitable mission, and Acumen served as its 
Portfolio Manager. Acumen, as the Portfolio Manager of the fund, leveraged its existing investment process 
and global team in India, Pakistan and East Africa to identify potential investment targets for ACM I, to work 
with the management of prospective portfolio companies to refine business strategies, to understand the 
associated risks and to provide guidance on financing, marketing, and operational issues, amongst other 
items. To pursue its social impact and financial return goals, ACM I adopted the following investment criteria: 
o 
Market-based delivery of a critical good or service (such as healthcare, energy, agriculture, 
housing, or water and sanitation) to a BoP market 
o 
Location in Acumen’s target geographical areas  
o 
Enterprise with an established business model and revenue stream 
o 
Innovative product or service with high scale and/or replication potential 
o 
Top-quality leadership and management with a proven track record and demonstrated 
commitment to targeting BoP markets 
o 
Potential for Acumen to add significant value through its expertise and networks 
o 
Willingness to work collaboratively and to meet pre-determined milestones 
o 
Typical investment size of approximately $250,000 to $2.0 million 
 
As of December 31, 2014, ACM I had disbursed $11.0 million of capital to 12 companies. The investment 
period of ACM I ended in 2014, and no more capital investments will be made into new companies.  
Social and Financial Impact to Date 
Since 2001, through its investment portfolio, Acumen has impacted 125 million lives, creating access to 
critical goods and services such as clean energy, clean water, improved agricultural inputs and quality 
healthcare. Acumen’s portfolio companies have collectively created more than 60,000 jobs. Ten of Acumen’s 
portfolio companies have impacted at least 1 million people.  
Energy 
Since 2007, Acumen has invested $14 million in 14 energy companies in East Africa, India and Pakistan. 
Acumen has invested in a wide-range of energy companies, including mini-grids (solar, hydro and biomass), 
solar lantern and solar home system companies, and cookstove companies. Acumen’s energy portfolio has 
reach approximately 50 million lives and has reduced approximately 4.5 million tons of CO223. In East Africa 
alone, Acumen has invested 5.4 million in 6 investments across solar, biomass and cookstove companies, 
reaching approximately 27 million lives and reducing approximately 2.5 million tons of CO2. 24 Below are 
estimates of Acumen’s energy portfolio impact to-date by specific investment.  
 
 
                                                                
23 Metrics are approximations derived from industry research, company data, and various assumptions and 
methodologies and have not been verified by a 3rd party. 
24 Metrics are approximations derived from industry research, company data, and various assumptions and 
methodologies and have not been verified by a 3rd party.

=== PAGE 17 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 15 
 
 
Region 
Sub-Sector 
Company 
Lives Impacted 
Tons of CO2 Reduced 
India & East Africa 
Solar Lanterns 
A 
51M 
4M 
India & East Africa 
Solar Home System 
B 
370K 
110K 
East Africa 
Solar Home System 
C 
1M 
260K 
East Africa 
Solar Home System 
D 
815K 
6K 
India 
Mini-Grid 
E 
200K 
60K 
India & East Africa 
Cookstove 
F 
270K 
270K 
India 
Cookstove 
G 
21K 
8K 
 
Acumen is currently raising a new impact fund that will be comprised of portfolio companies in the 
energy sector in East Africa that provide overlapping impact with the objectives of the GCF. We are requesting 
$20M of funding from GCF that will be invested in the Fund. We are targeting a $100M total fund size for the 
Fund. The Fund will seek to invest in 10 – 15 companies in the clean energy and agriculture. We are also 
requesting $5M of grant capital from the GCF for specific technical assistance activities such as creating a 
capital reserve to finance consumer protection interventions if a company goes bankrupt and training women 
to be solar technicians.  
 
The Fund will be managed by a wholly owned subsidiary of Acumen. Acumen will invest up to $7 million 
in the Fund and seek outside investments for a total of $100 million fund size.  
3.5 
Market Overview 
[Market Overview] 
Energy is critical for human development and determines access to critical basic goods and services like 
food, water, healthcare and sanitation. Still approximately 2.4 billion people globally lack access to reliable 
electricity, including approximately 1.5 billion people who lack access to any electricity at all, the majority of 
which live in sub-Saharan Africa. 
 
The market for off-grid solar products has seen rapid growth over the last 5 years as the costs of solar 
panels and decreased and innovative business models have emerged in order to distribute and finance solar 
lanterns and solar home systems. Institutions such as the IFC, through its Lighting Global programs, and 
ENEA Consulting have conducted market research and provide estimates of the market size for solar 
products. Estimations for market size for solar lanterns and solar home systems in the next 10 years range 
from roughly $5bn - $10bn. Current penetration are still low, with estimates ranging from about 5% - 10%.  
 
Acumen’s investees bring innovative new models of delivery that are affordable and sustainable, and 
scalable solutions that have the potential to create big impact. As an example, d.light, one of Acumen’s 
investees, was founded in 2007 with the goal of replacing kerosene lamps with solar energy. d.light has 
developed a suite of solar home products and is now brining energy to over 50M people in the developing 
world. 
 
[Key Competitor] 
The Fund expects to invest in multiple companies within the energy sector in East Africa. We cannot 
guarantee specific investments at this time although we do have a robust pipeline of investments. As such, 
competitive dynamics will vary based on each investment opportunity. Acumen considers these factors 
within its investment process and these will be reflected in the investment memorandums. 
In summary, there are 5 primary types of energy products / services that form the competitive 
environment in which the Fund’s investments will operations. These include 1) status quo products such as 
kerosene, charcoal, biomass, and wood for lighting and cooking purposes; 2) solar lanterns; 3) solar home 
systems; 4) community level mini-grids, and 5) the national grid. Different countries have different tariffs and

=== PAGE 18 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 16 
 
 
regulatory policies towards these different buckets of energy products and services as well as different levels 
of subsidies. Off-grid communities that are rural and difficult to reach by the grid will be served by solar home 
systems, lanterns, and mini-grids, and companies that provides those services will compete with each other 
and will also compete with the status quo fuel alternatives. For communities that are close to the grid, solar 
home systems and mini-grids will face competition from the grid if it expands into those communities.  
 
[Pricing Structure] 
The Fund expects to invest in multiple companies within the energy sector in East Africa. We cannot 
guarantee specific investments at this time although we do have a robust pipeline of investments. As such, 
pricing structures will vary based on each investment opportunity. Acumen considers these factors within its 
investment process and these will be reflected in the investment memorandums. 
 
In general, solar solutions for off-grid markets in East Africa make economic sense given their relative 
price for consumers and the price of alternatives – such as kerosene and diesel for lighting and power needs. 
The price of solar lanterns and home systems have declined rapidly over the last decade due in large part to 
the price reduction in solar panels. These price reductions have made the products more affordable to low 
income populations and many companies are now seeing these populations as viable markets for commercial 
sales of solar products. We also anticipate that governments will look to help scale solar solutions with 
programs such as credit guarantee mechanisms for consumer financed sales and improved regulatory and 
tariff policies which “level the playing field” against heavily subsidized fossil fuels. 
 
To date, solar lantern and solar home system companies have operated outside of government’s 
regulations related to power providers (i.e. the utility companies). Subsidies and tariffs vary by country and 
by solar product, so the Fund will diligence the relevant regulatory and tariff policies with regard to each 
investment opportunity.  
 
3.6 
Regulation, Taxation and Insurance 
The Fund will carry out the relevant due diligence on its portfolio companies to understand if they 
comply with the appropriate regulatory environment and under the applicable licenses. 
 
Acumen assesses regulatory, tax and insurance concerns in the diligence process of each investment 
opportunity. Acumen expects that the social enterprises it invests in operate within the appropriate 
regulatory environment and obtain all the appropriate licenses within each country. Acumen will monitor its 
portfolio companies and ask for relevant documentation and information proving continued to compliance 
with relevant laws and regulations.  
 
3.7 
Institutional / Implementation Arrangements 
Acumen Capital Partners is a wholly owned subsidiary of Acumen. ACP and the Fund will adhere to 
all the relevant policies of Acumen that the GCF reviewed in the accreditation of Acumen. There will be 
some policies that differ between ACP and Acumen because ACP, unlike Acumen, is not a tax exempt 
entity. These policies will be relevant for tax purposes and not related to the fiduciary, social and 
environmental, anti-corruption, and investment diligence processes upon which Acumen was 
accredited. During the implementation, Acumen will provide oversight and quality assurance in 
accordance with its policies and procedures and any specific requirements in the Accreditation Master 
Agreement (AMA) and project confirmation to be agreed with GCF. A diagram of the legal structure for 
Acumen, ACP, the Fund, and Investors is below.

=== PAGE 19 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 17 
 
 
 
 
All members of the Investment Team will have multiple years of experience in banking, private equity, 
emerging market investing and/or impact investing. The proposed structure of the team includes the 
following team members: 
 
1 Managing Director 
 
2 Portfolio Managers 
 
2 Portfolio Associates 
 
1 Investor Relations Associate 
 
1 Office Assistant 
 
All due diligence and deal execution of Fund investments will be led by an Investment Team 
member. In addition to their own resources, Investment Team members will also leverage the 
resources of Acumen’s global portfolio team and Acumen’s broad networks in the sourcing and 
execution of new investments. All investments that meet the Fund’s investment criteria will be directed 
to an investment professional on the Investment Team who will lead the diligence and execution of the 
investment. Each Portfolio Manager will follow the investment processes of the Fund. The Managing 
Director of the Investment Team will review Acumen’s entire pipeline of potential investments to 
ensure that all available investment opportunities consistent with the Fund’s investment criteria are 
appropriately considered for investment from the Fund. 
 
The Investment Committee of the Fund (the “IC”) is the core decision-making body for the Fund and 
controls all decision gates in the investment process prior to its final approval or rejection of a deal and 
in connection with exits.The primary responsibilities of the IC will be to: 
1. Approve/reject deals at key decision gates in the investment process and at exit 
2. Review current pipeline, post-investment management activities and deal outcomes 
3. Review investment and portfolio performance against annual goals and recommend potential 
corrective action, if necessary 
4. Review and provide guidance on global investment and portfolio management strategy 
 
100% Ownership
Fund management services
Legal Entity to Receive 
Carried Interest
(Delaware)
Acumen Capital Partners LLC
(Exempt investment advisor)
(the “Manager”) (Delaware)
Limited Partners
Limited Partners
Limited Partners*
Acumen Fund, Inc. 
(the “Promoter”)
(501c3 not-for profit corporation in 
New York)
KawiSafi Ventures Fund
(the “Fund”)
(Mauritius)
Class A 
Participating 
Shares
Management Shares
$ for services
*Ex. Green Climate Fund, 
Acumen, and other 
investors.
$ 
for shares
Class B 
Participating 
Shares
$ 
for shares
Service Level Agreement

=== PAGE 20 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 18 
 
 
The IC will typically meet at least two or three times per prospective investment prior to the final 
meeting at which a deal is approved or rejected. A majority of the members of the IC will constitute a 
quorum. Any decision by the IC must be unanimous by those participating in a meeting where a quorum 
is present. The IC will be comprised of up to five members. Initially, the IC will include, Jacqueline 
Novogratz, CEO of Acumen, Sachin Rudra, Chief Investment Officer of Acumen, C. Hunter Boll, Formerly 
Managing Director of Thomas H. Lee Partners, and the Managing Director of the Fund. 
IV. 
Rationale behind GCF involvement 
4.1 
Value Added for GCF Involvement 
Investment from the GCF will enable Acumen to create the world’s first climate change fund focused on 
BoP populations in developing countries that seeks to generate social, environmental and financial returns. 
The brand and resources of the GCF will excite other investors and provide a strong incentive for them to 
partner with Acumen and GCF in this Fund. 
 
GCF’s investment will be catalyzed to create the first climate mitigation fund to utilize SMEs to affect the 
lives of low-income populations in developing countries. We expect GCF’s investment will catalyze capital 
from leading foundations, development institutions and impact investors. 
 
 
GCF is enabling Acumen to build further expertise and a deep track-record in the renewable energy 
sector, which will enable Acumen to raise more money in the future, make more investments, and increase its 
impact in the world. 
4.2 
Exit Strategy 
Preparing for successful exits is a core element of Acumen’s investment strategy. Acumen’s investment 
professionals expend significant effort understanding the strategies and operational components of each 
portfolio company that can create a financially sustainable enterprise and help attract a later-stage purchaser. 
 
Overall, Acumen seeks to create investment structures that will allow for a clear path to exit, create 
liquidity in the medium term, and compensate for the risk of the investment. As a result, the Fund is expected 
to invest in preferred equity (with or without a dividend), convertible debt, debt with warrants, and debt with 
a share of revenue or EBITDA. Potential exit opportunities are expected to include sales to a later-stage 
growth investor, a strategic buyer or a management buyout. Initial public offerings are not seen as practical 
exit opportunities, and, in lieu of identifiable exit opportunities at the time of investment, Acumen may 
structure the Fund’s investments using self-liquidating, quasi-equity instruments. 
 
The Investment Team of the Fund will have ongoing relationships with potential strategic acquirers of 
portfolio companies and growth stage investment firms to help improve exit opportunities for the Fund’s 
investments. We have seen larger investment firms start to make small investments in companies that serve 
off-grid markets as they want to learn about the economic viability of these markets. Examples of these 
investment firms include Google Ventures, RRE, Draper Fisher Jurvetson, and Deutsche Bank. We have also 
seen many large energy companies start to invest in companies that are providing solar systems for off-grid 
homes and businesses. Examples of these companies that have invested are Schneider Electric, Caterpillar, 
First Solar, and General Electric.  
These companies represent potential acquirers for companies that Fund is seeking to invest in if those 
companies are successful in scaling their operations. The Fund’s catalytic investment in early stage SMEs in 
off-grid markets will enable them to reach economies of scales, which will reduce the cost of products and

=== PAGE 21 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 19 
 
 
services and create financially viable business models. Successful companies will serve as proof points for 
later stage investors and corporations that the off-grid solar market is economically viable and companies can 
build profitable business models.  
The Portfolio Manager will prepare an exit memorandum (the “Exit Memo”) at the completion of each 
investment, which occurs when the Fund is no longer a stakeholder in the portfolio company. The purpose of 
the Exit Memo is to summarize the key takeaways from the entire investment process in order to improve 
Acumen’s understanding of effective strategies for marketing critical goods and services to the poor, and 
assessing performance against intended impact and financial return goals. 
V. 
Expected Performance Against Investment Criteria 
5.1 
Impact Potential 
5.1.1 
 Mitigation / adaptation impact potential 
 
 
Climate impact potential 
o Demonstrating that nations can leapfrog fossil-fuel grids to clean energy 
o Reduction of CO2 emissions through displacement of kerosene use at the household level 
from adoption of solar lanterns and home systems and reduction of CO2 emissions from 
displacement of diesel generators and other dirty fuels through renewable energy mini-
grids.  
 
 
Paradigm shift potential 
o This Fund will be the world’s first climate change fund that is focused on SMEs that serve 
BoP populations in developing countries. With partnership from the GCF, this Fund will 
allow Acumen to demonstrate that nations can leapfrog fossil-fuel grids to clean energy. The 
Fund will create a blueprint to a clean-energy future that is aligned with GCF’s goals and can 
be followed by other nations.  
o The Fund’s investments will develop, prove and scale innovative clean energy technologies 
and products that will reduce the need for grid extension and construction of new grids that 
are reliant on dirty fuel (i.e. coal). Success stories from such investments should attract 
further private sector capital into those same companies and similar companies that arise to 
compete, which ultimately will serve to increase the scale and impact of clean energy 
companies operating locally within countries.  
 
 
Sustainable development potential 
o Due to Acumen’s focus on BoP populations, Acumen’s investments will also bring livelihood 
improvements to low-income populations. Such benefits could include increased income, 
safer and healthier household environments, improved food/water security and increased 
access to information. 
o The Fund’s focus on clean energy and renewable energy investments, such as solar-powered 
home systems and appliances and mini-grids, are considered environmentally sustainable 
and produce both economic and environmental benefits to end users.  
 
 
Needs of the recipient 
o Acumen targets low-income populations in developing countries, which is different than 
many traditional emerging markets focused investment funds. Acumen has experience 
working in a number of countries in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa and expects to have 
investments in Least Developed Countries (“LDCs”).

=== PAGE 22 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 20 
 
 
 
Country ownership 
o Acumen is committed to local country operations and expertise. Acumen has local offices in 
each of the regions it invests in (East Africa, West Africa, India, Pakistan and Latin America) 
with local employees that understand consumer needs and cultural context. Acumen’s team 
works with relevant local government, NGO and private sector partners to execute on its 
investment and impact goals. 
o All of the Fund’s investments will have significant, if not all, operations within the specific 
countries of focus. Such investments serve to create employment opportunities, local 
institutional knowledge that can be shared within public and private sectors, strengthen 
local supply and distribution channels required for scaling sustainable businesses. 
 
 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
o Acumen has a track record of deploying and returning capital. Acumen has appropriate 
internal controls to monitor its investments and report to investors. The Fund will conduct 
an annual review of its portfolio companies and will collect monthly and/or quarterly data 
from its portfolio companies to monitor performance and assist in execution of strategy and 
operations. Acumen has an ESG policy that the Fund will adhere to for all portfolio 
companies. The Fund will use a portfolio management system developed by eFront, an 
industry leader in portfolio management systems for private investment firms. Members of 
the Investment Team or other representatives of the Fund will normally sit on the board of 
the portfolio companies to assist in strategic decisions and growth of the company. The Fund 
will seek to generate a positive financial return to investors. 
5.1.2 
Key Impact Potential Indicator 
GCF core 
indicators 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2 
eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation only) 
Annual 
125,000 
Lifetime 
1,500,000  
Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries (reduced vulnerability or increased 
resilience); number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population (adaptation only) 
Total 
15,000,000 
Percentage 
(%) 
16% of the total 
population of the three 
target countries (93.7 
mil) 
Other 
relevant 
indicators 
 
Expected increase in the number of households with access to low-emission energy 
o 
2.1 mil households with access to low-emission energy through solar 
lanterns, solar home systems and mini-grid systems 
 
The calculation of “CO2 Reduction” for each portfolio company is as follows: 
 
Acumen’s research and knowledge of existing portfolio companies, as well as industry research and 
standards for reduction of specific interventions, have informed these estimates of the number of CO2 
emissions reduction from its investments. A CO2 reduction factor over a product’s lifetime is applied 
to the estimated number of products sold within the investment.  
 
Solar Lanterns: A solar lantern will reduce approximately 0.1 tons of CO2 per year. Assuming a 3-
year lifetime for solar lanterns, Acumen estimates each solar lantern investment reducing 
approximately 0.3 tons of CO2.

=== PAGE 23 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 21 
 
 
 
Solar Grid Systems: A solar home system will reduce approximately 0.2 tons of CO2 per year. 
Assuming a solar grid system can last a family 4 years, Acumen estimates each solar grid system 
reducing approximately 0.8 tons of CO2 emissions.  
 
Mini Grids: Each mini-grid connection will displace approximately 2 kerosene lanterns and will 
therefore reduce approximately 0.2 tons of CO2 per year. Assuming a 7-year lifecycle, Acumen 
estimates each mini-grid connection reducing approximately 1.4 tons of CO2 emissions. 
 
 
 
Acumen will work with the GCF to develop appropriate social impact metrics related to climate change 
mitigation and adaptation. The Fund will focus on portfolio companies that provide critical goods and 
services targeting the needs of BoP populations. Further, each potential portfolio company must demonstrate 
the ability or plan to grow its operations significantly 
 
The calculation of “Lives Impacted” for each portfolio company is as follows: 
 
Where there is a 1:1 correlation between one unit of a company’s product or service and one 
individual reached (e.g., an individual visit to a health clinic), Acumen currently uses and Acumen will 
similarly use data from the portfolio companies on products or services sold as equivalent to Lives 
Impacted. 
 
Where a product or service impacts the lives of more than one individual (e.g., wiring a home with 
electricity), Acumen currently multiplies, and will similarly multiply, data from the company’s 
products or services sold by a multiplier. This multiplier is agreed with the company and verified 
CO2 Emissions Reduction Model
Portfolio Assumptions
Target Fund Size
100,000,000
     
GCF Investment
20,000,000
       
Lives Impacted
15,000,000
       
Households
10,500,000
       
Institutions
4,500,000
         
Household Multiplier
5
                       
# of Households Imapcted
2,100,000
         
# of Investments
10
                     
Consumer Product/ Distribution
4
                       
Mini-Grid Power Generation
2
                       
Mobile based Credit Scoring
2
                       
Mobile Technology Enablers
2
                       
CO2 Baseline Assumptions
Annual Tonnes 
Product Life
Product
Lifetime (Yrs.)
# Kerosene Lamps
CO2 Reductions
CO2 Reductions
Comments
Kerosene
0.1
CO2 emmissions
Solar Lanterns
3
1
0.1
0.3
offset 1 kerosene lantern
Solar Home Systems
3
2
0.2
0.6
offset 2 kerosene lantern
Mini-Grid Power Generation
6
2
0.2
1.2
offset 2 kerosene lantern
CO2 Reductions Calculation
# of companies
# of Households
Tons of CO2 Reduced
Portfolio
6
                       
2,100,000
                            
1,500,000
                   
Solar Home Systems
4
                       
1,700,000
                            
1,020,000
                   
Mini-Grid Power Generation
2
                       
400,000
                               
480,000
                      
CO2 Cost Calculation
Tons of CO2 Reduction (Lifetime)
1,500,000
         
Estimated cost per tCO2eq
66.67
$              
Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq remo
13.33
$

=== PAGE 24 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 22 
 
 
either by field visits, and/or using census data as appropriate, to arrive at a total beneficiaries figure. 
For the majority of Acumen’s historical and current investments, the social impact multiplier used is 
“household size,” and typically is approximately 5 people per household. Acumen will use the 
“household size” multiplier for the Fund’s investments. 
The calculation of “CO2 Reduction” for each portfolio company is as follows: 
 
Acumen’s research and knowledge of existing portfolio companies, as well as industry research and 
standards for reduction of specific interventions, have informed these estimates of the number of CO2 
emissions reduction from its investments. A CO2 reduction factor over a product’s lifetime is applied 
to the estimated number of products sold within the investment.  
 
Solar Lanterns: A solar lantern will reduce approximately 0.1 tons of CO2 per year. Assuming a 3-
year lifetime for solar lanterns, Acumen estimates each solar lantern investment reducing 
approximately 0.3 tons of CO2.  
 
Solar Grid Systems: A solar home system will reduce approximately 0.2 tons of CO2 per year. 
Assuming a solar grid system can last a family 4 years, Acumen estimates each solar grid system 
reducing approximately 0.8 tons of CO2 emissions.  
 
Mini Grids: Each mini-grid connection will displace approximately 2 kerosene lanterns and will 
therefore reduce approximately 0.2 tons of CO2 per year. Assuming a 7-year lifecycle, Acumen 
estimates each mini-grid connection reducing approximately 1.4 tons of CO2 emissions. 
 
In order to estimate the number of CO2 emissions reduction from its investments, Acumen also looks at 
best practices and industry reports in the field.  
 
Solar Lanterns: The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change estimates 0.092 tons 
of CO2 per solar lantern per year and assumes a 5-year lifetime for solar lanterns. This number is in 
line with Light for Life and Lighting Africa programs which estimate 0.1 tons of CO2 per solar lantern 
per year.  
 
Solar Grid Systems: The Energy Technology Systems Analysis Program's Off Grid Power in Rural 
India study estimates a solar home lighting system reducing ~0.3 tons of CO2 per year. A UNFCCC 
report, which estimates that a high-power level 3 certified solar system replacing kerosene would 
reduce 0.723 tons of CO2 over its lifetime. 
 
Mini Grids: Electricity sold through microgrids displaces generator fuel used by commercial users at 
approx. 0.5 litres/kWh sold. Conversion factor: 0.00232 Tonnes of CO2/litre of petrol. Electricity sold 
also displaces kerosene use at approx. 0.1 litres/household/day. Conversion factor: 0.00254 Tonnes 
of CO2/litre of kerosene25 
 
Acumen has invested $14 million in 14 energy companies in East Africa, India and Pakistan. Acumen’s 
energy portfolio has reach approximately 50 million lives and has reduced approximately 4.5 million tons of 
CO226. In East Africa alone, Acumen has invested 5.4 million in 6 investments across solar, biomass and 
cookstove companies, reaching approximately 27 million lives and reducing approximately 2.5 million tons of 
CO2. 27 Below are estimates of Acumen’s energy portfolio impact to-date by specific investment.  
 
 
                                                                
25 http://www.eia.gov/environment/emissions/co2_vol_mass.cfm. 
26 Metrics are approximations derived from industry research, company data, and various assumptions and 
methodologies and have not been verified by a 3rd party. 
27 Metrics are approximations derived from industry research, company data, and various assumptions and 
methodologies and have not been verified by a 3rd party.

=== PAGE 25 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 23 
 
 
Region 
Sub-Sector 
Company 
Lives Impacted 
Tons of CO2 Reduced 
India & East Africa 
Solar Lanterns 
A 
51M 
4M 
India & East Africa 
Solar Home System 
B 
370K 
110K 
East Africa 
Solar Home System 
C 
1M 
260K 
East Africa 
Solar Home System 
D 
815K 
6K 
India 
Mini-Grid 
E 
200K 
60K 
India & East Africa 
Cookstove 
F 
270K 
270K 
India 
Cookstove 
G 
21K 
8K 
 
These metrics are approximations derived from industry research, company data, and various assumptions 
and methodologies, as described above, and have not been verified by a 3rd party. 
5.2 
Paradigm Shift Potential 
5.2.1 
Potential for Scaling up and replication 
The Fund will be the world’s first climate change fund that is focused on SMEs that serve BoP populations 
in developing countries. With partnership from the GCG, this Fund will demonstrate that nations can leapfrog 
fossil-fuel grids to clean energy, and create a blueprint to a clean-energy future that can be followed by other 
nations and that will attract billions of dollars in private capital. This will allow Acumen to develop a strong 
track record and will enable Acumen to raise future, larger funds to invest in more companies that are aligned 
with the GCF’s impact goals. 
 
By investing in for-profit companies, Acumen, GCF and other investors in the Fund will be creating 
financially sustainable enterprises that continue to operate through internal profits and follow-on investment 
capital even after the Fund has made its investments. By investing in these companies and creating a track 
record of success, Acumen can raise a second fund in year 5 or 6 of the Fund to invest in more companies that 
are aligned with the impact objectives of the GCF. Thus, GCF is enabling Acumen to build further expertise and 
a deep track-record in the renewable energy sector, which will enable Acumen to raise more money in the 
future and make more investments. 
 
The Fund’s investments will develop, prove and scale innovative clean energy technologies and products 
that will reduce the need for grid extension and construction of new grids that are reliant on dirty fuel (i.e. 
coal). Success stories from such investments should attract further private sector capital into those same 
companies and similar companies that arise to compete, which ultimately will serve to increase the scale and 
impact of clean energy companies operating locally within countries. The Fund’s focus on clean energy and 
renewable energy investments, such as solar-powered home systems and appliances and mini-grids, are 
considered environmentally sustainable and produce both economic and environmental benefits to end 
users.  
 
All of the Fund’s investments will have significant, if not all, operations within the specific countries of 
focus. Such investments serve to create employment opportunities, local institutional knowledge that can be 
shared within public and private sectors, strengthen local supply and distribution channels required for 
scaling sustainable businesses. 
 
Investing in for-profit, financially viable companies can create enterprises that are sustainable over the 
long-term. While it is true that products have useful lives, the benefits of investing in financially sustainable 
companies is that those enterprises can continue to serve customers with new products once products have 
reached their useful lives. Also, the company is incentivized to provide ongoing service and maintenance for

=== PAGE 26 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 24 
 
 
its products to ensure that its customers are satisfied with their product and experience and keep being 
customers of the company.  
 
In order to contribute to the long-term sustainability of the impact on consumers, the Fund will dedicate 
a portion of its Technical Assistance Facility to specific initiatives that contribute to long-term impact. 
Examples of these initiatives include a reserve fund to help provide maintenance and service to customers if a 
company they bought a product from goes bankrupt and funds to help train women become solar technicians 
so that they can achieve employment and income generation.  
5.2.2 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
Acumen is requesting that the GCF invest equity capital into a 12-year fund. This vehicle, and GCF’s 
anchoring investment, will enable Acumen to raise additional capital from like-minded investors that want to 
achieve the same goals of the GCF and Acumen. We think we can leverage GCF’s capital on a 4:1 ratio. Acumen 
will use the Fund’s capital to make equity, equity-like and convertible debt investments in SMEs that are 
serving low-income populations and achieving the desired environmental impacts. The 12-year time horizon 
of the Fund will enable the companies Acumen invests in several years to scale their businesses and impact. 
Further, the Fund will enable Acumen to invest both equity and quasi-equity capital, both of which are 
needed by the targeted investment. By organizing the Fund as a for-profit fund, Acumen and GCF can crowd-
in private sector capital that is looking for a financial return on its investment.  
 
Additionally, not only will Acumen be attracting capital from outside investors, but Acumen’s investment 
in companies will help bring in other capital into those companies, or will help fill out a round if other 
investors are there first, thus enabling the company’s intended impact to be achieved. 
 
 
Further, many of the companies that the Fund will target often utilize grant capital from foundations or 
public subsidies from governments to test-out innovation and jump-start markets. Thus, SMEs play a critical 
role in demonstrating how partnerships with civil organizations and government can be effective, especially 
when targeting low-income populations. Over time, insights from these partnerships and from operating 
experience in the market can prove out successful business models and attract larger sums of investment 
capital and enterprises that are striving for social and environmental impact.  
 
The Fund will target investments in SMEs whose business models employ innovation at the product, 
service and/or operating level that enables the SME to affordably and profitably serve its intended 
population. Such innovations require highly risk-tolerant capital to allow the models to iterate and learn from 
market and customer feedback. The investment capital from GCF through this Fund will enable these 
companies to achieve their intended impact. Further, once new technologies and business models are proven, 
these innovations can be replicated by other actors in the economy. 
 
5.2.3 
Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
 
This Fund will be the world’s first climate change fund that is focused on SMEs that serve BoP 
populations in developing countries. This Fund will contain approval of the local NDAs and be operating 
within the goals and regulations of the national policies referenced in section E.5. This investment vehicle will 
serve as a way for investors with climate focused impact strategies to achieve these country environmental 
goals. 
 
5.2.4 
Potential for knowledge and learning 
Acumen shares the insights learned to make us collectively more effective. Acumen has used the data 
drawn from its portfolio to author sector-defining reports such as From Blueprint to Scale alongside Monitor 
Inclusive Markets, and most recently Growing Prosperity: Developing repeatable business models to scale the 
adoption of agricultural innovation, in collaboration with Bain & Company. Acumen also shares its expertise

=== PAGE 27 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 25 
 
 
on impact measurement in a range of forums and advisories. In the last year alone, we held positions on the 
IRIS strategic advisory board, Clinton Global Initiative Metrics Advisory Council, and the Progress out of 
Poverty Index Strategic Task Force. 
 
We analyze the data we gather to teach us new information about our impact performance on our 
individual investments. With data collected across multiple companies, sectors and geographies we can also 
synthesize this to generate new crosscutting insights. 
 
Acumen will be open to providing a report on the actions and outcomes of the Fund. 
5.3 
Sustainable Development Potential 
5.3.1 
 Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive development 
impact 
 
Economic co-benefits  
Due to Acumen’s focus on BoP populations in developing countries, Acumen’s investments will provide 
economic savings and/or livelihood improvements. Such benefits include increased income due to the 
displacement of kerosene from the cheaper solar alternatives. Saving for a household can range from 
approximately $75 - $200 per year depending on the daily cost of kerosene, the amount of kerosene 
displaced, and the cost of the solar lantern / solar home system in the specific geographic market. Further, 
more powerful Solar Home Systems have the ability to power micro and small business to increase income 
for consumers. Thirdly, the solar home systems can be used for agricultural inventions – such as solar 
powered irrigation pumps and refrigeration – which can increase farmer yields and ultimate incomes.  
 
Social co-benefits  
- 
Improved access to education  
Families report that solar lights are predominantly used by children to do their homework after dark. With 
access to this bright, safe and clean light, children are doing an extra hour of homework each day28 
When children do well at school, they are likely to stay there longer and gain a higher level of education 
benefiting themselves, their families and their communities. 
- 
Improved health and safety  
Each solar light bought by a household results in the elimination of the regular use of one kerosene lamp 
and this means there is less indoor air pollution. Over half of families notice an improvement in health as a 
result; including a reduction in coughing, chest problems, eye irritation and illness.29 
 
 
Environmental co-benefits  
- 
Improved air quality  
Each solar light bought by a household results in the elimination of the regular use of one kerosene lamp 
and this means there is less indoor air pollution. Over half of families notice an improvement in health as a 
result; including a reduction in coughing, chest problems, eye irritation and illness.30 
 
 
Gender-sensitive development impact  
- 
Proportion of men and women in jobs created 
 
Many of the goods and services provided by the companies the Fund expects to invest in will have direct 
impact on women, such as solar lanterns and home systems which can lead to the reduction of kerosene use 
                                                                
28 http://solar-aid.org/impact/ 
29 http://solar-aid.org/impact/ 
30 http://solar-aid.org/impact/

=== PAGE 28 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 26 
 
 
and related indoor air pollution. Given the direct impact of these goods and services on women, many of 
these companies also hire women employees, providing income and empowerment for women. Acumen will 
seek to understand the impact that its investments have on women through company-provided data, 
diligence visits and company visits by members of the Fund’s investment team, and 3rd party research and 
data collection. Historically, Acumen has conducted its own research on the impact on women of certain of 
its portfolio companies and has also partnered with organizations like the International Center for Research 
on Women to research and better understand gender impact. Acumen expects to provide similar research 
for investments made by the Fund and will share that with the GCF.  
Acumen is currently finalizing its formal Gender Policy, which it will submit to the GCF in the coming weeks. 
The Fund will develop specific metrics to track and report on related to gender impact of its investments.  
The summary of the intended reporting related to gender impact is as follows: 
- 
The Fund will invest in companies that bring clean, solar energy to households and thus will 
benefit women as they are part of the household and will benefit from any displacement of 
kerosene. The Fund will use surveys and market research to report on how many women are 
reached from its investments.  
- 
Acumen has seen evidence from previous investments that women are often employed as sales 
agents or other employees of clean energy companies. The Fund will report on the number of 
women employed by its portfolio companies. 
- 
The Technical Assistance facility may be able to use funds to train women solar technicians, thus 
creating direct impact on women. The fund will report on the number of women technicians 
trained / employed. 
 
 Acumen is working with the International Center for Research on Women (ICRW) to better 
understand how our companies are engaging women, and how engaging women can affect the social and 
business performance of a company. After conducting the broad review of trends in the gender lens impact 
investment sector and assessment of what social enterprises are doing to engage, reach and impact women 
across various sectors, ICRW conducted a deeper analysis of some of the enterprises in which Acumen 
invests. Together with ICRW, we have developed the framework for the study, which will be anchored in 
identifying both the impact case and the business case for targeting women, and how the two can reinforce 
each other. We expect to have the final report in October 2015. The report will offer sector-level insights, 
identifying not only where our investees are currently targeting women but also places of opportunity, 
things that are not yet happening, but should be in order to create impact for women and communities.  
- 
Other 
 Due to Acumen’s focus on BoP populations, Acumen’s investments will also bringlivelihood 
improvements to low-income populations. Such benefits could include increased income, safer and 
healthier household environments, improved food/water security, and increased access to information. 
5.4 
Needs of the Recipients 
5.4.1 
Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups 
In Rwanda, over 70 percent of the population (~8.5M people) live off the grid, and the current best 
estimate is that cutting that figure to 30 percent will cost between $700 million and $1 billion per year for the 
next several years. This cost, which amounts to 10 to15 percent of the GDP, will still leave 3.5 million people 
in the dark. Moreover, the government’s current best plan reluctantly calls for 50 percent of the desperately 
needed new power generation to be sourced from fossil fuels. 
 
In Rwanda, less than 30% of the population has access to stable electricity. Most Households that do not 
have electricity rely on kerosene lanterns and candles to meet their lighting needs. But these sources of light

=== PAGE 29 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 27 
 
 
are dangerous, low quality and expensive. Customers pay $1 a week for kerosene for lighting, and $1 more for 
phone charging. In Rwanda, electricity costs are among the highest in the world, and higher than neighboring 
countries in region, with grid-connected users paying roughly—~$0.20/kWh compared to $0.12 in U.S. (high 
tariffs, heavily subsidized). In addition to high costs, power supply is unreliable. Rwanda sees the high cost 
and insufficient and unreliable supply as the number one barrier to stronger business and industrial growth.  
 
In Kenya, only 20% of the population is connected to the grid, leaving 35M people without access to 
affordable and reliable electricity. This lack of grid connectivity hinders the productivity as it limits daily 
activities such as schoolwork, household chores, and business at night or in the early morning. Given the slow 
rates of electrification coupled with high population growth, the grid supply versus demand crises will only 
be exacerbated. 92% of rural households rely on kerosene for lighting but it is expensive and takes up a huge 
proportion of family budgets. Rural Kenyan households spend around 2  of their income on lighting, or 
roughly $.42 per day on kerosene fuel at a far higher rate per hour of lighting than if the same was provided 
by the grid.  
 
Uganda 
The electrification rate of Uganda ranges from roughly 10% - 18%, depending on various sources. While 
electrification has reached almost 43% of the urban households, rural electrification is still very low at 4%. 
Only 0.4% of the population has access to modern cooking fuel and almost 86% still rely on fuel wood for 
cooking. An average Ugandan household spends between USD 4 and 10 per month on kerosene for lighting 
and between USD 1 and 2 per month on phone charging.  
 
The primary energy sources consist of biomass, imported oil products and hydro. Total installed 
electricity capacity (2010) is 539.5 MW (Thermal 31.5%, Hydroelectric 65.4% and Biomass (bagasse) 3.1%). 
With droughts severely affecting the water levels in Lake Victoria and River Nile, Uganda’s overdependence 
on large scale hydro power may prove problematic.  
 
The main goal of this project is to create the world’s first climate change fund focused on bottom-of-the-
pyramid populations in developing countries. The Fund will seek to catalyze a thriving off-grid solar 
ecosystem in East Africa, demonstrating that nations can leapfrog fossil-fuel grids to clean energy. The social 
enterprises Acumen will invest in will be providing critical goods and services to the poor in order to address 
the unfortunate baseline scenario described above, providing safe-reliable electricity and decreasing 
kerosene use. The Fund will bring off-grid solar power to a target of 15 million people in East Africa and will 
create a blueprint to a clean-energy future that can be followed by other nations. 
 
Solar home systems and appliances will aim to completely eliminate the use of kerosene in the 
household, eliminating the 0.1 tons of CO2 emissions per liter of kerosene per year.  
 
The Fund also expects some of its portfolio companies to have cross-cutting impact across the GCF’s 
mitigation and adaptation goals. With specific regard to adaptation goals, it is likely that a number of the solar 
companies the Fund invests in will provide solar products and systems to institutions such as schools, agri-
businesses, and small and micro businesses that create incremental income for vulnerable populations. One 
of Acumen’s current investees, SolarNow, has several solar systems that are being used by schools and 
affecting hundreds of children in each school. Other companies are also using solar power for various 
agricultural related activities. Examples of these include solar-powered irrigation pumps and power for small 
businesses such as rice processors. Farmers also use lanterns when they work in the field for safety reasons 
and to enhance productivity. Other than agri-businesses, entrepreneurs are using solar systems for income 
generating activities such as mobile phone charging, cosmetic services, cooling services, and simply extending 
business hours.  
 
It is hard to predict what percentage of solar systems will serve households, businesses, and schools. 
However, we have identified targets for what that mix may be based on only a few data points we know of 
from existing solar companies in the market. These are very rough estimates and are largely unsubstantiated.

=== PAGE 30 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 28 
 
 
The Fund will report on the breakdown of systems used at homes, schools and healthcare facilities, and agri-
business and other businesses.  
The estimates for the distribution of systems are as follows: 
 
Homes: 70% 
 
Agribusiness / Other Business: 20% 
 
Schools / Healthcare facilities: 10% 
5.4.2 
Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
Over the last decade, numerous social enterprises have been formed to address the needs of people living 
at the BoP. However, many of these enterprises have struggled to obtain investment capital for growth, in 
part because many traditional investors typically will not accept the financial risk and reward profile of these 
enterprises. Concurrently, several funding organizations and vehicles known as “impact investors” that target 
both social impact and financial return (and who often accept lower than market rates of financial return in 
exchange for outsized social impact of an investment) have formed to address the financing needs of these 
enterprises and capitalize on the potential commercial opportunity presented by them. However, early- to 
mid-stage social enterprises have struggled to attract investment capital even from impact investors as the 
majority of those investors have provided capital to relatively later-stage companies with lower risk, or have 
focused on the small sub-segment of these enterprises that present a higher financial return profile. Thus, 
even self-described impact investors often avoid the higher risk, lower margin businesses that directly touch 
the needs of individuals living at the BoP. A 2011 study of the social enterprise landscape in Africa done by 
Monitor Group highlights this point, noting that “only 6 of 84 funds investing in Africa offered early stage 
capital.”  
 
Over the last 13 years, Acumen has developed deep sector knowledge and local market insights, through 
its investing work and extensive research projects, such as From Blueprint to Scale: The Case for 
Philanthropy in Impact Investing written by Harvey Koh and Ashish Karamchandani of Monitor Group and 
Robert Katz of Acumen in 2012. From Blueprint to Scale explains how impact investors are constrained by the 
tough realities of inclusive business, and introduces the phenomenon of the pioneer gap; describes the 
emerging practice of enterprise philanthropy, and how it is the key to establishing the inclusive business 
models into which capital can then be deployed; and analyzes a number of companies from Acumen’s 
portfolio to understand both successes and setbacks. 
 
Acumen believes there is an attractive opportunity to invest in an increasing number of post-proof-of-
concept business models that serve BoP markets in a sustainable and scalable manner and provide the 
opportunity for a combination of social impact and financial return to investors. By investing in local growth-
oriented investments, Acumen will help to build the distribution and service value chains, which are currently 
lacking, to provide critical goods and services to those at the poor. 
5.5 
Country Ownership 
5.5.1 
Existence of a national climate strategy and coherence with existing plans and policies, 
including NAMAs, NAPAs and NAPs 
Acumen is committed to local country operations and expertise. Acumen has local offices in each of the 
regions it invests in (East Africa, West Africa, India, Pakistan and Latin America) with local employees that 
understand consumer needs and cultural context. Acumen’s team works with relevant local government, 
NGOs and private sector partners to execute on its investment and impact goals, and ensure alignment with 
local policies. Country ownership will be ensured in that Acumen will receive a letter of “no objection” from 
relevant NDAs. Acumen will ensure that it receives a letter of “no-objection” from the relevant country NDA 
ahead of the Fund investing in any companies in that specific country.

=== PAGE 31 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 29 
 
 
 
Below are environmental policies for Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda. These policies directly align with 
Acumen’s investment strategies and goals within these countries. 
 
Kenya: 
The Environment and Policy Management Component under the Natural Resource Management 
Programme (NRMP) supports the Government of Kenya in the implementation of the first medium-term plan 
(2008-2012) in general and, particularly, in relation to strategies and goals for environmental planning and 
governance. 
The mandate of the Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources (MEMR) is to “to protect, conserve 
and manage the environment and mineral resources through sustainable exploitation for socio-economic and 
political development” and its mission is “to promote, conserve, protect, monitor and sustainably manage the 
environment and mineral resources for national development”. 
MEMR’s strategic plan includes reducing environmental degradation and strengthening the role of 
environment and natural resources in reducing poverty.31 
Uganda 
The National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) is the Manager agency in Uganda, charged 
with the responsibility of coordinating, monitoring, regulating and supervising environmental management 
in the country. NEMA spearheads the development of environmental policies, laws, regulations, standards 
and guidelines; and guides the Government on sound environmental management in Uganda. NEMA 
contributes to social-economic development and wise use of natural resources, focusing on providing support 
to the Government’s main goal of ensuring sustainable development contributing to the National Vision, the 
National Development Plan (NPD), regional and global commitments including the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs).32 
 
Rwanda 
Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA) is the non-sectorial institution mandated to 
facilitate coordination and oversight of the implementation of national environmental policy and subsequent 
legislation. REMA has a key role to play towards the achievement of the national goal of sustainable 
development as set out in the National Development Vision 2020. 
 
The protection and management of the environment are among the pillars of Vision 2020. The objective 
of the Government is that by 2020, it will have built a nation in which pressure on natural resources, 
particularly on land, water, biomass and biodiversity, has significantly been reduced and the process of 
environmental pollution and degradation has been reversed. 
 
The environment is also one of the first priorities identified by the Poverty Reduction Strategy in Rwanda 
and is among the leading fundamental programs selected within agriculture transformation and rural 
development. The Poverty Reduction Strategy recommends actions in the energy sector by promoting the 
rational use of wood and the promotion of alternative sources of energy.33 
5.5.2 
Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
Since 2007, Acumen has invested $14 million in 14 energy companies in East Africa, India and Pakistan. 
Acumen has invested in a wide-range of energy companies, including mini-grids (solar, hydro and biomass), 
                                                                
31 http://kenya.um.dk/en/danida-en/nrm/annual-natural-resource-management-form/environmental-policy-and-
management/ 
32 http://www.nemaug.org/ 
33 http://www.rema.gov.rw/

=== PAGE 32 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 30 
 
 
solar lantern and solar home system companies, and cookstove companies. Acumen’s energy portfolio has 
reach approximately 50 million lives and has reduced approximately 4.5 million tons of CO234. In East Africa 
alone, Acumen has invested 5.4 million in 6 investments across solar, biomass and cookstove companies, 
reaching approximately 27 million lives and reducing approximately 2.5 million tons of CO2. 35 Below are 
estimates of Acumen’s energy portfolio impact to-date by specific investment.  
Region 
Sub-Sector 
Company 
Lives Impacted 
Tons of CO2 Reduced 
India & East 
Africa 
Solar Lanterns 
A 
51M 
4M 
India & East 
Africa 
Solar Home System 
B 
370K 
110K 
East Africa 
Solar Home System 
C 
1M 
260K 
East Africa 
Solar Home System 
D 
815K 
6K 
India 
Mini-Grid 
E 
200K 
60K 
India & East 
Africa 
Cookstove 
F 
270K 
270K 
India 
Cookstove 
G 
21K 
8K 
 
Acumen strongly believes that being able to utilize Acumen’s local presence in the markets in which it 
will invest is critical to the success of the Fund. This presence will allow the Investment Team to continue 
developing a deep understanding of the local market dynamics in which Acumen’s portfolio companies 
already operate, and to continue building strong relationships with local advisors and networks that already 
support the work of Acumen. 
 
While the India and Pakistan offices focus on their single country of location, the Ghana and Kenya offices 
serve as regional hubs looking to make investments throughout the broader regions of West Africa and East 
Africa, respectively. Similarly, the Colombia office is a developing hub for the Latin America region, with an 
initial focus on Colombia and Peru. The New York office makes investments in companies that are global in 
nature and also exists to help source and develop potential investments in all regions. Companies deemed to 
be “global” are those that (i) domiciled outside of East Africa, West Africa, South Asia or Latin America but 
have significant operations in those geographies. 
 
Through its local presence, Acumen has attracted experienced in-country senior leadership and built a 
strong network of well-respected local advisors who are influential members of their respective business 
communities. Due in part to this network, Acumen has built a powerful brand and is recognized as a leader 
amongst investing peers and entrepreneurs operating in the social impact sector. Acumen and the Investment 
Team will have access to in-country senior leadership and local advisors, and will leverage Acumen’s 
prominent brand recognition to source and facilitate investment opportunities.  
 
All of these factors provide Acumen with a competitive advantage in sourcing deal flow, specifically, 
allowing Acumen to source deals which are not seen by investors who lack the same local presence. Acumen 
is also plugged into many of the incubators and accelerators in the social impact sector, which serve as 
resources for potential Fund investments. Acumen actively monitors approximately 30 accelerators, 
incubators and business plan competitions that provide sources of early stage investment opportunities, 
some of which may be appropriate for the Fund.  
                                                                
34 Metrics are approximations derived from industry research, company data, and various assumptions and 
methodologies and have not been verified by a 3rd party. 
35 Metrics are approximations derived from industry research, company data, and various assumptions and 
methodologies and have not been verified by a 3rd party.

=== PAGE 33 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 31 
 
 
5.5.3 
 Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
The Fund will work with governments and other partners to create the right market ecosystems to 
support rapid growth for clean energy. Acumen is currently in conversations with multiple Development 
Finance Institutions (“DFIs”), foundations, and High Net Worth individuals that are interested in investing in 
this Fund. African investors, companies and/or government are also expected to be investors in the Fund.  
 
Further, Acumen has already identified 3 companies that are ready for investment and a number of other 
companies that could receive investment capital over the course of the next 6 – 12 months. Acumen has also 
been in contact with the GCF NDAs in Kenya, Uganda, and Rwanda, and expects to confer with the other 
relevant NDAs in countries in which Acumen intends to invest.  
5.6 
Strategic Context 
5.6.1 
Cost effectiveness and efficiency 
Acumen is requesting that the GCF invest equity capital into a 12-year fund. This vehicle, and GCF’s 
anchoring investment, will enable Acumen to raise additional capital from like-minded investors that want to 
achieve the same goals of the GCF and Acumen. We think we can leverage GCF’s investment capital in the fund 
on a 4:1 ratio by raising a $100M fund. We are also targeting a $10M Technical Assistance Facility, so GCF’s 
grant capital of $5M could be leveraged on a 1:1 ratio.  
 
Acumen will use the fund’s capital to make equity, quasi-equity and convertible debt investments in SMEs 
that are serving low-income populations and achieving the desired environmental impacts. The 12-year time 
horizon of the fund will enable the companies Acumen invests in several years to scale their businesses and 
impact. Further, the fund will invest both equity and equity-like capital, both of which are needed by the 
targeted investment given the relatively early stage nature of the enterprises and the risks involved in scaling 
the enterprises. By organizing the fund as a for-profit fund, Acumen and GCF can crowd-in impact-oriented 
private sector capital that is looking for a financial return on its investment as well as social impact. Given the 
impact focus of the fund and the risk / reward profile offered by the underlying investments of the fund, 
traditional private commercial capital is not interested in funding such an investment vehicle. Thus, the GCF’s 
involvement will in no way b be crowing out private capital, but on the contrary, will potentially crowd-in 
private capital that is looking to achieve social impact along with financial return.  
 
Lastly, Acumen has a strong track record of deploying and returning capital. Acumen has appropriate 
internal controls to monitor its investments and report to investors. The fund will seek to generate a positive 
financial return to investors. 
 
Based on our proposed investment vehicle and the resulting reduction cost of $66.67 per tCO2eq detailed 
in section E.6.5, we believe this proposal to be competitive amongst other interventions that have aimed to 
reduce CO2 emissions.  
EPA and other federal agencies use the social cost of carbon (SCC) to estimate the climate benefits of 
rulemakings. The SCC is an estimate of the economic damages associated with a small increase in carbon 
dioxide (CO2) emissions, conventionally one metric ton, in a given year. This dollar figure also represents the 
value of damages avoided for a small emission reduction (i.e. the benefit of a CO2 reduction). The EPA 
estimates the social cost of CO2 to be between $12 and $220.36 
 
                                                                
36 http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/EPAactivities/economics/scc.html

=== PAGE 34 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 32 
 
 
According to the journal of Natural Climate Change, the cost of one ton of CO2 emissions is estimated to be 
around $220, significantly above the previous estimates of $37 per ton, which a government study had 
concluded.37  
 
Vattenfall, a Swedish utility, estimated in 2005 the average cost of reducing one ton of CO2 emissions in 
different regions of the world. This report found that the marginal abatement costs, in terms of Gross 
Domestic Product, are 4.5 times higher among the poorest countries than among the wealthiest ones, the 
average cost of CO2 reduction for countries outside of North America, Europe, OECD, transitional economies 
and China was €18.2 ($24) at the time.38 
 
We believe our proposal provides a cost effective means of reducing CO2 emissions while also having 
significant social impact at the household level for BoP customers. 
5.6.2 
Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only)  
Acumen is requesting that the GCF invest equity capital into a 10-year fund. This vehicle, and GCF’s 
anchoring investment, will enable Acumen to raise additional capital from like-minded investors that want to 
achieve the same goals of the GCF and Acumen. We think we can leverage GCF’s capital on a 4:1 ratio.  
 
The Fund is intended to create a blueprint to a clean-energy future that can be followed by other nations 
and that will attract billions of dollars in private capital. 
5.6.3 
Financial Viability 
Without the anchoring investment of the GCF, Acumen believes it would be extremely difficult to raise 
such a Fund, if even possible at all.  
 
By creating this new Fund, the GCF is enabling a new and unique investing vehicle to target clean energy 
interventions that reduce CO2 emissions while also positively impacting the lives of low-income populations 
in developing countries. If this new Fund can prove that there are viable investment opportunities in this 
target sector over the next couple years, Acumen and other investors could raise multiple funds on the back 
of this success, which will serve to scale the GCF’s mitigation and adaptation goals. Thus, the GCF’s investment 
in this first Fund could catalyze multiple follow-on investment vehicles. Further, because this Fund is focused 
on for-profit enterprises, these companies should be able to continue to scale and remain financially viable 
once the investment capital from the Fund has been returned.  
 
Overall, Acumen seeks to create investment structures that will allow for exits, either through 1) sales to 
a later-stage growth investor, a strategic buyer or a management buyout or 2) self-liquidating instruments 
such as convertible debt and quasi-equity investment structures (i.e. instruments with shares of revenue or 
EBITDA). Initial public offerings are not seen as practical exit opportunities given the relatively immature 
capital markets in the economies in which the fund will invest.  
 
As an investor in Acumen’s proposed Fund, the GCF will receive its share of financial distributions from 
the fund when any liquidity events occur from the underlying portfolio companies. Such liquidity events 
could include a sale of the Fund’s shares of the company or payment of principal, interest and/or dividend 
payments from a portfolio company to the Fund. The specific timing and manner of financial distributions 
from the Fund to the GCF will be agreed upon in a Shareholder’s agreement between the GCF, the Fund, and 
other investors in the Fund. 
                                                                
37 http://news.stanford.edu/news/2015/january/emissions-social-costs-011215.html 
38 http://www.econweekly.com/2007/09/on-cost-of-reducing-co2-emissions.html

=== PAGE 35 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 33 
 
 
5.6.4 
Application of Best Practices 
Acumen invests in innovative companies that are bringing high quality products to vulnerable 
populations. Those products consist of break-through technologies as well as older technologies whose costs 
have come down over time, thus making them accessible to Acumen’s target market of low-income 
consumers. Such technologies include, refined solar panel technologies, innovative remote monitoring 
technologies, mobile payment, data and systems, emerging credit scoring models and algorithms to assess 
customer bankability as well as human centered design practices for product development. 
5.6.5 
Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, defined as total investment cost / expected lifetime emission reductions: 
(a) Total project financing 
US$ 100,000,000  
(b) Requested GCF amount  
US$ 20,000,000  
(c) Expected lifetime emission reductions overtime  
1,500,000 tCO2eq 
(d) Estimated cost per tCO2eq (d = a / c) 
US$ 66.67 / tCO2eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per tCO2eq removed (e = b / c) 
US$ 13.33 / tCO2eq 
 
The calculation of “CO2 Reduction” for each portfolio company is as follows: 
 
Acumen’s research and knowledge of existing portfolio companies, as well as industry research and 
standards for reduction of specific interventions, have informed these estimates of the number of CO2 
emissions reduction from its investments. A CO2 reduction factor over a product’s lifetime is applied 
to the estimated number of products sold within the investment.  
 
Solar Lanterns: A solar lantern will reduce approximately 0.1 tons of CO2 per year. Assuming a 3-
year lifetime for solar lanterns, Acumen estimates each solar lantern investment reducing 
approximately 0.3 tons of CO2.  
 
Solar Grid Systems: A solar home system will reduce approximately 0.2 tons of CO2 per year. 
Assuming a solar grid system can last a family 4 years, Acumen estimates each solar grid system 
reducing approximately 0.8 tons of CO2 emissions.  
 
Mini Grids: Each mini-grid connection will displace approximately 2 kerosene lanterns and will 
therefore reduce approximately 0.2 tons of CO2 per year. Assuming a 7-year lifecycle, Acumen 
estimates each mini-grid connection reducing approximately 1.4 tons of CO2 emissions. 
 
In order to estimate the number of CO2 emissions reduction from its investments, Acumen also looks at 
best practices and industry reports in the field.  
 
Solar Lanterns: The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change estimates 0.092 tons 
of CO2 per solar lantern per year and assumes a 5-year lifetime for solar lanterns. This number is in 
line with Light for Life and Lighting Africa programs which estimate 0.1 tons of CO2 per solar lantern 
per year.  
 
Solar Grid Systems: The Energy Technology Systems Analysis Program's Off Grid Power in Rural 
India study estimates a solar home lighting system reducing ~0.3 tons of CO2 per year. A UNFCCC 
report, which estimates that a high-power level 3 certified solar system replacing kerosene would 
reduce 0.723 tons of CO2 over its lifetime. 
 
Mini Grids: Electricity sold through microgrids displaces generator fuel used by commercial users at 
approx. 0.5 litres/kWh sold. Conversion factor: 0.00232 Tonnes of CO2/litre of petrol. Electricity sold 
also displaces kerosene use at approx. 0.1 litres/household/day. Conversion factor: 0.00254 Tonnes 
of CO2/litre of kerosene39 
                                                                
39 http://www.eia.gov/environment/emissions/co2_vol_mass.cfm

=== PAGE 36 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 34 
 
 
Acumen has invested $14 million in 14 energy companies in East Africa, India and Pakistan. Acumen’s 
energy portfolio has reach approximately 50 million lives and has reduced approximately 4.5 million tons of 
CO240. In East Africa alone, Acumen has invested 5.4 million in 6 investments across solar, biomass and 
cookstove companies, reaching approximately 27 million lives and reducing approximately 2.5 million tons of 
CO2. 41 Below are estimates of Acumen’s energy portfolio impact to-date by specific investment.  
 
Region 
Sub-Sector 
Company 
Lives Impacted 
Tons of CO2 Reduced 
India & East Africa 
Solar Lanterns 
A 
51M 
4M 
India & East Africa 
Solar Home System 
B 
370K 
110K 
East Africa 
Solar Home System 
C 
1M 
260K 
East Africa 
Solar Home System 
D 
815K 
6K 
India 
Mini-Grid 
E 
200K 
60K 
India & East Africa 
Cookstove 
F 
270K 
270K 
India 
Cookstove 
G 
21K 
8K 
 
These metrics are approximations derived from industry research, company data, and various 
assumptions and methodologies, as described above, and have not been verified by a 3rd party. 
 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed programme: 
 
Acumen is requesting that the GCF invest equity capital into a 12-year fund. This vehicle, and GCF’s 
anchoring investment, will enable Acumen to raise additional capital from like-minded investors that want to 
achieve the same goals of the GCF and Acumen. We think we can leverage GCF’s capital on a 4:1 ratio.  
 
By anchoring the Fund with a $20M investment, we believe Acumen can raise an additional $80M from 
other investors, including up to $5M from Acumen. Further, the creation of this new investment vehicle, and 
the resulting investments from this Fund, will attract capital from co-investors into the underlying portfolio 
companies as Acumen has a strong reputation and multiple value-add resources it can offer the portfolio 
company. It is harder to estimate an exact amount of how much capital will be invested in these companies as 
a result of Acumen investing in them with this Fund, however it is reasonable to expect that GCF’s creation of 
Acumen’s Fund will catalyze further capital from co-investors in the underlying portfolio companies of the 
Fund.  
 
We think a $20M anchor investment from the GCF is not only catalytic but also crucial to Acumen’s ability 
to raise this Fund. Furthermore, we believe being able to raise a 100M fund and leveraging GCF’s capital in a 
4:1 ratio is a strong use of GCF’s capital. 
 
A $20M investment from GCF will enable Acumen to create the world’s first climate change fund focused 
on BoP populations in developing countries. This anchor investment will be not only catalytic but also crucial 
to enable Acumen to create the first climate mitigation fund to utilize SMEs to affect the lives of low-income 
populations in developing countries. We believe being able to raise a $100M fund and leverage GCF’s capital 
in a 4:1 ratio is a strong use of GCF’s capital.   
                                                                
40 Metrics are approximations derived from industry research, company data, and various assumptions and 
methodologies and have not been verified by a 3rd party. 
41 Metrics are approximations derived from industry research, company data, and various assumptions and 
methodologies and have not been verified by a 3rd party.

=== PAGE 37 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 35 
 
 
VI. 
Appraisal Summary 
6.1 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
The forecasted financial return to investors in this Fund accounts for, amongst other factors, Acumen’s 
expectations of the ability of its underlying investments to scale and reach profitability, the size of the impact 
capital and commercial capital markets that are willing to take the risks stated above and invest in 
companies, and potential movements in foreign currency relationships over the life of the Fund.42 The 
economics of the Fund also account for the expenses that will be incurred in managing a portfolio of 
companies that operate in these challenging operating environments.  
 
Higher-level macro-economic factors such as currency risk and political risk are factored into the 
forecasted financial return of each investment.  
 
The Fund expects to make investments in illiquid markets, which have disproportionate risk relative to 
financial returns given the Acumen’s significant social objectives. As such traditional commercial capital, and 
even segments of “impact investors” that are still focused on achieving “market rate returns” are not 
interested in taking the risk of investing in the types of investment opportunities that Acumen’s Fund will be 
targeting. Specific risk factors and reasons that justify the concessionality of the GFC funding include 1) 
Liquidity Event/Exit, 2) Inflation and Interest Rate Risk, 3) Foreign Currency, Exchange Rate and Market 
Risks, and 4) Accounting Standards, Limited Availability of Information, and Due Diligence.  
6.2 
Technical Evaluation 
Acumen invests in innovative companies that are bringing high quality products to vulnerable 
populations. Those products consist of break-through technologies as well as older technologies whose costs 
have come down over time, thus making them accessible to Acumen’s target market of low-income 
consumers. Such technologies include, refined solar panel technologies, innovative remote monitoring 
technologies, mobile payment, data and systems, emerging credit scoring models and algorithms to assess 
customer bankability as well as human centered design practices for product development. 
6.3 
Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender 
Considerations 
Acumen has formalized robust ESG diligence, monitoring and reporting processes, which are based on 
industry standards, as well as guidelines outlined by several prospective Investors for its global portfolio 
(elaborate by stating the checklists that will be used) from leading organizations like the IFC and FMO. The 
ESG diligence process and reports include assessment of the 8 IFC Performance Standards and an overall 
rating on Environmental, Social, Business Integrity, and Corporate Governance risks of the enterprise Acumen 
will include a formal ESG process for conduct a formal ESG process for all investments of the Fund. Acumen 
will designate a person in charge of all ESG matters related to the Fund and its investments, and will also 
ensure all members of the Investment Team have been adequately trained with respect to appropriate ESG 
processes. As per its accreditation by the GCF, and with respect to ESS risks, the Fund will only target 
Category C projects for investment.  
                                                                
42 The Fund will make investments based on the Manager’s estimates or projections of internal rates of return and current 
returns. Investors have no assurance that the Fund will achieve its total return objectives on its investments. In 
addition, the Manager may adjust targeted returns to reflect any changes in market conditions.

=== PAGE 38 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 36 
 
 
As with any solar related project or intervention, one of the environmental issues to contemplate is the 
waste management of solar products after their useful lives. Some countries have policies and processes in 
place to handle waste management, while others are still developing the appropriate regulations and 
procedures. The Fund will seek to ensure to the best of its abilities that its portfolio companies comply with 
the relevant local policies and procedures regarding effective waste management. Example of initiatives that 
are being developed in places like Rwanda include recycling programs, quality standards to ensure products 
have long useful lives, and trade-in programs.  
In Initial Due Diligence, the Portfoliot Manager will analyze potential ESG risks and financial management 
and governance risks, based in part on the company’s sector, sub-sector and geography, as well as on an 
initial understanding of the company’s operations. Based on these factors, the deal team will rate potential 
ESG risks as Low, Medium or High. These risks ratings will be presented as part of the Preliminary 
Investment Memo (“PIM”), and will ultimately serve to guide the team as it prepares its formal diligence plan. 
During Formal Due Diligence, the Portfolio Manager will conduct extensive ESG diligence, focusing on 
areas highlighted from the initial ESG risk evaluation. The ESG diligence is meant to uncover ESG risks, 
identify potential risk mitigants and/or the lack thereof, as well as evaluate areas for potential ESG 
improvements. Upon completion of formal ESG diligence, the Portfolio Manager will rate each of the ESG risks 
as Low, Medium or High and come to a conclusion on whether the investment remains appropriate given this 
assessment. The Portfolio Manager will also complete an ESG Action Plan, which outlines steps that the 
company will take going forward to remedy or mitigate any ESG issues or risks deemed unacceptable. These 
elements will be presented to the IC in the Investment Memo (“IM”). 
In areas where the Portfolio Manager identifies high ESG risks, and which require specific and deep 
domain expertise (e.g., supply chain audit), Acumen will typically engage external experts as consultants to 
aid in diligence and verification. Acumen will, to the extent available, attempt to cover the costs of these 
external consultants from the Technical Assistance (“TA”) Facility raised in conjunction with the Fund, but 
such costs will otherwise be borne by the Fund. 
Given that the Fund will be focused on SME, the environmental and social risks are less than compared to 
larger infrastructure projects. Having said that, Acumen does understand these risks as they related to SMEs 
and has an ESG process, outlined above, in place that all investments will have to undergo before Acumen’s 
approves investment in them. This ESG process was built from industry standard practices of the IFC and its 
Performance Standards. Because of the relatively low environmental impact of the SMEs that the Fund will 
target, as well as the limited resources of the SMEs, Acumen does not typically require a formal ESMS at its 
investment companies. However, in situations in which potential more materials ESS risks are identified, 
Acumen would seek to leverage technical assistance funding to enable portfolio companies to implement an 
ESMS and those provide more robust monitoring and reporting capabilities. However, the Fund will adhere to 
Acumen’s ESG diligence and monitoring policies and will thus inherently require the portfolio company to 
provide sufficient information and risk mitigating practices related to ESS, even if the company does not have 
a specialized ESMS in place. 
With specific regard to women, many of Acumen’s investments positively impact women in such areas as 
health, safety, and livelihood. Solar lanterns can replace the use of kerosene, thus making lighting in the 
household higher quality and reducing the fumes that women and children are exposed to.  
Acumen is currently formalizing its Gender Policy, which will outline specific gender issues related to the 
governance and human resource aspects of Acumen the institution, as well as the specific gender indicators 
that the Fund will report on with respects to the gender impact of its portfolio companies. This policy will be 
approved by Acumen’s board and will be posted on the website so it can be seen and reviewed by the public. 
Acumen will have this formal Gender Policy in place before disbursement of any funds from the GCF to 
Acumen.

=== PAGE 39 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 37 
 
 
Regarding gender impact, many of the goods and services provided by the companies the Fund expects to 
invest in will have direct impact on women, such as solar lanterns and home systems which can lead to the 
reduction of kerosene use and related indoor air pollution. Given the direct impact of these goods and 
services on women, many of these companies also hire women employees, providing income and 
empowerment for women. Acumen will seek to understand the impact that its investments have on women 
through company-provided data, diligence visits and company visits by members of the Fund’s investment 
team, and 3rd party research and data collection. Historically, Acumen has conducted its own research on the 
impact on women of certain of its portfolio companies and has also partnered with organizations like the 
International Center for Research on Women to research and better understand gender impact. Acumen 
expects to provide similar research for investments made by the Fund and will share that with the GCF.  
Acumen is working with the International Center for Research on Women (ICRW) to better understand 
how our companies are engaging women, and how engaging women can affect the social and business 
performance of a company. After conducting the broad review of trends in the gender lens impact investment 
sector and assessment of what social enterprises are doing to engage, reach and impact women across 
various sectors, ICRW conducted a deeper analysis of some of the enterprises in which Acumen invests. 
Together with ICRW, we have developed the framework for the study, which will be anchored in identifying 
both the impact case and the business case for targeting women, and how the two can reinforce each other. 
We expect to have the final report in October 2015. The report will offer sector-level insights, identifying not 
only where our investees are currently targeting women but also places of opportunity, things that are not 
yet happening, but should be in order to create impact for women and communities.  
6.4 
Financial Management and Procurement 
Acumen has appropriate internal policies and procedures in place with regards to financial accounting, 
disbursement, wiring and receipt of Fund, and audits of financials. Acumen undergoes a financial audit ever 
year and can share audited financial statements and/or auditor engagement letters upon request. Acumen 
can also share any requested details on internal controls related to disbursement and wiring procedures and 
policies regarding Acumen’s Finance and Audit Committee.  
In its due diligence of investment opportunities, Acumen conducts, and the Fund will conduct, in-depth 
analysis and diligence of the financial and procurement operations of potential portfolio companies. Amongst 
many other items, diligence includes assessment of internal financial controls, relationships with suppliers 
and relevant procurement policies, and accounting systems and reports. Acumen requires that is portfolio 
company have audited financial statements once the company receives investment from Acumen. Acumen 
also ensures that its portfolio companies are in compliance with its anti-money laundering and anti-
corruption policies.  
The Manager plans to utilize investment capital from the Fund for growth-oriented investments in 
portfolio companies that are more developed than start-up enterprises, but are still relatively early-stage, 
high-risk companies in the context of traditional investing. The Manager will target portfolio companies that 
have shown proof of concept, have established business models and that have a clear path towards 
profitability. The Manager will also prioritize a strong management team with a track record of execution and 
operational experience.  
The Fund will seek to make minority (i.e.,less than 50% ownership) equity and equity-linked debt 
investments totaling from $2.0 million to $10.0 million per portfolio company. Detailed investment criteria of 
the Fund with respect to target portfolio companies and investment structures are described in the table 
below.

=== PAGE 40 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 38 
 
 
KSV Target Investment Criteria 
Company Leadership 
 
Experienced entrepreneur with proven ability to execute 
 
Complete or plan for completing management team 
Idea 
 
Proof of concept around business and revenue model 
 
No ambiguity around proving product or market 
Execution* 
 
Clear and quantifiable path to scaling operations and impact 
 
Historical operations showing ability to execute; at least 1 year of 
operations 
Financials* 
 
Revenue generating 
 
Positive gross margins 
Organization 
 
Basic structure and systems in place 
Market & Consumer 
 
Proof of customer adoption and market receptivity 
Competition/Substitution 
 
Identified as a potential leader in the defined market 
Regulatory & Legal 
 
Defined and established legal and regulatory environment 
ESG status 
 
Satisfactory results from environmental, social, and corporate 
governance assessment 
Integrity standards 
 
Satisfactory result from Patriot Act/Anti-Money Laundering checks on 
entrepreneurs, senior management, board members, and existing 
investors  
* Up to 20% of the portfolio companies in which the Program invests may be in an earlier stage; in such cases, 
the investment committee should approve that a company warrants early-stage investments for clear 
reasons, which must be elaborated in the investment memo for the company. 
VII. Risk Assessment and Management 
7.1 
Risk Assessment Summary 
 
As an investment fund focusing on innovative businesses in developing markets, the Fund and the 
portfolio companies in which it plans to invest may face a host of challenges. Acumen believes that these 
challenges can be summarized in three categories, across 1) Execution Challenges and Risks, 2) Financial 
Risks, and 3) Legal and Regulatory Risks. Acumen’s general strategies for risk management in each of these 
risk categories are outlined in the sections below. 
The Managing Director and Investment Director will regularly evaluate the overall risk of the Fund and its 
investments. They will also prepare a quarterly report for the IC, which identifies risks from the previous 
quarter and includes recommendations for procedures to mitigate and address such risks.

=== PAGE 41 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 39 
 
 
7.2 
Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures  
RISK FACTOR 1 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of risk 
Probability 
of risk 
occurring 
Execution Challenges & Risks 
 
The Fund will invest in early stage, innovative 
companies. By definition, these enterprises 
operate with a lot of unknowns around 
business model, company operations, and 
market dynamics. These enterprises may fail 
or may take longer than anticipated to 
achieve financially viable business models 
 
The Fund generally will seek significant 
minority stakes with strong contractual 
rights, though it sometimes may have a 
majority position in consortium with other 
co-investors. As such, the Fund does not 
expect to control the activities of its portfolio 
companies.  
 
Many of the Fund’s investments will involve 
selling and distributing consumer goods in 
rural, off-grid markets. These areas typically 
have very poor infrastructure and accidents 
can happen with respect to damages of goods 
and services while in transport and during / 
after product purchase or installation. 
 
The Fund will invest in enterprises that 
provide high quality products, those 
companies will face competitive pressure 
from cheaper and lower quality products 
 
Products provided by the Fund’s investees 
are intended to last for multiple years. Issues 
related to quality of the products, 
environment and weather, and user error 
could affect the actual useful life of products 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Medium

=== PAGE 42 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 40 
 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Fund has rigorous due diligence processes which include analysis of financial, operational, market and 
ESS issues. The due diligence process provides the Fund with the ability to asses high quality investment 
opportunities and select enterprises with strong management teams, high quality products, and strong 
brand names and reputation. The fund will not only provide investment capital, but will provide strategic 
advice and additional resources through such actions as sitting on the Board of companies, identifying and 
working with co-investors, providing access to local networks of experts and value-add partners, and 
offering specific technical assistance programs. Example of technical assistance programs could include a 
financial reserve to service products after purchase if a company goes bankrupt, training of women to 
become solar technicians, implementation of MIS and ESM systems, market research and impact 
measurement. 
 
 
RISK FACTOR 2 
Description 
Risk category 
Level of risk 
Probability 
of risk 
occurring 
Legal Challenges & Risks 
 
Countries in which the Fund seeks to invest 
lack fully developed legal systems, and many 
of the countries in which the Fund seeks to 
invest control the repatriation of investment 
income, and capital and profit that result from 
foreign investment. Some of the Fund’s 
investments may work in partnership with 
local, regional and/or national governments. 
Risks for corruption and bribery could be 
heightened within these partnerships 
 
Understanding of local legal frameworks in 
multiple countries in East Africa could be 
difficult 
Technical and 
operational 
Medium (5.1-
20% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
In order to mitigate legal risks, Acumen will rely on its experienced, local, in-house legal team as well as 
outside counsel. Acumen’s General Counsel has over 15 years of corporate law experience. Acumen has 
developed strong relationships with global law firms and local law firms in the countries in which Acumen 
invests who provide guidance and support on deal execution and other legal matters. The in-house legal 
team also is involved in deal research, diligence, structuring, closing and as needed, post-investment 
monitoring. The team develops strategies and processes for navigating regulations pertinent to specific 
geographies, industries and situations. Additionally, the legal team works to recommend deal structures 
that minimize legal challenges and risks. With regard to issues of repatriation of investment income and 
other capital, the risk exposure of the Fund of such capital controls seems to be relatively lower in the 
three target countries of Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda compared to other countries in the region. Excerpts

=== PAGE 43 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 41 
 
 
from documents from the US Department of State regarding capital controls in these countries are 
provided below.  
 
Kenya: (http://www.state.gov/e/eb/rls/othr/ics/2012/191175.htm) 
“Kenya’s Foreign Investment Protection Act (FIPA) guarantees capital repatriation and remittance of 
dividends and interest to foreign investors, who are free to convert and repatriate profits including un-
capitalized retained profits (proceeds of an investment after payment of the relevant taxes and the 
principal and interest associated with any loan). Kenya has no restrictions on converting or transferring 
funds associated with investment. Kenyan law requires the declaration of amounts above Ksh 500,000 
(about $5,600) as a formal check against money laundering. Foreign exchange is readily available from 
commercial banks and foreign exchange bureaus and can be freely bought and sold by local and foreign 
investors.” 
Rwanda (http://rwanda.usembassy.gov/investment_climate_.html) 
There is no difficulty obtaining foreign exchange, or transferring funds associated with an investment into 
a usable currency and at a legal market-clearing rate. In 1995, the government abandoned the dollar peg 
and established a floating exchange rate regime, under which all lending and deposit interest rates were 
liberalized. The central bank holds daily foreign exchange sales freely accessed by commercial banks. 
Investors can remit payments only through authorized commercial banks. There is no limit on the inflow of 
funds, although local banks are required to notify the central bank of all transfers over USD 10,000 to 
mitigate the risk of potential money laundering. Additionally, there are some restrictions on the outflow of 
export earnings. Companies generally must repatriate export earnings within three months after the goods 
cross the border. Tea exporters must deposit sales proceeds shortly after auction in Mombasa. Repatriated 
export earnings deposited in commercial banks must match the exact declaration the exporter used 
crossing the border. Rwandans working overseas can make remittances to their home country without 
impediment. 
It usually takes two to three days to transfer money using SWIFT financial services. Other financial services 
companies such as Western Union and Money Gram are also available to investors seeking to transfer 
funds. 
Since January 2007, the Rwandan franc (Rwf) has been convertible for essentially all business transactions. 
Rwanda has a liberal monetary system and complies with International Monetary Fund (IMF) Article VIII 
and all Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) convertibility requirements. 
 
Uganda (http://www.state.gov/e/eb/rls/othr/ics/2013/204753.htm) 
Uganda keeps open capital accounts, and Ugandan law imposes no restrictions on capital transfers in and 
out of Uganda. Investors can obtain foreign exchange and make transfers at commercial banks without 
approval from the Bank of Uganda in order to repatriate profits and dividends, and make payments for 
imports and services. Investors have reported no problems with their ability to perform currency 
transactions. 
 
The Fund is registered in Mauritius as the country has a well-developed regulatory framework and 
understanding of investment fund operations due the vast amount of funds that are already registered in 
the country. Mauritius also has tax treaties with several countries, which is beneficial to investors in the 
Fund. Non-US investors prefer investment funds that are registered in Mauritius as opposed other areas 
because of the tax treaties and the favorable regulatory environment.

=== PAGE 44 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 42 
 
 
RISK FACTOR 3 
Description 
Risk 
category 
Level of risk 
Probability 
of risk 
occurring 
 
Exit and Valuation Risks 
 
The Fund will invest in companies in markets 
which have limited options for liquidity events / 
exits due to lack of developed financial markets, 
including lack of an abundance of private equity 
and venture capital firms 
 
Many of the countries in which the Fund seeks to 
invest control, to some extent, the repatriation of 
investment income, and capital and profit that 
result from foreign investment.  
 
Accounting standards in the countries in which 
the Fund seeks to invest do not generally 
correspond to international accounting standards, 
and national accounting, auditing and financial 
reporting standards are not yet in place in many 
target countries Many portfolio investments will 
generate revenue that is denominated in foreign 
currency, and changes to exchange rates may 
affect the value of the Fund’s investments in 
portfolio companies. 
 
Financial 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
In order to mitigate financial risks, the Fund expects to develop investment structures reflective of market 
conditions. For example, the Fund wil invest equity capital when appropriate, but will also look to invest in 
debt instruments and equity-like instruments that have a pre-determined liquidation date to help improve 
the likelihood of financial exits. The Fund also expects to capture ongoing upside through vehicles such as 
dividends and warrants to help offset the unpredictability of markets. The Investment Team of the Fund 
will have ongoing relationships with potential strategic acquirers of portfolio companies and growth stage 
investment firms to help improve exit opportunities for the Fund’s investments. At times the Fund may 
employ currency-hedging strategies if those are available and affordable. The Fund will carefully monitor 
investments and utilize regional team to stay abreast of changing markets and company conditions. The 
Fund will require its portfolio companies to have financial audits in order to improve transparency of 
financials and accounting systems.

=== PAGE 45 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 43 
 
 
VIII. Logic Framework 
8.1 
Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund Level 
Objective: Shift to low-emission sustainable development pathways 
This Fund will be the world’s first climate change fund that is focused on SMEs that serve BoP populations in 
developing countries. With partnership from the GCF, this Fund will allow Acumen to develop a strong track 
record and will enable Acumen to raise future, larger funds to invest in more companies that are aligned with 
the GCF’s impact goals. 
 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-
term  
Final 
Fund-level impacts 
M1.0 Reduced 
emissions through 
increased low-
emission energy 
access and power 
generation 
 
Tonnes of 
carbon 
dioxide 
equivalent 
(tCO2eq) 
 
 
 
Company 
data and 3rd 
party 
validation 
and 
measurement 
0 
 
 
1,500,000 
tons of 
CO2 
reduced 
Each 
kerosene 
lantern 
displayed 
equals 
reducing 0.1 
tons of CO2 
per year 
 
8.1.1 
Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Programme Level 
 
Given the nature of equity investment, output could not be defined based on log-frame theory approach. 
Nonetheless, once the equity investment will be delivered, ACUMEN will track the number of sales/services 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-
term  
Final 
Project/programme 
outcomes 
Outcomes that contribute to Fund-level impacts 
M6.0 Increased 
number of small, 
medium and large 
low-emission power 
suppliers 
Number of 
households, and 
individuals 
(males and 
females) with 
improved 
access to low-
emission 
energy sources 
Number of 
the direct 
beneficiaries 
 
0 
 
15 million 
individuals 
The number 
of household 
(5 
individuals at 
average) to 
purchase 
Solar Home 
System

=== PAGE 46 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 44 
 
 
delivered by each beneficiary company. This includes track social impact metrics within the portfolio of 
companies where ACUMEN has invested 
8.2 
Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
Acumen will track social impact metrics of the portfolio companies and report those to the GCF. Acumen 
will work with the GCF to define the appropriate metrics. Potential metrics could include number of lives 
impacted, number of individuals/households with improved energy products, number of tons of CO2 reduced, 
amount of renewable energy generated, and increased income of smallholder farmers. 
Along with detailed ESG analysis and monitoring, Portfolio Managers will work to understand the 
potential impact of a portfolio company as a function of multiple components, including: Focus on the Poor, 
Breadth of Impact and Depth of Impact; and appropriate metrics related to climate change mitigation and 
adaptation as defined by Acumen and GCF. Acumen currently has a dedicated Impact team that can work with 
Portfolio Managers and portfolio companies to assess the social impact of its portfolio companies. Portfolio 
Managers will have access to Acumen’s knowledge and resources and will work with the Fund’s portfolio 
companies and external parties to assess social impact through the Portfolio Managers’ own diligence and 
analysis, metrics and insights provided by portfolio companies and partnerships with third parties interested 
in completing research and field studies. 
Through close relationships with portfolio companies, developed in part by obtaining board seats or 
board observer roles for information and access to the extent such roles are available, Acumen will monitor 
numerous factors in relation to the health and activities of the Fund’s portfolio companies. These factors 
include standard financial metrics, social performance tracking, ESG metrics, competitive positioning and 
ongoing market trends in the industries and geographies in which the Fund’s portfolio companies operate, in 
each case as reported and audited by portfolio companies. 
With respect to financial reporting, Acumen will pay particular attention to top and bottom line trends, 
cash balance, cash flow requirements as well as any other significant changes in financial performance and 
health. Acumen will also monitor operational metrics and ongoing working capital needs. With respect to 
social performance tracking, Acumen will monitor metrics which are agreed upon with each portfolio 
company’s management at the time of initial investment. These typically include units sold as a proxy for 
Lives Impacted as well as other important social data points that are gathered as part of ongoing operations. 
Acumen will actively monitor ESG matters in portfolio companies from point of investment onwards. This 
will typically include 1) monitoring ESG risk areas, 2) assessing progress made on the ESG Action Plan, and 3) 
evaluating any changes in the business, which might create additional ESG risks. The Portfolio Manager is 
expected to report all serious ESG issues (such as labor or manufacturing accidents) to Acumen. Additionally, 
Portfolio Managers and the Managing Director, with the support of Acumen’s investor relations professionals, 
will update the investors on ESG progress, risks and other pertinent ESG updates as part of the Annual 
Review process (described below). 
 
To monitor ongoing market trends, Acumen will typically inquire about key hires and departures, 
strategic priorities and any ongoing regulatory and legal processes. In some cases, the Fund’s investments 
will be structured in tranches, with specific requirements for additional disbursements. In these scenarios, 
Acumen will monitor progress against established milestones in order to anticipate future disbursements.

=== PAGE 47 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 45 
 
 
Specific documents, systems and processes used to carry out the above monitoring include: 
 
a) 100-Day Plan 
Portfolio Managers for Fund investments will develop a “100-Day Plan” at the time of an investment in 
collaboration with the management of the relevant portfolio company. This document identifies the key near-
term action items the company has committed to completing, as well as the challenges the company may face 
and the actions that can be taken to mitigate those challenges. The Fund’s internal processes will require a 
100-Day Plan to be drafted before the Fund will disburse funds. The 100-Day Plan will typically target three 
to four key priorities that can each be broken down to two to three specific tasks with clear timeframes and 
lines of responsibility. Examples of areas that the 100-Day Plan may focus on include corporate governance, 
management capacity building, sales and marketing, and operations and information management. The 
Portfolio Manager will monitor the progress of the action items included in the 100-Day Plan, typically 
through monthly reports from the portfolio company along with general communication with its 
management. 
 
b) Performance Management and Metrics 
i. 
eFront FrontInvest 
The Manager will utilize eFront’s FrontInvest product, a leading portfolio management platform for private 
equity and venture capital firms. This platform will be used to house all data related to pipeline tracking, deal 
execution and management, and portfolio level analysis and valuation. The platform will also be used to 
produce regular reports, including on portfolio company operations and impact.  
 
c) Annual Review Process 
The annual review process is a culmination of the monthly and quarterly reviews that occur throughout 
the year. The purpose of the annual review is to assess the performance of the Fund’s portfolio companies on 
financial, operational and social and environmental impact metrics; to identify those portfolio companies that 
are facing significant challenges as well as those that have seen superior performance; to foster detailed 
discussion and thought amongst the Investment Team members and the IC as to how best to support the 
portfolio companies going forward; and ultimately to inform strategic decisions related to the overall 
portfolio strategy.  
 
The annual review document is supplemented by a Post-Investment Management Plan (“Post Plan”) that 
outlines an engagement strategy with respect to each investment. The Post Plan is developed along the same 
timeline as the annual review document and is discussed in the same forum. The Post Plan identifies key post-
investment management priorities and outlines quarterly deliverables for each. The annual review 
documents will also include an update report on ESG matters. 
In conjunction with the above-described annual review, the Investment Director will conduct a review of 
the Fund’s underlying portfolio investments and make any adjustments deemed necessary to the valuation of 
each of the investments, including write-downs of any impaired investments. Acumen will also host an annual 
investor conference for the investors.

=== PAGE 48 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 46 
 
 
No-objection letters issued by the national designated authorities

=== PAGE 49 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 47

=== PAGE 50 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 48

=== PAGE 51 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.05/Rev.01 
Page 49 
 
 
 
 
_____________
