=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: Sunny Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 11 for Word
producer: Adobe PDF Library 11.0
creationDate: D:20151009190618+09'00'
modDate: D:20151015165130+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
∗ The agenda item number will be determined when the final sequence of items in the provisional agenda is 
confirmed by the Co-Chairs. 
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum 
Funding proposal package for FP001 
GCF/B.11/04/Add.01 
15 October 2015 
Meeting of the Board 
2 – 5 November 2015 
Livingstone, Republic of Zambia 
Provisional Agenda Item 14∗ 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following two parts: 
(a) 
A funding proposal entitled “Building the Resilience of Wetlands in the Province of 
Datem del Marañón in Peru” submitted by Profonanpe; and 
(b) 
A no-objection letter issued by the national designated authority or focal point. 
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national 
designated authority or focal point, respectively.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.01 
Page b 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
No-objection letter issued by the focal point

=== PAGE 4 ===
Contents 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
Section B 
FINANCING / COST INFORMATION  
Section C 
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
Section D 
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
Section E 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
Section F 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
Section G 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
Section H 
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
Section I 
ANNEXES 
Note to accredited entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
•
Sections A, B, D, E and H of the funding proposal require detailed inputs from the accredited entity. For all
other sections, including the appraisal summary in section F, accredited entities have discretion in how they
wish to present the information. Accredited entities can either directly incorporate information into this
proposal, or provide summary information in the proposal and cross references to other project documents
such as project appraisal documents.
•
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) is expected to not exceed 50.
Please submit the completed form to: 
<fundingproposal@gcfund.org> 
Please use the following naming convention for the filename: 
“[FP]-[Agency Short Name]-[Date]-[Serial Number]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 1 OF 101 A 
A.1. Brief Project / Programme Information 
A.1.1. Project / programme title 
Building the Resilience of Wetlands in the Province of Datem del Marañón, Peru 
A.1.2. Project or programme 
Project 
A.1.3. Country (ies) / region 
Peru 
A.1.4. National designated 
authority(ies) 
Ministry of Environment (MINAM) 
A.1.5. Accredited entity 
PROFONANPE 
A.1.5.a. Access modality 
☒  Direct 
☐  International 
A.1.6. Executing entity / beneficiary 
Executing Entity: PROFONANPE 
Beneficiary 20,413 direct and indirect beneficiaries from 120 indigenous 
communities of the Pastaza and the Marañón–Morona Basins, Provincial 
Municipality of Datem del Marañón 
A.1.7. Project size category (Total 
investment, million USD) 
☒  Micro (≤10)
☐  Medium (50<x≤250)
☐  Small (10<x≤50)
☐  Large (>250)
A.1.8. Mitigation / adaptation focus 
☐  Mitigation 
☐  Adaptation ☒  Cross-cutting 
A.1.9. Date of submission 
15 July 2015 
A.1.10. 
Project 
contact 
details 
Contact person, 
position 
Mr. Alberto Paniagua, Executive Director 
Organization 
PROFONANPE 
Email address 
<apanigua@profonanpe.org.pe> 
Telephone number 
+51 1 218 1097 
Mailing address 
Av. Javier Prado Oeste 2378, San Isidro, Lima, Peru 
A.1.11. Results areas (mark all that apply)
Reduced emissions from: 
☐
Energy access and power generation 
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.) 
☐
Low-emission transport 
(E.g. on-grid, micro-grid or off-grid solar, wind, geothermal, etc.) 
☐
Buildings, cities and industries and appliances 
(E.g. new and retrofitted energy-efficient buildings, energy-efficient equipment for companies and supply chain management, etc.)  
☒
Forestry and land use 
(E.g. forest conservation and management, agroforestry, agricultural irrigation, water treatment and management, etc.) 
Increased resilience of: 
☒
Most vulnerable people and communities 
(E.g. mitigation of operational risk associated with climate change – diversification of supply sources and supply chain management, 
relocation of manufacturing facilities and warehouses, etc.) 
☐
Health and well-being, and food and water security 
(E.g. climate-resilient crops, efficient irrigation systems, etc.) 
☐
Infrastructure and built environment 
(E.g. sea walls, resilient road networks, etc.) 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
(E.g. ecosystem conservation and management, ecotourism, etc.) 
☐

=== PAGE 6 ===
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 2 OF 101 A 
A.2. Project / Programme Executive Summary (max 300 words) 
The project seeks to enhance the resilience capacity of the indigenous communities living in the rich carbon stock 
wetland ecosystem in the Province of Datem del Marañón (PDM) in the Region 1 of Loreto, Peru, improve their 
livelihoods and to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from deforestation. The target population is primarily low-
income indigenous peoples from seven ethnic groups. The project aims to create social capital and agreed plans to 
entrust the management of the natural resource base to the indigenous communities. 
The proposed activities seek to: (a) facilitate the participatory preparation of land-use and operational management 
plans; (b) entrust natural resources management to indigenous communities and empower women in the decision-
making process; and (c) strengthen and expand commercially viable and sustainable bio-businesses of non-timber 
forest products. All activities foster empowerment and community ownership, improve livelihoods, enhance learning 
opportunities, and consolidate indigenous peoples’ basic rights. All the proposed activities are community-based 
adaptation and climate change mitigation good practices, which are complemented by strong monitoring and evaluation 
systems. The project includes a science and technology component to enhance the knowledge base in order to guide 
future activities aimed at preserving the carbon stock and enhancing community well-being. 
The total carbon stock in the swamps of Datem del Marañón is estimated at around 3,780 million tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (Mt CO2 eq). Based on data provided by MINAM, a deforestation reference scenario for the project 
area was defined as the average of the last 10 years of observation. The estimated avoided deforestation over a 10-
year period amounts to 140.6 hectares (ha) of aguajales (palm swamp forest) and 4,720 ha of terra firma forests, 
equivalent to 2.63 Mt CO2 eq. 
Climate change is expected to have profound impacts on forest and swamp ecosystems, with more frequent droughts 
and changes in primary productivity affecting peoples and ecosystems. 
A.3. Project/Programme Milestone 
Expected approval from accredited entity’s 
Board (if applicable) 
6 November 2015 
Expected financial close (if applicable) 
Not applicable 
Estimated implementation start and end dates 
Start: 1 March 2016 
End: 31 February 2021 
Project/programme lifespan 
___5___ years ___0___ months 
1 In this document, the term “region” corresponds to that concept of subnational government as defined according to 
Peruvian legislation.

=== PAGE 7 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 3 OF 101 C 
B.1. Description of Financial Elements of the Project / Programme 
According to Profonanpe’s administrative guidelines, project management is done by results. Goals, products deadlines 
and the annual operational budget are programed in an Annual Operation Plan (POA) according to templates 
established by Profonanpe. This planning instrument must be approved by the Project Administration Council (PAC) or 
Steering Committee. It facilitates monitoring and evaluation of the project and helps reaching expected results and 
objectives.  
Cost breakdown 
The project’s cost structure is shown in table B.1.1, in which funding is presented in seven categories that will be 
described in greater detail in this section. A detailed budget is presented in the annex section to the feasibility study. 
Table B.1.1. Project cost structure 
(Millions United States dollars) 
ITEMS 
GCF 
PROFONANPE 
KOREAN 
GOV. 
TOTAL 
A. Direct labour 
0.93 
1.02 
1.95 
B. Travel, transportation and per diem 
0.41 
0.41 
C. Workshops and trainings 
0.93 
0.93 
D. Procurement (consulting, research, etc.) 
3.46 
0.06 
1.80 
5.32 
E. Expendable supplies 
0.40 
0.40 
C. Communications 
0.08 
0.08 
G. Other direct costs 
0.02 
0.02 
TOTAL ESTIMATED COST 
6.24 
1.07 
1.80 
9.11 
   Note: Totals may not be exact due to rounding. 
Direct labour 
The project will have eight full-time employees, six of whom will work in the field and two in head office. Only two staff 
members will perform administrative and clerical work and will be based in the field. The rest will be professional staff 
conducting technical assistance work: four of them in the field and two in head office. The project will have a Project 
Manager who will be based in the field and will conduct short visits to head office, supported by three professionals: one 
in charge of natural resource management; other overseeing bio-businesses; and the third in charge of sociocultural 
aspects and capacity-building. The team in the field will be supported by two professionals in head office: one focused 
on climate change analysis, and the other focused on knowledge management, and monitoring and evaluation. It is 
important to stress that the remoteness of the project area and the difficult nature of the living conditions would need to 
be compensated by appropriate salaries for the highly qualified personnel required for successful project 
implementation. 
Travel, transportation and per diems 
The team will travel constantly to the region and will use its office in San Lorenzo as its base of operations. Visits to 
communities will be conducted using a boat owned by the project and by rentals of boats or airplanes as needed. Once 
a month, each member of long-term personnel will travel to and from the field and once there will travel constantly to 
visit communities across the province’s seven territorial units. Long-term personnel as well as short-term consultants will 
stay at the project’s house in San Lorenzo and will stay in hotels during their visits to various communities. Project-
budgeted travel and per diems take into account the most recent information gathered in the region. The budget also 
includes travel outside the country for short business development visits by delegations of community representatives

=== PAGE 8 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 4 OF 101 C 
from bio-businesses, to attend trade fairs or to meet potential buyers or investors, as long as the production and 
technology applied is tested locally.  
Workshops and trainings 
In addition to technical assistance work that will be delivered, with an emphasis on on-the-job training, the project will 
conduct formal training and capacity-building activities under three modalities: (a) regional training delivered by staff or 
consultants in the field; (b) training in Lima, Peru, or other cities delivered by academic institutions or other 
organizations; and (c) scholarship programmes for selected participants. Courses delivered in San Lorenzo will include 
participants from selected communities and will cover a variety of topics related to specific tasks under project 
implementation. The budget includes travel costs and per diems for lodging, meals and incidentals, rental of venues, 
materials and equipment. Scholarships will cover travel for participants, tuition, room and board, and materials. 
Procurement 
Procurement costs include various categories, such as office equipment for the Lima and San Lorenzo offices; engines 
for and refurbishment of the existing boat; software and digital information mainly related to Geographic Information 
System (GIS) and geospatial information; and communications and marketing using digital and printed materials. Four 
important categories are included: (a) consulting services; (b) research; (c) investments in bio-businesses; and (d) 
special programmes funded by co-financing institutions. Consulting activities are divided into five groups, including 
studies related to Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for indigenous groups, land-use management plans, bio-
businesses (process and marketing), natural resources plans, as well as land titling consulting expenses. Research 
activities will be focused on spatial data collection, focus groups, climate change and conservation analysis, and the 
collection and analysis of flora and fauna data. Investments in bio-businesses include purchases of equipment, 
maintenance costs, spare parts, and other expenses for inputs, registration, operating capital, and fuel and energy 
consumption. A separate agreement is in negotiation with the Korean Agency for the implementation of solar-energy 
studies for bio-businesses.  
Expendable supplies 
The expendable supplies category includes those related to the Lima and San Lorenzo offices, such as office supplies, 
utilities, office equipment, rent and miscellaneous. 
Communications 
This 
category 
includes 
expenses 
for 
Internet/telephone/fax/SIM 
cards, 
mobile 
phones and other expenses (radio, etc.). 
Other direct costs 
These 
include 
medical 
exams 
and 
immunizations, 
report 
preparation 
and 
reproduction costs, and translation services. 
Allocation of funds per component 
The project allocates most of the funds, or 51 
per cent of the total, to activities related to 
Component 3 output: resilience built through 
sustainable bio-businesses in natural resources 
management areas. 
Component 1 output: strengthened institutional capacity in government organizations has the project’s third largest 
Figure R.1.1. Allocation of funds per component 
(in million USD)

=== PAGE 9 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 5 OF 101 
 
C 
allocation of resources: USD 1.20 million or 13.2 per cent. This component is geared toward supporting government 
organizations in the development of the land-use plan (Plan de Ordenamiento Territorial - POT), which is the 
consolidation of all EMPs. The project will support the organization of meetings and the dissemination of plans from the 
seven different territorial units. Other activities include the establishment new environmental conservation areas (Áreas 
de Conservación Ambiental - ACA) and the support for the climate change (CC) strategy for the province as well as the 
provincial ecological and economic zoning (Zonificación Ecológica y Económica - ZEE) development. 
Component 2 output: strengthened capacity of community-based institutions is the second largest component in terms 
of the allocation of resources with USD 2.30 million dedicated to supporting community based organizations mainly to 
develop their EMPs for indigenous groups and allocating funds for studies, training activities and meetings at which to 
discuss the plan. Other relevant activities in this category include the provision of support to indigenous associations that 
will facilitate the implementation of bio-businesses. The expansion of bio-businesses involves the implementation 
operational plans for natural resources as well as the development of the management tools of the ACA. 
Component 3 output: resilience built through sustainable bio-businesses in natural resources management areas has 
the largest percentage with 51 per cent of the total budget and is fully aimed at providing support for bio-businesses, 
including for activities such as providing technical assistance in the market evaluation of a bio-business product; the 
design and development of a business plan; and support for implementation, including investments in equipment, 
maintenance, supplies, marketing nationally and internationally; and management, especially in finance and accounting.  
Under this component, the Government of the Republic of Korea will provide USD 1.8 million in co-finance to assist bio-
businesses in developing clean energy solutions for their operations. This component is important so as to decrease the 
emissions and pollution impacts of the alternative diesel generators; however less than full materialization of this co-
financing would not cause the failure of the bio-business component.  
Component 4 output: science, technology, knowledge management and monitoring and evaluation systems established 
has 10.5 per cent of the total budget and includes all expenses for communications, promotion materials, production of 
printed and digital media, systems to collect and systemize reports, analysis and studies, and all other products related 
to the website. 
Allocation by type of expense 
Most project expenses (41 per cent) are allocated 
to the funding of investments in the bio-businesses 
sector, 
including 
equipment 
purchases, 
maintenance costs, purchase of spare parts, and 
other expenses for registration, working capital, 
and fuel and energy consumption. The second 
expense category with 29 per cent is for the 
provision of technical assistance services, including 
all studies needed to develop plans for the seven 
territorial units and the POT at provincial level. 
Funds within this category are allocated to pay full-
time technical staff working in the field and at 
PROFONANPE headquarters, as well as short-
term consultants (Figure B.1.2).  
Allocation by activity 
The majority of funds are allocated to the implementation of natural resource operational plans, followed by the 
allocation of funds to the creation of bio-business units and solar energy. Other activities with a significant percentage of 
allocations are the development of EMPs and innovations in bio-business. 
Figure B.1.2. Allocation of funds per type of expense 
(In % of total project fund)

=== PAGE 10 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 6 OF 101 
 
C 
Table B.1.2 presents the allocation of funds per activity. 
 
Table B.1.2. Allocation of funds per activity 
(Millions of United States dollars) 
COMPONENT 
SUB-COMPONENT 
GCF 
PROFON
ANPE 
KOREA 
TOTAL 
AMOUNT 
COMPONENT 1 
OUTPUTS: 
Strengthened 
Institutional 
Capacity in 
Government 
Organizations 
Indigenous peoples registration 
0.07 
 
 
0.07 
Land-use plan (POT) development 
0.15 
0.06 
 
0.21 
New ACA establishment 
0.12 
0.05 
 
0.17 
Conflict-resolution authority granting to ACAs 
0.04 
 
 
0.04 
Provincial climate change (CC) strategy development 
0.04 
 
 
0.04 
Climate monitoring system implementation 
0.13 
0.06 
 
0.19 
Provincial ecological and economic zoning (ZEE) development 
0.21 
0.09 
 
0.29 
Region's CC strategy updating 
0.07 
 
 
0.07 
Development of white papers on legislation for resource 
management 
0.04 
 
 
0.04 
Produce GIS-based information for environmental monitoring  
0.08 
 
 
0.08 
   Total 
0.95 
0.26 
- 
1.20 
COMPONENT 2 
OUTPUTS: 
Strengthened 
capacity of 
community based 
Institutions 
CC observatory creation 
0.12 
 
 
0.12 
Implementation of natural resources operational plans 
0.85 
0.28 
 
1.13 
Development and implementation of ACAs' management tools 
0.28 
 
 
0.28 
Periodic updates of ACAs' monitoring of management plans 
0.16 
 
 
0.16 
Associations creation 
0.12 
 
 
0.12 
Environmental management plan (EMP) for indigenous groups 
0.43 
0.08 
 
0.51 
   Total 
1.94 
0.36 
- 
2.30 
COMPONENT 3 
OUTPUTS: 
Resilience built 
through 
sustainable bio-
businesses in 
natural resources 
management 
areas 
Creation of financially sustainable bio-businesses  
1.22 
0.14 
 
1.35 
Bio-businesses clean energy solutions 
 
 
1.80 
1.80 
Bio-business initiatives using innovations in production 
methods and tools 
0.56 
 
 
0.56 
Development of commercialization strategies  
0.32 
 
 
0.32 
Introduction of certification programs 
0.32 
 
 
0.32 
Establishing international commercial links 
0.28 
 
 
0.28 
   Total 
2.70 
0.14 
1.80 
4.64 
COMPONENT 4 
OUTPUTS: 
Science, 
technology, 
knowledge 
management and 
monitoring and 
evaluation 
systems 
established 
Design of technology enhancement for productive bio-
businesses 
0.10 
 
 
0.10 
Hydrological modelling 
0.13 
 
 
0.13 
Development flood and drought contingency plans 
0.16 
 
 
0.16 
Systematization of anthropological, economic and 
management observations 
0.07 
 
 
0.07 
Project description, lessons learned and monitoring and 
evaluation 
0.02 
0.31 
 
0.33 
Communication strategy development 
0.07 
 
 
0.07 
Dissemination brochures production and distribution 
0.06 
 
 
0.06 
Website development 
0.03 
 
 
0.03 
Project reports distributed 
0.03 
 
 
0.03 
    Total 
0.65 
0.31 
- 
0.96 
GRAND TOTAL 
 
6.24 
1.07 
1.80 
9.11 
                Note: Totals may not be exact due to rounding

=== PAGE 11 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 7 OF 101 
 
C 
 
B.2. Project Financing Information 
 
Financial Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor 
Pricing 
(a) Total 
project 
financing 
(a) = (b) + (c) 
9.11 
million USD 
($) 
 
(b) 
Requested 
GCF amount 
 
(i) Senior loans 
(ii) Subordinated loans 
(iii) Equity 
(iv) Guarantees 
(v) Reimbursable grants 
* 
(vi) Grants * 
 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
………………… 
 
6.24 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
million USD 
($) 
(  )  years 
(  )  years 
 
 
 
 
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % Internal rate 
of return (IRR) 
 
 
 
 
Total requested 
(i+ii+iii+iv+v+vi) 
6.24 
million USD 
($) 
 
(c) Co-
financing 
 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Name of 
Institution 
Tenor 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Grant 
Grant 
Grant 
Grant 
1.07 
1.80 
 
million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) 
million USD 
($) 
PROFONANP
E 
Government of
the Republic 
of Korea 
 
(  )  
years 
(  )  
years 
 
(   ) %  
(   ) %  
(   ) % IRR 
 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Options 
Lead financing institution: PROFONANPE  
Additional information can be found in the feasibility study and letters of commitment for co-financing the annex. A
detailed description of disbursements related to milestones is presented in table 5 of the feasibility study. 
B.3. Fee Arrangement (if applicable) 
Fee arrangement for the proposed project is to be aligned with the Board’s decision on fees, which is expected to be 
taken at the eleventh meeting of the Board. 
 
PROFONANPE estimates indirect costs are equivalent to 10 per cent of total project budget for managing and 
administration services. The estimate is based on the usual expenses of PROFONANPE, including management, 
administration and accounting fees. PROFONANPE will make no other charges to project resources unless they are 
clearly identified as a direct cost strictly related to project activities or products. 
B.4. Financial Market Overview (if applicable) 
No other potential funding sources have been identified. Climate change mitigation activities have concentrated
resources in the Green Climate Fund (GCF) as a strategy to centralize the decision-making process, thus providing

=== PAGE 12 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 8 OF 101 
 
C 
clear, transparent and fact-based guidance and developing funding criteria through a consensus-building process
between donors and developed and developing nations. 
Indigenous people lack access to finance, often not even being in the public registry which is a fundamental requirement
to gain funding. In addition, bio-businesses are not attractive investment opportunities for banks because of their high
risk. Due to this, private sector financing is not available. The project, however, will aim to address these barriers in order 
to allow members of the indigenous community to access funding.  
PROFONANPE has sought financial support to co-finance the proposed activities. Only the Government of the 
Republic of Korea has agreed to support activities under Component 3 – resilience built through sustainable bio-
businesses in natural resources management areas, through a technology-enhancement grant. 
 
 
C.1. Strategic Context 
 
The project is located in the western middle portion of the Amazon Basin, in the Province of Datem del Marañón, Loreto 
Region, Peru. The main feature of the project area is the presence of the alluvial cone of the Pastaza–Marañón Rivers. 
This alluvial cone is home to large extensions of swamps, swamp forests, lakes and floodplains partially inundated each 
year. Associated with these landforms are rich organic soils, better classified as peat. Most of the area is covered by 
forest, with some areas dedicated to subsistence farming and cattle ranching. 
San Lorenzo is the seat of the provincial government, with a population of 6,034 – 12 per cent of the provincial 
population of 49,446 (2007 census). All other towns and villages are smaller, with populations of fewer than 2,000. 
Datem del Marañón’s population is distributed in 284 population centres. Poverty affects over 75 per cent of the 
population, while extreme poverty affects 42 per cent, reaching 61 per cent in Morona (the country’s third-poorest 
district). It is estimated that 22,329 people speak Spanish as their main language; the remainder of the population – 
over half –only speak their native language. Seven indigenous peoples live in the province: Achuar, Awajún, Chapra, 
Kandozi, Quechua, Wampis and Shawi, each characterized as having its own territory, culture and language. Each of 
these indigenous peoples traditionally belongs to an ethnic group. The ultimate authority of native or indigenous 
communities is vested in the apu or curaca (native terms for the leader of the local indigenous communities). 
It should be noted that the mestizo (mixed race) population is growing faster than that of indigenous communities, and 
includes in-migration from other regions. This creates tensions over access to land and other natural resources, forests, 
fisheries, mining and oil extraction. 
The carbon stock 
In the Amazon Basin, researchers (such as Saatchi, Baccini and Mitchard) have indicated the existence of large stocks 
in the form of carbon stored in peatlands. Recent work by Draper et al. (2014)2 on the Pastaza–Marañón Basin (PMB) 
revealed the presence of extensive and deep accumulations of peat that contain around 3.14 Pg C in an area of 35,600 
km2. 
These results highlight the occurrence of different peat formations. In the PMB, peat has been found beneath 
aguajales, varillal (“pole” forests) and almost entirely herbaceous ‘open’ communities. Its vegetation types and the 
amount of associated below-ground carbon have the potential to guide regional land-use planning exercises to 
2 Draper FC, Roucoux KH, Lawson  IT, Mitchard ETA, Honorio Coronado EN, Lähteenoja O, Torres Montenegro L, 
Valderrama Sandoval E,  Zaráte R and Baker TR. 2014. The distribution and amount of carbon in the largest 
peatland complex in Amazonia. Environmental Research Letters 9 (124017) (12pp)

=== PAGE 13 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 9 OF 101 
 
C 
minimize the risks of disturbing and/or provoking large-scale carbon losses. 
The main results are summarized in table C.1.1 below: 
Table C.1.1. Summary of above- and below-ground carbon stocks in different peatland vegetation types within 
the Pastaza–Marañón Basin and mean values 
Peatland 
ecosystem type 
Area  
(km2) 
Peat 
thickness 
(cm) 
Carbon (C) 
content (%) 
Above-
ground C 
(t/ha) 
Below-
ground C 
(t/ha) 
Total C  
(t/ha) 
Pole forest 
3,686.0 
315 
50.5 
81 
1,340 
1,422 
Palm swamp 
27,732.0 
173 
44.0 
95 
748 
842 
Open peatland 
4,181.0 
265 
48.5 
662 
662 
Terra firma forests 
63–190 
132 
250 
 
The Amazon peatlands in Peru remain almost entirely intact, although they face an increasing range of threats, 
including degradation from large-scale cutting of palm trees for fruit, hydrocarbon extraction, expansion of the 
agricultural frontier, illegal logging and palm oil plantation expansion. We therefore suggest that the peatlands of the 
PMB should be a priority for carbon-focused conservation strategies. 
PDM has an area of 4,766,879 ha, of which 1,226,646 ha are aguajales, based on current data provided by MINAM. 
The carbon stock stored as carbon in the swamps in Datem del Marañón is estimated at around 1,032 Mt, including 
above- and below-ground mean carbon content (table C.1.1). 
Draper et al.’s research (2014) was selected to assess the carbon stock in the area of interest, based on the following 
considerations: (a) research and field studies had been conducted in the project area; and (b) several remote-sensing 
products were combined to increase reliability in determining forest/peatland categories; (c) the completeness of the 
fieldwork, which included four categories of data: (i) 218 ground reference points, used for remote-sensing 
classification; (ii) 24 forest census plots, used to estimate the quantities of above-ground carbon; (iii) 218 peat-thickness 
measurement points, used to determine the quantities of below-ground carbon; and (iv) 33 peat cores, from which C 
content and dry bulk density were measured. 
Threats to carbon stock 
The following specific threats to the existence of the large carbon stock in the Province of Datem del Marañón’s forests 
and aguajales have been identified: 
Deforestation. The MINAM National Directorate for Territorial Planning designed a deforestation map (2012) which 
indicated that deforestation had reached 8,033,216 ha by 2009 at national level. This suggests that the deforestation 
rate was 91,100 ha/year between 2000 and 2005, and had increased to 163,300 ha/year between 2005 and 2009 
(MINAM 2013), amounting to a 123,000 ha/year rate for 2000–2009. The main deforestation spots are located in the 
lower and mid-altitude areas of the mountainous forests in the regions of Cajamarca, Amazonas and San Martín and in 
the terraces and low hills of the regions of Loreto and Ucayali (lowland forest). The regions with the highest 
deforestation rates, according to a 1995 forest map, are San Martín (57,521 ha/year) and Loreto (54,712 ha/year) 
(MINAM 2009). Nevertheless, the 2009 deforestation map suggests that for the 2000–2009 period, regional 
deforestation rates decreased to 17,395 ha/year in San Martín and 23,454 ha/year in Loreto. Loreto’s deforestation 
accounts for nearly 20 per cent of the overall deforestation for this period. From 2009 to 2011, the highest rates were 
found in San Martín, Loreto and Ucayali (table C.1.2).

=== PAGE 14 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 10 OF 101 
 
C 
The project will work in Province of the Datem del Maranon (PDM) in 
the Loreto region. The historical deforestation statistics have been 
estimated by MINAM and provided to PROFONANPE for this 
proposal, as indicated in figure C.1.1 and in map 10.4 in section I. 
The data indicate that in this century the average deforestation rate at 
provincial level is 2,234 ha/year and the loss of aguajales averages 
102 ha/year. The historical loss of aguajales is depicted in figure 
C.1.2. The direct causes associated with the historical deforestation 
in PDM are the expansion of the agricultural frontier by new settlers 
to the province, the exploitation of forests in indigenous lands by 
intermediaries and with the consent of some members of the 
communities, and the application of traditional practices for collecting 
the fruit from palm trees by cutting the trees. Intermediaries have no 
incentives to apply sustainable practices because they have no stake 
in the land or its long-term productivity. 
Another source of deforestation in PDM comes mostly from illegal logging by intermediaries who obtain logging permits 
falsely in the name of the indigenous communities. Given the needs of communities and the fact that they are not 
creditworthy and lack the technical, legal and financial capability and support to develop and implement forest 
management plans, the extraction of timber by outside intermediaries is unsupervised by the authorities. Weakness and 
absence of regional and local authorities contribute to this lack of control. 
The projection of future deforestation rates is a difficult task that must follow the national guidance of the REDD-plus 
process in Peru. Since this guidance is not currently available, the baseline scenario is defined through simple analysis 
of the historical data under the most conservative approach. As a reference for the proposed project, the intensification 
of short-term deforestation, using the Kernel method, provided in map 10.5. Once the national guidance is available, 
the baseline scenario will be adjusted and communicated. For the purpose of this proposal, the following information is 
used to define the baseline scenario: three scenarios are estimated from very conservative, conservative and high. The 
first scenario takes the average of the last 10 years and assumes that it will be the same during the following 10 years. 
The conservative or medium scenario estimates the linear trend depicted by the historical data and projects it to the 
2016–2025 period. The high scenario, based on an initial projection provided by MINAM, uses a non-linear approach to 
estimate future deforestation. The results are summarized as follows: 
Accumulated deforestation in the terra firme forest: 
a. Very conservative scenario: 22,340 ha; 
b. Medium scenario:                 40,780 ha; and 
c. High scenario:                       67,560 ha. 
Accumulated deforestation in aguajales forest: 
a. Very conservative scenario: 1,020 ha; 
b. Medium scenario:                 1,956 ha; and 
c. High scenario:                       5,380 ha. 
Carbon emissions, based on the selected scenarios and 
the data indicated in table C.1.1 (best available scientific 
information) yield the following results of the carbon stock 
at risk, in Mt C in 10 years: 
 
Table C.1.2 Deforestation rate in the 
Peruvian Amazon, 2009–2011 
Figure C.1.1.

=== PAGE 15 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 11 OF 101 
 
C 
 
a. Very conservative scenario: 3.70 Mt CO2 eq; 
b. Medium scenario:                 6.80 Mt CO2 eq; and 
c. High scenario:                     13.10 Mt CO2 eq. 
Palm oil plantations. Peru is a net importer of cooking oil. It 
traded some 40,000 tonnes in 2011, and shows a tendency 
to increase. In 2012, the Government of Peru (GOP) 
adopted the national priority of increasing the internal 
production of vegetable oil, focusing on oil from palm trees, 
due to the country’s large area of suitable land, the very 
high yield of varieties already adapted to the Amazon, and 
the corresponding high profitability of the industry. The 
GOP has encouraged and supported the expansion of the 
industry since 1973, with the creation of ENDEPALMA. Government estimates indicate the need to increase palm oil 
plantations to over 125,000 ha by 2020. The Ministry of Agriculture has estimated that land under palm oil production 
amounted to 32,567 ha in 2012. Loreto is considered a most promising area for the promotion of palm oil plantations, 
with PDM being the most promising province. The Loreto region has the largest availability of highly suitable lands (over 
1.03 million ha or 50 per cent of all lands with this classification in Peru). It is expected (and highly likely) that lands in 
PDM will be co-opted for palm oil production. Although, the national legislation related to palm oil plantations restricts 
such plantations in native communities’ territories and in natural forests, there are areas in the PDM of unallocated land 
tenure which can be subject to the establishment of these plantations. 
Droughts. In recent years, the Amazon River has experienced extreme drought conditions, which have had major social 
and environmental consequences. As indicated in figure C.1.3, during the last 40 years the Amazon River has shown a 
dramatic negative trend in minimum yearly discharges. 
The very intense droughts in 2005 and 2010 raised the spectrum of Amazon die-back, a scenario in which the humid 
forest is replaced by savannah due to changes in temperature, rainfall and the onset of climate feedbacks. In the lower 
PMB, the 2005 and 2010 droughts have been studied as part of a larger interest in enhancing our knowledge of the 
rainforest’s expected behaviour when it is 
subjected to intense drought. There is general 
scientific agreement that droughts in the Amazon 
are associated with a shift or reduction in the 
forest’s capacity to sequester carbon from the 
atmosphere, and that it takes some time—several 
years—to return to its average level. Several 
conclusions indicate a strong potential for critical 
changes: 
In 2005, large sections of the western Amazon 
Basin experienced the most severe drought of the 
past 40 years and also one of the most intense of 
the last 100 years. The 2010 drought was even 
more extreme when analysed over the entire river 
basin, although its return period was not 
estimated. According to the trend exhibited, such 
events should not be considered extreme in the 
future. 
Figure C.1.3. Amazon discharges at Tamshiyacu, Peru 
Figure C.1.2.

=== PAGE 16 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 12 OF 101 
 
C 
If intense droughts increase in frequency, as suggested by global climate models (Cox et al. 2004; Betts et al. 2004), 
large areas of the Amazon’s forest canopy would likely be exposed to the persistent effect of drought and the slow 
recovery of forest canopy structure and function. Early signs of potential large-scale degradation of the Amazon 
rainforest from climate change,3 4 through increased rainfall variability in the past decade, may already be present in 
areas of the southern and western Amazon. 
Floods, and especially the combination of intense droughts and high floods, as has recently occurred (2012) in the 
Amazon Basin, have the potential for disrupting ecosystems, and could result in permanent changes in biodiversity and 
ecosystem services. Floods have produced severe damages to dwellings and infrastructure, have destroyed crops and 
killed domestic animals, have caused economic hardships, and are associated with severe outbreaks of diseases and ill 
health. Indigenous communities in the project area have observed flood stages never before reached, and have 
expressed their concern about the increased frequency of floods. These communities’ observations confirm conclusions 
reached by scientists through analyses using complex analytical tools. 
Infrastructure projects. The construction of large transportation infrastructure is also a major concern for the carbon 
stock in PDM. Several large projects are under consideration by the national and regional governments. The Loreto 
region lacks major roadways connecting it to the rest of the country. Its regional government has presented a 
transportation plan to the Ministry of Transportation and Public Works. This plan analyses the need for different modes 
of transportation and according to it, the first priority is a road connecting Iquitos to Yurimaguas.5 The construction of 
this road is a long-held dream that is not viable in the near future. Loreto will eventually be connected to the rest of the 
country through the road system, and this is a likely option to start with. Whatever the GOP decides, the road will 
accelerate deforestation and increase land grabbing and land degradation. If not well managed, the road is likely to 
have a severe impact on the carbon stock in the project area. 
Threats to the population 
The processes described above are likely to impact the population living in the project area. Based on existing 
information, it is estimated that minimum temperatures are increasing, and are likely to continue increasing in the future. 
The Meteorological and Hydrological National Service of Peru (SENAMHI) suggests that they are likely to increase 
between 4.0 and 6.0 o C, while the estimated range of increments for average temperatures is between 3.6 and 5.2 °C. 
Heatwaves are also expected to become more frequent, with estimates of 2.28 additional hot nights per decade and 1.2 
additional very hot days per decade. 
Floods are likely to become more frequent, changing the character of the alluvial rivers, especially in their deposition 
cones in the Andean foothills. Climate models and scenarios of future climate conditions do not offer guidance about 
expected changes in the river channel. More frequent floods, as already experienced in the Amazon, are likely to have 
serious impacts on the well-being of the population, its health and transportation costs. 
Underlying causes of deforestation 
From the above discussion, from PROFONANPE experiences working in the area for the past eight years, from 
technical literature and from the REDD-plus initiatives in Peru, the main underlying causes of deforestation have been 
identified. Due to their particular relevance in Loreto and PDM, we highlight the following: 
3 Zelazowski P, Malhi Y, Huntingford C, Sitch S, Fisher JB. 2011. Changes in the potential distribution of humid 
tropical forests on a warmer planet. Philos Transact A Math Phys Eng Sci 369(1934):137–160. 
4 Saatchi S, Asefi-Najafabady M, Aragão LEOC, Anderson LO, Myneni RB, and Nemani R. 2013.“Persistent effects 
of a severe drought on Amazonian forest canopy. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, available at 
<www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1204651110>. 
5 See <http://www.slideshare.net/richardinocnt/plan-vial-departamental-participativo-de-loreto-20062015>.

=== PAGE 17 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 13 OF 101 
 
C 
Weak government institutions: Government institutions are either absent or very weak in the project area. PDM was 
recently created (in 2005). It is consolidating its governance structure but is limited by the low population in its large 
area of jurisdiction as well as by the lack of a large pool of professionals from which to select key government officials. 
Budget-wise, the provincial government is also rather weak, with a long list of responsibilities and a tiny budget. 
According to the 2013 Report on Human Development in Peru by the United Nations Development Programme, PDM 
scored 0.4295 in the indicator of government presence (Indice de Densidad del Estado), with the second lowest score 
of all provinces in the country. Furthermore, the province ranked 194 out of 194 in the number of individuals without 
national identity documents, 174 in education services and 174 in the number of medical doctors available per 10,000 
inhabitants. The project proposes to strengthen the provincial government’s institutional capacity to better serve, guide 
and monitor users of natural resources. The emphasis on participatory planning processes helps to build trust and give 
legitimacy to government actions. 
Poor coordination among key stakeholders: For the protection, conservation and sustainable use of natural resources, 
all stakeholders should have an understanding of the activities of the other actors involved, their plans, and the 
possibility of building coalitions or creating synergies to better achieve their goals. The presence of different ethnic 
groups and indigenous communities, as well as the long history of unbalanced agreements between communities and 
settlers, have created an environment conducive to mistrust and minimal interaction. The low presence of government 
is a contributing factor to poor coordination. 
Land tenure/land security: 39 percent of the province lacks clear land tenure status, excluding wetlands; 43 per cent of 
the land that could have legal title has not been legalized. Land security favours the implementation of good natural 
resources management practices. In the project area, several ethnic groups (indigenous peoples) have not been able 
to formalize the titles to their communal lands. Many barriers exist to land titling in Peru, including the need for these 
peoples to register as citizens, the delimitation of their territory, and the resolution of boundary differences with 
neighbouring communities. 
Lack of coordination, poor sectoral alignment, lack of consistency, and absence of a common vision, are all expressions 
used to describe the workings of government offices with narrow mandates, policies defined without adjustment to the 
local context, and absence of dialogue with key stakeholders. PDM has yet to produce a shared vision for its peoples 
and territory, or guidance on how best to manage its large natural resources. Planning (participatory, inclusive, 
informed) is an activity that has not been undertaken. Land-use planning provides a good basis for natural resources 
management if it is properly accompanied by well-developed natural resources management plans. Land-use plans, 
developed through a participatory process that includes all relevant stakeholders, are considered legal (government-
enacted) guidelines for potential uses in the areas under the plan. As such, the local government may adopt 
management options based on the users’ agreed organizations, thus increasing users’ responsibility for the adequate 
and sustainable use of the resource base for their well-being. 
A long history of mistrust in the relationship between ancestral communities, settlers/migrants and government officials. 
 
C.2. Project / Programme Objective against Baseline 
The project’s challenge is to identify a proven, solid and culturally acceptable management strategy to protect the 
carbon stock from identified direct and underlying threats, and to prevent the development of new and unanticipated 
risks while improving the well-being and resilience of the indigenous communities in the area of interest. In other words, 
the problem is to select a management option for the sustainable use of natural resources, in the light of the threats of 
climate change, anthropogenic actions and governance difficulties associated with working with a sparse population of 
largely native communities in a remote location. An enabling strategy was selected based on the analysis of the main 
types of sustainable natural resources management options. It is emphasized that sustainable natural resources

=== PAGE 18 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 14 OF 101 
 
C 
management is both an effective mitigation scheme and a proven alternative to build resilience in ecosystems and 
communities. 
Mitigation logical framework 
The objective of this subsection is to describe the climate mitigation logical path that is the logical link from threats to 
the existing carbon asset and the underlying causes of deforestation to the selection of a strategy to deal with the 
threats and the corresponding main activities. As shown in table C.2.1, the existing carbon asset is being threatened by 
anthropogenic activities, which the project aims to influence. As indicated, the main threats are associated with the 
deforestation/degradation of indigenous lands through enabling intermediaries, forest exploitation and clearing by 
subsistence migrants, and the use of unsustainable practices to harvest non-timber forest products. These threats are 
the consequence of weak government presence due to the remoteness of the area of interest, tied to the lack of 
technical guidance on managing the natural resources base. The existence of large areas without defined land tenure 
is a major source of concern because 42 per cent of the useable land has not been allocated, and technical assistance 
and access to credit for the sustainable 
exploitation of its natural resources are 
lacking. The overall strategy seeks to: (a) 
entrust users with the tasks of implementing 
approved management plans, conducting 
surveillance and monitoring programmes, and 
preparing yearly reports; (b) build institutional 
capacity in government and communities for 
participatory 
planning, 
and 
foster 
accountability regarding agreed operational 
plans; and (c) promote new practices and 
innovative opportunities through sustainable 
bio-businesses sponsored through a business 
incubator 
and 
supported 
by 
teams 
of 
scientists and engineers; and (d) establish 
new 
ACA 
managed 
by 
indigenous 
communities. 
This 
strategy 
will 
be 
implemented through training activities, technical assistance and logistical support directed towards key stakeholders. 
Emphasis has been placed on building capacity in government and communities for the development of participatory 
land-use plans (POTs), through which the government and the community define allowed activities, as well as 
operational management plans, through which sustainable natural resources use is promoted. Training and assistance 
will also support the devolution of management authority for areas covered by operational management plans. 
Furthermore, the project will foster sustainable bio-businesses as a means of increasing community well-being, 
strengthening sustainable natural resources management practices, building stronger community associations, and 
facilitating the implementation of activities for the benefit of women and children. The project argues that devolving 
authority to the users of the natural resources for managing, monitoring and conducting surveillance to avoid 
misappropriation of the resources is tantamount to giving the communities, through their associations, responsibilities 
only associated with land tenure. As proposed, the communities will need to prove, year after year, that they are worthy 
of the responsibility entrusted to them. 
The emissions reduced by the project will be counted as part of Peru's contribution to mitigate climate change. Up to 
now, the project is not envisaging to claim for a results-based payment scheme and the GOP has not yet defined how 
these revenues would be distributed. If the possibility to claim results-based payment is opened, the project will adopt 
the country’s approved mechanism. 
Table C.2.1. Mitigation component logical framework

=== PAGE 19 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 15 OF 101 
 
C 
Adaptation component logical framework 
The project rightly argues that the general 
strategy adopted and all the activities 
described could and should be sought as 
elements of an adaptation plan of action. 
This subsection shows the logical rationale 
for such a statement. The adaptation logical 
framework, depicted in table C.2.2, follows 
the structure of the previous subsection, but 
is adjusted for the consideration of activities 
aimed at increasing resilience to the 
expected impacts of climate change. The 
logical framework relates threats to impacts 
that are the basis for selecting a response 
strategy with its main activities 
More precisely, people and ecosystems in the project area face serious climate change threats associated with 
changes in the rainfall patterns and hydrological regime, from increased temperatures, including extreme events 
(heatwaves or number of very hot days), and from changes in the hydrological behaviour of rivers, swamps and 
streams. Extreme events should be highlighted. The probability of floods, droughts and heatwaves is expected to 
increase; technical and scientific literature indicates that such changes are already observed in Western Amazonia. 
Such changes in climate are expected to have profound impacts on ecosystems and on the population whose livelihood 
is linked to ecosystem services. Among the major expected impacts, the following are underscored: Food security will 
be compromised as the previous rate of ecosystem service production is disrupted. This is supported by observations 
of animal migration, changes in flowering times, disruption of biological cycles associated with extreme events, etc. 
Extreme events could also have a profound effect on the productivity of ecosystems, as already indicated in the section 
on threats. However, of greater concern are the impacts on the population living in the project area whose livelihood 
depends on primary natural resources. Unfortunately, there is a considerable lack of scientific observations and 
research upon which to base a clear adaptation response. 
In response to these threats and impacts, the adopted strategy calls for the development and implementation of 
sustainable natural resources management. This approach will reduce other stressors on ecosystems, increase 
ecosystems’ resilience to deal with climate change, and could provide the population with new practices to use and 
profit from the richness of their territory without degrading or deteriorating it. Communities will need to receive training, 
technical assistance, and logistical and financial support to strengthen their associations and capabilities to plan for and 
implement plans of actions to sustainably use their forests, deal with extreme events, and collaborate on surveillance 
and environmental monitoring tasks. Finally, to complement environmental data collection activities, an applied 
research component is required in order to provide better foundations for future adaptation activities. 
Proposed strategy 
In summary, the proposed activities seek the sustainable use of natural resources through commercially viable 
businesses and the devolution of responsibility for the management of the natural resources base to the indigenous 
communities. Associations, of subsistence farmers and/or of indigenous communities, will be encouraged through 
training, technical assistance and access to bio-business incubator opportunities. Both sets of activities build social 
capital, foster empowerment and community ownership, promote exchanges with the rest of society, enhance learning 
opportunities, and consolidate indigenous peoples’ basic rights. 
Table C.2.2. Adaptation component logical framework

=== PAGE 20 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 16 OF 101 
 
C 
More precisely, the project will promote sustainable resource management through the use of formal mechanisms 
developed by the GOP to guide the adequate use of renewable natural resources. The project will promote the 
formulation and formalization of planning mechanisms required to guide land use and the sustainable use of natural 
resources. The natural products extracted under the guidance of the operational plans will be transformed into 
commercially viable products. 
Fostering indigenous communities’ responsibilities for the sustainable use of natural resources responds to their appeal 
to manage their ancestral territory, and includes, among other activities, the promotion of associations of indigenous 
peoples to embrace inclusive, participatory and transparent management models. The project will provide technical 
assistance and training aimed at improving management skills and conflict resolution. 
While the proposed project is expected to generate emission reductions, these will be accounted at the national level 
and discounted from the overall carbon accounting from the forest and land-use sector. The project will not claim for 
results-based payments from the emission reductions generated. Nonetheless, the proposed project will participate 
continuously in the development of the benefit sharing mechanism of results-based payments being developed at the 
national level so clear and transparent information is shared with the communities.  
C.3. Project / Programme Description 
Component 1: Strengthening institutional capacity in government 
The objective of this component is to strengthen the government’s capacity to plan for and implement guidelines in 
response to the needs of communities living in PDM. Although these activities are government mandates, the project 
argues and has shown that governments are weak in this area and require strengthening; that due to budgetary 
constraints, detailed planning commitments might have to wait for several years while other immediate social and 
political needs are addressed; and that the project proposes a paradigm shift towards a more inclusive and participatory 
planning process, actively involving indigenous communities and natural resource users. The specific services targeted 
are: (a) the POT, 6 formulated under the leadership of the provincial government with the active participation of 
indigenous groups. The POT will integrate and harmonize the work led by indigenous groups in the formulation of an 
EMP for their respective territories; (b) the formulation of the Provincial ZEE; (c) the establishment of new ACAs,7 (d) 
the entrusting of the implementation of agreed operational management plans in selected areas to community 
organizations under open, participatory and transparent management practices, including accountability mechanisms, 
and the granting of authority to communities for peaceful conflict resolution; (e) the formulation of climate-change 
strategies and action plans by the region and the province; and (f) the promotion of the registration of indigenous 
peoples. The project will provide technical assistance, training and logistical support, and will offer coordination among 
interested key stakeholders. 
Component 2: Strengthening capacity of community-based institutions 
The project will work with indigenous peoples to facilitate their participation in the preparation and formulation of the 
planning instruments mentioned in component 1. The main emphasis will be on creating the enabling conditions for 
indigenous peoples to participate in a meaningful manner by voicing their points of view and building alliances for their 
6 The GOP defines the POT as a planning and land-management tool that promotes and regulates the processes of organization and 
sustainable management of the territory, articulated with environmental, economic development, social and cultural plans and with 
other development policies in force in the country. The POT links the land-use planning process with other plans and instruments 
related to land management and development. 
7 The environmental conservation areas (ACAs) are created by the provincial government. ACAs are designed on three 
basic pillars: management by local populations, participation and financially viable production as the basis of sustainability. 
ACAs include predominantly untitled communities, with mixed populations, becoming areas of multiculturalism.

=== PAGE 21 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 17 OF 101 
 
C 
benefit. These conditions will also guide their new responsibility for the sustainable use of renewable natural products. 
Through this component, native communities will formulate the EMP for their respective territories as an input for the 
provincial POT. Under component 2, the project will also strengthen the management capacity of native communities 
and associations to implement the operational plans for natural resources, as approved by the corresponding authority 
(at the regional level). The project will also facilitate the registration of indigenous peoples at the Public Registry Office. 
Component 3: Resilience building through sustainable bio-businesses 
Under this component, the project will promote greater economic links between traditionally separated communities and 
the rest of the economy, based on nature-based products with proven markets and established commercialization links. 
To this end, the project will promote innovation in the identification and development of sustainable bio-businesses. 
Furthermore, through technical assistance and with the participation of scientists, the bio-businesses will be studied in 
order to identify and develop technological innovations in order to improve and assure the quality of their final products. 
This component will also prepare and execute a commercialization strategy to open new links and markets to the 
region’s products, and will introduce certification programmes. 
Component 4: Science, technology, knowledge management, and monitoring and evaluation systems 
The Province of Datem del Marañón is highly vulnerable to climate change and anthropogenic threats. The complicated 
hydrological, geomorphological and biological processes that have created the complex set of swamps, swamp forests, 
and aguajales remain little known. In order to provide the project with better knowledge for planning, managing and 
protecting the ecosystem, a scientific component has been included. Through this component, the project will obtain 
better understanding of the water cycle in the swamp complex, with emphasis on drought conditions. With project 
support, communities will prepare and implement contingency plans to deal with extreme events (droughts and floods). 
This component will also promote technological innovation in support of bio-businesses, the implementation of the 
project’s monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system, and the formulation and implementation of a communications 
strategy. 
C.4. Background Information on Project / Programme Sponsor 
PROFONANPE, the project sponsor, has catalysed non-reimbursable financing for biodiversity conservation and 
sustainable development for over 22 years in Peru, and has implemented and co-implemented 36 programmes and 
projects. The work of PROFONANPE, which began with an emphasis on protected areas, has evolved into a 
comprehensive approach for the sustainable management of natural resources in fragile or threatened areas. In 
particular, over the past decade PROFONANPE has directed its efforts towards promoting programmes and projects 
aimed at strengthening protected areas' contribution to climate change mitigation and adaptation, enhancing local 
communities by promoting sustainable economic activities, and creating a range of subnational-level and local-level 
mechanisms for the conservation of aquatic and land-based ecosystems. 
The new 2014–2024 Strategic Plan provides guidance to PROFONANPE for supporting national efforts aimed at 
countering climate change risks.  
With regard to the proposed intervention in Loreto, PROFONANPE has worked with local native communities in PDM 
since 2004. Over this period, it has earned their trust while contributing to their well-being through capacity-building, 
ongoing technical assistance to improve land management, and their inclusion in the social benefits system. These 
were achieved by working in close alliance with multiple stakeholders at the local, regional and national levels. 
Financial status 
As an environmental fund, the expertise of PROFONANPE is mainly focused on fundraising, administration, resource 
channelling and project management. By late 2014, it had increased its seed capital 29-fold, reaching nearly USD 152 
million, and has channelled resources of about USD 110 million.

=== PAGE 22 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 18 OF 101 
 
C 
Furthermore, during its work in the proposed project area from 2004 to 2013, PROFONANPE managed to establish an 
endowment fund of USD 5.5 million while implementing activities for over USD 9 million from a debt-for-nature swap 
between the Governments of Peru and Germany. Returns from the endowment fund are used to implement activities 
with native communities in Datem del Marañón, highlighting the long-term commitment to the communities and to the 
overarching goal of fostering the sustainable use of natural resources of GOP and PROFONANPE, while improving the 
well-being of indigenous communities (For more detailed information see annex XI). Besides serving as a co-financier 
for the implementation of the project, after its completion, these returns will serve to strengthen and facilitate the 
sustainability of the activities financed during the project’s life span.  
The core of future funding will be aimed at strengthening those bio-businesses that still require broader terms for 
consolidation. In particular and as appropriate, it will finance technical assistance in areas such as technology transfer, 
identifying new markets, marketing, maintenance of equipment, development of training workshops, internships, etc. To 
fulfill this purpose an allocation of USD 350,000–400,000 annually is estimated. Likewise and in order to ensure the 
follow up of post-project activities, the project endowment will provide financial resources to perform the tasks of 
monitoring and reporting for at least five years after project completion. In this case, an annual budget of around USD 
40,000 is estimated. 
C.5. Market Overview (if applicable) 
Fish and wild meat 
Fish is traded salted and dehydrated and wild meat as smoked. Both products are considered of high quality by local 
standards and are marketed in proper packaging and in polypropylene sacs. The final market is the city of Yurimaguas, 
region of Loreto, which has traditionally been supplied from the Pastaza Basin and Rimachi Lake. The city has a large 
market that absorbs the entire supply from the region mainly satisfying the demand from the increasing number of 
agricultural producers in the region. Tarapoto city is the next market to reach that can absorb growing production 
especially given the increasing economic growth rates seen recently. Bio-businesses sell the fish and wild meat 
products at retail prices during the season between January and July. Reaching the retail market through their 
associations gives producers a higher margin having eliminated two steps of intermediation to the final consumer.  
 
Aguaje pulp and oil 
Current production is being sold through a local firm called FRUTAMA, a company dedicated to the marketing of frozen 
pulp and oil of different fruits of the Amazon palm tree such as the aguaje, huasaí and ungurahui. There is growing 
potential to supply both products to the market for ice cream and soft drinks in various cities of the Amazon and in the 
rest of the country and potentially to foreign markets as an exotic product. Currently bio-businesses sell their products 
to FRUTAMA, which markets them to other merchants, supermarkets and wholesalers that have the facilities to keep 
them for as long as the products require, in the largest cities of the Peruvian jungle such as the cities of Iquitos, 
Yurimaguas and Tarapoto. Aguaje pulp has also entered the market in Lima, since the pulp is high in protein compared 
to milk or meat and is rich in proteins, lipids and vitamins.  
 
Dragon's blood 
This latex blood is sold to the markets of San Lorenzo and Iquitos. The product is also sold in other cities’ markets, 
mainly in Lima, in liquid form and in capsules through naturalist houses under the brands Censelva and vine Natura. 
The resin extracted from the tree of the species Croton is applied as part of healing processes, and anti-inflammatory 
and antiviral treatments. The latex blood is sold in markets, mobile stalls and pharmacies. The liquid is sold in 
containers of different sizes and its use is quite widespread being used in native forests and urban Amazonian 
populations. It should be noted that to the extent that the product is processed under minimum quality-controlled 
conditions and is certified, the export potential is significant. Currently bio-businesses sell to companies like L & CH 
from Yurimaguas, wholesalers that export to Mexico and the United States of America. Other companies like Shaman

=== PAGE 23 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 19 OF 101 
 
C 
Pharmaceuticals Inc have been interested in identifying suppliers with great potential in the market to treat diarrhoea in 
AIDS patients. The company only buys dragon’s blood from communities and organizations that are reforesting this 
species actively; accrediting and promoting reforestation to ensure that this valuable resource is not lost. 
 
C.6. Regulation, Taxation and Insurance (if applicable) 
With regard to the establishment of the ACAs, these are created and regulated by the provincial municipality of Datem 
del Marañón by Municipal Ordinance No. 002-2013-MPDM framed in Art. 73° Substances under municipal jurisdiction, 
section 3.2, which proposes "the creation of environmental conservation areas"; however in terms of competition to 
‘create’ or ‘set ACAs, it still remains unregulated. The legal vacuum persists; however ACAs constitute a legal 
alternative by which to conserve and sustainably use natural resources. ACAs are designed based on a solid 
theoretical and conceptual framework the pillars of which are three basic principles: the suitability of land management 
by local populations, participation as a necessary condition for conservation and productivity as basis of sustainability.  
The access of ACAs to natural resources is regulated by the Forestry and Wildlife Law (Law No. 29763), where 
sustainable resource management carried out by indigenous organizations is allowed through local forest and forestry 
permission when indigenous communities are entitled to do so. The responsibility of local forest manager would rest 
with the provincial or district municipality. The supervisory and control role is under the Regional Program Management 
of Forest Resources and Wildlife - Regional Government Loreto. 
For the specific project implementation, neither permits nor licenses are required. The investments in the indigenous 
community’s land will be subject to approval and consensus from the communities themselves.   
Between 43 and 50 per cent of the project land area is untitled. The project will not involve any land titling, as it is a 
sensitive issue among the communities in the area. 
Equipment purchased and other procured items will be subject to taxation at the rate of 18 per cent. 
C.7.  Institutional / Implementation Arrangements 
PROFONANPE will be the recipient of the GCF grant and will be responsible for the project’s technical and fiduciary 
execution, including monitoring and supervision. The internal procedures of PROFONANPE require the creation of a 
Project Administration Council (PAC) or Steering Committee to oversee the project’s implementation. In the case of this 
project, PAC will be formed by a representative of MINAM, a representative of the PROFONANPE Board of Directors, a 
representative of the provincial municipality, one representative from the three National Indigenous Organization based 
in the area of influence of the Project who will change every year, ,and the Executive Director of PROFONANPE. The 
Development and Supervision Director of PROFONANPE will act as the technical secretary. PAC will meet at least 
twice a year to review project progress and approve annual workplans, progress reports, and annual procurement 
plans. If necessary, PAC will hold additional meetings: for example, to review modifications to the procurement plans. 
Committee members will not receive honoraria or other kinds of financial remuneration. 
The project will establish a Technical Committee to provide overall technical assistance for project implementation and 
to serve as a consultative body. The Technical Committee will include well-known national and international experts in 
fields that will complement the knowledge and experience of PROFONANPE. It will meet twice a year to ensure that 
scientific knowledge and field experience are applied in work plans. Committee members will not receive honoraria or 
other kinds of financial remuneration. 
A Local Advisory Committee will be formed by representatives of the Loreto Regional Government; San Lorenzo–
Marañón de Loreto Subregion; Datem del Marañón Provincial Municipality; District Municipalities of Morona, Pastaza, 
Manseriche, Cahuapanas and Andoas; Indigenous Federations, Regional Indigenous Organizations and the Project 
Manager. The main functions of this committee will be to support the Project Management Unit (PMU) in planning

=== PAGE 24 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 20 OF 101 
 
C 
project activities, facilitate the interagency coordination process, and disseminate the project’s progress and 
achievements. Local Advisory Committee representatives will meet twice a year in San Lorenzo. 
The project’s technical aspects will be implemented by PMU under the supervision of PROFONANPE. PMU will: (a) 
implement the project according to the grant agreement, project document, annual operational plan and procurement 
plan; (b) prepare the above-mentioned plans; (c) carry out the monitoring of objectives and targets outlined by the 
project; (d) provide overall assistance to local stakeholders for project implementation; (e) prepare and submit to the 
PAC the operational plans and management reports; (f) prepare the technical documents, terms of reference, and other 
relevant documentation required to carry out the procurement and contracting of goods and services; and (g) organize 
meetings with the project’s Technical Committee to obtain technical assistance and stakeholders as required. 
PROFONANPE will appoint a Project Manager to lead PMU. This manager will be in charge of overall project direction 
and have the primary responsibility of meeting the project’s general objectives and results. The Project Manager will be 
in charge of developing the terms of reference for technical studies, participating in procurement processes, preparing 
annual operational plans and progress reports that may be required by PAC, conducting the necessary coordination 
and communications with counterparts and other relevant agencies as required, and in general ensuring the proper 
implementation and monitoring of project interventions. The Project Manager, based in the field, will carry out and 
supervise field activities. 
The Project Manager will be supported by three professional staff covering three areas of work: natural resources 
management, bio-businesses, and sociocultural and capacity-building aspects. These professionals will support the 
Project Manager in implementing project activities in all communities of the region, provide feedback and review of 
technical studies, and complement these with technical documents needed in discussions and reviews of plans 
developed at the provincial or territorial unit level across the region. 
The field team will be supported by two senior professionals covering the areas of (a) climate change analysis and (b) 
knowledge management with M&E. The CC analyst will provide assistance to PMU regarding CO2 emissions reduction 
monitoring and the implementation of adaptation measures to CC within local communities. He/she will be involved in 
activities related to the development/updating of CC strategies, where his/her knowledge and skills on this subject will 
be transferred. The field team will have two staff members to provide support for administrative tasks as well as for 
transport. PMU will have a Local Advisory Committee with recognized experts in the culture of indigenous communities 
as well as with Amazonian livelihoods. The committee will meet by request of the field office to comment and provide 
advice on specific issues that may arise during project implementation. As it has been planned, the project 
implementation would not require additional contract arrangements with other implementing partners. 
Beneficiaries include two main groups: (a) government institutions and officials, including district and provincial 
municipalities as well as regional and ministry levels; and (b) local representatives, including indigenous communities, 
producers’ associations, indigenous federations, local management committees, and community surveillance 
committees. The project will act as a facilitator and supporter of activities that the local beneficiaries will implement at 
government and indigenous community levels. 
 
Additionally, in order to ensure the project is in line with the country’s climate change-related priorities and development 
plans, the Ministry of Environment of Peru, principally, through its Climate Change, Water and Desertification Office will 
permanently participate during the project’s formulation, implementation and monitoring; in coordination with other 
relevant offices within the Ministry.

=== PAGE 25 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 21 OF 101 
 
C 
 
Figure C.7.1. Project’s organizational structure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GCF
Field Team 
• Project Manager
Natural Resources Management 
Bio-Businesses
Socio Cultural and Capacity Building
Project Administrative 
Council
Climate Change Analyst
District Municipality
Province Municipality
Regional Government
Indigenous Communities
Producers Associations
Local Mgmt. Committees
Community Surveillance 
PROFONANPE
Project Management Unit
Technical Committee
Local Advisory 
Committee
Knowledge Management and 
M&E Specialist

=== PAGE 26 ===
DETAILED PROJECT / PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 22 OF 101 
 
C 
 
C.8. Timetable of Project/Programme Implementation 
The feasibility study in the annex presents the project implementation programme in detail. The following 
is a summarized version that includes all project activities spread over the five-year life cycle of the 
project.

=== PAGE 27 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 23 OF 101 
 
 D 
8 Under the Policy Guidelines for Land Use approved by Ministerial Resolution No. 026-2010-MINAM, land-use planning is a 
political and technical administrative process for concerted decision-making with the participation of social, economic, political 
and technical stakeholders, for the orderly occupation and sustainable use of the territory; and for the regulation and promotion 
of the location and sustainable development of human settlements, of economic and social activities as well as of spatial 
physical development, based on the identification of potentials and limitations, considering environmental, economic, cultural, 
institutional and geopolitical criteria. 
D.1. Value Added for GCF Involvement 
 
 
PROFONANPE argues that incremental GCF cost support is fundamental for reducing deforestation and enhancing 
the climate resilience of the population in the area of intervention, benefiting 120 communities with 20,413 inhabitants. 
GCF resources will address core, underlying causes of deforestation through a strategy that also strengthens 
communities’ resilience to more frequent floods and droughts. Without GCF funds, no resources will be available for 
the implementation of the proposed activities. This would have potentially negative consequences for the carbon 
stored in Datem del Marañón’s peatlands, as described by the baseline scenario. The following considerations support 
this statement: 
• 
The forested area, including aguajales, swamps and associated ecosystems, is threatened by climate change 
and other forces external to the occupants of the territory. 
• 
At this time 43 per cent of the land in PDM remains untitled. Consequently, many communities perceive that 
their land rights are insecure and might be contested by unknown third parties. Moreover, the titling process is 
cumbersome, protracted and expensive. The communities consider it to be beyond their control. 
• 
Without strong property rights, the communities find it difficult to assert dominion over their territories and face 
climate-change impacts and anthropogenic threats, as identified in section C.1. Communities fear 
deforestation, forest degradation, and land-grabbing by external actors, as witnessed in other areas of Peru. 
We argue that entrusting the communities with the responsibility of managing, monitoring and providing 
surveillance in their respective territories provides the sense of ownership required to foster long-term 
considerations of natural resources management. 
• 
The GOP faces resource constraints and gives priority to areas other than those that are very remote and 
difficult to reach, with very low populations. PDM ranks 193 on the list of priority out of 194 provinces in the 
country. The planning mandates of the GOP in the project area will have a protracted implementation, rely 
mostly on consultants’ input, and provide a technically sound basis for enacting POTs and natural resources 
management guidelines. The suggested approach will support a more community-based approach, and 
conclude with a common, shared agreement on how land and resources should be managed in the province. 
PROFONANPE advocates the latter approach. Furthermore, the project will engage local and regional 
governments to increase their public budget through proposals under the National System of Public 
Investment (SNIP) for providing long term sustainability of the implementation of the POTs and will continue 
strengthening capacities in the public sector. 
D.2. Exit Strategy 
The project results are sustainable beyond the project life cycle, and the approach is likely to expand so as to cover 
other provinces and regions in Peru’s Amazon Basin, provided that funding from international donors can be secured, 
with increased funding from the central government. The following arguments support this statement: 
• 
The project will provide the province and its population with a formal (i.e. legally enacted), enforceable land-
use plan, developed with and owned by the participants.8 According to recent regulations, provinces with

=== PAGE 28 ===
RATIONALE FOR GCF INVOLVEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 24 OF 101 
 
 D 
formally adopted POTs are prioritized to receive public investment funds to anchor the agreed plans. The 
project will provide technical assistance to Datem del Marañón Provincial Municipality to strengthen its project 
preparation capabilities so it can expedite its requests for investments from the National System of Public 
Investment and facilitate the flow of budgetary resources. This will attract the presence of government entities 
to service PDM inhabitants. This strategy is being successfully implemented by PROFONANPE mainly as a 
way to ensure: (a) the implementation of approved plans and (b) the sustainability of actions under 
implementation by public institutions. 
• 
Large areas will be under government-approved and established operational management plans under the 
tutelage of community organizations responsible for management, surveillance and monitoring. Newcomers 
and other potential users will need to negotiate with the communities to gain access to land or any other 
resource. The main incentives for managing the territories in a sustainable manner—the entrusted authority to 
manage the area, and the income-generating bio-businesses—will remain after the end of the project. It is 
argued that the indigenous communities will comply with the approved management plans so as not to 
concede this prerogative. 
• 
Commercially viable, sustainable bio-businesses will protect subsistence farmers and indigenous peoples’ 
sources of wealth. As described in the feasibility report, bio-businesses’ profitability is high. Based on previous 
experiences in the area, there is demand by the communities to participate in this type of activity, which would 
provide the communities with money to participate in economic transactions otherwise out of their reach or 
subject to unfair trade. In all cases, demand for the selected products is many times greater than the ability of 
the communities to serve the local markets in Iquitos. Experience has indicated that more than two years of 
sustained support is needed to achieve commercial feasibility, with three years as the most commonly agreed 
upon figure to reach this target. PROFONANPE, as indicated below, will remain in the area to provide this 
long-term backing. 
• 
The GOP will have a proof-of-concept project for the sustainable management of large areas through the 
devolution of responsibility to local associations of resource users. If the proposed approach is proven correct, 
the GOP would like to replicate it in other areas and adjust its details to other settings. 
PROFONANPE has decided to make a long-term commitment to PDM. This is a formal and financed commitment: 
PROFONANPE has allocated a USD 5 million endowment fund, in perpetuity and exclusively to this area. The 
revenues from this endowment (estimated at USD 350,000 per year) will be assigned to maintain technical assistance 
by the PMU (project manager and one field coordinator) and training in support of some of the bio-businesses that, by 
the end of the project, will not yet have achieved financial sustainability and to support the creation of new bio-
businesses to integrate value chains. This endowment fund will also provide resources for a five-year period ex-post 
monitoring and reporting of the project implementation for an amount of USD 40,000/year approximately.

=== PAGE 29 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 25 OF 101 
 
 E 
 
E.1. Impact Potential 
Potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas 
E.1.1. Mitigation / adaptation impact potential 
The Building the Resilience of Wetlands in the Province of Datem del Marañón, Peru, project contributes both to 
mitigation and adaptation goals. More precisely, the project’s approach is to build resilience to climate change in 
communities that depend on natural resources in Datem del Marañón as the best strategy to protect and prevent the 
deterioration of a substantial carbon stock found in the wetlands and natural forests. It is possible to argue that all of 
the GCF resources provided will be used for adaptation, and at the same time that the allocation of resources to 
mitigation will also be 100 per cent. This carbon stock has been estimated at 3,780 Mt CO2 eq, and the estimates of 
avoided loss amount to 2.63 Mt CO2 eq in the next 10 years. The direct beneficiary population (annex VII) has been 
estimated at 20,413 indigenous peoples living in 120 communities. The indirect beneficiary population is more than 
twice as large as that directly covered by the project. 
E.1.2. Key impact potential indicator 
Provide specific numerical values for the indicators below. 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2 eq) to be reduced or avoided (Mitigation only) 
Annual 
0.26 million 
Lifetime 
2.63 million (in 10 years) 
Expected total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries (reduced vulnerability or increased 
resilience); number of beneficiaries relative to total 
population (adaptation only) 
Total 
20,413 
Percentage (%) 
35 
Other 
relevant 
indicators 
 
• 
Expected increase in hectares of land or forests under improved and effective management that 
contributes to CO2 emission reductions. 
• 
Expected increase in the number of males and females benefiting from the adoption of 
diversified, climate-resilient livelihood options (including fisheries, agriculture, etc.). 
• 
Increased coverage of ecosystems protected and strengthened in response to climate variability 
and change. 
• 
Volume of finance leveraged. 
 
Expected tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) to be reduced or avoided 
The project’s activities are within the frame of reference of the national REDD-plus programme, and the baseline 
scenario will be re-estimated once the national programme completes its national estimates. With the support of 
MINAM, the project will also collect and analyse high-resolution satellite data to assess deforestation in the project 
area. These parallel activities will provide the required input to calculate carbon losses due to deforestation. 
The estimates of avoided deforestation are based on the assumption that the project will achieve a 50 per cent 
reduction in the deforestation rate in areas of direct intervention. This is a very conservative estimate because 
supporting information indicates that indigenous titled lands exhibit lower deforestation rates in the Amazon Basin. 
The following table summarizes the calculations, based on the carbon content presented in table C.1.1.

=== PAGE 30 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 26 OF 101 
 
 E 
Table E.1. Estimate of avoided deforestation: very conservative scenario 
 
 
Expected total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries (reduced vulnerability or increased resilience) 
For the selection of beneficiary communities, four main criteria have been used: (a) those communities that are 
located in areas vulnerable to deforestation; (b) those that are located in the most important wetlands or their 
surrounding areas; (c) those that took part in the first stage of the PROFONANPE project and that showed 
willingness to work and improve; and (d) those that were not able to take part in the project for different reasons, but 
that have persistently required their incorporation in the project’s work. The number of communities that will be 
benefitted is 120 with a total population of 20,413 people (4,150 families).9 Due to the communal social organization, 
any profit used for communal purposes (i.e. bio-business) will benefit the whole community directly. Data on 
beneficiaries disaggregated by gender is not available due to the limited number of people registered under the 
official national identity registry. The only information available, according to the Datem del Marañón Health Network 
data, estimates that 50 per cent of the total population are women. More precise information will be collected upon 
the start of the project to be considered as baseline, and throughout its implementation. In addition, the project will 
support the registration of the people involved in the project. It is expected to support the registration of at least 
3,000 indigenous people in the project area. 
Expected increase in hectares of land or forests under improved and effective management that contributes 
to CO2 emission reductions 
Currently only 34,356 ha of forest (including aguajales) and 10,000 ha of aquatic ecosystems have management 
plans under implementation. The project will foster sustainable natural resources management plans in 10 new 
areas (the surface covered with these management plans will be determined during the project implementation 
stage). 
Expected increase in the number of males and females benefiting from the adoption of diversified, climate-
resilient livelihood options (including fisheries, agriculture, etc.) 
An open and transparent process will be used to select the participating communities, and the number of individuals 
participating in the bio-businesses will be a community and specific decision. No estimate as to the number is 
available at this time. The project will be responsible for collecting data on the individuals and families inscribed 
through indigenous associations in bio-businesses. They will be eligible for technical assistance and training. Family 
data collection is expected to be difficult because indigenous communities guard against outsiders collecting ‘private’ 
information. 
9 2013. Datem Marañón Health Network.  
Reference 
Lost area
Reference 
Lost "C"
Reference Lost 
CO2e
Scenario 1 
efficacy
Scenario 1 
Lost area
Scenario 1 "C" Scenario 1 CO2e
1,020.0
859,860
        
3,155,686
             
0.138
879.4
            
741,331
        
2,720,685
          
22,340.0
2,826,010
      
10,371,457
           
0.211
17,620.3
       
2,228,966
      
8,180,304
          
13,527,143
           
10,900,989
        
2,626,154
             
Total tons CO2e
Avoided emissions
Tons CO2e

=== PAGE 31 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 27 OF 101 
 
 E 
The project will conduct comparisons with other projects that are carrying out similar activities in Peru, in the 
Amazon Basin, and in areas with similar landscapes. 
Increase in coverage of ecosystems protected and strengthened in response to climate variability and 
change 
PROFONANPE will work in the territory of 120 out of 284 communities in PDM. It is estimated that the project will 
work in an overall area of 338,000 ha as it will promote the creation of one ACA. The area’s status will be defined by 
an administrative act from the relevant government office. The project will directly document and collect the 
corresponding evidence. 
E.2. Paradigm Shift Potential 
Degree to which the proposed activity can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project/programme investment 
E.2.1. Potential for scaling up and replication (Provide a numerical multiple and supporting rationale) 
Until June 2014, the Information System of Native Communities of the Amazonia (SICNA) database has registered 
2,006 native communities, of which 1,343 have demarcated an area of 11,689,647 ha. In addition, there are five 
territorial reserves for indigenous peoples in isolation or initial contact totalling 2,812,686 ha. In that sense, the 
combined area of native communities and indigenous reserves for a total of 14,502,333 ha demarcated for 
indigenous Amazonian people, equivalent to 18.5 per cent of the Peruvian Amazon. In most of these areas, the 
context in relation to threats to the livelihoods of indigenous communities and the natural ecosystem is similar. 
Therefore, the potential to scale up is around 45 times the area of the project. 
The Building Resilience in Wetlands of Datem del Marañón project presents an innovative approach to the objective 
of reducing GHG emissions and improving the livelihoods of one of the most vulnerable populations in the country. 
For the GOP, this is a proof-of-concept project. If the results are successful, as expected, the approach will be 
replicated in other provinces in the Peruvian Amazon inhabited by indigenous communities, and will provide 
guidance for its utilization in other Amazon Basin countries, as well as on other continents with native communities 
living in tropical wetland forests threatened by climate change. 
PROFONANPE has assigned great relevance to planning instruments designed at the national level. In this sense, 
the project aligns with higher institutional goals set by the GOP. But our approach to the preparation of such 
planning instruments is bottom-up. It is based on building consensus and sharing a common vision for the future of 
the territory. It implies considerable effort in terms of coordination and building trust among the many participants. 
The regional and provincial governments have agreed to this approach, and the indigenous communities have 
expressed their interest in being heard, in expressing their point of view, and in defending their territory and ways of 
life. PROFONANPE has built considerable social capital among all stakeholders, and will use these resources to 
foster a new approach to planning. The GCF will enable these activities and greatly improve the usefulness of 
planning instruments. The GOP has embraced the approach, again as a proof of concept, and has expressed its 
willingness to actively participate in these processes. PROFONANPE will facilitate the necessary processes and 
promote legal and regulatory adjustments as required for the success of the process. 
A theory of change diagram is presented in figure E.2.1 and provides the logical underpinning of the project. 
Specifically, the theory of change highlights the relation between “activities”, here indicated by the actions 
contemplated in each component, and the main “products” or expected outputs from the execution of the activities. 
For the successful achievement of the products, under the current sociopolitical environment some hypotheses are 
needed, as shown in the figure as assumptions. The right half of the figure provides the link between the “products”

=== PAGE 32 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 28 OF 101 
 
 E 
and the expected outcomes, or project “results”. It also indicates that if sustainable natural resources management is 
achieved and the responsibility for managing the resources is entrusted to the users of the natural resources, then 
the carbon stock in Datem del Marañón’s peatlands will be preserved and protected by the indigenous communities 
to further their interests. From “results” to “impacts” we assumed, as indicated in the figure, that improvements in 
land security enhance the effectiveness of natural resources management, that land-use planning provides good 
guidance for natural resources management, and that natural resources operational management plans, agreed by 
the users, sanctioned by government, and managed by the beneficiaries, are efficient means by which to achieve 
sustainable use of natural resources. 
 
E.2.2. Potential for knowledge and learning 
The Building resilience in the wetlands of Datem del Marañón project includes a series of capacity-building 
packages for indigenous people aiming to strengthen their capacity to participate in innovative business models as 
well as to get more closely involved in the land-use planning process jointly with local government. This project also 
incorporates component 4 activities related to knowledge management. In particular, the project will implement a 
comprehensive M&E system, document its activities, promote the sharing of experiences and disseminate its 
findings. The project is posed to conduct at least three comprehensive evaluations: at the end of the first year, a 
mid-term review and an end of project evaluation. Each exercise will include the identification of lessons learned and 
their dissemination. 
The project also includes a science and technology component, which is expected to share experiences and 
disseminate results.

=== PAGE 33 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 29 OF 101 
 
 E 
E.2.3. Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
Consensus building among key stakeholders, including government, indigenous groups and private-sector actors, is 
a difficult, largely neglected task due to its large transaction costs. Nonetheless, many experiences confirm that 
sharing a common vision is a very efficient and effective mechanism through which to achieve societal goals. The 
Building resilience in the wetlands of Datem del Marañón project approach could be described as developing a 
pragmatic mechanism through which to build consensus in the operational management of wetlands and associated 
lands. The project has selected several planning instruments to be formulated through a transparent and open 
participatory process, guided by the entity entrusted with its enactment, and facilitated through the project. Technical 
assistance, training, logistical support and coordination are the responsibilities of the project, together with the 
facilitation process to allow all actors to express their views, expectations and contributions, and to reach 
agreements for the benefit of all participants. It is hoped that after several similar participatory processes, community 
leaders, public officials and leaders from the private sector will learn that such an approach is valid and worth the 
additional initial transaction costs, and that reaching agreements is an effective means of managing relationships 
with other societal actors. 
The project will strengthen private-sector participation through its support for the definition of clear land-use plans 
and sustainable operational management plans. Both instruments should reduce the transaction costs of setting up 
new businesses and increase the efficiency of government licensing entities. 
The project will also support and enhance bio-businesses by strengthening the commercialization of their products 
and fostering innovation. Successful experiences will be documented and disseminated. 
E.2.4. Contribution to regulatory framework and policies 
The project has been classified as proof-of-concept. The province where the project is located lacks of the most 
basic land-use planning instruments that could guide sustainable use of natural resources. These instruments will be 
built jointly between native communities and local government as a first step towards ensuring long-term sustainable 
development of the province. The project will also analyse the institutional environment and suggest options to 
facilitate participatory, open and transparent planning processes. 
Furthermore, the participatory process for land-use planning, POT, will be closely documented and lessons from this 
experience will be shared with the national government. Legal and regulatory adjustments, as required for effective 
planning, will be suggested through white papers. 
E.3. Sustainable Development Potential 
Wider benefits and priorities 
E.3.1. Environmental, social and economic co-benefits, including gender-sensitive development impact 
The sustainable development potential as a result of project implementation is significant, given the characteristics 
of PDM, the fourth-largest province in Peru. The province is equivalent in size to the Dominican Republic or Costa 
Rica. It has one of the country’s lowest population densities, with just over one person per square kilometre (km2). 
The tropical climate, with 87 per cent humidity and significant annual rainfall of 2,650 millimetres (mm), is combined 
with the large water resources of the three main rivers: the Pastaza, Morona and Marañón. The province is covered 
by tropical forest and wetlands, and has great biodiversity with nearly untouched forest reserves, aquatic resources 
with species of commercial value, as well as an abundance of fauna. The urban centres are small; San Lorenzo is 
the largest with 6,034 inhabitants. Seven indigenous peoples—the Wampis, Quechua, Candoshi, Awajún, Shapra,

=== PAGE 34 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 30 OF 101 
 
 E 
Shawi and Achuar—are distributed in contiguous territories. 
Environmental benefits 
The most relevant impacts and benefits as a result of project implementation will be mainly related to improved 
biodiversity. The environment will be protected through a province-wide land-use plan (POT) by year five of project 
implementation. POT will be the result of multiple EMPs developed by each of the seven indigenous groups. 
EMPs, developed with project support, will be the result of a concerted effort among the ethnic groups, represented 
by their federations, with provincial- and district-level political representatives. The indigenous groups will decide on 
the use of their natural resources and will follow the indigenous approach of protecting their environment and 
conducting limited exploitation of their resources through bio-businesses, thus creating a source of revenue while 
also protecting the environment. 
The protection of the environment with clear POTs will limit the irrational exploitation of resources, preserve flora and 
fauna, and therefore protect carbon stocks mainly located in the wetlands, in an area totalling 338,000 ha (three 
ACAs). 
Social benefits 
Increased expenses for social services funded by bio-business revenue 
With the successful implementation of component 3, at least 50 more bio-businesses will be in place by year five. 
These will create a solid income base to support investments in social areas, mainly in health and education. 
According to different studies, indigenous communities consider education and health as the third and fourth most 
important aspects for their livelihoods, with territory as the most important. The expected revenue generated by new 
businesses will benefit a considerable number of families. Using as an example the programme implemented over 
the past six years, we believe that an average project with an investment of USD 30,000 can benefit 67 families (see 
feasibility analysis in the project feasibility annex) by creating employment for some of them and redistributing 
benefits to the community. In view of the indicators of return on investment and positive cash flow from year one, the 
bio-businesses will continue to support the income of the region’s families for many years by developing a solid 
revenue base that will foster social development. 
Increased social capital through collective planning of territorial management 
The development of the POT at provincial level, supported by the development of EMPs for indigenous peoples in 
each of the seven cultural groups, will be carried out by means of multiple meetings and discussions among 
members of a community as well as among communities at the provincial level. The building of trust and the 
management of conflicts will guide the planning processes. These will ultimately create social capital, understood as 
collective cooperation between individuals and groups to form a network and increase the productivity of the region 
as a whole. The underlying purpose of these discussions, focused on natural resources management, represents a 
very important concept related to social and economic aspects that are linked to productivity and the discussion of 
the best options to develop the economy by conserving the environment. 
Improved access to education 
Besides the fact mentioned previously that additional income from bio-businesses provides additional resources to 
spend on education, there is another benefit to education through courses, workshops and scholarships to be 
provided by project consultants or third parties in the region or in other cities. The project has estimated that a total 
of 250 community leaders will be directly trained by any of the modalities mentioned above, and a wider group of 
beneficiaries will be reached through the distribution of educational and information materials produced by the

=== PAGE 35 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 31 OF 101 
 
 E 
project. 
Economic benefits 
The project will have an economic impact on the following categories. (A detailed estimate is provided in the 
feasibility study.) 
1. Bio-businesses 
Based on the results of bio-businesses supported by PROFONANPE during the past few years, the following table 
illustrates the potential economic impact of 50 new bio-businesses in sectors similar to those currently under 
operation. 
Table E.3.1. Potential impact of new bio-businesses 
(Based on a selected sample of projects) 
Concept 
Unit 
Total 5th year 
Direct income generation 
person 
4,300 
Accumulated cash flows 
USD million 
1.75 
Accumulated purchases of goods and services 
USD million 
6.20 
Accumulated revenue 
USD million 
7.92 
 
2. Project implementation benefits 
The project will have a significant impact on the region. It is estimated that close to USD 7 million will be spent in five 
years on: (a) investments in bio-businesses (equipment, consulting in the field, maintenance and expendables); and 
(b) expenses for transport, lodging, meals and materials for all courses and workshops, and the presence of six staff 
based in the field. 
Table E.3.2. Allocation of project resources  
Concept 
Unit 
Value 
Bio-businesses 
USD million 
4.89 
People living in the region who are directly employed 
No. of employees 
6 
Expenses in the region (transport, lodging, meals, 
communications, etc.) 
USD million 
0.21 
 
Non-quantifiable 
1. Long-term planning will allow rational use of resources and enable their long-term exploitation. 
2. Preservation of ecosystems through appropriate planning will allow a balanced approach to development 
and an equitable distribution of resources, thereby creating a sustainable and enabling environment that is 
ideal for attracting long-term investments. 
Gender-sensitive development impact 
The project will focus on gender-promotion activities through the following areas: 
1. Bio-businesses: 
Women play a significant role in the implementation of bio-businesses. In the production of hardwood floors, they 
play a role in the organizational and administrative tasks of the operation. In handicraft production, they have total 
control over production and administration. In the production of oil or pulp from aguaje and ungurahui, they 
participate in the family labour of collecting the fruits. They also participate in the cleaning, salting and freeze-drying 
of fish. For other products, including medicinal mud production and dragon’s blood, they also participate in the family 
labour of collecting the products from forest trees. At this time, no detailed information is available on the number of

=== PAGE 36 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 32 OF 101 
 
 E 
women working in the bio-businesses, although during the consultation process, women voiced their support for the 
project and requested backing for more bio-businesses in their territories. 
2. Training 
The programme will include training activities with significant participation by women. Since these groups are a 
critical part of bio-businesses, the project will start with training programmes for the specific tasks required in each of 
the bio-businesses and will encourage leadership and participation in decision-making and control of all areas of the 
businesses. Although, at present, only men participate in the land-use planning process, our team will seek specific 
contexts in which women could make a meaningful contribution to these discussions. 
In general terms, in order to incorporate women in spaces that allowed them to strengthen their abilities and 
decision, actions will be taken in a progressive way. On the first stage, there will be work with men, either from the 
community’s directive board or associations in general, to raise awareness around the importance of women’s 
participation in training spaces, in decision making processes and in their associations. The advantages of 
incorporating them in these spaces will be made visible to men; advantages in favor of their families, children, and in 
the development of the community in general will be highlighted. During the second stage, the project is designed to 
work with women in both, mixed spaces and exclusively, to promote their training and active participation in bio-
businesses, in the climate change observatory and in other activities promoted with the project.  
 
Additionally, the project will include positive discrimination measurements (assignment of scores or preferences) to 
assure that associations are conformed both by men and women, and even more, to assure that there are 
association exclusively integrated by women. The project will strongly support women associations to work in bio-
businesses, among others. The work days or workshops developed with women will be done in hours that facilitate 
their participation and in their towns, so they do not have to travel and be away from their families. 
 
A gender-sensitive social analysis will be developed in the first year of the Project, in order to examine the roles of 
women and men, according to their responsibilities, access, use and control over resources; as well as the 
problems, needs, opportunities and benefits obtained by each role. This analysis will allow Profonanpe´s Project 
Management Unit, to establish an appropriate strategy to gradually incorporate women in project activities.  
 
The project will therefore: 
• 
Be aligned with the Law of Equal Opportunity between Men and Women (Law N°2893 of 2007);10 
• 
Contribute to accomplish Strategic Objective 8 from the National Plan for Gender Equality 2012–2017, 
specifically: 8.1 Environmental management at national and regional level with a gender approach; 8.2 Risk 
management and natural disaster prevention, as well as natural resources management and care with a 
gender approach; and 8.3 Increase access and use of natural resources by women11; and 
• 
Allow PROFONANPE to participate in meetings for the preparation of the Gender Action Plan for Adaptation 
to Climate Change, and PROFONANPE will therefore assure that the project contributes to its 
accomplishment. 
E.4. Needs of the Recipient 
Vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary country and population 
E.4.1. Vulnerability of country and beneficiary groups (Adaptation only) 
Level of exposure to climate risks for the beneficiary country and groups 
10 See 
<http://www.mimp.gob.pe/files/programas_nacionales/pncvfs/legislacion/nacional/ley_28983_lio.pdf>. 
11 See <http://www.mimp.gob.pe/files/planes/planig_2012_2017.pdf>

=== PAGE 37 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 33 OF 101 
 
 E 
Peru is included among the world’s 10 most vulnerable countries to climate change (Tyndall Centre 2004). 
Moreover, its population continues to grow and its territory is subject to increasing threats by hydrometeorological 
phenomena. Peru has limited institutional and organizational capacity and resources to deal with the impacts of 
climate change. 
Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
Peru is one of Latin America’s fastest-growing economies. Between 2002 and 2013, the average growth rate was 
6.1 per cent in a context of low inflation (2.6 per cent on average). The effects of strong growth on employment and 
income have significantly reduced poverty rates and boosted shared prosperity. Between 2005 and 2013, poverty 
rates fell by more than half, from approximately 55.6 per cent to 22.7 per cent of the population (National Institute of 
Statistics and Information (Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática - INEI). In 2013, an estimated half a million 
people escaped poverty in the country. In addition, the share of the population living below the official extreme 
poverty line declined dramatically, from 15.8 per cent in 2005 to 4.7 per cent in 2013. Extreme poverty is highly rural 
and is concentrated in 8 per cent of Peru’s districts. 
Datem del Marañón is the country’s third-poorest district, with its population distributed in 284 population centres. 
Poverty affects over 75 per cent of the population, while extreme poverty affects 42 per cent, reaching 61 per cent in 
Morona. Health services are provided through 42 local health centres coordinated from San Lorenzo. The local 
population suffers from a strong persistence of endemic diseases, such as hepatitis B, dengue and malaria. The 
health services provided do not yet meet the needs and culture of the people they should serve. These deficiencies 
contribute to educate failure and exacerbate extreme poverty in a vicious cycle of inequality, injustice and exclusion 
(Datem Marañón Health Network 2013). Education is provided through 203 educational centres at initial, primary 
and secondary levels; classrooms mostly have one teacher and multiple grades. There are 400 teachers and more 
than 10,578 students distributed among 280 communities. 
Needs for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity 
The current national environmental authority in Peru is the Ministry of Environment (Ministerio del Ambiente -
MINAM), which has a General Directorate for Climate Change, Desertification and Water Resources (Dirección 
General de Cambio Climático, Desertificación y Recursos Hídricos), which is the focal point of the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) secretariat. MINAM chairs the National Commission on 
Climate Change (Comisión Nacional de Cambio Climático), founded in 1993 and amended in 2009, the role of which 
is to coordinate the implementation of the UNFCCC in various sectors and to design and promote the National 
Climate-Change Strategy (Estrategia Nacional sobre Cambio Climático (ENCC)). ENCC, adopted in 2003 and 
currently being updated, is part of all policies and activities related to climate change taking place in Peru. 
The Organic Law of Regional Governments, which established the obligation to draft Regional Climate Change 
Strategies, was adopted in 2002. Three regions already have a Regional Climate Change Strategy; there are 9 
Regional Technical Groups on Climate Change (Grupos Técnicos Regionales de Cambio Climático); and 11 have 
developed adaptation and mitigation projects under the National System of Public Investment (Sistema Nacional de 
Inversión Públic - SNIP). The National Centre for Strategic Planning (Centro Nacional de Planeamiento Estratégico - 
CEPLAN) was created to drive and develop joint planning, which has promoted the discussion of Plan Peru 2021–
Strategic Plan for National Development incorporating policy guidelines on climate change adaptation and 
mitigation. 
Despite these very impressive advances in strategic planning at the national level, government institutional capacity 
lags behind its many responsibilities, in particular in the provision of services to remote and low-population areas 
such as PDM in the Loreto Region. At regional and provincial levels, government capabilities are more limited.

=== PAGE 38 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 34 OF 101 
 
 E 
Government presence in Datem del Marañón is rated as very low and practically non-existent. Moreover, according 
to the 2013 Report on Human Development in Peru by the United Nations Development Programme, PDM scored 
0.4295 on the indicator of government presence, with the second lowest score in the country.  
 
E.4.2. Financial, economic, social and institutional needs 
Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population  
The project will target the poorest group in the third poorest district in Peru. Resilience will be promoted through 
three core activities. The communities will be responsible for managing the natural resources in their respective 
territories, or in areas under EMP, sanctioned by the relevant authority. The project will also promote and support 
commercially viable bio-businesses that are proposed by the indigenous associations and enhanced through 
collaboration with a team of scientists and innovation engineers. In addition, the project will foster the preparation 
and implementation of community-based contingency plans to deal with extreme climate events, floods and 
droughts. 
Absence of alternative sources of financing 
Project activities do not require beneficiaries to be actively eligible for credit. Traditionally, indigenous communities 
have not fared well when non-traditional sources of financing have been offered. Indigenous peoples are not 
normally eligible for credit from formal financial institutions. As previously indicated, many are not in the public 
registry; therefore, from the point of view of financial institutions, they do not exist. However, as demonstrated by the 
previous PROFONANPE project in the area, with time and after a learning period, some native associations are in 
the process of becoming eligible for credit. The project will encourage and support indigenous associations in the 
long journey from non-registered persons, to persons with bank accounts, to persons eligible for credit. 
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity 
In response to the institutional weaknesses exhibited by the government, the project contemplates strengthening its 
ability to conduct and formulate land-use plans as well as operational plans for natural resources management, 
while encouraging the devolution of responsibilities for the sustainable management of natural resources to users. 
Component 1 of the project aims at systematically strengthening the government’s ability to formulate planning 
instruments as mandated by law. At each level, the project will provide support and technical assistance, and will 
prepare documentation for the conduct of their services. In addition, the project will prepare a white paper, 
summarizing lessons learned and suggesting adjustments in policy formulation, regulations and, in selected cases, 
existing laws. The selected strategy will facilitate the implementation of the planning processes. The main actors and 
stakeholders will receive training before and during the planning processes, participate, voice their opinions, listen to 
other participants, and negotiate and compromise on a common, agreed plan of action. The implementation of such 
plans will be in their best interest. Moreover, recent regulations indicate the allocation of preferential investment 
projects to ‘anchor’ agreed POTs. Furthermore, national government entities (ministries, special programmes, etc.) 
are encouraged, by law, to participate in the process and contribute to their implementation. 
The implementation of land-use plans is a long-term endeavour that will require support and funding beyond the 
proposed project. PROFONANPE has pledged to remain in the region for the long term and will support the 
provincial government in the preparation of projects for consideration by the national government and donor 
community.

=== PAGE 39 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 35 OF 101 
 
 E 
E.5. Country Ownership 
Beneficiary country (ies) ownership of, and capacity to implement, a funded project or programme 
E.5.1. Existence of a national climate strategy and consistency with existing plans and policies, including NAMAs, 
NAPAs and NAPs 
Peru’s ENCC was approved in 2003 and is currently being updated. This strategy is the framework for all policies 
and activities related to climate change in Peru. Its main objective is to reduce the adverse impacts of climate 
change through adaptation strategies implemented in the most vulnerable areas and/or sectors. It also controls GHG 
emissions through the use of renewable energy and energy-efficiency programmes in different production sectors. 
The present project is closely related to 4 of the 11 strategic lines of action of ENCC, as listed below: 
1. Promote and develop scientific, technological, social and economic research on climate change vulnerability, 
adaptation and mitigation; 
2. Promote projects the objectives of which are to alleviate poverty, reduce vulnerability and/or mitigate GHG; 
3. Manage forest ecosystems to mitigate vulnerability to climate change and enhance carbon sequestration 
capacity; and 
4. Manage threatened ecosystems, in particular mountain ecosystems, to mitigate vulnerability to climate change. 
The project will also further the objectives set by the national REDD-plus programme. Peru’s readiness preparation 
proposal states that Peru has chosen to adopt a nested approach to REDD-plus. This approach should allow for 
different rates of implementation as technical capacities are developed, from the subnational to national levels. It is 
expected that reference scenarios and the national forest monitoring system will be developed in line with this 
approach. The national reference level will therefore be developed using a ‘bottom-up’ approach with regional 
deforestation forecasts aggregated to the national level. This approach will allow for the accounting of emission 
leakages between regions. 
At the regional level, the project is aligned with the region of Loreto’s Regional Climate-Change Strategy under the 
following strategic lines of action: 
1. Promote projects the objectives of which are to alleviate poverty, reduce vulnerability and/or mitigate GHG; 
2. Promote policies, measures and projects with techniques to develop the ability to adapt to the effects of climate 
change and reduce vulnerability; 
3. Promote responsible management of forests and fragile ecosystems to mitigate their vulnerability to climate 
change and improve carbon sequestration capacity; and 
4. Promote a forestry programme in the region of Loreto that will be profitable, sustainable and neutral to GHG 
emissions. 
In addition to ENCC, the project is supported by other strategies mainly related to POT that enable the policy and 
institutional framework to make the project a success. POT-related activities will be held in agreement with the 
provincial municipality and the indigenous organizations with specialized technical assistance. The government 
agency partnering with PROFONANPE for this project is MINAM, which is leading the land-planning process in the 
country. MINAM has assigned a high priority to this project in order to complete a comprehensive planning process 
aimed at introducing the sustainable management of natural resources and preserving the wetlands’ rich carbon 
stock. 
Since the preparation of the concept note in February 2015 until the final version of the proposal was completed, 
PROFONANPE had several meetings with different divisions of the Ministry of Environment appointed by the focal 
point of the GCF in Peru (Deputy Minister for Strategic Development of Natural Resources). During these meetings, 
the following aspects where discussed: (a) project objectives, dimension and beneficiaries, (b) government

=== PAGE 40 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 36 OF 101 
 
 E 
participation, (c) provision of data, (d) coordination with indigenous peoples’ organizations, and (e) relationship with 
national strategies and plans. 
 
 
E.5.2. Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
PROFONANPE has implemented 36 programmes and projects during its 22 years of existence. Its experience in 
managing financial resources is demonstrated by its track record of attracting more than USD 152 million and 
channelling (as implementer or co-implementer) about USD 110 million. After having completed a six-year project in 
PDM, PROFONANPE is prepared to lead the implementation of this project. During its presence in the region, it has 
established solid relationships with community leaders of all native groups, with government authorities in the 
province and region, as well as with national government agencies. 
PROFONANPE has developed procedures for the acquisition and procurement of goods and services, which are 
described in the operations manual. These were developed based on standards of multilateral cooperation, and their 
application is constantly audited and evaluated by donors. 
The operations of PROFONANPE follow strict procedures to maintain the highest standards for its code of ethics 
and transparency. It also has experience in the implementation of environmental and social safeguards that include 
vulnerable populations. Currently, it has established its own procedures for the identification of impacts and risks 
from the implementation of its own activities and for the development of measures to mitigate such impacts and 
risks. 
Based on years of experience in working with multilateral agencies, PROFONANPE has developed M&E processes 
and procedures to review the progress of results achieved in terms of objectives, indicators, and physical and 
financial goals set for each project in the course of its implementation. These procedures also include follow-up 
activities, including annual workplans, quarterly or semi-annual assessments, and reviews of studies and reports. 
Previously, PROFONANPE assisted the process of land-use planning in the Pastaza Province, promoting a 
participatory methodology with indigenous communities. The process was facilitated by the indigenous federations in 
conjunction with the Provincial Municipality Datem Maranon, the Quechua people of Pastaza, the Chapra and the 
Kandozi people. 
Other institutions that will participate in the implementation of this project include: 
The national programme for forest conservation (Programa Nacional de Conservación de Bosques), serving as a 
member of the board of directors for this project and part of MINAM, will contribute to the programme with its 
experience and information on forest management, and the development of good practices for the promotion of 
productive activities. 
SENAMHI will be part of this project as well as its co-funding agency. It is also part of MINAM and has more than 45 
years of experience in providing public services, studies and research on climate measurement, hydrology, agro-
meteorology and climate change. 
The Regional Government and the Provincial Municipality are subnational governments that have worked together 
with PROFONANPE on a previous project in the area. Their new leadership has demonstrated its commitment to 
carry out the project by providing co-financing to implement the local and province-wide planning exercise. The 
project will support both governments in the implementation of participatory planning processes. This approach 
promotes a shared vision and facilitates the formulation of agreed plans of actions among the key stakeholders and 
participants. If government plans have the full support of the stakeholders, their implementation is simplified.

=== PAGE 41 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 37 OF 101 
 
 E 
Although the regional and provincial governments are weak, the suggested approach minimizes the demand of 
direct government involvement while increasing the likelihood of achieving results. 
 
E.5.3. Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
The project recognizes indigenous peoples as key partners in this project, who will ensure the achievement of the 
project’s objectives. Previous work in the area enabled PROFONANPE to build trust with the communities of the 
seven ethnic groups to be included in this proposal. 
Moreover, consultations took place during project design (23 June–1 August 2015) with representatives of these 
ethnic groups, as well as with the representative authorities of the two environmental conservation areas (ACAs) that 
are already constituted. During the consultations, more than 80 communities, represented by nearly 500 people and 
21 organizations (federations, associations, committees, etc.), participated, and the project’s components and 
activities were presented. (In the supporting social impact assessment document, the presentations are 
summarized, including the teaching material used.) The activities that captured the greatest interest of the 
participants included the sustainable use of natural resources through management plans and bio-businesses, as 
well as technical and vocational training. In most cases, they requested greater assistance in funding, training and 
technical assistance for the implementation of productive projects. They also asked that assemblies be held at the 
community level once the project is approved in order to inform the community. Women were present at the 
meetings; however, for cultural reasons, their participation was limited. Nevertheless, in informal settings (held at the 
end of participatory consultation meetings) they expressed their interest in voicing their opinions and their wish to 
participate in bio-business opportunities. The participants signed minutes to indicate their acceptance of, satisfaction 
with, and commitment to the proposed project. A recording of the consultation meetings is available at 
<https://youtu.be/LM8VeCPs-bY>. 
Peru’s readiness preparation proposal has created a participation and consultation plan based on guidelines for 
information sharing, and the participation and consultation of indigenous people interested in REDD-plus. 
Furthermore, the Forest Investment Programme contains the Actors Involvement and Participation Plan for Peru’s 
Forest Investment Programme investment strategy. Both documents serve to ensure the involvement of 
stakeholders in the design and implementation of the National REDD-plus Strategy and support citizen participation 
and prior consultation processes where relevant. The consultation process also includes the inter-institutional 
dialogue at the national, regional and local levels. The main spaces for dialogue are the REDD Group Peru, the 
National indigenous REDD-plus roundtable, the Regional REDD-plus roundtables, the Interregional Amazon Council 
(Consejo Interregional Amazónico), the Regional Environmental Commission (Comisión Ambiental Regional (CAR)), 
the Municipal Environmental Commission (Comisión Ambiental Municipal) and the Forestry and Wildlife 
Management Committee (Comité de Gestión Forestal y de Fauna Silvestre (CGFFS)). 
 
Under the framework of the National REDD-plus Strategy, an Attention to the Citizen Mechanism is being built. The 
project will adopt this mechanism once approved by the GOP. 
 
E.6. Efficiency and Effectiveness 
Economic and, if appropriate, financial soundness of the  project/programme 
E.6.1. Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
The financial structure for project implementation is presented in table E.6.1, which shows the allocation of 
resources among all four project components. The largest items are for direct labour with eight full-time staff (six in

=== PAGE 42 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 38 OF 101 
 
 E 
the field and two in head office), research, consulting services and investments in bio-businesses. 
The intensive demand for information and analysis to feed POTs, both at the level of ethnic groups’ territories as well 
as at the provincial level, will require significant resources for consulting services as well as research from multiple 
local and international sources. The research on carbon stocks and the study of aguajal hydrology will be part of the 
research and consulting work as well as the development of advanced technologies to be adopted by bio-
businesses. 
The overall allocation of resources to develop the studies, and in general to construct and strengthen an institutional 
framework, will help overcome one of the biggest challenges of the GOP, that is allocating resources to basic 
studies of natural resources management. The lack of support at this time will postpone the POT exercise for many 
years, placing the management of critical resources at great risk and leaving the fragile environment vulnerable to 
irrational exploitation methods. 
Investments in bio-businesses will not crowd out private investments. Instead, they will allow the expansion and 
consolidation of economies of scale that will increase the attractiveness of the area to private capital for investments 
in processing plants, storage facilities, transport infrastructure, and general services to supply materials and 
equipment to the potentially growing bio-businesses. Examples of the sustainable exploitation of natural resources in 
the Amazon rainforest are plentiful in Brazil, which has developed the economy of the region’s inhabitants while 
maintaining and restoring the environment. 
 
Table E.6.1. Allocation of project resources 
(United States dollars) 
ITEMS 
Component  
1 
Component   
2 
Component  
3 
Component  
4 
Total 
A. DIRECT LABOR 
510,662 
667,832 
531,179 
236,491 
1,946,165 
B. TRAVEL, TRANSPORTATION, AND 
PER DIEM 
- 
207,056 
207,056 
- 
414,113 
C. WORKSHOPS AND TRAININGS   
- 
465,213 
465,213 
- 
930,426 
D. PROCUREMENT 
514,418 
786,158 
3,361,881 
655,153 
5,317,611 
iv) Communications and marketing 
- 
- 
- 
230,000 
230,000 
v) Consulting services 
183,703 
263,340 
- 
75,000 
522,042 
vi) Research  
- 
242,103 
- 
- 
242,103 
vi) Investments in bio businesses  
- 
- 
3,353,831 
- 
3,353,831 
vii) Special programs 
300,000 
150,000 
- 
- 
450,000 
E. EXPENDABLE SUPPLIES 
140,872 
140,872 
59,149 
59,149 
400,042 
F. COMMUNICATIONS 
32,440 
32,440 
7,765 
7,765 
80,408 
G. OTHER DIRECT COSTS 
5,309 
5,309 
5,309 
5,309 
21,237 
         Total 
1,203,700 
2,304,880 
4,637,553 
963,868 
9,110,00

=== PAGE 43 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 39 OF 101 
 
 E 
 
E.6.2. Co-financing, leveraging and mobilized long-term investments (mitigation only) 
Thirty per cent of the project’s budget will be provided by two different sources, as described in the table below. The 
largest contributor is the Government of the Republic of Korea with 20 per cent of total financing, followed by 
PROFONANPE with 12 per cent. 
Other organizations will contribute their respective areas of expertise. For example, SENAMHI will contribute funds 
toward climate observation activities and equipment. The contribution from the provincial municipality will be mainly 
geared toward supporting the development of POTs and cooperation in other related project activities within the 
province. 
 
Table E.6.2. Co-financing for mitigation activities 
(United States dollars) 
Financial instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Name of the institution 
Grant 
1.07 million USD 
PROFONANPE 
Grant 
1.80 million USD 
Korean Government 
Total 
2.87 million USD 
 
 
 
E.6.3. Financial viability 
Throughout the development of POT for the province, the project will help establish a framework of institutional 
arrangements to manage the natural resources used by indigenous communities and will also help to establish clear 
rules for the sustainable exploitation of various products. This plan, accompanied by ACA management tools and 
the implementation of management areas, will enable the operation of multiple businesses, the most relevant of 
which are bio-businesses supported by the project. 
Table E.6.3 shows the results achieved by PROFONANPE from a sample of seven bio-businesses implemented in 
the area. A more detailed presentation is provided in table 11 of the feasibility study. 
As the results indicate, all of these bio-businesses achieved profits during their first year of operation and a positive 
return on investment. The encouraging results obtained so far, and the enhanced support that will be provided by 
the new project in terms of the amount of resources and support for technical, financial and marketing aspects, will 
further improve the chances of success and increase possibilities of viable, sustainable development in the long 
term. 
Throughout the five-year planning process and the project’s assistance to bio-businesses, all seven participating 
ethnic communities will learn about the importance of their resources in their respective territories and will acquire 
specific knowledge of potential business opportunities. This will provide the project with a good exit strategy.

=== PAGE 44 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 40 OF 101 
 
 E 
 
Table E.6.3. Bio-business sustainability 
(Thousand United States dollars) 
 
                                        Source: 2014.Systematization of Bio-Businesses Report. PROFONANPE. 
 Product
Families
2015
2016
1 Fish Charapa Cocha - Fisher's Assoc. TAAKI
51
  Total Earnings
11.67
    
12.02
    
  Total Cost
15.53
    
11.20
    
   Net Cash flow
(3.86)
    
0.82
      
   IRR
19%
2 Fish Nueva Yarina - Fisher's Assoc. KATINBASCHI
60
  Total Earnings (includes grocery store)
13.72
    
14.14
    
  Total Cost
15.58
    
12.02
    
   Net Cash flow
(1.85)
    
2.12
      
   IRR
117%
3 Aguaje Pulp - Aguaje Prod. Assoc. – ASPROMAG
160
  Total Earnings
55.70
    
58.49
    
  Total Cost
73.15
    
44.65
    
   Net Cash flow
(17.44)
  
13.84
    
   IRR
90%
4 Aguaje Oil - Assoc. APUAPISEM (est.)
50
  Total Earnings
66.67
    
70.00
    
  Total Cost
94.57
    
67.15
    
   Net Cash flow
(27.91)
  
2.85
      
   IRR
25%
5 Fish and Wild Meat - Prod. Assoc. HUITOYACU 
50
  Total Earnings (data from 3 campaigns projected to 5)
19.32
    
19.90
    
  Total Cost
23.60
    
18.61
    
   Net Cash flow
(4.28)
    
1.29
      
   IRR
30%
6 Dragon's blood - Achuar Prod. Assoc. URUCHNUM (est.)
28
  Total Earnings
11.28
    
11.62
    
  Total Cost
13.73
    
10.07
    
   Net Cash flow
(2.44)
    
1.21
      
   IRR
49%
7 Handicrafts - Assoc. of Idigenous Women AMIAH
-
        
  Total Earnings
-
        
  Total Cost
29.72
    
   Net Cash flow
-
        
   IRR
-
        
7 Ice Factory - Fisher's Assoc. TAAKI (est.)
200
  Total Earnings
19.37
    
19.95
    
  Total Cost
40.21
    
12.12
    
   Net Cash flow
(20.84)
  
1.89
      
   IRR
31%
     Average Families Benefitted
86
     Average Earnings
28.25
    
29.45
    
     Average Cost
39.48
    
25.12
    
     Average Cash flow
(11.23)
  
3.43
      
     Average IRR
44%

=== PAGE 45 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 41 OF 101 
 
 E 
 
Income impact on beneficiary families  
Bio-businesses deliver direct and indirect economic and social benefits. Beneficiary families, as members of the bio-
business association, have direct benefits from three main sources: (a) sale of products that they collect at 
preferential prices and rapid payment (e.g. fish, palm fruits or resins collected from lakes, rivers and forests); (b) 
salary compensation from employment in the business (association members that work in plants or administrative 
tasks and are compensated with salaries); and (c) profit sharing (surpluses that are reinvested in additional services 
like loans, grocery stores at reduced prices, etc.). The table below shows the estimations based on data presented 
in this report.   
Table E.6.4. Bio-business impact on the income of beneficiaries  
(Average estimates for 2016–2020) 
 
 
 
Assuming that the baseline income for each product was 40 per cent lower as was determined by the 
PROFONANPE recent study in the region,12 the increase in income with bio-business was more than threefold with 
an average total income (including income from employment and profit sharing) 3.26 times higher than the baseline. 
By the end of the project, it is estimated that 4,150 families will have benefitted from bio-businesses with an increase 
of income from the baseline similar to the average estimated above.  
 
When compared to a proxy of average income for the season, the income generated by the bio-businesses can be 
significant. In some cases, like in the production of aguaje oil, the income for families participating in the association 
12 Estimates from consultants studying the implementation of bio-businesses in the region  have confirmed that 
Associations pay 40% more for products delivered by its members (fish, wild meat and palm fruits) compared to 
prices paid by intermediaries. It was also found that shops set by associations, offer basic food stuffs as well as tools 
and supplies at prices 40% lower than what were paid to intermediaries.  
Season
No of 
Beneficary 
Families 
Baseline 
Income²  
$US
Income 
from sale 
of goods 
$US
Income 
from 
Employm
ent       
$US
Profit 
Sharing 
$US
Total 
Income 
Received 
$US
Increase of 
Income 
from 
Baseline
Income 
per 
Family 
$US
Proxy of 
Average 
Income 
per 
Season¹   
$US
Income 
Received as 
% of 
Average 
Total 
Income per 
Season
Fish Charapa Cocha - Fisher's 
Assoc. TAAKI
3 months 
per year
51
3,889
       
6,481
        
776
         
870
         
12,066
      
210%
237
         
450
         
53%
Fish Nueva Yarina - Fisher's 
Assoc. KATINBASCHI
3 months 
per year
60
3,889
       
6,481
        
610
         
2,248
      
13,288
      
242%
221
         
450
         
49%
Aguaje Pulp - Aguaje Prod. 
Assoc. – ASPROMAG
3 months 
per year
160
17,888
     
29,813
      
7,808
      
17,224
    
72,893
      
308%
456
         
450
         
101%
Aguaje Oil - Assoc. APUAPISEM 
(est.)
3 months 
per year
50
32,069
     
53,449
      
7,843
      
6,056
      
99,467
      
210%
1,989
      
450
         
442%
Fish and Wild Meat - Prod. 
Assoc. HUITOYACU 
3 months 
per year
50
7,875
       
13,124
      
198
         
1,369
      
22,616
      
187%
452
         
450
         
101%
Dragon's blood - Achuar Prod. 
Assoc. URUCHNUM (est.)
3 months 
per year
28
4,433
       
7,388
        
284
         
1,212
      
13,345
      
201%
477
         
450
         
106%
Ice Factory - Fisher's Assoc. 
TAAKI (est.)
Year
200
1,620
      
7,125
      
8,945
        
45
           
1,500
      
3%
Notes:
² The proxy was estimated in $150/month by two methods; 1) empirical verification of income equivalent to $US 200/month per family during production season that can extend to three products and 
cover 9 months of the year (fish, meat, palm fruits); normally this is bartered for food and tools at very high prices; 2) estimation of the lowest minimun wage in Peru that corresponds to the Amazon 
Department based on data from IUS. Revista de Investigación Jurídica. El Debate Sobre el Salario Mínimo Diferenciado por Regiones en el Perú. María Areta Martínez. 
file:///C:/Users/SEGURA%20Consulting/Downloads/Dialnet-ElDebateSobreElSalarioMinimoDiferenciadoPorRegione-4492129%20(1).pdf. 
¹ Assuming 40% lower prices paid by intermediaries before the creation of the Association. Systematization Report of Selected Bio-Businesses. Profonanpe 2014. Pages 48. 95, 197, 247, 292, 433.

=== PAGE 46 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 42 OF 101 
 
 E 
may represent three times the average compensation.  
 
Other indirect benefits as demonstrated by older bio-businesses like the commercialization of fish by the TAAKI 
Association and the KATINBASCHI Association show the following results made possible by the surplus generated 
by the bio-businesses: 
 
1. Creation of basic grocery shops with 40 per cent lower prices; 
2. Creation of shops to buy tools and production inputs at prices 40 per cent lower than 
intermediaries; 
3. Short term loans to finance consumption, production and health and education needs; 
4. Investment in an ice-making facility; 
5. Investment in a transport fleet; and 
6. Support to education services in the community. 
 
Additional resources generated by bio-businesses represent higher incomes for the indigenous population 
increasing their living standards and improving their productivity (a preferred purchase by families is an additional 
boat with an engine), giving, women especially, increased mobility and opportunities to advance their interests and 
participation in the community. Surpluses accumulated by associations, as seen above, translate into even more 
benefits for the community, improving further its living standards and therefore the access for women to more work 
opportunities (shops employ women) and better services for the community.  
 
Location of new bio-businesses 
 
The new bio-businesses will be located in the most vulnerable areas for deforestation in the Marañon Basin 
(subwatersheds of the Cahuapanas) and the Pastaza Basin (subbasin of the Huitoyacu and the Pastaza Rivers).  
 
 
 
Table E.6.5. Location of new bio-businesses 
 
 
 MORONA BASIN
5
11
Shoroya Nuevo, Nazareth, Puerto Luz 
(Tipishca), Caballito, Bagazán, 
Unanchay, Puerto Pijuayal, ACA Bajo 
Morona
Fish trade
Wood floring, aguaje oil, 
dragon blood
PASTAZA BASIN
12
14
San Fernando, Chimara, Sungache, 
Loboyacu, Soplín. Río Huitoyacu - 
Cocha Huangana, Wijint, Pto. Pijuayal, 
Kuranda Cocha. Río Huitoyacu, Qda. 
Kuranda, Lago Rimachi,  Río Huasaga, 
Lago Anatico, Río Manchari, ACA 
Humedales
Fish trade
Wood flooring, ntual products, 
wild meat, aguaje oil
MARAÑÓN BASIN
1
2
Sinchi Roca
Fish trade
Wood floring, aguaje oil, 
dragon blood
5
Wood floring, aguaje oil, 
dragon blood
CAHUAPANAS BASIN
Aguajales   
(Has.)
Percentage of 
Focus Area
7,885
220,638
1,050,865
44%
18,164
494,322
1,863,099
30%
13%
417,062
16,794
76,440
19,482
132,026
416,066
13%
Deforested 
Area       
(Has.)
Total Area 
(Has.)
BASIN/COMMUNITY
BIO-BUSINESSES

=== PAGE 47 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 43 OF 101 
 
 E 
E.6.4. Application of best practices 
Incubator approach to bio-businesses 
PROFONANPE will use the incubator approach to bio-businesses to develop tailored support for indigenous 
communities, based on successful experiences in other countries. The project will support communities in the 
following topics: 
1) Financial management, including banking practices, contracts, and computerized business applications; 
2) Business practices, including negotiation skills, regulatory obligations, tax payments and partnerships; 
3) Developing and implementing business plans, accessing price and market information, and managing 
support from business schools and other forms of support; and 
4) Communication tools, including the Internet, website design and management, connection with indigenous 
groups in other places, contacting mentors, and identifying successful cases. 
Solar energy (solar photovoltaic and energy storage systems) 
As an integrated activity of Component 2, the project will allocate funds to develop applications for clean and 
renewable energy in bio-business processes, such as equipment operation, lighting, cold storage and lyophilization 
(freeze-drying). This innovation is considered as a technological enhancement of bio-business, which improves their 
probability of success. 
The project will receive support from the Government of the Republic of Korea to implement a pilot intervention for 
the adoption of solar photovoltaic (PV) and energy storage system (ESS) technology on multiple fronts. The initial 
step will be a feasibility study to identify the variety of activities that could adopt this technology, and the available 
sources around the world that meet technical and cost specifications of the Korean assistance. In August 2015, a 
preliminary analysis in the project area was carried out by a delegation from the Government of the Republic of 
Korea, as a way to produce more specific information on electricity needs of bio-businesses and site conditions. 
Based on the preliminary analysis, the Korean delegation identified 6 potential bio-businesses where solar PV and 
ESS will be implemented – three existing bio-businesses (including one aguaje oil plant, one aguaje pulp plant and 
one ice plant); and three new bio-businesses (including one aguaje oil plant, one aguaje pulp plant and one ice 
plant). The expected capacity of solar PV in an aguaje oil plant, an aguaje pulp plant and an ice plant are 8kW, 8kW, 
and 21kW, respectively. In the project, there are 9 existing bio-business plants and 22 new bio-business plants 
consuming electricity for their bio-business processes, however only a select number of bio-businesses can be 
included for installation of PVs and ESS due to a limited budget, and these numbers will be finalized upon 
completion of a feasibility study. Installation of solar PV and ESS will act as a clean technology demonstration 
project and will have a significant replicability potential throughout the isolated communities in the Amazon area. 
These investments by the Government of Korea will add value to the proposed project through piloting an innovative 
approach to integrate clean energy into sustainable land use and forest conservation.   
 
Integration of Innovation and traditional knowledge 
The project will allocate funds for a full-time staff member who will be in charge of knowledge management and 
innovation and will focus on studying and researching technologies that integrate scientific know-how with traditional 
indigenous knowledge. Some of the technologies pursued by this function will be related to high-precision natural 
resources measurement and management; development of practices with new technologies in forestry, harvesting, 
and processing; recycling programmes; and development of alternatives for nature-based energy production. 
The knowledge management function will also work on integrating information management systems and will 
compile and systemize knowledge of sustainable natural resources management.

=== PAGE 48 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 44 OF 101 
 
 E 
 
E.6.5. Key efficiency and effectiveness indicators 
GCF 
core 
indicators 
Estimated cost per t CO2 eq, defined as total investment cost/expected lifetime emission reductions 
(mitigation only) 
 
(a) Total project financing 
USD 9.11 million 
(b) Requested GCF amount  
USD 6.24 million  
(c) Expected emission reductions (10 years)  
2.63 Mt CO2 eq 
(d) Estimated cost per t CO2 eq (d = a/c) 
USD 3.46/t CO2 eq 
(e) Estimated GCF cost per t CO2 eq removed (e = b/c) 
USD 2.37/t CO2 eq 
 
Estimating avoided deforestation: preliminary analysis 
The project will work in PDM, and the historical deforestation statistics have been estimated by MINAM 
and provided to PROFONANPE for this proposal, as indicated in figure C.1.1 and in map 10.4 in section 
I. The data indicate that in this century the average deforestation rate at provincial level is 2,234 ha/year 
and the loss of aguajales averages 102 ha/year. The historical loss of aguajales is depicted in figure 
C.1.2. The direct causes associated with the historical loss of forests in PDM are the expansion of the 
agricultural frontier by new settlers to the province, the exploitation of forests in indigenous lands by 
intermediaries and with the consent of some members of the communities, and the irrational application 
of traditional practices for collecting the fruit from palm trees by cutting the trees. Intermediaries have no 
incentives to apply sustainable practices because they have no stake in the land or its long-term 
productivity. The projection of future deforestation rates is a difficult task that must follow the national 
guidance of the REDD-plus initiative in Peru. Since such guidance is not available at this time, the 
baseline scenario is defined through simple analysis of the historical data. The intensification of short-
term deforestation, using the Kernel method, in provided in map 10.5. Once the national guidance is 
available, the baseline scenario will be defined and communicated. For the purpose of this proposal, the 
following information is used to define the baseline scenario: three scenarios are estimated, from very 
conservative, conservative and high. The first scenario takes the average of the last 10 years and 
assumes that it will be the same during the project’s 10-year planning horizon. The conservative or 
medium scenario estimates the linear trend depicted by the historical data and projects it to the 2016–
2025 period. The high scenario, based on initial projections provided by MINAM, uses a non-linear 
approach to estimate future deforestation. The results are summarized as follows: 
Accumulated deforestation in the 2016–2015 period: 
• 
Very conservative scenario: 22,340 ha;  
• 
Medium scenario:                 40,780 ha; and 
• 
High scenario:                      67,560 ha. 
Accumulated loss of aguajales in the 2016–2025 period: 
• 
Very conservative scenario: 1,020 ha; 
• 
Medium scenario:                 1,956 ha; and 
• 
High scenario:                       5,380 ha.

=== PAGE 49 ===
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 45 OF 101 
 
 E 
Carbon emissions, based on the selected scenarios and the data indicated in table C.1.1 (best available 
scientific information) yields the following results of the carbon stock at risk, in million tonnes of carbon 
(Mt C) in 10 years: 
• 
Very conservative scenario: 3.70 Mt C; 
• 
Medium scenario:                 6.80 Mt C; and 
• 
High scenario:                      13.10 Mt C. 
The following hypotheses are the basis for estimating avoided deforestation: 
For aguajales, the project will work in 338,000 of the province’s 1,226,646 ha of wetlands. In the areas 
subjected to community management, the deforestation rate will be reduced in half. 
For terra firma forests, the project will work in the territories of 120 of the 284 indigenous communities. In 
these areas, the deforestation rate will be reduced by 50 per cent. This expected reduction is a very 
conservative approximation, because data in Western Amazonia show that indigenous communities with 
secure land tenure exhibit low rates of illegal deforestation. 
Under these hypotheses the avoided deforestation estimates are as follows: 
 
Scenario 
Avoided loss of 
aguajales: hectares 
Avoided loss of terra 
firma forest: hectares 
Avoided carbon: Mt 
CO2 eq 
Conservative 
141 
4 720 
2.63 
Medium 
270 
8 615 
4.83 
High 
742 
14 273 
8.92 
Expected volume of finance to be leveraged by the proposed project/programme and as a result of the 
Fund’s financing, disaggregated by public and private sources (mitigation only) 
PROFONANPE has received a letter announcing a co-financing agreement of USD 1.8 million with the 
Government of the Republic of Korea to implement a specific programme to establish a solar PV and 
ESS for processing plants associated with sustainable bio-businesses. The activity will include the 
development of a master plan to identify renewable energy demand and adequate technology, 
installation and maintenance of solar PVs and ESS, training of local engineers for the operation and 
management O&M of solar PVs and ESS, and capacity-building activities for stakeholder engagement 
and awareness raising. A more detailed explanation of the programme can be found in the feasibility 
study. 
Other relevant indicators (e.g., estimated cost per co-benefit 
generated as a result of the project/programme) 
 
* The information can be drawn from the project/programme appraisal document

=== PAGE 50 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 46 OF 101 
 F 
F.1. Economic and Financial Analysis 
Cost of avoided deforestation 
Baseline estimate 
Based on the conservative scenario, the expected deforestation without project intervention is estimated at 1,020 ha of 
aguajales and 22,340 ha of terra firma forest. 
With-project conservative scenario 
Assuming that the project improves forest management and follows best practices for similar areas, we estimate that 
deforestation will reach 879 ha of aguajales and 17,620 ha of terra firma forest. 
Avoided deforestation and cost of carbon tonnes saved through deforestation 
The calculations presented in section E.6.5 indicate that the avoided deforestation for the conservative baseline 
scenario is equivalent to 2.63 Mt CO2 eq for the selected project’s horizon of 10 years. When compared to project 
costs, this helps us to identify the cost of avoided deforestation per dollar spent by the project. 
  
                   
 
 
Economic analysis 
Cost–benefit analysis 
Based on estimates presented in the previous section as well as detailed data from studies carried out on existing bio-
businesses, table 15 presents the cost–benefit analysis of the project. We base our analysis on data estimated from 
seven bio-businesses studied in more detail in tables E.6.3 and 23 (from annex II - feasibility study).  
 
Costs 
The costs were estimated from the detailed breakdown presented in annex 2 (table 23), including the initial investment 
and recurrent costs of purchases of raw materials, labour, energy, transport, depreciation and other items.  The 
average cost was then multiplied by the number of bio-businesses implemented every year as detailed in table F.1.2. 
 
As part of the cost, we include the support that PROFONANPE is committed to provide beyond the life of the project to 
promote the creation of three additional bio-businesses every year.   
We also include the investment for avoided emissions provided by the project consisting of the total amount of the 
project minus the items dedicated to support the bio-businesses. Finally, we include a variable that does not have a 
source of information but is added as an adjustment factor. In this case, we consider that the project can support an 
opportunity cost of leasing the land that we estimate in USD 500,000, a significant value close to 70 per cent of the 
total revenue from bio-businesses.  
 
 
 
 
GCF Project Cost 
Carbon Saved
=
US$7,003,807
2,630,000 Tons
=
US$2.66/t CO2e

=== PAGE 51 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 47 OF 101 
 F 
Table F.1.1. Cost–benefit analysis 
(Millions United States dollars) 
 
 
 
Benefits 
 
As benefits we include the value of revenues produced by bio-businesses created in the life of the project as shown in 
table F.1.2 and by those three bio-businesses added every year after the project ends until 2025. These new bio-
businesses will be financed by PROFONANPE mainly to promote the development of value chains in order to improve 
efficiency and maximize the income generation for associations. Funds will also be used to provide specific technical 
support to existing bio-businesses.    
A second category of benefits is the value of avoided emissions estimating it in 2,626,154 t CO2 eq multiplied by USD 
5/t CO2 eq. The resulting cash flow is negative until the fourth year of the project when it will reach more than USD 1 
million/year, by the sixth year. 
Discounted flows, net present value and internal rate of return 
 
Assuming a discount rate of 7 per cent, the project would be completely paid off by 2021 with a net present value of 
USD 3.34 million and an IRR of 39 per cent. Simulations of the cost-benefit model changing the opportunity cost can 
provide better indicators of present value as well as rate of return. 
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Costs
2.25
   
2.37
  
2.82
  
3.24
  
3.38
  
2.41
  
2.55
  
2.70
  
2.86
  
3.02
  
Bio-businesses costs
0.71
   
0.70
  
1.11
  
1.55
  
1.73
  
1.87
  
2.01
  
2.16
  
2.32
  
2.48
  
PROFONANPE support to bio-businesses
-
     
-
    
-
    
-
    
-
    
0.04
  
0.04
  
0.04
  
0.04
  
0.04
  
Investment for avoided emissions¹
1.04
   
1.17
  
1.21
  
1.19
  
1.15
  
-
    
-
    
-
    
-
    
-
    
Opportunity cost of leasing the land²
0.50
   
0.50
  
0.50
  
0.50
  
0.50
  
0.50
  
0.50
  
0.50
  
0.50
  
0.50
  
Benefits
1.82
   
2.14
  
2.63
  
3.17
  
3.42
  
3.61
  
3.82
  
4.04
  
4.27
  
4.52
  
Bio-business revenues
0.51
   
0.82
  
1.32
  
1.86
  
2.10
  
2.30
  
2.50
  
2.72
  
2.96
  
3.21
  
Avoided CO2 emissions 
1.31
   
1.31
  
1.31
  
1.31
  
1.31
  
1.31
  
1.31
  
1.31
  
1.31
  
1.31
  
Net Cash Flow
(0.43)
  
(0.24)
 
(0.18)
 
(0.07)
 
0.04
  
1.20
  
1.27
  
1.34
  
1.42
  
1.50
  
Price of CO2 emissions (US$/ton CO2e)
5
Discount Factors
Discount Rate
7%
Base Year
2016
Year Index
-
     
1.00
  
2.00
  
3.00
  
4.00
  
5.00
  
6.00
  
7.00
  
8.00
  
9.00
  
Discount Factor
1.00
   
0.93
  
0.87
  
0.82
  
0.76
  
0.71
  
0.67
  
0.62
  
0.58
  
0.54
  
Discounted Flows
Costs
2.25
   
2.22
  
2.46
  
2.65
  
2.58
  
1.72
  
1.70
  
1.68
  
1.66
  
1.64
  
Benefits
1.82
   
2.00
  
2.30
  
2.59
  
2.61
  
2.57
  
2.54
  
2.51
  
2.49
  
2.46
  
Net
(0.43)
  
(0.22)
 
(0.16)
 
(0.06)
 
0.03
  
0.86
  
0.84
  
0.83
  
0.82
  
0.82
  
Cumulative
(0.43)
  
(0.65)
 
(0.81)
 
(0.87)
 
(0.84)
 
0.02
  
0.87
  
1.70
  
2.52
  
3.34
  
Net Present Value
3.34
   
Internal Rate of Return
39%

=== PAGE 52 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 48 OF 101 
 F 
Return on investment 
Due to the difficulties in estimating value and return on investment of activities related to institutional strengthening and 
indigenous community building, we consider the bio-businesses as the only category in this proposal that can be 
valued through market mechanisms. 
Therefore, we estimated the return on investment of the project funds as measured by the average cash flow 
generated by the sample of seven bio-businesses presented in table E.6.3 (for more detail, see table 12 in annex 2). 
Based on the estimates presented in the previous section, we calculated the likely scenario of a return on investment 
of successful bio-business, assuming that: 
1. The cash flow generated by future bio-businesses is equivalent to the average of the sample of seven bio-
businesses presented in the previous section; 
2. The new bio-businesses will reach a total of 50, with 5 in the first year and then 10, 15, 15 and 5, consecutively; 
3. After the project ends, three additional bio-business will be created every year for five years until 2025 with 
support from  the PROFONANPE endowment fund reaching a total of 78 units in 2025; and 
4. The period of analysis is 10 years, until 2025. 
Based on the above criteria, GCF funds invested in the programme, with Component 3 supporting bio-businesses, will 
have a return of 21 per cent. 
 
Table F.1.2. Internal rate of return calculated on bio-businesses 
 
 
F.2. Technical Evaluation  
Section C.2 provides information on the logical relation between the proposed activities and the identified threats. In 
particular the following subsections are highlighted:  
• 
Responding to identified threats; 
• 
Mitigation logical framework; 
• 
Adaptation component logical framework; and  
• 
Proposed strategy.  
Solar power needs for the bio-businesses is provided in section E.6.4. 
Total
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
CASH FLOW FROM BIO-BUSINESSES
  Average cash flow (in thousand $us)
(11.23)
  
3.43
     
4.77
     
5.29
     
5.85
     
6.45
     
7.08
     
7.76
     
8.48
     
9.24
     
  Bio-businesses in operation (Unit)
13
13
  New bio-businesses (Unit)
65
5
10
15
15
5
3
3
3
3
3
  Total bio-businesses in operation (Unit)
18
28
43
58
63
66
69
72
75
78
    Total cash flow (million of $us)
(0.20)
    
0.10
     
0.21
     
0.31
     
0.37
     
0.43
     
0.49
     
0.56
     
0.64
     
0.72
     
INVESTMENTS 
  GCF Contribution (million of $us)
1.50
0.06
  
0.60
  
0.60
  
0.15
  
0.09
  
Net Flow (million of $us)
(0.26)
 
(0.50)
 
(0.39)
 
0.16
  
0.28
  
0.43
  
0.49
  
0.56
  
0.64
  
0.72
  
Internal Rate of Return
21%

=== PAGE 53 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 49 OF 101 
 F 
F.3. Environmental, Social Assessment, including Gender Considerations 
PS1: Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and impacts. The project’s social and 
environmental classification is “C”. The project will not generate adverse environmental and social impacts and risks. 
Instead, institutional strengthening of government and community institutions, coupled with management plans for the 
sustainable use of natural resources for income-generating bio-businesses, will contribute to providing proper care for 
the natural resources base and to improving livelihoods in the province. 
Negative environmental and social impacts and risks are minor and can be prevented and/or mitigated. A strong bond 
and trust have been built between PROFONANPE and indigenous communities in the area. This is one consideration 
that explains the indigenous communities’ request to join the project. Their full support for the project can be verified 
with the results obtained during the participatory process of social licensing (consultation) held in June 2015. Section 
E.5.3 summarizes the consultation process, indicating the participation of over 80 communities represented by nearly 
500 people and 21 organizations (federations, associations, committees, etc.). 
Prevention and mitigation measures for social and environmental impacts and risks have been designed and are 
summarized in the table below. 
Project component 
Related activity 
Potential 
environmental 
and social risks 
Prevention/mitigation measure 
Component 1: 
Strengthened 
institutional capacity in 
government 
organizations 
Institutional 
strengthening 
Increased motor 
boat traffic and 
solid waste 
- 
Plan trips efficiently to reduce motor boat 
traffic 
- 
Solid-waste disposal campaign 
Component 2: 
Strengthening capacity 
of community-based 
institutions 
Formulation and 
implementation of 
the land-use plans 
(POT) and natural 
resources 
management plans 
Exclusion of 
minorities 
- 
Create opportunities and mechanisms to 
promote dialogue and conflict resolution in 
order to protect the rights of minorities 
Institutional 
strengthening 
Increased motor 
boat traffic and 
solid waste 
The same as those established for Component 1 
Component 3: Building 
resilience through 
sustainable bio-
businesses 
Promotion of bio-
businesses 
Unexpected 
changes in 
community 
organization 
- 
Avoid concentration of power and money in a 
few individuals or households 
- 
Build self-esteem and cultural identity of 
indigenous communities 
- 
Create spaces for women’s participation in 
bio-businesses 
- 
Empower women in the logic of economic 
development 
- 
Promote the sharing of experiences between 
women from target groups and other women 
leaders 
- 
Consider inclusion in the project team of a 
professional sociologist or anthropologist to 
observe and evaluate any change in social 
dynamics of indigenous communities that 
could constitute a risk to the population

=== PAGE 54 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 50 OF 101 
 F 
Increased motor 
boat traffic and 
solid waste 
The same as those established for Component 1 
Unsustainable 
harvesting of 
natural resources 
- 
Strict monitoring of management plans 
Use of fossil fuel 
to generate 
energy for 
processing 
- 
Use available town energy where possible 
and study the possibility of using renewable 
energy 
 
If unforeseen impacts or risks arise during project implementation, specific measures will be established to prevent, 
correct and/or mitigate them. These must be included in the Environmental and Social Management System of 
PROFONANPE. 
Engagement with stakeholders; communications and grievance mechanism 
Consensus will be the preferred method in the negotiation of complaints and local demands. In particular, the project 
will expand the participatory monitoring process to include a space to gather suggestions, questions and complaints 
directly from the community (in contrast to the formal process in which the community leader provides feedback to 
project managers). All suggestions, questions and complaints will be documented, analysed and provided with a 
formal answer. 
Furthermore, the PROFONANPE website will maintain an online format for users to make suggestions, ask questions, 
request information and file complaints. This correspondence will be sent to the Administration and Finance Director, 
and the Development and Supervision Director, who will have the responsibility to reply, when applicable. Project 
stakeholders will be informed about this procedure. It should also be mentioned that the Directorate of Development 
and Supervision of PROFONANPE will be in charge of implementing the environmental and social risk management 
system. 
As it was mentioned in section E.5.3, under the framework of the National REDD-plus Strategy, a n Attention to the 
Citizen Mechanism is being built. The project will adopt this mechanism once approved by the GOP. 
PS2. Labour and working conditions. PROFONANPE has high standards when hiring staff and rigorously applies 
all of Peru’s legal guidelines, in addition to standards set by international cooperation agencies. All staff recruitment 
takes place in a competitive and transparent manner, without discrimination, and is particularly respectful of local 
sensitivities where it works. 
The project does not involve the permanent recruitment of indigenous staff. It seeks to empower communities to 
implement the actions identified as a result of the enactment of POT and natural resources management plans. This 
does not exclude the fact that, among consultants and technical staff, the project may give preference to those who 
are from the region and are of indigenous origin. 
The project will not promote or force child labour. (In indigenous communities, underage children are traditionally 
involved in productive activities as apprentices and perform tasks suited to their abilities under adult supervision.) 
PS3: Resource efficiency and pollution prevention. The project will not generate any significant pollution or GHG 
emissions. In addition, to avoid soil contamination and emissions from processing plants used for the transformation of 
biodiversity products, alternative-energy generation based on renewable resources will be tested. Innovation in bio-
businesses will be promoted to ensure the processing efficiency of sustainably harvested products.

=== PAGE 55 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 51 OF 101 
 F 
PS4: Community health, safety and security. The project will ensure that health and safety conditions apply to 
communities and personnel working on project activities: for example, the use of life jackets on motor boat trips. 
Furthermore, the project will ensure that all sanitation and safety regulations required by the relevant offices issuing 
authorizations—fisheries, forestry, processing plants—are complied with. A registry of incidents and accidents will be 
kept so that corrective measures may be implemented. 
PS5. Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement. The project will not generate the displacement of indigenous 
communities. Instead, it will strengthen legal security by promoting land titling and land-use planning. It seeks the 
sustainable use of, and unrestricted access to, natural resources in the province, without discriminating between 
indigenous and non-indigenous peoples. There is a possibility that non-indigenous peoples and persons from outside 
the territory may inhabit the same territory as project beneficiaries. In these cases, the project will develop a policy of 
intercultural interaction as is currently being implemented in ACAs. 
PS6: Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural resources. The project will 
contribute to protecting and conserving Amazonian biodiversity and ecosystem services by applying community 
management plans to large areas of wetlands. Income generation based on sustainably managing and adding value to 
local natural resources will provide additional reasons for communities and government agencies to care for and 
oversee the resource base. The existing bio-businesses have management plans based on biodiversity conservation 
principles. These plans are updated periodically and have strict reporting requirements. 
PS7. Indigenous peoples. Indigenous peoples are understood as peoples whose ancestors were in territories that 
were conquered and have preserved cultural institutions and their own identity. In Peru, the State has recognized the 
rights 
of 
54 
indigenous 
or 
native 
peoples, 
including 
7 
ethnic 
groups 
of 
this 
project 
(<http://bdpi.cultura.gob.pe/introduccion>). To date there is no information on the composition of men and women. 
However, it is estimated that women make up 50 per cent of the population in the area.  
The main socioeconomic activities common to all indigenous peoples are subsistence agriculture (farms), fishing, 
hunting, timber extraction to commercialization and extraction of non-timber species with food, craft or medicinal 
purposes.  
 
The project will ensure full respect for indigenous peoples. It will be implemented in indigenous territories where 
activities can only be carried out with prior informed consent. Its design included this process, as a result of which the 
social licensing of the project was obtained. This process included an intercultural approach and was gender sensitive. 
The project will develop a process of information and permanent dialogue with indigenous peoples, so that all 
decisions regarding it will be taken with consensus as the preferred method. 
The project will develop guidelines for social safeguards implementation and all actors involved in it will be trained in 
their use so that all can apply the safeguards. Finally, the project includes a strong tracking component to periodically 
report on its implementation. 
The project does not require an indigenous peoples plan because the beneficiaries of the entire project are indigenous 
peoples. Nonetheless, the project will prepare such plans with the communities as elements of the POT process. 
PS8. Cultural heritage. The project will fully respect the cultural heritage of indigenous populations. Archaeological 
remains in the area must still be legally recognized by the national authority; the Ministry of Culture. If the project finds 
archaeological remains or elements of the cultural heritage of ethnic groups and communities, it will follow the rules 
and guidelines laid down in the Regulations for Archaeological Intervention (RIA). The corresponding decree stipulates 
that chance archaeological findings should be reported to the Regional Directorate of Culture (for the project, the 
directorate is located in Iquitos), which in turn is under the Ministry of Culture. This directorate is responsible for 
undertaking archaeological assessments, will determine the existence and extent of the remains found, and will take

=== PAGE 56 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 52 OF 101 
 F 
the required actions in coordination with the project team. The project will take steps to prevent these remains from 
being damaged and promote their conservation. Part of the project is located within the Abanico del Pastaza Wetland 
Complex Ramsar Site, which could be considered a natural heritage site since it will also contribute to the protection of 
this wetland of international importance. 
Gender 
Based on cultural aspects, indigenous families have well-defined roles for their members. Men are responsible for 
hunting, fishing and forest resource gathering, while women are in charge of food preparation and childcare. Work on 
the farm (chacra), where yuca (Manihot esculenta) is the principal product, is an activity performed by both men and 
women. 
Although men carry out extractive activities, the processing and conservation activities will incorporate women. 
According to the experience of the Pastaza Morona–First Stage Project with bio-business implementation, women 
were included in the productive transformation and preservation process (aguaje fruit processing, drying and salting 
fish), and in the production of handicrafts and ceramics. Taking these experiences into account, the project will create 
spaces for the gradual participation of women in bio-businesses and will train them in economic development issues, 
and promote their role in forest management and participatory monitoring. Furthermore, it will promote the sharing of 
experiences with women leaders of other indigenous groups, while respecting their traditional customs, and will 
promote to the extent possible their access to financial products, as part of the component to support indigenous 
peoples’ registration and access to finance. 
Currently, most women in the seven native communities only speak their native language. In that sense, the project 
will be respectful of their culture and will seek to achieve the gradual participation of women in community meetings, 
enabling the conduction of such meetings in each population’s language. 
There is a considerable gap in socioeconomic and family composition data and information on the ethnic groups in 
PDM. It will take a long time to build trust before such information can be collected. The proposed M&E system will 
seek to gather such data. 
PROFONANPE will seek a balanced participation of women in the field office. If feasible, no less than 50 per cent of 
the project’s personnel in Datem del Marañón will be women. 
F.4. Financial Management and Procurement 
PROFONANPE has expertise in working with donor funds and has a good track record in implementing or co-
implementing 36 programmes and projects using sound financial management practices. The PROFONANPE 
Directorate of Administration and Finance adheres to policies and procedures that meet donor agencies’ requirements. 
For this project, it will be responsible for fiduciary aspects and will be accountable for all financial and investment 
activities. 
With regard to accounting policies and procedures, the principal regulatory framework for the project’s financial 
management will comprise: (a) Peru’s laws governing budget and financial management for the private sector; and (b) 
the operating manuals and norms of PROFONANPE, which include acceptable accounting policies and procedures. 
The tailor-made administrative management integrated system (Sistema Integrado de Gestión Administrativa) of 
PROFONANPE enables the recording of the entity’s transactions through the use of international accounting 
standards. Financial statements are prepared using the accrual basis of accounting and the standard chart of 
accounts accepted in Peru. 
A specific bank account, in United States dollars, is set up for the project and resources are changed to local currency

=== PAGE 57 ===
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 53 OF 101 
 F 
according to the project’s requirements. 
PROFONANPE does not have an internal audit department. However, it has a control specialist, reporting to the 
Director of Administration and Finance, in charge of: (a) checking all payment support documents and ensuring 
compliance with the donor’s hiring and procurement conditions; (b) checking compliance with terms of contracts for the 
procurement of goods and services, in regard to deliverables, deadlines, service conformity, amounts and 
characteristics or delivered goods or equipment, work assessments, and work progress reports; and (c) ensuring 
payment vouchers comply with tax regulations. Furthermore, PROFONANPE has an internal audit committee 
designated by its Board of Directors that follows and controls an external auditing process. In addition, the 
administrative staff of PROFONANPE has established periodic and spot-check reviews (in situ) of programmes’ and 
projects’ accounting and financing procedures. The purpose of these reviews is to verify the accuracy of the 
documents and to ensure that agreed activities have been implemented using internal regulations. 
The budget for travel and per diems is consistent with the policy of PROFONANPE, and is the same one applied to all 
projects in the area. The rates are arrived after taking into account the most recent information gathered in the region.

=== PAGE 58 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 54 OF 101 
 
 G 
G.2. Risk Factors and Mitigation Measures 
 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
Description 
Risk 
category 
Level of risk 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Development of a negative perception of project 
activities or personnel by key stakeholders. Although 
the previous project built trust with all indigenous 
communities, there is a potential risk for the 
relationship to sour with some key stakeholders. The 
likely consequence would be a protracted project, with 
Technical and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
G.1. Risk Assessment Summary 
The following risks have been identified: 
Financial risks: No relevant risk has been identified in this category. PROFONANPE has over 20 years of 
experience in managing, channelling, supporting and supervising project execution, with considerable success 
in carrying out its fiduciary responsibilities. Delay in securing co-financing, other than the endowment fund of 
PROFONANPE, does not affect the proposed core activities. Given that the Government of the Republic 
Korea is co-financing a technology-enhancing component, no risk is associated with such a grant, planned to 
become effective by the fourth quarter of 2016.  
Technical risks: The project does not include complex technologies. Natural products (pulp, flour, oils) are  
processed/extracted through the use of proven technologies, which the project seeks to adapt to the particular 
setting of the Amazon Basin and to improve through innovation and science. 
Operational risks: (a) Development of a negative perception of project activities or personnel by key 
stakeholders; and (b) difficulties in hiring proficient and experienced personnel to work in Datem del Marañón 
for the duration of the project. Other operational risks include: market failure and lack of local skills related to 
the maintenance of the bio-business’ equipment. 
Social risks: Potential heightening of social tensions associated with newcomers and immigrants to the 
province. As indicated in the analysis of threats to the area of interest, very strong external forces are exerting 
pressure on Datem del Marañón. These include illegal forest harvesting and cutting and/or the search for 
highly adaptable areas for palm oil plantations. 
Environmental risks: Although the project’s environmental category is “C” (very low environmental impact), 
other external environmental events could disrupt the project’s performance: (a) severe droughts and 
associated fires; and (b) large oil spills that affect swamps, aguajales, and associated ecosystems, killing 
vegetation and reducing production of inputs for bio-businesses. Such events could force the communities to 
seek other areas to harvest; this could have potential social, economic and environmental consequences. 
Political risks: Elections for the executive and legislative branches are to be held in 2016. Political shifts could 
reduce the national government’s interest in channelling resources to the project area. 
Performance risks: External market conditions or lower than expected demand could affect the performance of 
bio-businesses.

=== PAGE 59 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 55 OF 101 
 
 G 
uncertainty about the achievement of key outputs and 
results. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project implementation team will continue with its successful strategy of entrusting all decision-making authority 
to the communities and acting as the principal facilitator, trainer and source for technical assistance. The Project 
Manager will exercise utmost respect for the communities, their customs and governance structures. 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
Description 
Risk 
category 
Level of risk 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Difficulties 
in hiring 
proficient and 
experienced 
personnel to work in Datem del Marañón for the 
duration of the project. Living conditions in the project 
area are difficult, communications are poor, and trips 
to and from Lima take two or more days each way. 
The area has limited health services, making health 
issues a major concern for those willing to work in 
Datem del Marañón. Under these circumstances, the 
pool of competent and experienced professionals is 
limited, and selecting the right personnel is critical. 
Technical and 
operational 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
PROFONAPE offers competitive salaries and has the reputation of being “a good place to work”. In addition, 
frequent travel to Lima might be agreed in order to attract candidates. A national competitive process will be 
implemented. If the right candidate is found, PROFONANPE will negotiate his/her participation. At least three of the 
main professionals in the field will be women, including the Project Manager. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
Description 
Risk 
category 
Level of risk 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Potential heightening of social tensions associated 
with newcomers and immigrants to the province. In the 
past, violence has erupted as a consequence of 
immigrants and others moving into the area. Such 
events have the potential to disrupt field activities, 
delay meetings and actions, prevent the normal flow of 
work, and increase transaction costs. 
Social and 
environmental 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
This type of event is difficult to predict in a large area with a sparse population and minimum government presence. 
The project has included the training of indigenous communities and associations in conflict-resolution methods.

=== PAGE 60 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 56 OF 101 
 
 G 
Peaceful resolution of differences will be encouraged, as well as through example in the implementation of the 
project activities. The project will ensure to set a monitoring plan to provide early warning on any potential social 
conflict. In addition to that, a grievance mechanism will be put in place as part of the activities of the project. 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
Description 
Risk 
category 
Level of risk 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Severe droughts and associated fires have proved to 
be potentially very disruptive to life and economic 
activities in the Amazon. Transportation is severely 
curtailed, natural productivity is reduced, the quality of 
forest products has changed, and more time is needed 
to find food. In addition, forest fires could become a 
real threat to communities unfamiliar with the 
phenomena and lacking the skills necessary to survive 
and/or 
contain 
fires. 
Health 
issues 
could 
be 
aggravated as a consequence of smoke. 
Social and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Droughts take time to develop. Contingency plans could be formulated with the support of experts brought into the 
region. The project is building social capital by strengthening the social and support network in Datem del Marañón, 
and will use this network to disseminate good practices, strengthen awareness, train personnel, heighten 
surveillance and monitoring, and facilitate the formulation of contingency plans. Resources could be diverted for 
these activities if needed. PROFONANPE will work with MINAM and the General Directorate of Forestry in the 
development of a national plan of action to address the increasing likelihood of forest fires in the Amazon. Such a 
plan of action has not yet been developed. 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
Description 
Risk 
category 
Level of risk 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Large oil spills that affect swamps, aguajales, and 
associated 
ecosystems, 
killing 
vegetation 
and 
reducing the production of inputs for bio-businesses. 
Social and 
environmental 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Oil spills have a long history in the province: production wells are common and oil pipelines criss-cross its territory. A 
large oil spill could affect swamps, lakes and swamp forests, and could produce forest fires if it occurs during dry 
conditions or drought events. The responsibility for dealing with these events is outside of the project’s sphere of 
influence. The project will provide support in developing appropriate emergency preparedness plans, including 
communications with relevant authorities to inform and seek assistance in case of an emergency. It could facilitate 
dialogue and encourage peaceful resolution of the generated conflict. At the request of the communities affected, 
the project could provide training and technical assistance to develop good practices for living and coping with the 
consequences of such events until definite action is taken.

=== PAGE 61 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 57 OF 101 
 
 G 
 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
Description 
Risk 
category 
Level of risk 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Political shifts could reduce the national government’s 
interest in channelling resources to the project area 
and potentially change incentives to promote palm oil 
development. Because Peru is facing a new election 
cycle, it is clear that support for one of the country’s 
poorest provinces, with a very sparse population and 
even lower political leverage, is highly dependent on 
the elected officials and their preferences. An adverse 
result could bring sharp reductions in government 
investment and support for Datem del Marañón. From 
the project’s perspective, this could imply a reduction 
in cooperation and protracted bureaucratic processes 
that might delay the adoption of decisions. 
Other 
High (>20% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project is well established in the region and the province. It has gained the support of all levels of government. 
Building this relationship has required time and perseverance, as well as trust-building activities. The two main 
mitigation options to be implemented are: (a) “early engagement” (i.e. provision of information and data to 
disseminate expected outcomes); and (b) “awareness creation” through well-orchestrated events to disseminate the 
project and its achievements.  
It is also important to note that the project will coordinate with the relevant governmental organizations at the 
national level to mitigate these risks, including the Forestry Service (SERFOR), the Ministry of Agriculture 
(MINAGRI), and the National Program of Forest Conservation (PNCB) at the Ministry of Environment (MINAM), 
more specifically in regard to the agricultural development and palm oil Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action 
(NAMA) currently under preparation.  
Selected Risk Factor 7 
Description 
Risk 
category 
Level of risk 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
Political risk arising from the indigenous communities’ 
registration and land titling, including potential conflict 
between different groups, and the inability of the 
independent Redress Mechanism to solve conflicts 
and to solve them in a timely manner. If these risks 
were to materialize, they would affect not only the 
project, but through legal and reputational risks, both 
the accredited entity and the GCF. 
Other 
Medium (5.1-
20% of project 
value) 
Medium

=== PAGE 62 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 58 OF 101 
 
 G 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project is well aware of the long fight of indigenous communities to gain legal tenure of their territories. 
PROFONANPE has gained the support of all levels of government. Building this relationship has required time and 
perseverance, as well as trust-building activities. The main mitigation measures to be implemented are:  
(a) Transparency in communication, stressing that the project has no land titling component; 
(b) The Project will facilitate the registration of indigenous peoples with the National Registry, giving rights to those 
legally recognized by the State, and as an early step in the process of land titling in Peru. 
(c) Participation in project’s activities will be conditioned to peaceful and respectful assembly of all interested parties 
to create a common vision for their territory. Conflict resolution training will be provided before the start of all 
planning including community planning for the use of their natural resources;  
(d) Dissemination of the project’s scope and components will continue during the entire live of the activities.  
It is important to note that the project will not encourage land titling, instead it seeks to build consensus on long term 
land-use planning of the territory already allocated to indigenous communities but also to promote conservation 
areas which are to be managed by both local governments and indigenous communities. For example, Component 
1, strengthening government agencies, seeks to build the enabling environment to: (i) give natural resources users 
the responsibility to manage their territory; and, (ii) give legal protection to bio-business through approved 
Management Plans. It is also relevant to indicate that representatives of indigenous groups at the local and national, 
level will get involved in the decision making process of the project as members of the board of the project with a 
yearly rotation period.  
Selected Risk Factor 8 
Description 
Risk 
category 
Level of risk 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
The potential failure of the bio-business is also critical 
for ensuring the sustainability of the economic 
activities which are innovative products with high 
transaction costs. 
Other 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Medium 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The bio-business includes a diversified portfolio of alternatives for some of which the project relies on previous 
experience from PROFONANPE. In addition, strong components related to marketing nationally and internationally 
are considered in the project activities. The project already includes the assumption that there will be a failure rate of 
20 per cent, and includes an endowment fund mechanism to provide technical assistance to struggling bio-
businesses and supports the creation of new ones. 
Selected Risk Factor 9 
Description 
Risk 
category 
Level of risk 
Probability of risk 
occurring 
No-materialization, or materialization of a lower 
amount 
of 
co-financing 
could 
compromise 
the 
Financial 
Low (<5% of 
project value) 
Low

=== PAGE 63 ===
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 59 OF 101 
 
 G 
provision of energy to the processing plants of bio-
businesses and boats. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project has received a commitment letter from the Government of the Republic of Korea. Talks have confirmed 
co-financing to the value of USD 1.8 million. In case the co-financing does not fully materialize, bio-businesses will 
have access to conventional sources of energy, such as diesel generators.  
* Please expand this sub-section when needed to address all potential material and relevant risks.

=== PAGE 64 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 60 OF 101 
 
 H 
H.1. Logic Framework.  
Please specify the logic framework in accordance with the GCF’s Performance Measurement Framework 
under the Results Management Framework. 
 
H.1.1. Paradigm Shift Objectives and Impacts at the Fund level13 
Paradigm shift objectives 
Shift to low-emission 
sustainable development 
pathways 
The project will preserve one of the world’s largest carbon stocks. Due to the nature of the peatlands 
and their strong vulnerability to intense droughts and anthropogenic forces, the project will create 
enabling conditions for users to sustainably manage their natural resource base. 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verificatio
n (MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term  
(if 
applicable) 
Final 
Fund-level impacts 
M4.0 Reduced 
emissions from land use, 
reforestation, reduced 
deforestation, and 
through sustainable 
forest management and 
conservation and 
enhancement of forest 
carbon stocks 
M4.1 Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t 
CO2 eq) reduced or 
avoided (including 
increased removals) as 
a result of GCF-funded 
projects/programmes–
forest and land-use 
subindicator  
Average C 
content in 
forest class 
times 
avoided 
deforestatio
n, using the 
measureme
nt, 
reporting 
and 
verification 
(MRV) 
system 
being 
developed 
at the 
national 
level and 
data 
generated 
at the local 
level  
0 t CO2 eq 
0.65 Mt 
1.31 
Mt CO2 
after 5 
years 
and 
2.63 
Mt CO2 
after 
10 
years  
1. MINAM, through the 
national MRV 
programme, collects 
detailed data on 
deforestation through 
satellites. 2.Communities 
and local governments 
enforce land-use plans 
against palm oil 
development and illegal 
logging 
A1.0 Increased 
resilience and enhanced 
livelihoods of the most 
vulnerable people, 
communities and 
regions 
A1.2 Number of males 
and females benefiting 
from the adoption of 
diversified, climate-
resilient livelihood 
options (including 
fisheries, agriculture, 
tourism, etc.) 
Data 
collected 
from 
families 
participatin
g in bio-
business 
collected 
from 
internal 
reports 
biannually 
5 000 ( 
1 079 
families)  
11 000 
(Populati
on 
assessm
ent from 
20 new 
bio-
business
es times 
estimate
d 
average 
20 400 
(  
4 150 
familie
s). 
Communities secure 
approved management 
plans for bio-businesses; 
participation in bio-
businesses promoted by 
leaders of the community  
13 Information on the expected results and indicators of the GCF can be found in its performance Measurement 
frameworks available at the following link (Please note that some indicators are under refinement): 
<http://www.gcfund.org/fileadmin/00_customer/documents/Operations/5.3_Initial_PMF.pdf>.

=== PAGE 65 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 61 OF 101 
 
 H 
and 
annually 
number 
of 
participa
nts) 
A 4.0 Improved 
resilience of ecosystems 
and ecosystem services  
 
A 4.1 Coverage/scale of 
ecosystems protected 
and strengthened in 
response to climate 
variability and change  
Areas 
under 
approved 
manageme
nt plans 
(hectares) 
Two 
ACAs 
operating 
330 000 
ha 
 
3 ACAs: 
338 
000 ha 
Authorities approve 
management plans  
Approved management 
plans add value to bio-
businesses  
 
H.1.2. Outcomes, Outputs, Activities and Inputs at Project/Programme level 
Expected Result 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions 
Mid-term 
(if 
applicable)  
Final 
 
Project/programme 
outcomes 
Outcomes that contribute to Fund-level impacts 
M9.0 Improved 
management of land or 
forest areas contributing to 
emission reductions 
M9.1 Hectares of land 
or forests under 
improved and effective 
management that 
contributes to CO2 
emission reductions 
National 
Forest 
Conservatio
n 
Programme 
data using 
the MRV 
system 
being 
developed at 
the national 
level and 
data 
generated at 
the local 
level 
34 356 
100 000 
338 
000 
MINAM, through the 
national MRV 
programme, collects 
detailed data on 
deforestation through 
satellites. Project studies 
will provide better 
estimates of carbon 
avoided 
M5.0 Strengthened 
institutional and regulatory 
systems 
M5.1 Institutional and 
regulatory systems that 
improve incentives for 
low-emission planning 
and development and 
their effective 
implementation 
Participatory 
planning 
process 
agreed by 
key 
stakeholders
. 
Land-use 
plan 
approved 
0 
– 
1 
Indigenous peoples 
agree on delimitation of 
their territory; 
regulatory stability 
Volume of leveraged 
financing 
Amount of funds 
leveraged  through bio-
businesses and other 
project activities 
Bio-
businesses’ 
reports and 
studies and 
mid-term 
and final 
evaluations 
USD0 
USD 1 
million 
USD 
2.9 
million 
Willingness and financial 
capability of associations 
to access additional 
financing 
Other project/programme 
outcome 
Outcomes that do not directly contribute to Fund-level impacts

=== PAGE 66 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 62 OF 101 
 
 H 
Component 3: Bio-
businesses increase 
income of indigenous 
communities  
Number of bio-
businesses operating 
with positive cash flow 
Financial 
statements 
with positive 
cash flow 
13 bio-
busine
sses 
33 bio-
business
es 
63 bio-
busine
sses 
Communities’ interest; 
favourable/stable market 
conditions 
Project/programme 
outputs 
Outputs that contribute to outcomes 
Component 1: Strengthened institutional capacity in government organizations 
1.1. Indigenous peoples 
registered 
1.1.1. Number of 
registration campaigns 
Annual 
reports 
0 
7 
7 (1 for 
each 
ethnic 
group) 
Communities’ interest 
1.1.2. Number of 
indigenous people with 
identity national 
document (DNI) 
registered during project 
implementation 
Public 
registry 
0 
1 000 
3 000 
Communities’ interest 
1.2. Land-use plan (POT) 
approved 
1.2.1. POT ordinance 
issued 
Land-use 
plan 
ordinance 
0 
– 
1 
Indigenous peoples’ 
interest and political will 
1.3. New ACA established 
1.3.1. ACA established 
Ordinance 
enacting the 
new ACA 
2 
– 
1 
Indigenous peoples’ 
interest and political will 
1.4. Conflict-resolution 
authority granted to ACAs 
1.4.1. Document on 
legal analysis and 
interpretation 
Document 
on legal 
analysis and 
interpretatio
n 
0 
– 
1 
 
1.4.2. Number of trained 
staff 
Annual 
reports 
1 
10 
20 
Political will 
1.5. Provincial climate 
change strategy adopted 
1.5.1. Number of 
districts implementing 
the climate change 
strategy 
Annual 
reports from 
the province 
on action 
plan 
implementati
on 
0 
2 
6 
Political will 
1.6. Climate monitoring 
system in operation 
1.6.1. Number of 
reports documenting 
traditional knowledge 
Reports on 
climate 
monitoring 
0 
1 
4 
Communities’ interest 
1.7. ZEE concluded for the 
province 
1.7.1. ZEE concluded 
and submitted 
ZEE 
document 
0 
– 
1 
Political will 
1.8. Region’s climate 
change strategy updated 
1.8.1. Number of 
provincial proposals 
submitted to the region 
to update the climate 
change strategy 
Proposal 
reports 
0 
– 
1 
Political will 
1.9. White papers on 
legislation for communities’ 
land resources 
management produced 
1.9.1. Amount of 
feedback on white 
papers received (forest, 
lakes, wetlands) 
Papers 
submitted 
0 
1 
3 
Communities’ interest 
and political will 
1.10. GIS-based 
information for 
environmental monitoring 
system in operation 
1.10.1. Number of 
database sets 
submitted (forest, lakes, 
wetlands) 
Annual 
reports 
0 
1 
3 
 
Component 2: Strengthened capacity of community-based institutions 
2.1. Climate change 
observatory in operation 
2.1.1. Percentage of 
communities generating 
Reports 
documenting 
0 
10 
30  
Communities’ interest

=== PAGE 67 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 63 OF 101 
 
 H 
information on climate 
change observations 
traditional 
knowledge 
2.1.2. Percentage of 
women participating in 
climate change 
observations 
0 
20 
50 
Women´s interest  in 
participating in climate 
change observations 
2.2. Natural resources 
management plans under 
implementation 
2.2.1. Number of plans 
approved 
Managemen
t plans 
10 
20 
50 
Communities’ interest 
2.3. Development and 
implementation of  the 
management tools of ACAs 
2.3.1. Number of tools 
approved 
Tools 
approved 
0 
1 
3 per 
ACA 
Political will 
2.4. Periodic updates of the 
monitoring management 
plans of ACAs 
2.4.1. Number of 
monitoring reports 
Reports 
0 
1 
4 
 
2.5. Associations in 
operation 
2.5.1. Number of 
associations in 
operation 
Register files 
13 
15 
35 
Communities’ interest 
2.5.2.Percentage of 
trained women per 
association 
Reports 
0% 
5% 
10% 
Women´s interest in 
participating in bio-
business and 
communities´ interest in 
integrate them in steering 
committees 
2.6. EMP 
Number of EMPs 
EMPs 
0  
2  
7  
Communities’ interest 
Component 3: Resilience built through sustainable bio-businesses in natural resources management areas 
3.1. Women take active 
roles in the bio-businesses 
3.1.1. Percentage of 
women participating in 
bio-business 
Bio-business 
associations’ 
reports 
– 
10 
10 
Women´s interest in 
participating in bio-
business and 
communities´ interest in 
integrate them in steering 
committees 
3.1.2. Number of 
indigenous people 
trained, with increased 
participation by women 
(trainings/trained/wome
n) 
Associations
’ meeting 
minutes; 
Filed reports 
3/26/6 
10/50/18 
25/200
/70 
Communities’ interest 
Gender discrimination 
3.2. Bio-businesses using 
solar PV and ESS 
3.2.1. Number of bio-
businesses using solar 
energy 
Annual 
reports 
0 
3 
6 
In-kind co-financing 
3.3. Bio-business initiatives 
using innovations in 
production methods and 
tools 
3.3.1. Number of bio-
business initiatives with 
innovated methods or 
tools 
Annual 
reports 
2 
2 
10 
In-kind co-financing 
3.4. Commercialization 
strategies developed 
3.4.1. Number of bio-
business products 
exported 
Associations
' meeting 
minutes 
0 
– 
2 of 50 
Market interest and 
competitive products 
3.5. Certification programs 
introduced 
3.5.1. Number of bio-
business producers 
certified 
Certifications 
0 
– 
2 of 50 
 
3.6. International 
commercial links in 
operation 
3.6.1. Number of 
agreements with 
local/foreign buyers 
Signed 
agreements 
(local/foreign
) 
0 / 0 
– 
35 / 2  
of 50 
Market interest and 
competitive products 
Enhanced technology 
implemented

=== PAGE 68 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 64 OF 101 
 
 H 
Component 4: Science, technology, knowledge management, and monitoring and evaluation systems established 
4.1. Design of technology 
enhancement for 
productive bio-businesses 
4.1.1. Number of 
technology 
enhancements adopted 
by bio-businesses 
Reports 
0 
1 
3 
Availability of 
technological supply 
4.2. Hydrological modelling 
4.2.1. Number of 
weather stations 
Reports 
0 
4 
4 
 
4.2.2. Number of 
reports 
Reports 
0 
1 
2 
 
4.3. Anthropological, 
economic and 
management resource 
observations systemized 
4.4.1. Number of 
systemization 
documents 
Systemizatio
n document 
0 
1 
3 
 
4.4. Project description and 
lessons learned prepared 
4.5.1. Number of 
reports 
Initial 
implementati
on, mid-term 
and final 
evaluation 
reports 
0 
2 
3 
 
4.5. Communication 
strategy implemented 
4.6.1. Communication 
strategy 
Communicat
ion strategy 
approved 
0 
1 
1 
 
4.6. Dissemination 
brochures distributed 
4.7.1. Number of 
brochures issued 
Brochures 
issued 
0 
7 
15 
 
4.7. Website fully 
operational 
4.8.1. Website 
Website 
0 
1 
1 
 
4.8. Project reports 
distributed 
4.9.1. Number of mid-
year reports 
Mid-year 
reports 
0 
3 
5 
 
4.9.2. Number of annual 
reports 
Annual 
reports 
0 
2 
5 
 
Activities 
Description 
Inputs 
Description 
Component 1: Strengthened institutional capacity in government organizations 
1.1.1. Registration 
campaigns 
Visit communities, communications by 
radio and print 
Logistics, contracts 
for advertising 
Hire of transport vehicles, 
companies to produce media 
1.1.2. Indigenous 
registrations 
Facilitate registration of individuals 
Transport, materials 
Hire transport services, facilitate 
documentation 
1.2.1. Develop POT for the 
province 
Organize meetings and develop studies 
and research 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
1.2.2. Perform territorial 
diagnostic at provincial 
level 
Organize meetings and develop studies 
and research 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
1.3.1. Develop technical 
study 
Contract studies and organize meetings 
Consultants, logistics, 
transport 
Contract consultancy firms and 
individuals, hire transport services 
1.4.1. Legal analysis and 
interpretation of transfer of 
conflict-resolution rights on 
natural resources to ACAs 
Coordinate meetings and develop 
studies and research 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
1.4.2. Train staff in the 
legal powers of ACAs to 
deal with conflicts over the 
management of natural 
resources 
Organize meetings and develop studies 
and research 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
1.5.1. Develop a climate 
change strategy 
Coordinate meetings and develop 
studies and research 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
1.5.2. Disseminate a 
Visit communities, communicate by 
Logistics, contracts 
Hire transport vehicles, companies

=== PAGE 69 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 65 OF 101 
 
 H 
 
climate change strategy at 
the provincial level 
radio and in print 
for advertising 
to produce media 
1.6.1. Consolidate 
information based on 
communities’ observations 
Coordinate meetings and develop 
studies and research 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
1.6.2. Manage, systemize, 
process and analyze data 
collected, including 
weather-station information 
Organize meetings and develop studies 
and research 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
1.7.1. Facilitate the process 
to develop the ZEE 
Organize meetings and develop studies 
and research 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
1.8.1. Facilitate the process 
to update the strategy 
Coordinate meetings and develop 
studies and research 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
1.8.2. Disseminate the 
strategy at the regional 
level 
Visit communities, communicate by 
radio and in print 
Logistics, contracts 
for advertising 
Hire transport vehicles, companies 
to produce media 
1.9.1. Draft documents with 
specialized lawyers and 
experts to develop 
legislation proposals aimed 
at regulating natural 
resources management at 
the international Ramsar 
site 
Coordinate meetings and develop 
studies and research 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
1.10.1. Compile and share 
information related to GIS 
environmental monitoring 
with National Program 
Forest Conservation 
Hire services to collect information, 
organize meetings, transport 
participants, develop reports 
Hire staff, transport, 
logistics 
Hire staff to gather data, transport 
people, pay for workshop logistics 
Component 2: Strengthened capacity of community-based institutions 
2.1.1. Provide logistical 
support and access 
Organize systems and services to  
efficiently manage meetings and 
workshops 
Transport, logistics 
Negotiate a contract and organize 
a system of service suppliers 
2.2.1. Organize 
community-level groups to 
collect information on 
indigenous knowledge 
about climate observations 
Organize meetings and develop studies 
and research 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
2.2.2. Prepare reports 
Develop monthly, quarterly, biannual 
and yearly reports 
Project staff 
Produce reports 
2.3.1. Conduct inventory 
and evaluation of natural 
resources 
Contract studies and organize meetings  
Consultants, logistics, 
transport 
Contract consultancy firms and 
individuals, hire transport services 
2.3.2. Develop 
management plans for 
natural resources 
Contract studies and organize meetings 
Consultants, logistics, 
transport 
Contract consultancy firms and 
individuals, hire transport services 
2.3.3. Management plan 
approval process 
Organize meetings and develop studies 
and research 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
2.4.1. Feasibility study of 
new ACAs 
Contract studies and organize meetings  
Consultants, logistics, 
transport 
Contract consultancy firms and 
individuals, hire transport services 
2.4.2. Develop 
management tools 
Contract studies and organize meetings  
Consultants, logistics, 
transport 
Contract consultancy firms and 
individuals, hire transport services 
2.4.3. Organize monitoring 
and evaluation activities 
Coordinate meetings and develop 
studies and research 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
2.5.1. Design 
Contract studies and organize meetings 
Consultants, logistics, 
Contract consultancy firms and

=== PAGE 70 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 66 OF 101 
 
 H 
methodologies for the 
monitoring and evaluation 
of specific conservation 
issues 
transport 
individuals, hire transport services 
2.5.2. Produce periodic 
reports on carbon storage 
conservation 
Contract studies and organize meetings 
Consultants, logistics, 
transport 
Contract consultancy firms and 
individuals, hire transport services 
2.6.1. Training programme 
on bio-business 
management 
Organize meetings and develop training 
materials 
Transport, logistics, 
consultants 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for training 
2.6.2. Promote the 
formation of producers’ 
associations supporting 
legal incorporation and 
internal organization 
Coordinate meetings and develop 
studies and research 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
2.7.1. Delimit native 
peoples' geographic areas 
Contract studies and organize meetings 
Consultants, logistics, 
transport 
Contract consultancy firms and 
individuals, hire transport services 
2.7.2. Develop economic 
and ecological zoning 
study 
Contract studies and organize meetings 
Consultants, logistics, 
transport 
Contract consultancy firms and 
individuals, hire transport services 
2.7.3. Develop thematic 
studies 
Contract studies and organize meetings 
Consultants, logistics, 
transport 
Contract consultancy firms and 
individuals, hire transport services 
Component 3: Resilience built through sustainable bio-businesses in natural resources management areas 
3.1.1. Technical and 
financial feasibility study 
Contract studies and organize meetings 
Consultants, logistics, 
transport 
Contract consultancy firms and 
individuals, hire transport services 
3.1.2. Develop business 
plan 
Contract studies and organize meetings 
Consultants, logistics, 
transport 
Contract consultancy firms and 
individuals, hire transport services 
2.1.3. Training (process, 
management, marketing) 
Coordinate meetings and develop 
training materials 
Transport, logistics, 
consultants 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for training 
3.1.4. Start-up process 
Organize meetings with bio-businesses, 
organize practical training programmes, 
and provide direct assistance 
Transport, logistics, 
consultants 
Visit bio-businesses, organize 
meetings, organize visits and 
meetings with buyers/investors 
3.1.5. Support 
implementation 
Organize meetings and develop training 
materials 
Transport, logistics, 
consultants 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for training 
3.2.1. Feasibility studies for 
the introduction of solar PV 
and ESS in bio-businesses' 
activities 
Contract studies and organize meetings 
Consultants, logistics, 
transport 
Contract consultancy firms and 
individuals, hire transport services 
3.2.2. Purchase and install 
equipment 
Select options for the best technology, 
conduct a procurement process, 
purchase and install equipment 
Consultants, 
purchases 
Consult, purchase equipment, hire 
maintenance services 
3.2.3. Provide training and 
support implementation 
Coordinate meetings and develop 
training materials 
Transport, logistics, 
consultants 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for training 
3.3.1. Feasibility studies for 
the introduction of 
innovations in methods and 
tools 
Organize meetings and develop studies 
and research 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
3.3.2. Purchase and install 
equipment 
Select options for the best technology, 
conduct a procurement process, 
purchase and install equipment 
Consultants, 
purchases  
Consult, purchase of equipment, 
hire maintenance services 
3.3.3. Provide training and 
support implementation 
Coordinate meetings and develop 
training materials 
Transport, logistics, 
consultants 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for training 
3.4.1. Develop a 
commercialization strategy 
Coordinate meetings and develop 
studies and research 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
3.4.2. Implement 
commercialization strategy 
Organize meetings, visit potential 
buyers/investors, participate in trade 
fairs, produce promotion materials 
Transport, logistics, 
travel, printed 
materials, pictures, 
Bring participants to outside 
markets, hire printers, produce 
materials, contract services

=== PAGE 71 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 67 OF 101 
 
 H 
 
 
 
event participation 
3.5.1. Perform a 
certification requirements 
study for bio-business’ 
products 
Coordinate meetings and develop 
studies 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
3.5.2. Access certification 
services 
Facilitate meetings with certification 
agencies, conduct training and organize 
discussions 
Transport, logistics, 
training 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
3.5.3. Implement 
processes and procedures 
to meet certification 
requirements 
Facilitate meetings with certification 
agencies, conduct training and organize 
discussions 
Transport, logistics, 
training 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
3.6.1. Access fairs, 
meetings and markets to 
establish linkages with 
potential buyers or 
investors 
Organize meetings, visit potential 
buyers/investors, participate in trade 
fairs, produce promotional materials 
Transport, logistics, 
travel, printed 
materials, pictures, 
events participation 
Bring participants to outside 
markets, hire printers, produce 
materials, contract services 
3.6.2. Communicate, 
coordinate visits and 
provide support to 
conclude agreements 
Coordinate meetings and develop 
materials 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
Component 4: Science, technology, knowledge management, and monitoring and evaluation systems established 
4.1.1. Conduct studies on 
technology enhancements 
on bio-business’ processes 
Organize meetings and develop studies 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
4.2.1. Conduct studies to 
produce meteorological 
and hydrological models for 
the province 
Organize meetings and develop studies 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
4.3.1. Conduct studies to 
analyse changes in 
communities due to project 
activities 
Organize meetings and develop studies 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
4.4.1. Conduct studies to 
compile project activities 
and extract lessons 
Organize meetings and develop studies  
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
4.5.1. Develop a 
communication strategy 
Visit communities, communicate by 
radio and in print 
Logistics, contracts 
for advertising 
Hire of transport vehicles, 
companies to produce media 
4.5.2. Implement the 
strategy 
Visit communities, communicate by 
radio and in print 
Logistics, contracts 
for advertising 
Hire of transport vehicles, 
companies to produce media 
4.6.1. Conduct analysis of 
topics related to climate 
change, carbon storage 
and conservation 
Organize meetings and develop studies 
Transport, logistics, 
studies 
Bring participants to meetings and 
provide materials for discussions 
4.7.1. Develop a website 
Hire a local designer, develop 
information and create a website 
Web designer, staff  
Collect information, draft texts and 
produce graphic design 
4.7.2. Introduce features in 
media, blogs and monitor 
project activities 
Hire a local designer, develop 
information and create a website 
Web designer, staff  
Collect information, draft texts and 
produce graphic design 
4.8.1. Produce reports 
Develop monthly, quarterly, biannual 
and yearly reports 
Project staff 
Production of reports

=== PAGE 72 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 68 OF 101 
 
 H 
H.2. Arrangements for Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation 
The monitoring plan will be aligned with the logical framework and will be targeted at three levels: 
1. 
Mitigation outcome: Improved management of land or forest areas that contribute to emission reductions 
Mitigation outcome: Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems 
Mitigation outcome: Financially sustainable bio-businesses in operation 
Adaptation outcome: Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate-responsive planning and 
development 
2. 
Component 1 output: Strengthened institutional capacity in government organizations 
Component 2 output: Strengthened capacity of community-based institutions 
Component 3 output: resilience built through sustainable bio-businesses in natural resources management 
areas 
Component 4 output: Science, technology, knowledge management, and monitoring and evaluation systems 
established 
3. 
Activities for Components 1 to 4. 
Although the country's strategy for REDD plus is still under construction, the project is clearly linked to the concept of 
reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, to preserve the stock of carbon in forest ecosystems of 
PDM. The project will adhere to the national MRV system once it is adopted by MINAM.  
No survey was conducted to develop a baseline of the number of males and females and respective income and 
expenditure level, given the sensitivity that traditional indigenous communities give to this information. Building a 
trustworthy relationship is required before the communities will accept sharing such socioeconomic data. Data 
collection efforts will be promoted by the project from year one with the purpose of developing a socioeconomic 
baseline. 
The project PMU will have a dedicated professional who will manage the M&E programme and develop all the reporting 
mechanisms, using up-to-date information produced by the project. MINAM has agreed to provide detailed satellite data 
and information regarding vegetation cover, as well as analyses of extreme events. The M&E system will be designed 
to provide detailed data and analyses that can be used by the PMU to oversee and manage the execution of activities, 
assess stakeholders’ response to these activities, and formulate project modifications to address any problems that 
may arise. 
Over the life cycle of the project, the PMU will report on the implementation of the project’s workplan, on indicator data 
and on proposed changes in activities/design. The project reporting frequency and project level evaluations will be 
semi-annual, aligned with the requirements set by AMA. The latter will be based on analyses of reasons for differences 
between expected and actual levels of project activities, counterpart behaviours, and indicator values. The reports will 
include a ‘lessons learned’ component that provides input for developing proposed changes in project activities and 
insights for future activities during the life span of the project. PMU will explicitly link the monitoring plan with lessons 
learned during the project’s activities, especially the innovation pilots. This information will be uploaded in the project-
created knowledge management system, which will develop a unified mechanism for identifying lessons from evidence. 
During the project post-implementation period, PROFONANPE will ensure that monitoring and reporting to the GCF will 
continue for five more years. This is possible as due to its long-term commitment in the intervention area and the 
indigenous communities living therein. A proposed M&E plan for post-project implementation is attached in annex 12.  
Methods, tools and techniques

=== PAGE 73 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 69 OF 101 
 
 H 
Dynamic implementation–monitoring of project activities 
Monitoring of project activities will be achieved through management actions, including monthly briefings with the GCF, 
weekly staff meetings, and review of staff and adviser inputs to quarterly reports. A system will be established to 
channel counterpart responses through activity feedback forms, and the findings will be incorporated in 
recommendations for changes as needed. 
Specific issues addressed in these feedback forms will include the quality of technical assistance provided by the 
project, the quality and timeliness of the implementation data provided by the project, and the recipients’ response to 
project assistance. 
Dynamic implementation–monitoring results 
Performance monitoring involves two related tasks: (a) analysing realized indicator values; and (b) evaluating the 
overall results and impacts of the project. Realized (actual) indicator values will be analysed, focusing primarily—but 
not exclusively—on those indicators whose values differ significantly from proposed levels. The question, “Why the 
difference?” will be answered, and findings will be incorporated in recommendations for changes in indicator values, 
specific tasks or expected results. 
Specific issues to be addressed include the quality of reported data, such as timing and data classification, operation of 
the data collection and reporting system, how related tasks were implemented, how recipients responded to assistance 
as contrasted with expectations, and how closely indicator values are a function of identified tasks. 
Progress reporting  
The M&E system will provide information regarding project execution; progress towards achieving key targets; and, 
probability to meet impacts and outcomes. The Project Coordinator will prepare reports for each regular meeting of the 
PAC. An outside independent third party will conduct the mid-term review and the end-of-project evaluation. The mid-
term review and the end-of-project evaluation will be presented by the consultants to the PAC and analysed in detailed 
with the PMU. Lessons learned will be documented and communicated to the GCF, the GOP and the community of 
development practitioners. Dissemination of lessons learned will include national and international meetings on REDD 
and climate change. The GCF will be briefed on a regular basis and as needed.  
Monitoring of capacity-building 
The project will provide support for capacity-building to increase the sustainability of project investments. During 
implementation, the project will create various indicators (e.g. number of people trained, number of government offices 
supported) representative of the progress of building government capabilities, and of communities’ and associations’ 
capacity to develop plans to manage natural resources and implement activities for the creation of sustainable 
livelihoods in order to promote trade, investment and private-sector development. 
Monitoring implementation of pilots 
The project will conduct various pilot programmes to test innovative technologies that could produce tangible impacts. A 
number of indicators will be created (e.g. baseline studies for pilot programmes, M&E to ascertain the impact of pilot 
programmes). 
Proposed indicators 
The proposed indicators are linked to project objectives and outputs. Indicators were selected based on the scope of 
each result and the specifics of the activities involved. Each indicator in table H.1 is related to the corresponding 
desired output. These indicators will be continually reassessed throughout project implementation.

=== PAGE 74 ===
RESULTS MONITORING AND REPORTING 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 70 OF 101 
 
 H 
Data collection and reports 
Many of the required outputs and results will be available as a result of our direct engagement with counterparts on 
specific activities such as training events, facilitation workshops and development of consulting services. Accordingly, 
the project team will be made aware of those indicators relevant to their specific areas and will be tasked with collecting 
the information to be inputted in the M&E database as events take place. For other indicators, we will work with 
counterparts to obtain reports, administrative records or other files available on a timely basis.

=== PAGE 75 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 71 OF 101 
 
 I 
 
I. Supporting Documents for Funding Proposal 
☒ 
NDA No-objection Letter 
☒ 
Feasibility Study 
☐ 
Integrated Financial Model that provides sensitivity analysis of critical elements (xls format)  
☒ 
Confirmation letter or letter of commitment for co-financing commitment 
☒ 
Project/programme confirmation (Term Sheet) 
☒ 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social Management Plan 
☐ 
Appraisal Report or Due Diligence Report with recommendations 
☐ 
Evaluation Report of the baseline project 
☒ 
Map indicating the location of the project/programme 
☐ 
Timetable of project/programme implementation 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting 
documents.

=== PAGE 76 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 72 OF 101 
 
 I 
Annex I: National designated authority no-objection letter

=== PAGE 77 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 73 OF 101 
 
 I 
Annex II: Feasibility study  
(See separate document:  
Feasibility study: Building the resilience of wetlands in Datem del Marañón – Perú. PROFONANPE. 2015)

=== PAGE 78 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 74 OF 101 
 
 I 
Annex III: Letter of Commitment for co-financing – Government of the Republic of Korea

=== PAGE 79 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 75 OF 101 
 
 I 
Annex IV: Letter of commitment – municipality

=== PAGE 80 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 76 OF 101 
 
 I 
[English translation] 
 
 
San Lorenzo, 14 July 2015 
 
Mister: 
Alberto PANIAGUA VILLAGRA 
Executive Director PROFONANPE 
 
Subject: Proposal for agreement MPDM – PROFONANPE 
 
I am pleased and honoured to address your office, in order to extend a fraternal greeting on behalf of the 
people of the Datem Marañón province, with its archeological capital city, San Lorenzo; and the District 
Mayors that belong to our province, to request the assessment of PROFONANPE for the Provincial 
Municipality of Datem del Marañón.  
 
Development and promotion of appropriate mechanisms for the generation of information that contributes 
scientifically and technologically to sustainable development, by creating an inter-institutional 
collaboration platform to implement work mechanisms and instruments to care for the natural richness 
and prevent global warming which is affecting the natural balance worldwide.  
 
For this we believe it is convenient to create a fund from our exiguous transferences as a local 
government, of S/.3,600.00 nuevos soles, for the maintenance of the municipal conservation areas, the 
creation of a family shelter adequate to cultural ethnic references in Yachaycuna – city of San Lorenzo, 
district of Barranca, Province of Datem del Marañón – Loreto, a municipal contribution of 40% of the 
project for a total sum of S/.173,463.37 nuevos soles; for the fulfillment of the objective 0036 in our Solid 
Waste Integrated Management a contribution of S/.563,400.00 for which the financial resources come 
from FONCOMUN (S/.198.000), RDR (S/.214,000) and CANON (S/.150,000). 
 
For any matter related to this subject, contact us at Calle Tigre 249 – San Lorenzo; or the RPM 
#990274845; 
RPC 
986151231; 
RPM 
#970009652; 
RPC 
984362500 
and/or 
email 
<jr_chavez@hotmail.com>. 
 
We appreciate in advance your attention to this matter, and we take this opportunity to show you our 
special consideration and personal esteem.  
 
Sincerely,

=== PAGE 81 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 77 OF 101 
 
 I 
Annex V: Letter of commitment– Meteorological and Hydrological National Service of Peru

=== PAGE 82 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 78 OF 101 
 
 I 
[English translation] 
 
 
15 July 2015, Lima 
LETTER N° 482 SENAMHI/PREJ-2015 
 
Mr. 
ALBERTO PANIAGUA V. 
Executive Director 
PROFONANPE 
Av. J. Prado Oeste 2378 
San Isidro.- 
 
 
I have the pleasure to address you to express my regards and SENAMHI’s interest in 
participating in the project “Conservation and sustainable use of wetlands in the province Datem del 
Marañón”, in order to contribute to the implementation of the hydrometeorological network in the project’s 
area. 
 
With the aim of performing studies and investigations, as well as to cooperate in the operational 
and maintenance activities, SENAMHI offers as counterpart the amount of S/. 105,000.00 on an annual 
basis. 
 
With this in mind, the Executive Presidency, would appreciate if you submitted our proposal and 
we hope that it is welcome. 
 
I take this opportunity to express my regards for your special consideration. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Eng. AMELIA DÍAZ PABLÓ 
Executive President of SENAMHI

=== PAGE 83 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 79 OF 101 
 
 I 
Annex VI: Letter of commitment – Centre for International Forestry Research

=== PAGE 84 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 80 OF 101 
 
 I 
Annex VII Potential beneficiaries of the project14 
 
Indigenous communities 
Population Ethnic group Legal title 
Land with titles 
(ha) 
  
Huitoyacu: 
1 851 
  
    
1 Puerto Pijuayal  
144 
KANDOZI 
029-92 
18 000.0 
2 Nuevo Ucayali 
85 
KANDOZI 
  
3 Nuevo Progreso  
106 
KANDOZI 
  
4 Hortensia Cocha  
187 
KANDOZI 
505 
54 438.2 
5 San Fernando  
105 
KANDOZI 
  
6 CHINTU 
162 
ACHUAR 
  
7 CHUINTAR 
254 
ACHUAR 
023-92 
6 859.9 
8 CHURUS 
135 
ACHUAR 
  
9 WAWAIN 
115 
ACHUAR 
  
10 Wisum 
166 
ACHUAR 
021-92 
6 317.4 
11 Pankintsa 
191 
ACHUAR 
025-92 
18 870.5 
12 Nayunentsa 
71 
ACHUAR 
  
13 Waknir 
130 
ACHUAR 
  
14 Wijint 
324 
ACHUAR 
015-91 
15 619.5 
15 Kuyunsa 
370 
ACHUAR 
017-92 
49 940.0 
  
Huasaga/Pastaza 
2 262 
  
    
16 Cocha Purahua (sangre de grado) 
185 
ACHUAR 
002-92 
9 037.8 
17 Unión Antonieta (sangre de grado) 
130 
ACHUAR 
015-92 
4 981.2 
18 Achuar Anatico  
174 
QUECHUA 
014-92 
4 418.9 
19 Bolognesi (cocha y río) 
159 
QUECHUA 
CN-031-77 
8 471.0 
20 Sungache (cocha y río) 
248 
QUECHUA 
504 
23 145.4 
21 Loboyacu (río) 
298 
QUECHUA 
503 
35 914.5 
22 Santa María (río) 
272 
QUECHUA 
  
23 Kushilia (rio) 
80 
KANDOZI 
441 
8 272.0 
24 Nueva Esperanza (río) 
80 
QUECHUA 
  
25 Soplín 
205 
QUECHUA 
CN-016-91 
3 238.5 
26 WAYUSENTSA 
131 
Achuar 
  
27 SAN JUAN DE MANCHARI 
300 
Achuar 
  
  
Morona 
1 415 
  
    
28 Shoroya Nueva 
128 
Chapra 
CN-006-77 
21 415.0 
29 Naranjal 
93 
Chapra 
  
14 Indigenous peoples are understood as peoples whose ancestors were in territories that were conquered, and have 
preserved cultural institutions and their own identity. In Peru, the State has recognized the rights of 54 indigenous or 
native peoples, including the 7 ethnic groups of this project, see <http://bdpi.cultura.gob.pe/introduccion>. 
To date there is no information on the composition of men and women in indigenous peoples.

=== PAGE 85 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 81 OF 101 
 
 I 
30 Puerto Pijuayal 
257 
Chapra 
  
31 Unanchay 
98 
Chapra 
  
32 Caballito 
138 
WAMPIS 
  
33 Numpankit 
60 
WAMPIS 
747 
3 746.3 
34 Consuelo 
148 
WAMPIS 
  
35 Inca Roca 
378 
WAMPIS 
CN-002-77 
10 960.0 
36 Union Indigena 
17 
Chapra 
  
37 Bellavista 
33 
Chapra 
  
38 Panguanita 
65 
Chapra 
  
39 Musa Candashi 
53 
Awajún 
  
  
Lago Rimachi: 
1 684 
  
    
40 Charapa Cocha 
50 
KANDOZI 
  
41 Puerto Barranquito 
179 
KANDOZI 
  
42 San Ramón 
48 
KANDOZI 
  
43 Kaspa Cocha 
90 
KANDOZI 
  
44 Nueva Yarina 
173 
KANDOZI 
021-91 
37 935.0 
45 Puerto Chuinda 
50 
KANDOZI 
  
46 Puerto Angara 
100 
KANDOZI 
  
47 Nueva Unión 
156 
KANDOZI 
  
48 Puerto Pirumba 
137 
KANDOZI 
  
49 Musa Karusha 
50 
KANDOZI 
  
50 Puerto Requena 
166 
KANDOZI 
054-84 
5 744.2 
51 Nuevo Chingana 
56 
KANDOZI 
  
52 Puerto Chingana 
102 
KANDOZI 
003-85 
6 335.1 
53 Puerto Wichi 
66 
KANDOZI 
  
54 Puerto Matiwa 
48 
KANDOZI 
  
55 Puerto Baschiri 
45 
KANDOZI 
  
56 Puerto Tangama 
80 
KANDOZI 
  
57 Puerto Ungurahui 
88 
KANDOZI 
  
ACA Humedales Bajo Marañón/Pastaza 
5 408 
  
    
58 Linchis 
103 
MESTIZO 
  
59 Santa Rosa 
98 
MESTIZO 
  
60 Nueva Islandia 
52 
MESTIZO 
  
61 San Juan de Mojarayacu 
260 
MESTIZO 
  
62 San Antonio 
753 
MESTIZO 
  
63 Puerto Industrial 
791 
MESTIZO 
  
64 Porvenir 
353 
MESTIZO 
  
65 Palpa 
69 
MESTIZO 
  
66 Papayacu 
286 
MESTIZO 
  
67 San Isidro 
264 
MESTIZO

=== PAGE 86 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 82 OF 101 
 
 I 
68 Ungumayo 
298 
MESTIZO 
  
69 Libertad 
349 
MESTIZO 
  
70 Los Ángeles 
185 
MESTIZO 
  
71 Indio del Perú 
88 
MESTIZO 
  
72 Santa Ana 
380 
MESTIZO 
  
73 Nueva Unión 
81 
MESTIZO 
  
74 La Curva 
98 
MESTIZO 
  
75 Recreo 
258 
MESTIZO 
  
76 Puerto Díaz 
96 
MESTIZO 
  
77 Campo Verde 
156 
QUECHUA 
  
78 Trueno Cocha 
315 
QUECHUA 
  
79 Nuevo Ungurahui 
75 
MESTIZO 
  
ACA Bajo Morona/Alto Marañón 
2 443 
  
    
80 Atlantida 
139 
Mestizo 
  
81 Vencedor 
70 
Mestizo 
  
82 Alfonso Ugarte 
80 
Mestizo 
  
83 Copales Unidos 
71 
Mestizo 
  
84 Limón 
100 
Mestizo 
  
85 Puerto Elisa 
75 
Mestizo 
  
86 Acapulco 
80 
Mestizo 
  
87 Luz del Oriente 
53 
Mestizo 
  
88 Puerto Libre 
56 
Mestizo 
  
89 Dos Hermanos 
40 
Mestizo 
  
90 Nuevo Milagro 
65 
Mestizo 
  
91 Mayuriaga 
360 
Wampis 
038-93 
14 015.6 
9293 Paragua Viejo 
511 
Mestizo 
  
94 Paragua Nuevo 
120 
Mestizo 
  
95 Puerto Alegria 
490 
Mestizo 
  
96 Santa Rosa 
77 
Mestizo 
  
97 Tierra Blanca 
56 
Mestizo 
  
98 Chapís 
323 
Awajún 
043-83 
7 350.0 
99 Nueva Alegría 
106 
Awajún 
  
100 Capernaúm 
62 
Awajún 
  
101 Ájachim 
256 
Awajún 
  
102 WEE 
200 
Mestizo 
769 
9 126.8 
  
Cahuapanas 
3 971 
  
    
103 BARRANQUITA  
250 
Shawí 
448 
15 781.0 
104 BUENOS AIRES 
142 
Shawí 
  
105 INCHIYACU 
165 
Shawí 
  
106 STA MARIA DE C 
705 
Shawí 
028-80 
5 355.0 
107 STA MARTHA 
283 
Awajún 
018-80 
5 245.0

=== PAGE 87 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 83 OF 101 
 
 I 
108 NVO MILAGRO 
112 
Awajún 
  
109 ZAPOTE 
235 
Shawí 
  
110 PALMICHE  
542 
Shawí 
CN-04-79 
15 781.0 
111 CHACATAN 
305 
Shawí 
  
112 KAUPAN 
653 
Awajún 
743 
8 781.9 
113 PONGO 
180 
Awajún 
  
114 KAWIT 
239 
Awajún 
  
115 JOSE OLAYA 
160 
Awajún 
  
Marañón/Manseriche 
1 379 
  
    
116 Pijuayal 
187 
Awajún 
  
117 Sachapapa 
733 
Awajún 
  
118 Atahualpa 
459 
Awajún 
CN-141-75 
57 460.0 
119 Sinchi Roca 
175 
Awajún 
529 
28 983.2 
120 Nuevo Jerusalem 
205 
Awajún 
  
  
TOTAL 
20 413   
  
521 539.7

=== PAGE 88 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 84 OF 101 
 
 I 
Annex VIII. Environmental impact assessment summary  
(The full assessment can be found as a separate document in Spanish) 
This project is focused on promoting participatory bio-business initiatives by indigenous communities, 
based on sustainable management plans of the natural resources in their territories. It will also support 
the consolidation of the proper zoning and territorial management of the Province of Datem del Marañón 
(Loreto Region), which provides the legal and technical framework. 
 
The purpose of the environmental assessment of this proposal is to ensure that the project pays due 
consideration to environmental aspects by preventing, eliminating or minimizing potential environmental 
damage due to project activities. On the other hand, the assessment also identifies opportunities to 
maximize the potential positive impacts. The environmental safeguards are also tools and means by 
which communities may safeguard their indigenous rights by expressing their views and asking for 
modifications or improvements so their rights are not affected. 
 
The methodology used is based on guidelines established by PROFONANPE and the Green Climate 
Fund for the application of performance standards (PSs), which are also those used by the International 
Financial Corporation (IFC). Of the eight PSs considered by IFC, the following four are most relevant to 
the project in terms of the environment: 
 
• 
PS1: Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and impacts; 
• 
PS3: Resource efficiency and pollution prevention; 
• 
PS6: Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural 
resources; and 
• 
PS7: Indigenous peoples. 
 
PS4: Community health, safety and security is partly applied to promote safety and health safeguards to 
project activities. In addition, PS8: Cultural heritage is applied to avoid any harm to ancient ceramic art 
found within Achuar communities and other ethnic groups. 
 
The impacts were characterized to identify their positive or negative potential effects on the following 
environmental elements: water, soil, air, aquatic fauna, terrestrial fauna and forests/aguajales (palm 
swamp forest). The risks and magnitude of the negative impacts were quantified so that the final 
environmental risk could be classified as significant, moderate or minor/non-significant. 
 
The evaluation results were grouped by project component and are shown as follows: 
 
Component 1. Strengthening institutional capacity in government organizations 
The activities under this component are focused on providing training, technical assistance and 
coordination support so that the official institutions and authorities can provide their mandated services 
and support at the district, provincial, regional and national levels, according to national government 
structure and legislation. These services are related to the promotion of conservation units, preparation 
and dissemination of information, institutional strengthening and citizenship building, territorial zoning, 
and coordination between sectors and government levels, in order to achieve the effective and 
sustainable use of the province’s natural resources. In that sense, these indirect impacts are all of a 
positive nature.

=== PAGE 89 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 85 OF 101 
 
 I 
However, the project’s direct impacts are basically linked to the increased motor boat traffic on the rivers 
and lakes (cochas) of the province as well as the potential accumulation of solid waste in soil and water 
due to the increased number of local visits, meetings, workshops and training activities promoted by the 
project. The increased use of fuel by motor boats may affect water quality and aquatic fauna, and may 
produce more greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
The magnitude of the environmental risks is evaluated as minor/non-significant. The proposed mitigation 
measures are as follows:  
 
a) Plan the visits, meetings, workshops and training activities in advance in order to minimize the 
distance travelled by motor boats used by communities, and government or project personnel; 
and 
b) In conjunction with communities and municipal governments, promote activities to strengthen 
public awareness of the potential impacts of disposing of solid waste, particularly plastics and 
used batteries, in soil and water. Activities should include the promotion of best practices to 
properly dispose of solid waste, especially that which is non-biodegradable. 
 
Component 2. Strengthening capacity of community-based institutions 
Component 2 is focused on working directly with communities and their institutions, such as production 
associations, environmental monitoring committees (from the environmental conservation areas) and 
indigenous federations. As in Component 1, this component is geared towards strengthening indigenous 
institutionalism by facilitating relevant technical and legal information, training and technical assistance for 
those tasks within community responsibility that provide sustainability to project activities. These tasks 
include the promotion of good practices in organization and natural resources management, 
accountability, the establishment of community land boundaries, providing technical assistance to bio-
businesses and their respective management plans, and the creation or strengthening of knowledge-
sharing opportunities, among other activities. Through these actions, institutions will be strengthened, as 
will the sustainability of natural resources management. The indirect impacts on the province’s natural 
resources will be positive. 
The project’s operational actions will depend largely on coordination among project personnel, community 
institutions and government officials. Constant visits, meetings, workshops, studies and training activities 
will be involved during the life span of the project, and will require numerous trips within the province in 
motor boats that use fossil fuels and emit carbon dioxide. Many of the meetings will involve taking 
packaged food and beverages for attendees. These packages are usually disposed of in the environment 
and pollute soil and water. 
Similar to Component 1, the impacts are qualified as minor/non-significant, according to the methodology 
followed, and should be minimized by applying the following mitigation measures: 
a) Plan the visits, meetings, workshops and training activities in advance in order to minimize the 
distance travelled by motor boats used by communities, and government or project personnel; 
and 
b) In conjunction with communities and municipal governments, promote activities to strengthen 
public awareness of the potential impacts of disposing of solid waste, particularly plastics and 
used batteries, in soil and water. Activities should include the promotion of best practices to 
properly dispose of solid waste, especially that which is non-biodegradable.

=== PAGE 90 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 86 OF 101 
 
 I 
 
 
Component 3. Resilience built through sustainable bio-businesses in natural resources 
management areas 
This component promotes bio-businesses through the sustainable use of locally managed natural 
resources and according to community choices and opportunities. Emphasis is placed on the sustainable 
use of natural resources and subsequent income generation through processing, value adding and 
marketing. Component 3 represents the economic development of the project. 
 
Bio-business choices are diverse, some of which are already in operation since they started during the 
previous phase of the project. New ideas are being considered by communities, such as ice-making, and 
production of oil and pulp from aguaje and other palm trees, fresh and processed fish, sangre de grado 
(dragon’s blood) latex, managed wildlife meat, ancient medicines (herbs and clay), and handicrafts using 
seeds, sawn timber, etc. 
When the products are to be sold, an officially approved management plan is required. This ensures the 
sustainability of the natural resource base. Conservation through sustainable use results in a highly 
positive impact on the environment, particularly on the aquatic and terrestrial fauna that are under 
anthropic pressure in the rivers, cochas, aguajales and forests. 
The promotion of new associations and the increased economic drive generated by the bio-businesses 
will have a direct influence on motor boat traffic, causing negative impacts, albeit minor, on water and air. 
Moreover, more meetings, training activities and income may result in the increased consumption of 
goods and consequently the corresponding solid waste produced, causing localized impacts on soil or 
water. 
On the other hand, some of the bio-businesses, such as ice-making, palm oil production and sawmilling, 
require externally generated energy from fossil fuels. Pollution of soil, water and air is a risk—evaluated 
as minor—which can be minimized. The following mitigating measures are being proposed for 
Component 3: 
a) Regarding the generation of energy for processing (bio-businesses), coordinate with local 
authorities to partially use the public energy already being produced in order to connect to the 
town grid when possible; 
b) Analyse the possibility of partially replacing fossil fuel produced energy for bio-businesses with 
renewable energy sources; 
c) Carry out regular maintenance of energy generators and avoid contamination of the liquid or solid 
waste produced;  
d) Strictly monitor management plans for the sustainable use of natural resources; 
e) Plan the visits, meetings, workshops and training activities in advance in order to minimize the 
distance travelled by motor boats used by communities, and government or project personnel; 
and 
f) 
In conjunction with communities and municipal governments, promote activities to strengthen 
public awareness of the potential impacts of disposing of solid waste, particularly plastics and 
used batteries, in soil and water. Activities should include the promotion of best practices to 
properly dispose of solid waste, especially that which is non-biodegradable.

=== PAGE 91 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 87 OF 101 
 
 I 
Component 4. Science, technology, knowledge management, and monitoring and evaluation 
systems established 
The generation of knowledge and innovation is the essence of this component. The studies to be carried 
out will estimate the carbon sequestered and stored in aguajales and describe its hydrological cycle and 
ecology. In addition, innovation to improve efficiency in transportation and bio-businesses will be 
promoted. Efforts will be made to systematically learn from the project lessons and to establish a 
communications strategy. The environmental impacts of this component are positive. These direct 
operational activities have minor or non-significant effects. 
 
In summary, the negative potential impacts, albeit minor, should be mitigated as follows: 
Activities related to 
Risks 
Potential Impact 
Main mitigation 
measures 
Institutional 
strengthening 
Increased motor boat 
traffic and solid waste 
- Mortality of aquatic 
life 
- Contamination of 
soil, water and air 
- Plan trips efficiently to 
reduce motor boat 
traffic 
- Solid waste disposal 
campaigns 
 
Promotion of bio-
businesses 
Increased motor boat 
traffic and solid waste 
Unsustainable 
harvesting of natural 
resources 
- Depletion of 
natural resources 
- Strict monitoring of 
management plans 
Use of fossil fuels to 
generate energy for 
processing 
- Contamination of 
soil, water and air 
- Use available town 
energy, when possible, 
and examine the 
possibility of using 
renewable energy 
 
In terms of environmental safeguards, the performance standards applied are summarized as follows, 
taking into consideration that PS1, PS3, PS6 and PS7 are those most directly related to the project’s core 
business. 
 
PS1: Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and impacts. The project will 
not generate significantly negative environmental impacts. Instead, institutional strengthening of 
government and community institutions, coupled with management plans for the sustainable use of 
natural resources for income-generating bio-businesses, will contribute to the proper care of the natural 
resource base in the province. The risk of negative impacts is minor or not significant and can be 
mitigated. These risks are related to increased pollution due to motor boat traffic, solid-waste production 
in meetings and workshops, and use of fossil fuels to generate energy for adding value to bio-business 
production. Mitigation measures have been designed. 
 
PS3: Resource efficiency and pollution prevention. The project will not generate any significant 
pollution or greenhouse gas emissions. In addition, to avoid soil contamination and emissions from the 
processing plants used for biodiversity product transformation, alternative energy generation based on 
renewable resources will be attempted. Innovation in bio-businesses will be promoted to ensure the 
processing efficiency of sustainably harvested products.

=== PAGE 92 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 88 OF 101 
 
 I 
PS4: Community health, safety and security. The project will ensure that health and safety conditions 
will apply to communities and personnel working on project activities: for example, using life jackets on 
motor boat trips. Furthermore, the project will ensure that all sanitary and safety regulations demanded by 
the relevant offices issuing authorizations—fisheries, forestry, processing plants—are complied with. A 
registry of incidents and accidents will be kept so that corrective measures can be applied. 
 
PS6: Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural resources. The 
project will contribute to protecting and conserving Amazonian biodiversity and ecosystem services by 
applying community management plans to large areas of wetlands. Income generation based on 
sustainably managing and adding value to local natural resources will provide additional reasons for 
communities and government agencies that care for and oversee the resource base. 
 
PS7. Indigenous populations. The project will ensure full respect for indigenous peoples. It is to be 
implemented in indigenous territories where activities could only be carried out with prior informed 
consent, which has been gained at this stage. If the project is approved, a new round of consultation is 
anticipated for work planning. The project will avoid or minimize any adverse environmental impacts due 
to increased motor boat traffic or solid-waste production at meetings. Moreover, the project will only 
support activities in which the communities themselves are committed to work. 
 
PS8. Cultural heritage. The project will fully respect the cultural heritage of the indigenous populations. 
Archaeological remains in the area have not yet been legally recognized by the national authority. The 
project will take steps to prevent these remains from being damaged and will promote their conservation. 
Part of the project is located within the Ramsar site at the Abanico del Pastaza Wetland Complex, which 
could be considered a natural heritage site since it will also contribute to the protection of this wetland of 
international importance.

=== PAGE 93 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 89 OF 101 
 
 I 
 
Annex IX: Social impact assessment summary 
(The full assessment can be found in a separate document.) 
The purpose of the social assessment of this proposal is to ensure that the project pays due 
consideration to social aspects by avoiding, preventing, eliminating or minimizing potential adverse social 
impacts and risks due to project activities. 
The assessment also identifies opportunities to maximize the potential positive impacts. The social 
safeguards are powerful tools by which communities, during the design of the project, may safeguard 
their indigenous rights by expressing their views and asking for modifications or improvements so their 
rights are not affected. 
The methodology used is based on: (a) consultations held between 23 June and 1 July 2015 with more 
than 80 communities represented by nearly 500 people (men and women) and 21 organizations 
(including federations, associations and committees); and (b) guidelines established by PROFONANPE 
and the Green Climate Fund for the application of performance standards (PSs) that are also those used 
by the International Financial Corporation (IFC). Of the eight PSs considered by IFC, the following five are 
most relevant to the project: 
• 
PS1: Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and impacts; 
• 
PS2. Labour and working conditions; 
• 
PS5. Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; 
• 
PS7. Indigenous peoples; and 
• 
PS8. Cultural heritage. 
 
Moreover, the social assessment identifies the opportunities to incorporate a gender approach in the 
project, respecting indigenous communities’ organizations and their traditional culture. 
 
1) 
PS1: Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and impacts. 
 
a) 
Impacts and social risks identification 
Various minor social impacts and risks have been identified. These are associated mainly with activities in 
Components 2 and 3. Prevention measures are proposed in order to prevent their occurrence (table 1). 
In case unforeseen impacts or risks arise during project implementation, specific measures will be 
established to prevent, correct and/or mitigate them. These must be included in the PROFONANPE 
Environmental and Social Management System. 
b) 
Engagement with stakeholders, communications and grievance mechanism 
Consensus will be the preferred method in the negotiation of complaints and local demands. In particular, 
the project will expand the participatory monitoring process to include a space to gather suggestions, 
questions and complaints directly from the community (in contrast to the formal process through which the 
community leader provides feedback to project managers). All suggestions, questions and complaints will 
be documented, analysed and provided with a formal answer. 
Furthermore, the PROFONANPE website will maintain an online format through which users can make 
suggestions, ask questions, request information and file complaints. This format is sent to the 
Administration and Finance Director and the Development and Supervision Director, who have the 
responsibility to reply where applicable. Project stakeholders will be informed of this procedure. It should

=== PAGE 94 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 90 OF 101 
 
 I 
also be mentioned that the PROFONANPE Directorate of Development and Supervision will be in charge 
of implementing the environmental and social risk management system. 
Table 1. Social impacts and risk identification and prevention/mitigation measures 
Component/ 
related activities 
Analysis 
Negative 
impact/risk 
Prevention/mitigation 
measure 
Component 1. 
Strengthened 
institutional capacity in 
government 
organizations 
Activities considered in this component 
generate positive impacts because 
they are aimed at strengthening 
national and subnational government 
capacities (for sustainable land 
management). The official registration 
of indigenous people through the 
issuance of national identity 
documents will formally enable them to 
sustainably manage and 
commercialize natural resources, and 
to access other benefits provided by 
the State, such as health and 
education 
None 
None 
Component 2. 
Strengthening capacity 
of community-based 
institutions 
 
Activities considered in this component 
generate positive impacts because 
they are aimed at strengthening the 
capacity of indigenous people for land 
management and sustainable use of 
natural resources with the support of 
the corresponding authority. In addition 
to responding to the indigenous 
communities’ demands, titling of lands 
will give them legal security and 
access to larger spaces for the 
management of natural resources, 
thereby fostering elements of a culture 
of peace and rule of law. Nevertheless, 
the participatory formulation and 
implementation of territorial and natural 
resources management plans to some 
extent could generate the exclusion of 
minorities by failing to take their 
opinions into account. Therefore, 
prevention measures should be 
implemented in order to avoid social 
conflicts 
Exclusion of 
minorities 
Create opportunities and 
mechanisms to promote 
dialogue and conflict 
resolution in order to 
respect the rights of 
minorities 
Component 3. 
Building resilience 
through sustainable 
bio-businesses 
Currently, the distribution of economic 
resources from bio-businesses is 
undertaken in the community since 
indigenous federations appoint 
managers of producers’ associations. 
Unexpected 
changes in 
community 
organization 
Avoid the concentration of 
power and money by: (a) 
implementing mechanisms 
for the accountability of 
producers’ associations to

=== PAGE 95 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 91 OF 101 
 
 I 
Component/ 
related activities 
Analysis 
Negative 
impact/risk 
Prevention/mitigation 
measure 
 
Moreover, they operate as 
intermediaries in the purchase and 
sale of managed products. Therefore, 
each family within the community 
benefits. However, it should not rule 
out the possibility that further economic 
growth could lead to differences in 
status among families, changing the 
community organization. This could 
also undermine their self-esteem and 
cultural identity. Moreover, it could 
generate a gap between men and 
women if the income is mainly handled 
by the former 
their communities; (b) 
delivering a semi-annual 
report to the project on the 
use of resources; and (c) 
training community 
members in good practices 
for money use 
Build self-esteem and 
cultural identity of 
indigenous communities 
Create spaces for women’s 
participation in bio-
businesses 
Empower women in the 
logic of economic 
development 
Promote the sharing of 
experiences of women from 
target groups with other 
women leaders 
Consider in the project 
team a professional 
sociologist or 
anthropologist who will be 
in charge of observing and 
evaluating any change in 
the social dynamics of 
indigenous communities 
that could constitute a risk 
to the population 
Occurrence 
of work 
accidents 
Establish guidelines and 
mechanisms for the safety 
of people in bio-businesses 
as well the project team 
Component 4. 
Science, technology 
and knowledge 
management 
Assessments and research on carbon 
stocks and impacts of climate change 
in the region are of high social impact 
since consistent measures of 
mitigation and adaptation to the local 
context can only be implemented with 
the right knowledge. Furthermore, 
technological innovation is highly 
important not only for the impact it may 
None 
None

=== PAGE 96 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 92 OF 101 
 
 I 
Component/ 
related activities 
Analysis 
Negative 
impact/risk 
Prevention/mitigation 
measure 
have on the implementation of clean, 
environmentally friendly energy 
systems, but also for its importance 
and potential replicability. However, to 
enhance these actions, monitoring and 
evaluation of indigenous peoples’ 
adaptation to these new technologies 
are recommended 
 
2) 
PS2. Labour and working conditions 
PROFONANPE has high standards when hiring staff and rigorously applies all of Peru’s legal guidelines, 
in addition to standards set by international cooperation agencies. All staff recruitment takes place in a 
competitive and transparent manner, without discrimination, and is particularly respectful of the local 
sensitivities where it works. 
The project does not involve the permanent recruitment of indigenous staff. It seeks to empower 
communities to implement the actions identified as a result of the enactment of the land-use plan and 
natural resources management plans. This does not exclude the fact that, among consultants and 
technical staff, the project may give preference to those who are from the region and are of indigenous 
origin. 
The project will not promote or force child labour. (In indigenous communities, underage children are 
traditionally involved in productive activities as apprentices and perform tasks suited to their abilities 
under adult supervision.) 
3) 
PS5. Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement 
The project will not generate the displacement of indigenous communities. Instead, it will strengthen legal 
security by promoting land titling and land-use planning. 
The project seeks the sustainable use of, and unrestricted access to, natural resources in the province, 
without discriminating between indigenous and non-indigenous peoples. There is a possibility that non-
indigenous peoples and persons from outside the territory may inhabit the same territory as project 
beneficiaries. In such cases, the project will develop a policy of intercultural interaction as is currently 
being implemented in the environmental conservation areas. 
The project will promote alternative activities through the development of bio-businesses, such as the 
commercialization of dried, salted and frozen fish, and aguaje harvesting (without cutting down palm trees) 
and its transformation into pulp, flour and oils. 
4) 
PS7. Indigenous peoples 
The project’s design includes a process for the free and informed consent of indigenous peoples, as a 
result of which the social licensing of the project was obtained. This process included an intercultural 
approach and was gender sensitive. 
The project will develop a process of information and permanent dialogue with indigenous peoples, so 
that all decisions regarding the project will be made with consensus as the preferred method.

=== PAGE 97 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 93 OF 101 
 
 I 
The project will develop guidelines for social safeguards implementation, including indigenous land 
acquisition and involuntary resettlement. All actors involved in the project will be trained in their use so 
that all can apply the safeguards. Finally, the project includes a strong tracking component to periodically 
report on its implementation. 
5) 
PS8. Cultural heritage 
 
The project will not affect the values of physical and cultural heritage. Instead, the proposal will help 
facilitate the management of the physical environment by respecting the culture of the population. 
 
Gender 
Based on cultural aspects, members of indigenous families have well-defined roles. Men are responsible 
for hunting, fishing and forest resource gathering, while women are in charge of food preparation and 
childcare. The work in the farm (chacra), where yuca (Manihot esculenta) is the principal product, is an 
activity performed by both men and women. 
Although it is true that extractive activities are mainly carried out by men, the activities of processing and 
wetland conservation will incorporate women. According to the Pastaza Morona–first stage project’s 
experience regarding bio-business implementation, women were included in the productive 
transformation and preservation process (salting dried fish) and in the production of handicrafts and 
ceramics. Taking into account this experience, the project will create spaces for the gradual participation 
of women in bio-businesses and will train them in issues of economic development. Furthermore, it will 
promote the sharing of experiences with women leaders of other indigenous groups and respect their 
traditional customs. However, care must be taken not to contravene the culture of women’s participation, 
leading to gradual and negotiated incorporation without overloading their occupations, which would mean 
an increased workload and potential conflicts in their homes. 
Currently, most women of the seven ethnic groups only speak in their native languages. In that sense, the 
project will be respectful of their culture and will seek to achieve gradual participation of women in 
community meetings and will enable the conduct of meetings in each population’s language.

=== PAGE 98 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 94 OF 101 
 
 I 
LEGEND 
 
District capital 
Hydrography  
Lake 
Native communities 
District limit 
Datem del Marañon 
province 
Annex X: Maps indicating the project location 
Figure 10.1. Map of Datem del Marañón Province 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.2. Political Map of Datem del Marañón

=== PAGE 99 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 95 OF 101 
 
 I 
 
Figure 10.3. Map of wetlands in Datem del Marañón 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LEGEND 
 
Distric capital 
Hidrography  
Lake 
Distric limits 
Datem del 
Marañon Province 
Wetlands 
LEGEND 
 
District capital 
Hydrography  
 
Lake 
District limits 
Datem del 
Marañon Province 
Wetlands

=== PAGE 100 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 96 OF 101 
 
 I 
Figure 10.4. Map of the deforestation rate in Datem del Marañón 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deforestation rate for  
2011, 2012 and 2013 
LEGEND 
 
District capital 
Hydrography  
 
Lake 
 
District Limit 
 
Datem del Marañon 
Province 
Deforestation rate for  
2011, 2012 and 2013 
Based 
on 
the 
Kernel 
analysis 
method 
with 
information on forest loss
Extremely high 
Very high 
High 
Medium 
Low

=== PAGE 101 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 97 OF 101 
 
 I 
Figure 10.5. Map of land tenure categorization in Datem del Marañón

=== PAGE 102 ===
ANNEXES 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 98 OF 101 
 
 I 
Annex XI: Project sustainability: an innovative response by PROFONANPE 
A recurring question emerges from almost all projects funded mainly by international sources, no matter if 
they deal with conservation, sustainable development, climate change or infrastructure: how sustainable 
are post-project activities? In fact, there is little empirical evidence based on appropriate indicators that 
objectively demonstrates the degree of sustainability after a project has come to the end of its life span. 
Partly because: (a) there are very few ex-post evaluations five years after the closing periods;(bi) in 
certain cases there are insufficient provisions to ensure the future sustainability of actions; (c) the design 
of certain works are poorly adjusted to the real needs of beneficiaries; (d) very few financial resources are 
allocated by governments and/or donors for such assessments; and (e) the continuous changes in 
government staff tend to erode the memory of commitments given. Some of these causes by themselves, 
or a combination of them, may, in fact, explain the recurring question. 
PROFONANPE has almost 23 years of experience in funding projects from bilateral, multilateral, 
corporate and international foundation sources; and two decades facing the same question. However, its 
institutional design has enabled it to implement a unique arrangement, not yet practised in most 
developing countries: the allocation of trust funds. These can be of two types: sinking funds and 
endowment funds. The first is fully disbursed during the project life span and the second is a capital 
invested in the stock market the annual returns on which are used for project funding. The resulting 
capital is granted to PROFONANPE in perpetuity.  
Thanks to the trust fund mechanism, PROFONANPE has managed to apply a useful answer to the 
uncertainty of sustainability, particularly in the case of beneficiaries for whom the average duration of a 
project (five years) is still insufficient within which to consolidate operations achieved during that period. 
To date, PROFONANPE has a total of USD 50 million in endowments, the purpose of which is to facilitate 
the sustainability of project achievements in the long run. 
A formula derived from this mechanism is the generation of an endowment from the annual income 
gained by a sinking fund during its lifetime. In spite of the fact that a sinking fund has a determined period, 
by means of the proper management of investments it is possible to obtain capital in perpetuity at the end 
of the project. PROFONANPE has called this modality "mixed trust fund" and it is the first institution of its 
kind that has applied it in Latin America. 
The purpose of such a mechanism is not to replace the potential sustainability of certain investments or to 
simply subsidize sustainability. Applying a reasonable investment strategy, the idea is to technical assist 
some initiatives during a certain period in order to achieve full sustainability, especially those with little 
prior experience or facing long periods of maturity. 
Examples of PROFONANPE achievements in the past five years are shown in the following table: 
Endowment funds set up by PROFONANPE 
2010-2015 
 
Source 
Project 
Implementation 
period 
 
Project 
amount 
(USD millon) 
Endowment 
amount 
(USD millon) 
Estimated 
endowment 
amount 
(USD millon) 
GEF/WB/KfW 
PRONANP 
2010-2015 
23.7 
12.6 
– 
Debt swap 
SINANPE III 
2013-2018 
10.0 
– 
4.0a

=== PAGE 103 ===
ANNEXES 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 99 OF 101 I 
(Germany) 
GEF/WB 
Guaneras 
2014-2019 
9.0 
2.0 
– 
IFAD 
Payment for 
ecosystem 
services
2015-2020 
5.0 
2.0 
– 
  a Expected amount to be obtained at the end of 2018 after cumulative returns of the sinking fund.
In the specific case of the project Building the resilience of wetlands in Datem del Marañón - Peru 
(Wetlands project), there is an endowment of USD 5.5 million, resulting from a mixed trust fund obtained 
from a project whose original value (now extinct) was USD 9.2 million. The annual returns of this capital 
are to be allocated in perpetuity and exclusively to the Province of Datem del Marañón. Besides serving 
as co-financier for the implementation of the wetlands project, after its completion it will serve to 
strengthen and facilitate the sustainability of the activities financed during the project’s life span. An 
average of USD 350,000–400,000 will be allocated annually.15 
The core of future funding will be aimed at strengthening those bio-businesses that still require broader 
terms for consolidation. In particular and as appropriate, it will finance technical assistance in areas such 
as technology transfer, identifying new markets, marketing, maintenance of equipment, development of 
training workshops, internships, etc.  To fulfill this purpose, an allocation of USD 250,000–300,000 
annually is estimated. Likewise and in order to ensure the follow up of post-project activities, the project 
endowment will provide financial resources to perform the tasks of monitoring and reporting for at least 
five years after project completion. In this case, an annual budget of around USD 40,000 is estimated. 
15 These amounts are referenced to the historical average annual return of around 7 per cent.

=== PAGE 104 ===
ANNEXES 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 100 OF 101 I 
Annex XII. Monitoring and evaluation post-project implementation 
Outcome/Output 
Indicator 
Target 
Mean of 
verification 
Frequency 
Responsible 
Outcomes 
Reduced 
emissions from 
land use, 
reforestation, 
reduced 
deforestation, and 
through 
sustainable forest 
management and 
conservation and 
enhancement of 
forest carbon 
stocks 
Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent 
(t CO2 eq) reduced 
or avoided 
(including 
increased 
removals) as a 
result of Green 
Climate Fund 
(GCF)-funded 
projects/programm
es–forest and land-
use subindicator  
2.63 Mt CO2 
National MRV 
programme 
reports from the 
National Forest 
Conservation 
Programme 
5 years 
PROFONANPE 
in coordination 
with the 
National Forest 
Conservation 
Programme 
Increased 
resilience and 
enhanced 
livelihoods of the 
most vulnerable 
people, 
communities and 
regions 
Number of males 
and females 
benefiting from the 
adoption of 
diversified, climate-
resilient livelihood 
options (including 
fisheries, 
agriculture, tourism, 
etc.) 
20,413 people 
(4,150 
families, 
disaggregated 
by gender and 
age)  
Bio-business 
associations 
reports 
Every 2 
years 
PROFONANPE 
and bio-
businesses 
associations 
Improved resilience 
of ecosystems and 
ecosystem 
services  
Coverage/scale of 
ecosystems 
protected and 
strengthened in 
response to climate 
variability and 
change  
338,000 
hectares (3 
environmental 
conservation 
areas (ACAs) 
under 
approved 
management 
plans) 
ACA management 
plans reports 
generated by the 
Provincial 
Municipality of 
Datem del 
Marañón (PMDM) 
5 years 
PROFONANPE, 
in coordination 
with PMDM 
Improved 
management of 
land or forest areas 
contributing to 
emission 
reductions 
Hectares of land or 
forests under 
improved and 
effective 
management that 
contributes to CO2 
emission reductions 
338,000 
hectares 
National Forest 
Conservation 
Programme data 
using the MRV 
system being 
developed at the 
national level and 
data generated at 
the local level 
Every 3 
years 
PROFONANPE 
in coordination 
with the 
National Forest 
Conservation 
Programme

=== PAGE 105 ===
ANNEXES 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL | PAGE 101 OF 101 I 
Outputs 
Strengthened 
institutional 
capacity in 
government 
organizations 
Institutional and 
regulatory systems 
that improve 
incentives for low-
emission planning 
and development, 
and their effective 
implementation 
1 
Land-use planning 
and Climate 
Change Strategy 
implementation 
reports generated 
by PMDM 
Every 2 
years 
PROFONANPE 
in coordination 
with PMDM 
Strengthened 
capacity of 
community-based 
institutions 
Number of ACA 
monitoring 
management plans 
implemented 
3 
ACA management 
plan reports 
generated by 
PMDM 
Annual 
PROFONANPE 
in coordination 
with PMDM 
Resilience built 
through 
sustainable bio-
businesses in 
natural resources 
management areas 
Number of bio-
businesses 
operating with 
positive cash flow 
50 
Integrated 
financial 
statements; field 
reports 
Every 2 
years 
PROFONANPE 
and bio-
businesses 
associations 
Science, 
technology, 
knowledge 
management, and 
monitoring and 
evaluation systems 
established 
Number of weather 
stations operating 
4 
Meteorological 
and Hydrological 
National Service of 
Peru (SENAMHI) 
reports 
Annual 
PROFONANPE 
in coordination 
with SENAMHI

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.11/04/Add.01 
No-objection letter issued by the focal point 
________
