=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 24.3.20112
producer: Microsoft® Word for Microsoft 365
creationDate: D:20241014110343+09'00'
modDate: D:20241019144750+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
21 – 24 October 2024 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 10 
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
19 October 2024 
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum VII 
Funding proposal package for FP245 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled "Green City Kigali: a new model for urban development in
Rwanda";
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal
point(s);
c)
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure
d) Secretariat’s assessment;
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
f)
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Content 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
67 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
68 
Secretariat’s assessment 
72 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
86 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
97 
Gender documentation 
99

=== PAGE 3 ===
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Project/Programme title: 
Green City Kigali: a new model for urban development in 
Rwanda 
Country(ies): 
Rwanda. 
Accredited Entity: 
Ministry of Environment  
Date of first submission: 
[2022/03/14] 
Date of current submission  
[2024/08/02]  
Version number 
[V.004]

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-reference to 
annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details provided in 
the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be reflected in all 
relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not exceed 60. 
Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual service standard 
time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals will be 
disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the 
redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Accredited Entities are 
asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[MoE]-[Rwanda/Kigali]-[2024/08/02]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 1 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Project 
A.2. Public or 
private sector 
Public 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
 
GCF  
contribution 
Co-financers’ 
contribution 
Mitigation total 
0 % 
0 % 
☐  Energy generation and access 
 
0 % 
☐  Low-emission transport 
0 % 
0 % 
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances 
0% 
0% 
☐  Forestry and land use 
0 % 
0 % 
Adaptation total 
100% 
100 % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities 
10 % 
10 % 
☒  Health and well-being, and food and water security 
7% 
7 % 
☒  Infrastructure and built environment 
83 % 
83 % 
☐  Ecosystems and ecosystem services 
0 % 
0 % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered) 
No mitigation outcome 
 
Quantified co-benefit of 
125,032 tonnes CO2eq 
A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached) 
Indicate total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
30,252 direct 
beneficiaries 
1,132,686 
indirect1 
beneficiaries 
Indicate % of 
direct 
beneficiaries vis-
à-vis total 
population 
0.23% of 
population2 
Indicate % of 
indirect 
beneficiaries vis-
à-vis total 
population 
8.7% of 
population 
A.7. Total (GCF + co-
finance)  
                                           
35,107,775  USD 
A.9. Project size 
Small (Upto USD 50 million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
27,995,786USD 
 
For multi-country proposals, 
please fill out annex 17.

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2 
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
 
☒  Grant 
27,995,786 USD 
 
 
☐  Loan 
Enter number 
☐  Guarantee 
Enter number 
☐  Equity  
 
    Enter number 
☐  Results-based payment    Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
5 years 
A.12. Total lifespan 
40 years 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
This is the date that the 
Accredited Entity obtained/will 
obtain its own approval to 
implement the project/ 
programme, if available.  
 
Click or tap to enter a date. 
 
A.14. ESS category  
 
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
The Executing Entity is the National Fund for Environment (FONERWA). FONERWA 
has a core mandate to mobilize, manage, monitor, and facilitate cross-sector access to 
green finance, and provide financial and technical support to catalyse climate-resilient 
development impacts at scale. 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
 
Climate Rationale 
 
Rwanda is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate change and is increasingly experiencing the 
impacts of climate change. Current climate variability in Rwanda is already resulting in an increased incidence of 
drought, flooding and landslides. Increased heavy rainfall events3 are causing floods, landslides, damage to houses, 
roads and other infrastructure as well as creating power cuts. The nationally determined contribution of Rwanda 
highlights that rainfall has become increasingly intense and the variability is predicted to increase by 5% to 10% by 
2030. Changes in temperature and precipitation and their distributions are the key drivers of climate and weather-
related disasters that negatively affect Rwandans and the country’s economy. Temperature increases exhibit records 
in mean temperature rise from 1971 to 2016 between 1.4°C and 2.56°C in the south-west and eastern regions of 
Rwanda. The occurrence of prolonged dry spells from rising temperatures is creating create heat stress and new 
challenges for water management and storage to cope with the future water demand from Rwanda’s growing urban 
population. The NDC reports that Rwanda still is water scarce with 670 m³ of water per capita per year and 25% of the 
population are still unable to access safe drinking water. 
 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in its 4th and 5th assessments have explicitly identified informal 
settlements within the global south as a key factor shaping climate-related risk. The Ministry of Infrastructure reports 
that that 62.60% of the urban population in Rwanda in 2016 live in informal settlements, while less than 20% of the 
urban population live in areas covered by master plans had storm water considerations.  Climate and disaster related 
risks in cities cannot be addressed without the upgrade of informal settlements. In parallel, the upgrade of settlements 
will be incomplete without accounting for and incorporating the risks of climate change. Kigali, where official estimates

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3 
 
indicate the population living in unplanned settlements at a very high 77.3% (EICV 5) 4, is at particular risk even 
compared to many of its neighbours. In addition, Rwanda has been identified as a country at very high risk of climate 
change events overall. 
 
The project site is situated on Kinyinya Hill in Gasabo district, 6.5km to the north-east of the central business district of 
Kigali. The population of Gasabo is ranked as one of the most vulnerable districts to landslides in Rwanda (ranked 
second out of 30). The district is the most populated in Rwanda with 47% of the total population of Kigali5 and contains 
7% of all the housing in Rwanda that is susceptible to landslides due to its high population density, the high 
concentration of informal settlements located in landslide-prone areas and the weak building materials used in 
construction. The population in the project have high vulnerability to increasing climate-related risks. Within Kinyinya 
Hill it is estimated that 8,400 of the 8,660 households mapped (representing around 97% of the population) live 
informally, far higher than Kigali’s very high levels and thus bringing the risks around unplanned settlements into even 
greater focus. 
  
The project site resides with a larger 600ha area at Kinyinya Hill which has been designated by the GoR as a focal 
area for the development of communities employing urbanization models to provide affordable housing and 
infrastructure for target groups in sustainable and culturally compatible, climate-resilient urban communities, which 
establishes new standards that can be replicated elsewhere in Rwanda and beyond - setting a trajectory towards a Net 
Zero future. The first stages of this model community will be in the form of a mixed-use pilot situated on a 15.8-hectare 
parcel (Pilot Area) at the northwest of the Planning Area as well as the Upgrade of an existing informal settlement at 
Ngaruyinka, as the focal point, but with further transport interventions throughout the Murama cell, representing the 
western half of the 600ha area. This 600ha model area has been identified originally as the Green City Pilot and 
subsequently renamed to Green City Kigali (GCK). The GCK seeks to reflect the Rwandan context in terms of its current 
and future cultural and environmental climate. Doing so engages with the challenges vulnerability to climate change 
and increasing urban sprawl. 
  
The upgrade of the informal settlement at Ngaruyinka has been identified as an informal settlement that is typical of its 
type in Kigali (formerly rural, then peri-urban and increasingly urban as the city of Kigali grows rapidly). Ngaruyinka, 
with poor infrastructure access, prevalence of low-income households, and located on sloped terrain has been identified 
as particularly vulnerable to present and future climate change threats as well as the other issues that affect a low 
income and informal community. Thus, the upgrade will focus on interventions that prepare it for the climate-based 
threats of today and tomorrow (adaptation) and minimize emissions during its construction and operations (mitigation), 
while developing a toolkit for climate responsive upgrade elsewhere within Rwanda and further afield. Further 
information on the site and its threats is provided within the Upgrade Feasibility Study (Annex 2) and in the Land 
Development Plan (Annex 23). 
 
The upgrade of informal settlements within the frame of green city development is also pertinent to mitigation efforts. 
Under a business-as-usual projection, Rwanda’s total emissions are forecast to more than double over the 2015-2030 
period, rising from 5.3 million tCO2e in the base year to 12.1 million tCO2e in 2030 (excluding removals from the forest 
and land use sectors). The forecast indicates the growing contribution from fossil fuels to national emissions, arising 
from increasing demand for power generation, road transport and other modern energy uses. 
According to the nationally determined contribution (NDC) of Rwanda, a detailed assessment of identified GHG 
mitigation options for Rwanda estimates a total emissions reduction potential of around 4.6 million tCO2e in 2030 
against the business as usual (BAU) emissions in the same year of 12.1 million tCO2e. The NDC presents an 
unconditional contribution with a reduction of 16 per cent relative to BAU in the year 2030; equivalent to an estimated 
mitigation level of 1.9 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2e) in that year. This is an unconditional target, 
based on domestically supported and implemented mitigation measures and policies. It also presents a conditional 
contribution: An additional reduction of 22 per cent relative to BAU in the year 2030; equivalent to an estimated 
mitigation level of 2.7 million tCO2e in that year. This represents an additional targeted contribution, based on the 
provision of international support and funding. 
  
Within energy use, increased use of renewables to meet increasing energy demand dominates the mitigation potential. 
Significant emissions reduction potential exists across each of the main sub-sectors. Hydropower, covering large- and 
small-scale new generation, represents the largest share of the identified GHG reduction potential, followed by the use 
of solar energy for water heating, pumping for agricultural irrigation and off-grid electricity which together account for 
around a quarter of all mitigation. 
 
The project supports activities under the conditional NDC target, Solar mini-grids, Off-grid and rooftop solar 
electrification, Solar water heater (SWH) programme.

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4 
 
Following the agricultural sources, major sources for 2015 included CO2 emissions from fuel combustion for heating 
and cooking in buildings (LPG, kerosene), which accounted for 14% of the total, and CO2 emissions from liquid fuel 
use in road transport (diesel, gasoline), which accounted for 13% of the total. 
 
Emissions from Ngaruyinka Village are expected to follow similar trends under a BAU scenario with increasing levels 
of energy consumption for cooking, lighting and operating electrical appliances is expected to increase. Emissions from 
transport would also increase, with increased use of cars and motorcycles. In the solid waste sector, the BAU scenario 
includes increased emissions from solid waste disposal and wastewater. 
 
There is a direct and well-documented link between gender equality, women’s empowerment and climate change. 
Research shows that women are disproportionately more vulnerable to the effects of climate change, which can result 
in existing gender disparities becoming even more pronounced and harmful over time.6 Rapidly advancing climate 
change will amplify chronic environmental threats, such as water scarcity and land degradation, which hits the poorest 
communities the hardest. Due to gender bias and inequalities related to education, economic empowerment, violence 
and other forms of oppression and marginalization, women are more likely to be poor than men, and this is true in the 
case of Rwanda. Among other disadvantaged groups who experience poverty, women are often the poorest of the 
poor, particularly if they face other challenges such as having a disability. Poor women are especially vulnerable to 
climate change as their incomes are often highly dependent on natural resources that are sensitive to climate shocks 
and variability, and in general, women possess fewer assets. They receive less education than their male counterparts, 
have less economic independence, and are not involved in political or household decision-making processes to the 
same degree that men are, a situation that is well-documented in Rwanda. Given this evidence base, and in line with 
the clear requirements of the GCF Gender Policy, it is critical that gender equality considerations and actions be 
integrated into all climate change adaptation and/or mitigation interventions. 
 
Proposed Interventions 
 
The project at its core focuses on the sustainable upgrade of informal settlements, by piloting a realistic climate 
mitigative and adaptive multi-sectoral program of actions that can be used as a template for future upgrading at similar 
communities throughout Kigali and secondary cities. Thus, the project also includes technical assistance programs in 
order to facilitate this future upgrading expansion as well as to promote new sustainable greenfield housing 
development projects as well. Some of the specific interventions include: 
 
• 
Integrated investments in resilient infrastructure, household energy solutions and community facilities in an 
informal settlement on Kinyinya hill - Ngaruyinka Village, to serve as a model for a resilient, low emission upgrade. 
This would include:  
o 
creating a green, permeable network of swales, gullies and detention-filtration-percolation areas to increase 
retention of water on the hill, improve stormwater management and reduce the risk of flooding and 
landslides;  
o 
establishing community composting, neighbourhood collection points, recycling centres to improve solid 
waste management, reducing emissions, increasing the productivity of urban agriculture and reducing the 
blockage of drains with solid waste; 
o 
expanding the central water supply (including connections), rainwater harvesting, point of use household 
water treatment technologies to improve the water supply and enhance water security during dry spells;  
o 
creating green rights of way network to improve transport and mobility, safety and security, using green 
construction methods and materials to minimize emissions;  
o 
establishing toilets with biogas recovery and providing training on sanitation improvements to improve 
health and reduce emissions; 
o 
installing solar PV and solar water heaters (SWH) and promoting the use of clean cooking technology, 
energy efficient lighting and appliances to reduce emissions; and 
o 
establishing a technical and vocational education and training (TVET) centre, community focal points and 
market squares to enhance green skills and livelihoods development in new value chains. 
 
• 
Provision of Technical Assistance (TA) to support the scale up and replication of resilient, low emission 
approaches through:  
o 
developing training programs for building the capacity of construction sector workers and professionals to 
adopt best practices in green construction; 
o 
assess and select best practices in green construction that can be replicable in Rwanda 
o 
developing training events to enhance the institutional capacity of GoR agencies to support inclusive, green 
city development; 
o 
providing support relating to the planning and regulatory environment in order to develop an enabling 
environment that fosters increased investment in the green upgrade of informal settlements;

=== PAGE 9 ===
A 
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5 
 
o 
conducting several types of events, including through social media, briefs, meetings, exchange visits, for 
raising awareness, and engaging citizens to increase their active participation in resilient, low emission 
initiatives; and 
o 
developing a design template and blueprinting the GCK and the planning code for the GoR so that it can be 
easily and cost effectively replicated. 
 
Climate Impacts / Benefits 
The result is a project with strong climate benefits, as well as social, health, economic, environmental co-benefits. 
These climate benefits include a reduction of CO2 emissions by 125,032 tCO2eq over the lifetime of the investments 
(see Annex 22 for details), as well as adapting to present and future climate risks. This will contribute to the targets set 
out in Rwanda’s NDC. The project thus advances several of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), including 
(climate benefit specific in bold): 
• 
SDG 1 no poverty 
• 
SDG 3 good health and well being 
• 
SDG 5 gender equity and empowerment for all women and girls 
• 
SDG 6 clean water and sanitation  
• 
SDG 7 affordable and clean energy  
• 
SDG 8 decent work and economic growth  
• 
SDG 9 industry, innovation and infrastructure 
• 
SDG 10 reduced inequalities 
• 
SDG 11 sustainable cities and communities 
• 
SDG 13 climate action 
• 
SDG 17 partnerships for the goals 
 
The project’s expected results include: 
 
• An upgraded urban settlement with public infrastructure that is low emission and resilient to flooding, landslides 
and heat stress as well as household energy use that is efficient, low emission and geared to low-income 
households to demonstrate innovation and best practice; 
• increased awareness of low emission and climate resilient approaches and enhanced capacity across all 
stakeholder groups to support and participate in low emission and climate resilient upgrade projects; and 
• an enabling environment to catalyse inclusive, climate resilient, low emission investments in urban settlements 
that will contribute to low-carbon pathways towards 2030 and beyond .

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6 
 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Climate change problem 
 
The project will address: 1) the high vulnerability and low resilience of informal urban settlements to climate change; 
and as a co-benefit, (ii) the potential high emission development pathway that would ordinarily occur with the re-
development of an informal urban settlement in Kigali. 
  
1) Climate vulnerability and low resilience 
 
Climate change impacts in the Central African region 
Specific data on observations and projections for Rwanda is limited. IPCC reports that the central African region 
(which includes Rwanda) has experienced an increase of mean annual temperature by 0.75℃–1.2°C since 1960. 
The number of hot days, heatwaves and heatwave days increased between 1979–2016 and cold extremes have 
decreased. IPCC refers to projects that indicate that mean annual temperatures in Central Africa are projected to 
be on average, 0.6°C, 1.1°C and 2.1°C warmer than the 1994–2005 average under 1.5°C, 2°C and 3°C global 
warming scenarios. Children born in 2020, under a 1.5°C-compatible scenario will be exposed to 6–8 times more 
heatwaves in their lifetimes compared to people born in 1960; this exposure increases to 7–9 times more 
heatwaves at a 2.4°C temperature increase scenario. IPCC further reports that under temperature scenarios of 
1.5°C - 2°C there may not be changes in mean rainfall, however, regional models predict increases of 10-25% in 
3°C - 4°C scenarios, then combined with increasing intensity of extreme precipitation. This is projected to increase 
the likelihood of widespread flood occurrences before, during and after the mature monsoon season.7  
 
Current climate variability in Rwanda is already resulting in an increased incidence of drought, flooding 
and landslides.  Rwanda is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate change8 and is increasingly 
experiencing the impacts of climate change. Current climate variability in Rwanda is already resulting in an 
increased incidence of drought, flooding and landslides. Increased heavy rainfall events 9 are causing floods, 
landslides, damage to houses, roads and other infrastructure as well as creating power cuts. The nationally 
determined contribution of Rwanda highlights that rainfall has become increasingly intense and the variability is 
predicted to increase by 5% to 10% by 2030. Changes in temperature and precipitation and their distributions are 
the key drivers of climate and weather-related disasters that negatively affect Rwandans and the country’s 
economy. Temperature increases exhibit records in mean temperature rise from 1971 to 2016 between 1.4°C and 
2. 56°C. 
 
Rwanda’s 3rd national communication to the UNFCCC reports that projections regarding rainfall patterns are 
uncertain, but the period 2015-2050 is generally expected to have a decreasing trend at in mean rainfall across the 
country with exception in the north-western highlands. High variability in mean rainfall with a tendency to decrease 
is expected especially in 2015-2023 and 2033-2042. More occurrences of extreme weather events (flooding and 
droughts episodes) might be also predicted from the fact that a number of positive and negative rainfall anomalies 
are projected in the periods. 
 
Rwanda is urbanising fast. Between 2002 and 2015, Rwanda’s urban population more than doubled increasing 
from 16% to 27% of the total population10 and is expected to grow to 41% by 205011. The capital city of Kigali 
accommodates about half of the urban population and is one of the fastest-growing cities in Africa. It is the most 
popular destination for rural migrants12 and its population is expected to rise from 10.5 million in 2012 to 23.2 million 
in 2050. Following current growth patterns, Kigali needs to produce over 35,000 dwelling units per year but falls 
well short of this resulting in high levels of informal housing - more than 70% of housing is informal as most formal 
housing is too expensive for the average resident13.   
 
Current urbanisation trends have been toward low-density informal sprawl on unsuitable land, creating 
vulnerable communities and threatening Rwanda’s food security and the environment. Rising urban sprawl is 
forcing people to commute greater distances than necessary, with motorised transport resulting in congestion, high 
transport costs for the population and increased GHG emissions and air pollution. Based on number of 
registrations, total vehicle numbers are estimated to have grown from 47,631 in 2006 to 161,925 in 2015, 
representing an increase of over 300%. Motorcycles accounted for around 51% of total vehicles in 2015, followed 
by passenger cars (34%), and other vehicles including buses and trucks (15%), according to the updated NDC.

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7 
 
 
Rwanda’s high rate of urbanisation increases its overall vulnerability to climate change. Urban households 
are vulnerable to climate change due to Rwanda’s hilly topography and the high number of people living in 
unplanned settlements. Low infiltration rates for storm water create high runoff speeds leading to erosion and 
downstream flooding. Less than 20% of the urban population that live in areas covered by master plans had storm 
water considerations in 201614. Moreover, low recharge rates for groundwater tables reduce the availability of 
groundwater as a potable water resource. These problems are accentuated by climate change.   
 
Many informal settlements are concentrated on sites most at risk from flooding and landslides with poor 
quality housing and infrastructure less able to withstand extreme weather events. Moreover, informal settlements 
tend to be very dense with very little open/public space and often with corrugated iron roofs and poor ventilation 
that contribute to higher indoor temperatures. Impacts from rising maximum temperatures, more hot days and heat 
waves are greatest for infants and young children, the elderly, expectant mothers, and those with health problems. 
Rising minimum temperatures with fewer cold days is also extending the range and activity of some disease vectors 
including mosquito and tick-borne diseases with populations at risk from malaria expected to increase by 150% by 
205015.  The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in its 4th and 5th assessments have explicitly 
identified informal settlements within the global south as a key factor shaping climate-related risk.   
 
Residents in informal settlements experience greater water constraints during prolonged dry spells. 
Periods of water stress arise due to a low capture and storage capacity and a high precipitation run-off rate16. Water 
demand is expected to increase rapidly by 2040 further increasing the pressure on water resources as more homes 
are connected to mains water supply (only 35% of households in Kigali have water piped into the home), industries 
develop, and the population grows17.  The occurrence of prolonged dry spells from rising temperatures is creating 
create heat stress and new challenges for water management and storage to cope with the future water demand 
from Rwanda’s growing urban population. The NDC reports that Rwanda still is water scarce with 670 m³ of water 
per capita per year and 25% of the population are still unable to access safe drinking water. 
 
There are an estimated 29,215 houses across the country that are vulnerable to landslides. The exposure 
of housing in Kigali City is especially high due to the high and moderate slope susceptibility, high population density, 
the concentration of informal settlements and use of low-quality construction materials. All three districts in the City 
of Kigali have high and moderate slope susceptibility and exposure of housing to landslides18.  
The population of Gasabo is ranked as one of the most vulnerable districts to landslides in Rwanda (ranked 
second out of 30). The district is the most populated in Rwanda with 47% of the total population of Kigali19 and 
contains 7% of all the housing in Rwanda that is susceptible to landslides due to its high population density, the 
high concentration of informal settlements located in landslide-prone areas and the weak building materials used 
in construction. 
  
The project site is situated on Kinyinya Hill in Gasabo district, 6.5km to the north-east of the central 
business district of Kigali. The site is located Kinyinya in one of the most populated sectors with more than 
57,000 residents (11% of the district’s population)20. 81% of Kinyinya’s population live in unplanned settlements. 
The Kinyinya Hill site extends over approximately 600 ha with a population of 168,892 and is a typical ‘hillcrest to 
wetland’ landscape commonly found across Rwanda. There are several existing settlements on the hill with several 
more under development or consideration. There are a number of informal settlements on Kinyinya Hill, and the 
intention is to upgrade these via well-planned densification, greater land use efficiency and connection to 
infrastructure, and in accordance with the National Informal Urban Settlement Upgrading Strategy (2017). In a 
business as usual (BAU) scenario, densification will be achieved through conventional development practices 
which rely on carbon intensive construction materials and housing and infrastructure investments that fail to take 
account of the increased risk of flooding, landslides and prolonged dry periods. 
 
Erosion from storm water is a significant problem in the community undermining the stability of buildings, 
roads and footpaths with the potential to cause landslides.  The Ministry of Infrastructure reports that that 62.60% 
of the urban population in Rwanda in 2016 live in informal settlements, while less than 20% of the urban population 
live in areas covered by master plans had storm water considerations.  High levels of run-off arise due to the 
construction of homes on steep slopes, a lack of culverts, ditches and other stormwater infrastructure combined 
with compacted soil and limited vegetation in the area. This results in low permeability and limited recharge of 
ground water, low levels of evapotranspiration and poor interception and evaporation of storm water leading to 
severe run off and erosion especially during the wettest months of April and November.

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Ngaruyinka Village – existing location of significant eroded 
gullies and picture of uncontrolled stormwater channels in the 
community 
 
 
Water supply in the community is intermittent. Ngaruyinka is connected to the public potable water utility line 
that comes from a Water Treatment Plant (WTP) managed by Water and Sanitation Corporation (WASAC) Ltd.. In 
order to obtain a household connection, residents need to pay the CAPEX for materials to connect, which is 
approximately 70 000 RWF and unaffordable for many residents. Households that lack a connection typically 
purchase water from the community kiosk. There is intermittent rationing of water in the system as the demand 
exceeds the supply and households tend to store water at home during periods when the supply is shut off. If 
households run out of water, they use other sources, such as local springs, surface water sources, other kiosks 
etc. Occasionally if there is a longer water shortage, water trucks supply water to the area, but this is too expensive 
for many residents. In the meantime, WASAC also recommends boiling the water prior to drinking for the people 
who cannot afford package water, but residents report that boiling water takes too long and is expensive due to the 
need to purchase charcoal, a high CO2 emission fuel source. However, projects are currently underway to increase 
the supply available for the whole area, and WASAC is shifting to a better water quality management which shall 
not require boiling potable water before drinking by the time of project implementation. 
  
 
Figure 2: Rainwater harvesting from roof tops is common throughout the village. Water kiosk where residents can purchase water. A household water 
connection in the community 
 
Most people living in Kigali use pit latrines as there is no central sewer network. The common practice with 
pit latrines is to close them when they become full and to dig a new pit latrine in another location as it is difficult for 
exhauster trucks to reach many of the informal settlements in Kigali, and the cost for emptying is too high for most 
households. In Gasabo district, 47% of houses either have their own pit latrine (47%) or use a shared latrine (46%), 
only 4% of households have a flush toilet21. In Ngaruyinka Village, the pit latrine is the most commonly used but 
there is now limited space to cover them when full and build new ones.  There are projects underway in Kigali to 
develop a central sewerage network system in the long term, for example the Kigali Centralized Sewerage System 
Phase II, which covers the Kinyinya sector. In addition, there are projects to improve the faecal sludge management 
for the safety of non-sewered users. The organic material in latrine pits may cause emissions of methane as a 
result of anaerobic decomposition. While not quantified, addressing sanitation will lead to a reduction of GHG 
emissions. The use of latrines makes communities vulnerable in cases of water scarcity due to risk of 
contamination. 
  
Current transport infrastructure is underdeveloped with poor accessibility, reliability and resilience and 
posing threats to properties through erosion and flooding hazards. Roads are packed clay earth with erosion cracks 
and channels, and none are consistently wide enough for passing vehicles. Adjacent buildings and the slope of the

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 
 
hill constrain road widths for roads across the slope, and some roads are very steep (10-20% gradient). There are 
many footpaths between houses and some up the hill, and erosion channels are present as well as erosion and 
flooding controls such as sandbags. There are numerous slip hazards especially in wet conditions, and railings and 
safe stairways are mostly lacking.  Some brick channels exist for open drains, and ditches are common. Right of 
way lighting is present on buildings but is not continuous on thoroughfares. The poor infrastructure and inadequate 
lighting contribute to both safety and security risks. The community is served by one local bus terminus at the top 
of the hill and the motorcycle taxi service which operates throughout Kigali.  Conditions for cycling are very poor 
and unsafe especially due to uneven surfaces, uncontrolled runoff and gradients. 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram)

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 
Theory of Change Narrative for Green City Kigali Project 
Impact: Paradigm Shift 
IF technical and financial support is provided to develop a replicable climate-resilient, low-emission 
upgrade of an informal settlement and capacity for scale-up is developed, THEN vulnerable 
households will have reduced exposure to landslides, flooding, and heat stress along with better 
living conditions and improved access to public services and employment opportunities, because  
climate risks will be mitigated and pathways established to ensure replication and scale-up across 
the country. 
Outcomes: 
1. Strengthened Adaptive Capacity, Heat Stress Mitigation, and Reduced Exposure to Climate 
Risks; Activities will focus on improving infrastructure and services to withstand climate risks 
such as flooding, landslides, and heat stress. This involves upgrading public infrastructure 
and implementing nature-based solutions for stormwater management. 
2.Strengthened Institutional and Regulatory Systems for Climate-Responsive Planning and 
Development; Enhancing the capacity of governmental and institutional bodies to plan, 
regulate, and implement climate-responsive and low-emission development strategies. 
Co-benefits: 
I. Reduced Energy Intensity of Buildings, Cities, Industries, and Appliances 
Promoting the use of renewable energy and energy-efficient technologies to lower the overall energy 
consumption and carbon footprint of urban areas. 
II. Gender Empowerment through Inclusive Planning and Capacity Building 
Ensuring that women and marginalized groups are included in the planning and implementation 
processes, thereby enhancing their roles and capacities in climate-resilient development. 
III. Enhanced Local Employment and Skill Development 
Creating job opportunities through the construction and maintenance of upgraded infrastructure and 
services, as well as through vocational training and skill development programs. 
Outputs and Activities: 
Output 1.1:  Resilient Transport, Water, and Energy Infrastructure 
Activity 1.1.1: Detailed climate-resilient and emissions-reducing engineering design for Ngaruyinka 
Village; Developing comprehensive and integrated engineering designs that incorporate climate 
resilience and emission reduction principles. 
Activity 1.1.2: Implement resilient green transport/mobility networks and green construction methods; 
Establishing a network of green transport options and utilizing sustainable construction materials and 
methods. 
Activity 1.1.3: Implement resilient stormwater management systems using nature-based solutions; 
Utilizing nature-based solutions such as green ditches and permeable surfaces to manage 
stormwater and prevent erosion.

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 
Activity 1.1.4: Expand, install, and ensure resilience of central water supply and rainwater harvesting 
systems; Enhancing the community’s water security through improved central supply systems and 
rainwater harvesting. 
Activity 1.1.5: Promotion and implementation of renewable energy and energy-efficient technologies; 
Supporting the adoption of solar PV, solar hot water heaters, and energy-efficient appliances. 
Output 1.2 Improved Waste Management and community facilities 
Activity 1.2.1 Implementation of resilient Community-Based Solid Waste Management Systems 
Activity 1.2.2 Establishment of resilient Community Facilities for Climate-Resilient Development 
Activity 1.2.3Improve sanitation with Biogas recovery system 
Output 2.1: Capacity Building and community Engagement 
 
Activity 2.1.1: Capacity building for construction sector workers, professionals and community 
members at the climate-focused TVET center; Training workers and professionals on climate-
resilient construction techniques and technologies. 
Activity 2.1.2: Institutional capacity development for Government of Rwanda agencies/institutions; 
Strengthening the capacity of governmental bodies to implement and oversee climate-responsive 
initiatives. 
Activity 2.1.3: Strengthening planning and regulatory frameworks to support an enabling 
environment; Developing and enforcing regulations and standards that facilitate climate-resilient 
urban development. 
Activity 2.1.4: Awareness raising and citizen engagement for climate action; Engaging the community 
in climate action through awareness campaigns, workshops, and participatory planning processes. 
Output 2.2 Knowledge Management and development 
 
2.2.1: Blueprinting the Green City Kigali and developing planning codes for the Special Purpose 
Vehicle (SPV). 
2.2.2: Establishment of a knowledge management system. 
2.2.3: Development of support program for recycling groups. 
 
Barriers and Risks: 
B1: Challenges in community participation and behavior change; Difficulty in achieving active and 
sustained community engagement and changes in behavior necessary for the project’s success. 
B2: Potential delays in implementation due to regulatory or logistical issues; Regulatory hurdles and 
logistical complexities that could slow down the progress of project activities.

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 
R1: Constraints in scaling up successful interventions; Limitations in resources, capacity, or 
infrastructure that might hinder the expansion of successful project components. 
B3: Climate variability and extreme weather events; Unpredictable weather patterns and extreme 
events that could impact project timelines and effectiveness. 
R2: Limited financial and technical capacity for climate investment; Insufficient financial resources 
and technical expertise to fully realize climate-resilient investments. 
Assumptions: 
▪ 
Created mechanisms for ongoing community support and project replication. 
▪ 
Continued interest and investment from national and international stakeholders in green 
urban development. 
▪ 
Availability and accessibility of sustainable technologies and resources at a global level. 
▪ 
Favorable climate conditions that allow for the successful implementation of climate-resilient 
infrastructure. 
▪ 
Consistent regulatory support and favorable policies for sustainable urban development.

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 
Figure 3: Theory of Change Diagram 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization 
Outcome 
number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation 
MRA 2 
Low-
emission 
transport 
MRA 3 
Building, 
citiies, 
MRA 4 
Forestry 
and land 
use 
ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people 
ARA 2 
Health, 
well-being, 
food and 
ARA 3 
Infrastruct
ure and 
built 
ARA 4 
Ecosyste
ms and

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 
and 
access 
industries, 
appliances 
and 
communiti
es 
water 
security 
environme
nt 
ecosystem 
services 
Outcome 
1 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
Outcome 
2 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
Co-benefits are listed in section D.3.  
Co-benefit 
number 
Co-benefit 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
Gender 
Adaptation 
Mitigation 
Co-benefit  
I 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
Co-benefit  
II 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
Co-benefit 
III 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
The Theory of Change (ToC) effectively maps outcomes and co-benefits to the Green Climate Fund 
(GCF) Mitigation Results Areas (MRA) and Adaptation Results Areas (ARA), ensuring a clear 
alignment with GCF objectives. This mapping enhances the logical flow of the ToC by demonstrating 
how specific project activities contribute to broader mitigation and adaptation goals. 
 
For Outcome 1: Strengthened Adaptive Capacity, Heat Stress Mitigation, and Reduced Exposure to 
Climate Risks, the ToC aligns with ARA 1 (Most Vulnerable People and Communities), ARA 2 
(Health, Well-being, Food and Water Security), and ARA 3 (Infrastructure and Built Environment). 
Activities such as the integrated upgrading of public infrastructure and implementing nature-based 
solutions for stormwater management enhance the resilience of the built environment to climate 
impacts. This focus on adaptation ensures that vulnerable communities are better equipped to handle 
climate risks such as flooding, landslides, and heat stress, thereby improving their overall well-being 
and security. 
 
For Outcome 2: Strengthened Institutional and Regulatory Systems for Climate-Responsive Planning 
and Development, the ToC aligns with MRA 3 (Buildings, Cities, Industries, Appliances) and ARA 1 
(Most Vulnerable People and Communities). This outcome focuses on enhancing the capacity of 
governmental and institutional bodies to plan, regulate, and implement climate-responsive and low-
emission development strategies. By strengthening regulatory frameworks and institutional 
capacities, the project ensures that climate-resilient and low-emission practices are integrated into 
urban planning and development, contributing to both mitigation and adaptation efforts. 
 
In terms of co-benefits, the project provides comprehensive impacts across environmental, social, 
economic, gender, adaptation, and mitigation dimensions. 
 
Co-benefit I: Reduced Energy Intensity of Buildings, Cities, Industries, and Appliances addresses the 
need to lower energy consumption and carbon footprint through the promotion of renewable energy 
and energy-efficient technologies. This co-benefit aligns with both mitigation and adaptation by 
ensuring that urban areas are more sustainable and resilient to climate change. 
 
Co-benefit II: Gender Empowerment through Inclusive Planning and Capacity Building ensures that 
women and marginalized groups are included in the planning and implementation processes. This 
co-benefit addresses social, economic, and gender dimensions by empowering women and 
promoting gender equality in climate action, thereby enhancing the resilience of these groups to 
climate impacts. 
 
Co-benefit III: Enhanced Local Employment and Skill Development focuses on creating inclusive job 
opportunities through the construction and maintenance of upgraded infrastructure and services, as 
well as through comprehensive vocational training and skill development programs accessible to all 
community members, including women, youth, and marginalized groups. This co-benefit aligns with

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 
economic and social dimensions, ensuring that the entire workforce is equipped to support and 
sustain climate-resilient practices, thereby contributing to both mitigation and adaptation goals. 
This detailed outcome and co-benefit mapping ensures that the project's activities are directly linked 
to GCF's broader goals, providing a clear and comprehensive understanding of the project's 
contributions to both mitigation and adaptation efforts. 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) 
The Project will upgrade an existing informal settlement (Ngaruyinka Village on Kinyinya hill) with low 
emission infrastructure that is resilient to climate change and support the use of renewable energy in 
the planned GCK pilot development. The informal settlement extends over 18ha on Kinyinya Hill, and 
the pilot is located nearby and extends over 16ha. The objective is to create a climate responsive 
model which can be scaled up and applied to multiple situations across Rwanda and the region. In 
order to promote the scale up and replication, the project will include activities to build awareness 
and develop institutional capacity.  
The Green City Kigali is a pioneering project that seeks to address these crucial issues and create 
new paradigms with innovative, sustainable and place-specific urban models.  
A 600 Ha Masterplan has been developed which divides 600 Ha the whole area into 18 – Local Area 
Plans. The GCK Masterplan aims to provide easily accessible workplace opportunities, education 
and amenities and boost economic development of Kinyinya Hill and Kigali in general. The Pilot area 
is realized in LAP5 while the Ngaruyinka upgrade is realized in LAP6 as indicated in the figure below: 
 
 
 
The two neighborhoods are adjacent to each other, hence there will be synergies in their 
implementation, especially as they share infrastructures such as roads, public facilities, and others 
according to the Masterplan. The development of the Ngaruyinka upgrade with GCF funding will 
contribute to achieving the GCK goal in terms of the supply of affordable housing, climate change 
resilience, and resource efficiency. The residents of Kinyinya will be given priority to purchase houses 
in the pilot area. 
 
The construction of the pilot area, which will commence by 2026, will provide job opportunities for the 
residents of the Ngaruyinka village, leading to holistic development and enhancing inclusivity.

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 
The project comprises several outcomes, outputs, and activities identified through a participatory 
process: 
 
Outcomes and Outputs 
Outcome 1: Strengthened Adaptive Capacity, Heat Stress Mitigation, and Reduced Exposure to 
Climate Risks 
 
Output 1.1:  Resilient Transport, Water, and Energy Infrastructure 
 
Activity 1.1.1: Detailed Climate-Resilient and Emissions-Reducing Engineering Design for 
Ngaruyinka Village including transport and mobility, stormwater management, water supply, 
sanitation, energy, solid waste management, community facilities ensuring the following 
characteristics of the design: 
 
The activity involves developing comprehensive engineering designs that incorporate climate 
resilience and emission reduction principles, (i) coverage of key climate risk factors (heavy rain and 
landslides with coverage for future projection of climate change for these climate hazards), (ii) 
conducted in an integrated manner for infrastructure elements including geotechnical and 
hydrological study, (iii) ensure climate resilience during the construction phase, (iv) analysis of land 
ownership and necessary land ownership solutions (informed by the Resettlement Action Plan) to 
enable the construction in accordance with the design, (v) specification of materials and technologies 
to be deployed under construction, (vi) presenting detailed budget for construction including earth-
stabilization measures where necessary, enabling determination of the use of pre- defined budget, 
(vii) presenting necessary vocational capacity building, including engineering capacity, enabling 
effective O&M of the constructed infrastructure, to be financed under Outcome 2, (viii) defining O&M 
costs to be further appropriated by the contractor delivering construction, and (ix) presenting key ToR 
aspects for the procurement of the construction company/consortium, and the oversight engineering 
consultant to supervise the construction. The detailed designs are essential to ensure that 
infrastructure can withstand the impacts of climate change, including increased rainfall and heat 
stress in order to achieve it’s risk-reducing and resilience building impact for the community 
households (see feasibility study, page 45), and therefore this step is crucial to provide a solid 
foundation for all subsequent infrastructure development, ensuring it is both climate-proof and 
sustainable. 
 
Activity 1.1.2: Implement Resilient Green Transport/Mobility Networks and Green Construction 
Methods 
 
The poor quality of rights of way and access due to high levels of run-off and erosion presents 
significant slip and flood hazards, necessitating sustainable transport solutions (Feasibility Study, 
page 53). This activity involves developing a Green Rights of Way network using green construction 
methods and materials to enhance walkability, cycling, and public transport use. This network will 
improve safety and security, which are at further risk from increasing climate hazards, and establish 
critical links to key locations near the community to encourage sustainable means of transport and 
improve resilience and security. 
 
Activity 1.1.3: Implement Resilient Storm Water Management Systems Using Nature-Based 
Solutions 
 
Erosion problems significantly impact property and personal safety. Improved stormwater 
management is critical for helping the community adapt to increased rainfall events due to climate 
change (Feasibility Study, page 60). This activity focuses on establishing a green, permeable network 
of swales, gullies, and detention-filtration-percolation areas to prevent erosion by absorbing rainfall 
energy, reducing overland flow velocity, increasing infiltration, retaining soil moisture, and binding 
soil particles together. This Activity will include a stormwater conventional system backup if the 
detailed designs deems necessary to withstand 1-in-100 year flood events as per industry best-
practices.Implementing rainwater harvesting systems on suitable households and community 
buildings will enhance water security. 
 
Activity 1.1.4: Expand, Install, and Ensure Resilience of Central Water Supply and Rainwater 
Harvesting Systems

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 
 
Water shortages are expected to worsen due to climate change, affecting vulnerable groups such as 
women, children, persons with disabilities, and elderly persons (Feasibility Study, page 67). This 
activity addresses this by expanding the central water supply system and implementing rainwater 
harvesting systems on suitable buildings. This will enhance water security and build climate resilience 
through improved water access. 
 
 
Activity 1.1.5: Promotion and Implementation of Renewable Energy and Energy-Efficient 
Technologies 
 
Affordability and low awareness are key barriers to the uptake of low-emission technologies at the 
household level (Feasibility Study, page 98). This activity involves promoting and implementing solar 
PV systems, solar water heaters, improved cookstoves, and energy-efficient lighting and appliances, 
and providing education and technical assistance related to these technologies. Investing in a range 
of low-emission technologies will enhance climate resilience and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Output 1.2 Improved Waste and Community management Systems 
 
Activity 1.2.1: Implementation of Resilient Community-Based Solid Waste Management Systems 
 
Poor management of solid waste contributes to GHG emissions, pollution, and public health impacts 
(Feasibility Study, page 75). This activity involves investing in community composting, neighborhood 
collection points, and recycling centers, and supporting awareness systems to motivate waste 
reduction, source-separation, and reuse. These measures will develop and operationalise value 
chains for community composting, neighborhood collection points, and recycling centers. 
 
Activity 1.2.2: Establishment of Resilient Community Facilities for Climate-Resilient Development 
 
Developing facilities such as a TVET center, community focal points, and market squares supports 
sustainable development and promotes community cohesion (Feasibility Study, page 83). This 
activity involves constructing a Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) Centre, 
rehabilitating the market, and developing community spaces to provide training in climate-resilient 
construction practices and green technologies, and serve as hubs for community activities and 
economic development. 
 
Activity 1.2.3: Improve Sanitation with Biogas Recovery Systems 
 
Poor sanitation levels disproportionately impact the poorest households and are unsustainable. 
Developing biogas recovery systems will manage waste, provide renewable energy, and reduce 
public health risks (Feasibility Study, page 91). This activity involves constructing toilets at the TVET 
and market area connected to a biogas recovery system, and providing technical assistance for 
sanitation improvements and hygiene education. 
 
Output 2.1: Capacity Building and community engagement 
 
Activity 2.1.1: Capacity Building for Construction Sector Workers, Professionals and community 
members at the Climate-Focused TVET Center 
 
Providing training and capacity-building programs focused on climate-resilient construction practices 
and the use of green technologies ensures that the workforce is equipped to support and sustain 
climate-resilient practices (Feasibility Study, page 110). ),. including engineering capacity, enabling 
effective O&M of the constructed infrastructure as guided by the results of Activity 1.1.1. This activity 
involves developing a curriculum that includes the practical application of skills learned, identifying 
the target group and conducting a training needs assessment, developing training content and 
materials in collaboration with the Rwanda TVET Board, and obtaining accreditation for training 
programs. 
 
Activity 2.1.2: Institutional Capacity Development for Government of Rwanda Agencies/Instituitons

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 
Strengthening the institutional capacity of government agencies to implement and manage climate-
resilient initiatives ensures that policies and practices are effectively integrated and maintained 
(Feasibility Study, page 118). This activity involves identifying needs and developing a capacity-
building programme on climate-resilient infrastructure programming, conducting a capacity needs 
assessment and establishing an evaluation process, and developing training content and materials 
along with a training and development calendar. 
 
Activity 2.1.3: Strengthening Planning and Regulatory Frameworks to Support an Enabling 
Environment 
 
Developing and implementing planning codes and regulations that support climate-resilient and low-
emission investments creates a favourable environment for sustainable urban development 
(Feasibility Study, page 125). This activity involves documenting the development of the GCK, 
creating a design template for future developers to promote the scale-up and replication of 
sustainable and affordable housing projects, and developing and implementing a mainstreaming 
programme for regulatory reforms. 
 
Activity 2.1.4: Awareness Raising and Citizen Engagement for Climate Action 
 
Conducting awareness campaigns and engaging citizens in climate-responsive planning and 
development fosters community ownership and support for sustainable practices (Feasibility Study, 
page 132). This activity involves developing an inclusive Community Sustainability Committee, 
promoting waste separation, recycling, and composting through awareness campaigns, and 
developing a citizen engagement strategy and engagement tools. 
 
Output 2.2 Knowledge Management and Development 
 
Activity 2.2.1: Blueprinting the Green City Kigali and Developing Planning Codes for the Special 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) facilitated by climate resilient knowledge management practices. 
 
Creating detailed blueprints and planning codes guides sustainable urban development and ensures 
that the lessons learned from the GCK pilot project can be replicated in other areas (Feasibility Study, 
page 139). This activity involves developing a platform to store, manage, and disseminate knowledge 
on climate-responsive building methods and urban planning, tendering and procuring the necessary 
ICT equipment, collecting and documenting lessons learned on an annual basis, and developing and 
disseminating knowledge products. 
 
Activity 2.2.2 Establishment of a knowledge management system 
 
The establishment of a knowledge management system (KMS) is a critical component of the project, 
aimed at enhancing the collection, organization, dissemination, and utilization of knowledge related 
to climate-resilient and low-emission development. This system will serve as a central repository and 
interactive platform for sharing best practices, research findings, project results, and other relevant 
information among stakeholders involved in the Green City Kigali initiative and beyond. 
 
Activity 2.2.3 Development of support program for recycling groups 
 
The development of a support program for recycling groups aims to enhance the effectiveness and 
sustainability of community-based recycling initiatives. This activity will provide technical, financial, 
and organizational support to local recycling groups, enabling them to operate more efficiently and 
contribute significantly to waste management and environmental conservation efforts in Ngaruyinka 
Village. 
 
Implementation Strategy 
GCK proposes an approach to local economic development where the local community, government, 
and private sector work together. It is unique in requiring a financially reproducible model suitable for 
developing countries as a key part of its social, economic, and environmental sustainability aims. 
 
The integrated upgrading of the site will serve as a model for community-based resilience 
strengthening that can be scaled-up to other parts of Kigali and secondary cities in Rwanda. The

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 
design was guided by the National Informal Urban Settlement Upgrading Strategy (2017) developed 
by MININFRA and aims to increase resilience to climate change while also minimizing resettlement, 
land acquisition, and social disruption. Low-cost interventions were prioritized in order to increase 
the scope for scale-up and replication. 
 
The Project will adopt a ‘spatial’ focus to facilitate the integration of sectors and stakeholders, 
including Government Institutions and Partners: City of Kigali, Ministry of Infrastructure (MININFRA), 
Rwanda Housing Authority (RHA), Rwanda Development Board (RDB), Rwanda Environmental 
Management Authority (REMA), Water and Sanitation Corporation (WASAC), Rwanda Energy Group 
(REG), Rwanda TVET Board, Rwanda Utilities Regulatory Authority (RURA), Green Global Growth 
Institute (GGGI), and Rwanda Transportation Development Authority (RTDA), to reach sustainable 
and climate-compatible urban development solutions. The design is informed by a programme of 
work undertaken over 26 months, including sector analyses, a feasibility study, and a Land 
Development Plan for upgrading Ngaruyinka Village, along with environmental and social safeguards 
documents and frameworks (Feasibility Study, Annex 2, Annex 23). 
 
The integrated upgrading of Ngaruyinka Village will involve a comprehensive approach, ensuring all 
planned infrastructure—waste management solutions, water supply and sanitation schemes, 
stormwater solutions, and transport—is designed in conjunction to avoid contradictions and 
competition for narrow spaces. The engineering design will encompass geological and hydrological 
analysis to prevent maladaptation, physical damages, and economic losses. 
 
The planning and design work actively involved local communities and stakeholders over more than 
a year, with steps such as selecting engagement methods, tailoring questionnaires, planning 
engagement actions, and implementing feedback mechanisms (Feasibility Study, Annex 2, Annex 
23). 
 
The project will integrate capacity-building efforts to promote long-term sustainability, with technical 
specialists supporting the implementation of activities. Consultation and continued dialogue with 
national and city-level administrative bodies will be maintained, and regular site visits and inspections 
will ensure the project's successful execution. 
 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
The Ministry of Environment (the accredited entity) will lead in the overall management, reporting and 
supervision of the project with GCF.  In Rwanda, FONERWA (the national fund for Environment and 
Climate Change) is the primary vehicle through which environment and climate change finance is 
channelled, programmed, disbursed and monitored, and therefore FONERWA will execute the 
project.     
FONERWA was established in 2012 and invests in sustainable wealth creation and poverty reduction 
by providing strategic financing that accelerates Rwanda’s commitment to building a strong climate 
resilient and green economy. In 2013, FONERWA obtained financing from the British International 
Climate Fund (ICF) of £22.5 million, making it the largest demand-based climate fund in Africa. 
FONERWA has provided funding to over 30 projects.  
The following sections explain the project governance arrangements and information on the financial 
flows and implementation arrangements.  
Steering Committee: The GCF activities will be overseen by a Steering Committee chaired by the 
Ministry of Environment Permanent Secretary. The Steering Committee will serve as the project 
coordination and decision-making body and will ensure it delivers its outputs and achieves its 
outcomes. The Committee will periodically review progress and evaluations, facilitate implementation 
(ensuring the necessary resources and support are provided in a timely manner) and provide 
guidance to the PMU. The Steering Committee will reflect the multi-sectoral nature of the project and 
will include senior-level representatives from GoR and partner organisations. The Steering 
Committee will meet every 6 months to review progress and approve work plans, budgets and any 
major changes in implementation.  Members who are senior level representatives from the 
Government and partners in line with the mandate will include the Ministry of Infrastructure, Rwanda 
Housing Authority, City of Kigali, District Executive of Gasabo, as well as a civil society member. 
Proposed role of the project Steering Committee is:  
• 
Coordination of stakeholder involvement:

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 
• 
Act as a focal point for all Government of Rwanda “policy owners” in areas covered 
by the Project  
• 
Planning and budgeting:  
• 
Receiving and approving: 
▪ 
Project work plan & budget 
▪ 
Annual work plan and budget 
▪ 
Procurement plans 
• 
Financial management:  
• 
Approving disbursements from the Project Bank Account to Executing Agencies 
• 
Managing the internal audit function and fiduciary risk 
• 
Receipt of external audit reports 
• 
Monitoring & Evaluation:  
• 
Receiving and quality assuring quarterly budget execution and Project 
implementation reports 
• 
Approving reports in the required format for onward transmission to the CGF  
 
Programme Management Unit: FONERWA will establish a Programme Management Unit (PMU) that 
will be housed within the Fund Management Team of FONERWA.  Activities will be implemented 
using the Ministry of Environment existing management and financial systems.  The Accredited Entity 
will participate in the recruitment of the PMU. The implementation of the project will be done in 
collaboration with relevant government partner organizations including: MININFRA, Rwanda Housing 
Authority (RHA), REG as well as the Ministry of Trade & Industry (MINICOM). (As indicated on page 
128).FONERWA will be the hiring team and will coordinate delivery of the programme outputs.  
The project activities and funding will be programmed through the PMU.  Urban development projects 
are inherently complex and require strong project (and especially contract) management skills, 
requiring sufficient resources to allow for capacity building and high-quality delivery through 
consultant support to the PMU. Resources have been built into the cost estimates to ensure that the 
PMU receives the necessary support to carry out fiduciary, safeguards, technical supervision, and 
monitoring activities. The PMU will provide the Steering Committee with quarterly progress reports. 
The PMU will close its operations once the final project evaluation is completed and documentation 
required by the GCF has been completed and submitted to the Ministry of Environment and Steering 
Committee. The PMU will be staffed by professionally and technically qualified staff who hold 
experience with managing projects in the sector. These staff will be selected and recruited following 
FONERWA’s procedures.  
The project PMU will be supplemented by a number of technical experts – providing either full time 
or part time inputs - to ensure that obligations on MoE (and its implementing entities) set out in the 
AMA with the Green Climate Fund can be met. 
FONERWA’s responsibilities are summarized below: 
• 
Planning the project activities  
• 
Receiving funds from the Accredited Entity 
• 
Disbursing grant funds to third parties, after due diligence 
• 
Establishing and staffing the Project Management Unit in FONERWA 
• 
Accounting for funds under its disposition, receiving reports from entities to which funds have 
been disbursed 
• 
Preparing annual workplans and budgets 
• 
Organising oversight and audit (internal, financial, procurement) 
• 
Managing the provision of funding and payment of contractors and consultants engaged 
under the Project 
PMU positions / input include: 
• 
Project manager 
• 
Finance officer 
• 
Project administrator 
• 
Communication Officer 
• 
Procurement Specialist 
• 
Waste management Engineer  
• 
Community Development Specialist  
• 
Renewable Energy Engineer 
• 
Consultants to support on specific technical studies/surveys during implementation, 
progress, mid-term and end of project evaluation

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 
 
FONERWA will oversee the staff working on the Ngaruyinka project, including leads for different 
activities and specialists such as gender and social experts. This ensures that all aspects of the 
project are managed effectively and that expertise is applied where needed. 
 
Technical Advisory Committee 
A Technical Advisory Committee will provide guidance to both the Steering Committee and the 
Project Management Unit (PMU). This committee is composed of members from entities affiliated 
with the Ministry of Environment, such as the Rwanda Green Fund, as well as other relevant 
government institutions including WASAC, REG, CoK, RHA, RURA, REMA, RTDA, and the Rwanda 
TVET Board. Members are selected through a formal request from the Executing Entity (EE) directed 
to the relevant institutions, asking them to appoint a focal point who will serve as the institution's 
representative on the committee. The Ministry of Environment (MoE), in its role as the Accredited 
Entity (AE), will also be represented on this committee. 
 
Sector Working Groups (SWGs) 
To facilitate the uptake and scaling of project interventions, the PMU will ensure that results are 
communicated through Sector Working Groups (SWGs). These groups serve as a forum for dialogue 
that includes development partners supporting the sector, as determined by the Government of 
Rwanda's division of labor. The SWGs help build synergies in policy formulation and implementation. 
The PMU will regularly report results to the SWGs and provide inputs for continuous improvement of 
project delivery. 
 
Planning Coordination Meetings 
In line with the Urban Planning Code (UPC), Planning Coordination Meetings will be held bi-monthly 
and will be open to the public. These meetings aim to: 
• 
Coordinate and integrate plans and implementation decisions across development sectors 
and stakeholders in accordance with existing plans. 
• 
Assess building permit and real estate development permit applications, preparing technical 
decisions where necessary. 
• 
Monitor development decisions to ensure they align with applicable planning documents for 
land development and urban planning, considering the harmonization of technical aspects 
and various interests for the benefit of the public. 
• 
Initiate the development of an interim development strategy where no urban planning 
document exists while starting the process for creating the required urban planning 
documents. 
• 
Analyze and evaluate feasibility studies and development proposals responding to public 
tenders. 
• 
 
Community Upgrading Committee 
A Community Upgrading Committee has been established at the village level in Ngaruyinka. This 
committee will play a crucial role in facilitating information sharing and community participation, 
working closely with the Ngaruyinka Upgrading Project and other local agencies. The committee will 
help ensure contributions from landowners and residents and provide information on contracting, 
construction supervision, and maintenance. 
 
Flow of Funds 
In terms of the flow of funds, the Green Climate Fund (GCF) will disburse funds to the Ministry of 
Environment (MoE), the Accredited Entity (AE) responsible for the project. The MoE will then transfer 
these funds to FONERWA, the Executing Entity (EE), which will manage the funds for the Ngaruyinka 
project. FONERWA will make payments to contractors and service providers hired through a 
competitive procurement process, ensuring transparent and efficient use of the funds.

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Organisation Chart 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Rwanda is highly vulnerable to climate change effects, yet its readiness22 to combat these effects is 
moderate, as evidenced by its ranking of 116 out of 181 countries in the ND-GAIN index (2016) for 
climate vulnerability23. It is the 29th most vulnerable and 94th least ready country. Climate change is 
expected to result in increased temperatures, intensified rainfall, and prolonged dry seasons in 
Rwanda, which are likely to exacerbate consequences of rapid urbanisation. This trend is expected 
to intensify in the future according to climate change projections. The nature, magnitude and urgency 
of climate related threats faced by vulnerable urban communities, coupled with the scale of 
investment required for this project are beyond the capacity of GoR.  
Rwanda’s topography and climatic profile make it prone to localised floods and landslides. 42% of 
the country’s area is classified as having a moderate to very high susceptibility to landslides. 
Rwanda’s steep slopes are prone to landslides, which are predicted to increase due to the high 
intensity rainfall events associated with climate change. Between 2010 (when a systematic recording 
system was established by MIDIMAR) and 2013, 74 people died, 22 persons were injured and over 
573 houses were destroyed or damaged. The exposure of housing in Kigali City is especially high 
due to the high and moderate slope susceptibility, high population density, the concentration of 
informal settlements and use of low-quality construction materials. 43% of Rwanda’s health 
facilities24, 25% of schools and 74% of district roads are exposed to landslides25. Its vulnerability is 
increased by high rates of urbanisation and the concentration of the majority of the urban population 
in unplanned, informal settlements which puts additional pressure on services and leads to increased 
risks from flooding and landslides. This problem is most acute in Kigali where informal settlements 
account for more than 70% of housing26 as most formal housing is too expensive for the average 
resident - as compared to GNI per capita, Rwanda has the most expensive housing in Sub-Saharan 
Africa.   
Rising demand for water is coinciding with periods of water stress due to prolonged dry spells, a low 
capture and storage capacity, and a high precipitation run-off rate27. There is a rising demand for 
water in a context of low per capita water availability and increasing need for substantial amounts of 
water for its growing cities, irrigation and industry. Poorly managed sanitation systems also pose a 
risk to the quality of limited water resources.  Water demand is expected to increase rapidly by 2040 
further increasing the pressure on water resources as more homes are connected to mains water 
supply (currently in Kigali, only 35% of households have water piped into the home), irrigated 
agriculture increases, industries develop, and the population grows 28 . Residents in informal 
settlements experience greater water constraints during prolonged dry spells. Rwanda’s energy

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 
supply is also at risk from the increasing rainfall variability and prolonged dry spells as hydropower 
accounts for 50% of the power supply to the country29.  
Informal settlements tend to be very dense with very little open/public space and often with 
corrugated iron roofs and poor ventilation that contribute to higher indoor temperatures. Impacts from 
rising maximum temperatures, more hot days and heat waves are greatest for infants and young 
children, the elderly, expectant mothers, and those with health problems. Rising minimum 
temperatures with fewer cold days is also likely to extend the range and activity of some disease 
vectors including mosquito and tick-borne diseases with populations at risk from malaria increasing 
by 150% by 2050 30. Infants and young children vulnerable living in informal settlements are 
particularly vulnerable due to the lack of public health measures to control vectors.  
Rwanda remains dependent on international climate finance for the majority of its climate 
investments. This is due to constraints on its domestic finances. Rwanda is one of 46 designated 
Least Developed Countries (LDCs) with a Gross national income (GNI) per capita of USD830 — 
ranked 172 out of 192 countries31. It also has one of lowest Human Development Indexes ranked 
159 out of 177 32. Despite a range of fiscal incentives, attracting private investment in climate 
compatible development is challenging due to high transport costs, a small domestic market, limited 
access to affordable financing, inadequate infrastructure, ambiguous tax rules and a lack of skills in 
the workforce. Financial constraints are likely to continue given that the economy has fallen into its 
first recession since 1994 due to the COVID-19 (coronavirus) pandemic with gross domestic product 
(GDP) estimated to have fallen by 0.2 percent in 2020, compared to a projected expansion of 8 
percent before the COVID-19 outbreak. The construction sector contracted by 7.2 percent in the first 
three quarters of 2020, as the lockdown slowed work and reduced the availability of supplies. The 
poverty headcount is forecast to rise by 5.1 percentage points (more than 550,000 people) in 
2021.The pandemic-driven rise in the fiscal deficit (due to higher expenditures and lower tax 
revenues) is increasing public debt which is estimated to have reached nearly 66 percent of GDP in 
2020. In this context, the grant financing from GCF is important in ensuring that climate investments 
do not add to its debt burden33. The project is also timely as it can influence investments in Rwanda’s 
post-COVID Economic Recovery Plan (a stimulus package equivalent to about 4.4 percent of GDP 
on average per year).  
There is high level political commitment and progressive legal and institutional structures in place to 
support low emission, climate resilient growth. Climate change has long been recognised at the 
highest political level as a major barrier to achieving Rwanda’s medium- and long-term development 
goals as evidenced by national priorities identified in the updated NDC. GoR is an early adopter of 
low-carbon resilient development, and climate resilient development has been mainstreamed into 
Rwanda’s planning and budgeting processes. Rwanda’s progressive environment and climate 
legislation has created a critical enabling environment for developing and implementing progressive 
institutional arrangements, policies and strategies. The GoR also adopted innovative institutional 
arrangements to improve the coordination of environment and climate priorities as cross-cutting 
development issues. These include the Sector Wide Approach (SWAp) Secretariat in MoE, as well 
as the Natural Resources Sector Working Group and the Environment and Climate Change Sub-
Sector Working Group, which serve as multi-stakeholder forums to discuss environment and climate-
related issues34. However, tackling climate change remains highly conditional on the availability of 
international climate finance.  
The request for GCF financing is needed to address key barriers to ensure that the country’s rapid 
urbanisation takes place on a sustainable footing, taking into account current and future climate 
variability and shifting to a low emission trajectory. GCF support will help to demonstrate the viability 
of a resilient, low-emission regeneration and avoid a lock-in of emissions intensive growth that may 
otherwise arise as urbanisation accelerates. GCF support will help to catalyse the low emission, 
climate resilient transition of the construction sector investments creating new jobs. Without GCF 
support, GoR will not have adequate resources or capacity to take forward its ambitious plans to 
reduce the exposure of communities living in precarious, informal settlements to climate risks. GCF 
financing is also needed to strengthen GoR’s institutional and regulatory systems for climate-
responsive planning and development in urban areas and help to scale up investments to increase 
the adaptive capacity of vulnerable urban communities and lower the energy intensity of its cities. 
The support from GCF will thus be additional. 
Despite its resource constraints, the GoR will be providing approximately 5.4m USD from its own 
budgetary sources. GCF finance is only used for the incremental climate costs. Please refer to the 
Annex 4 Budget for additional information. 
MoE/AE is seeking a GCF grant to support the climate resilient infrastructure investments and provide 
TA to support the scale up and replication of the interventions. Specifically, this will include the

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 
technical and financial support to construct climate resilient rights of way, improve stormwater 
management, improve year-round access to an improved water supply, improve the management of 
solid waste, improve sanitation and accelerate the uptake of low energy solutions at the household 
level, as well as establish a TVET centre on the site for long-term replication of these activities. It will 
also include a range of TA to develop capacity, improve the enabling environment, build awareness, 
and blueprint the GCK. The Feasibility Study (Annex 2) provides more detailed information about the 
selected interventions, as well as a multi-criteria analysis that assessed how well these interventions 
performed against the GCF investment criteria.  
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The project design has been led by Rwanda Green Fund (EE) formerly known as FONERWAin close 
consultation and involvement of the MoE and other relevant government agencies and communities 
in the project area. This has ensured strong alignment of the planned investments with national and 
sectoral policies and strategies (NDC, NAP etc.) and a high level of country ownership and relevance 
for local communities. The project will be implemented in close collaboration with the City of Kigali 
as well as relevant utilities which ensures that key skills and expertise developed during 
implementation will be retained within national and local institutions. During project design, a 
dedicated community upgrading committee maintained a regular dialogue between the design team 
and the community, and this will be continued during implementation and later operation. A 
community WhatsApp group has been created as well to make information sharing easier. During 
implementation, these structures and processes will enable the project to continue working closely 
with the community and to develop local ambassadors that will be involved in the upgrade process 
to promote the approach in other areas through cross visits and other communication channels.  
All Operation & Maintenance (O&M) arrangements are in place and the local authority and community 
are committed to the arrangements for sustaining and maintaining the project interventions in the 
long term. All infrastructure investments will be undertaken in close collaboration with local entities 
and/or households. Individual households will maintain the roof-top water harvesting structures in 
their homes with service support and training from the suppliers including the provision of operation 
and Maintenance (O&M) guidelines and schedule (in Kinyarwanda). This will be built into supplier 
contracts along with the requirement for five-year warranties. These measures will be consolidated 
with additional training and awareness activities by the project to ensure the effective and efficient 
operation and maintenance of the infrastructure after the project has ended. The table below 
summarises the operation and maintenance responsibilities beyond the project period.  
The assignment of activities and budget for O&M of up-graded climate-responsive and emissions-
reducing infrastructure shall be assigned based on the information provided to this end by Activity 
1.1.1, further amended when construction is completed following completion of Activity 1.1.2. 
Project Component 
Responsibilities during O&M (funding by the 
responsible actor listed below; no GFC funding) 
Transport / mobility improvements 
(Construction of green rights of way, green 
road construction methods) 
City of Kigali will be responsible for road 
maintenance required. The community will 
perform some on-going maintenance. 
Blue/Green stormwater management systems 
City of Kigali will be responsible for maintaining 
the stormwater management systems. The 
community will perform some limited on-going 
maintenance. 
Households will be responsible for maintaining 
the measures on their land.  
Expansion of central water supply (100% 
connection rate) 
WASAC will be responsible for O&M of the 
system, with funds from the water tariff from 
users. 
Rainwater harvesting (as supplement to central 
supply) 
System owners will be responsible for 
maintaining the systems 
Filters for Household Water Treatment / 
Efficient Fixtures  
Households would be responsible for 
maintaining any systems if purchased.

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 
Biogas system at the TVET / market 
Operation and maintenance will be managed 
by the TVET building management. There will 
be a small fee for public use of the toilets, 
which will help fund maintenance.  
Training on on-site sanitation improvements / 
Improved Greywater management 
Households will be responsible for maintaining 
the systems as they are implemented.  
Community composting 
The community will identify a team of persons 
responsible for the community composting. 
Waste and Recycling collection stations 
The waste collection company will pickup all 
waste and recyclables on a regular basis, 
funded by the collection fees.  The community 
will repair the collection point if needed. 
Solar PV and water heaters 
Maintenance of solar PVs on public roads will 
be done by the City of Kigali 
Maintenance for the solar PV system in the 
pilot will be done by a solar PV provider, 
funded by user-paid tariffs.  
Maintenance of solar water heaters will be 
done by owners.  
Clean cooking technology 
Operation and maintenance will be done by the 
cook stove owner.  
Community hubs & market squares 
The City of Kigali will be responsible for 
maintenance of public spaces. The community 
will be responsible for some maintenance of 
public spaces as well.  
Establishment of a Technical and Vocational 
Education and Training (TVET) Centre 
The Rwanda TVET Board will be responsible 
for the operation and maintenance of the TVET 
Center. 
 
The financial sustainability of the GCF investment is predicated on the strengthening of the enabling 
environment and the development of investable projects. The strengthening of policy and regulatory 
frameworks at the national level will create an enabling environment to foster more demand and 
investment in this area.  
The capacity and awareness building interventions will strengthen institutional capacity for public 
private partnerships to scale up and replicate the Green City Kigali pilot and the upgrade with a 
decreasing level of external support. This will target key Government institutions including MoE, 
FONERWA, REMA, RHA, and CoK with a focus on developing capacity to support planning and 
programming sustainable upgrade projects and new climate responsive urban developments. The 
project will also develop the capacity of the private sector to design and deliver green regeneration 
projects targeting key actors including the construction industry and recycling industry and providing 
support to develop the required skills and expertise as well as to develop / strengthen partnerships 
with government and communities. Extensive engagement with the private sector during the design 
and construction phases will strengthen public-private partnerships for future green city initiatives. 
The TVET Centre will play a key role in sustaining investments in capacity development. It will serve 
as a technical training focal point co-located within the upgrade and close to the pilot GCK site. 
Students will have easy access to completed works demonstrating the viability of investments in 
climate responsive urban development whether it is regeneration or a new build. The development 
of a governance structure and constitution with at least 50% representation from women and the 
development of a financial plan and mechanism will put the centre on a sound financial footing. The 
TVET will be integrated within the existing network of TVETS across the country and supported 
through the ongoing GoR TVET programme.  
Knowledge generated through the development of the GCK pilot and upgrade as well as best practice 
and lessons learned through the implementation will be shared widely through an information portal

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 
 
and used to scale up project interventions across the country. A comprehensive knowledge 
management intervention has been included to ensure that best practices and innovative 
technologies are accessible to practitioners, sustaining interventions beyond the project lifetime. 
These will be institutionalised by integrating this knowledge and learning into the curricula of the 
TVET.  Further the project seeks to develop a project design template for future affordable and 
sustainable housing development in Rwanda based upon the design information produced during 
the development of detail design for the GCK pilot project. The goal is to lower the cost barriers to 
entry for future private developers for the development of environmentally sustainable, climate 
adaptive and mitigative, and economically affordable developments as opposed to conventional 
business-as-usual approaches. Thus, promoting sustainable urbanization in Kigali and Rwanda’s 
secondary cities.  
The MoE, as the AE, will be responsible for monitoring and evaluating the impact of project 
investments and the management and dissemination of information and lessons learned through 
Sector Working Groups to ensure inter-institutional learning and collaboration as well as 
mainstreaming into sector strategies and plans. This mainstreaming process will be led by REMA 
(which is the agency mandated to drive climate and environmental mainstreaming across 
government) working closely with key agencies and supported by the project during implementation.

=== PAGE 31 ===
C 
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + 
v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
27.9 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) Senior loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(iii) Equity 
Enter amount 
 
 
Enter % equity 
return 
(iv) Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable 
grants 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(vi) Grants 
 27,995,786 USD 
 
 
 
(vii) Results-
based payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-
financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
7.17.2 
                               
 
million USD ($) 
Name of 
institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Rwanda Ministry 
of Finance 
Grant 
 
7,111,989 
million USD 
($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
Click here to 
enter text. 
Options 
Enter 
amount 
Options  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
Click here to 
enter text. 
Options 
Enter 
amount 
Options  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
Click here to 
enter text. 
Options 
Enter 
amount 
Options  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
(c) Total 
financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
35.1 
million USD ($)  
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 
words, 
approximately 
0.5 page) 
Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from any type of 
guarantee (e.g. sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee) 
NA 
Please also explain other contributions such as in-kind contributions including tax exemptions and 
contributions of assets.  
Costs are quantified in section b. 
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme (refer to the co-
financing policy).  
The Green City Kigali pilot development is located near the community upgrade site. The 
design and construction of infrastructure for the pilot site is being financed by KfW (water 
supply, sanitation, roads, etc). The design and construction of homes will be done by a 
private developer.  
Parts of the GCF-funded activities will support the GCK pilot intervention’s ambition 
towards reaching a net zero carbon in the future. To do this, the project plans to install a 
centrally managed solar PV mini-grid and solar hot water heaters for the new affordable 
homes planned in the pilot. 
C.2. Financing by component

=== PAGE 32 ===
C 
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
 
 
 
 
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component and output as outlined in section B.3. above and disaggregate 
by source of financing. More than one co-financing institution can fund a single component or output. Provide the 
summarised cost estimates in the table below and the detailed budget plan as annex 4.  
 
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
million 
USD ($) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
million USD 
($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
million 
USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name of 
Institutions 
 
Outcome 1 
 
 
Output 1.1 
Click here to 
enter text. 
                             
25,856,043 
 
21,927,958 
Grants 
 
4,387,459 
 
Grants 
Rwanda 
Ministry of 
Finance 
 
Rwanda 
Ministry of 
Finance 
 
Output 1.2 
Click here to 
enter text. 
                             
2,789,349  
 
 
 
2,363,858 
Grants 
465,662 
Grants 
Rwanda 
Ministry of 
Finance 
Outcome 2 
Output 2.1 
2.060,668 
1,682,402 
Grants 
 
378,265 
Grants 
Rwanda 
Ministry of 
Finance 
 
Output 2.2 
863,864 
742,587 
Grants 
121,277 
Grants 
Rwanda 
Ministry of 
Finance 
Project 
Manageme
nt 
Click here to 
enter text. 
1.5 
1.27 
Grants 
0.23 
Grants 
Rwanda 
Ministry of 
Finance 
Land 
compensati
on 
Click here to 
enter text. 
2.028 
0 
Grants 
2.02 
Grants 
Rwanda 
Ministry of 
Finance 
Indicative total cost (USD) 
35.1 
27.9 
7.1 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
These activities are essential for building local capacity, transferring technology, and creating a sustainable 
and resilient urban development model in Kigali. The GCF funding will play a critical role in achieving these 
objectives by providing the necessary financial support. 
 
Total Budgets for Capacity-Building Activities: 
 
2.1.1 Capacity Building for Construction Sector Workers, Professionals and community members at the Climate-
Focused TVET Center: $646,916 
 
2.1.2 Institutional Capacity Development for Government of Rwanda Agencies/Institutions: $145,663 
 
2.1.3Strengthening Planning and Regulatory Frameworks to Support an Enabling Environment: $535,860 
 
2.1.4 Awareness Raising and Citizen Engagement for Climate Action: $930,353 
 
2.2.1 Blueprinting the Green City Kigali and Developing Planning Codes for the Special Purpose Vehicle 
facilitated by sustainable Knowledge management practices(SPV): $280,802

=== PAGE 33 ===
D 
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
 
 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Continued urban development on a business as usual basis (BAU) will lock Rwanda into unsustainable, high carbon 
pathways with low resilience to climate change. Unsustainable consumption and production patterns and inadequate 
responses to address climate change, also undermine efforts to end poverty and to achieve sustainable development. 
One third of the reduction in poverty between 2014 and 2017 was due to the movement of people from the rural areas 
to urban areas35. Sustainable urbanisation will encourage the movement of workers currently dependent on rainfed 
agriculture into more productive sectors raising wages and skills (urban workers in Rwanda earn, on average, twice the 
rural wage for similar work in similar sectors of employment36). It is critical for Kigali to “get ahead” of its rapid expansion 
with a more intensive program to apply climate resilient approaches.  Higher density walkable cities reduce levels of 
urban sprawl and travel distances to work resulting in lower transport costs for the population and reduced GHG 
emissions and air pollution as well as reduced development of housing on steep slopes which are vulnerable to flooding 
and landslides. Please refer to section E for tables on the project indicators. 
Adaptation Impact Potential:  The proposed GCF project contributes to increased climate-resilient development in 
the following ways: 
GCF adaptation results area A1.0 – Increased resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people, 
communities and regions: climate-related disasters are expected to increase in Kigali as a result of increased heavy 
rain events. This is a major risk to the project community. The proposed permeable road construction materials, as well 
as better stormwater management, will allow more infiltration and less and slower runoff, which will help protect houses, 
roads, other infrastructure, resulting in 5.4M USD in economic assets protected from the impact of extreme climate-
related disasters.  
GCF adaptation results area A2.0 – increased health and well-being, and food and water security: increasing duration 
of droughts, increased temperatures and changing rainfall patterns are expected to lead to decreasing water quality 
and quantity, increase in vector borne diseases, and heat stress in the project area. The proposed rainwater harvesting 
tanks and expansion of the central water supply system will result in year-round access to reliable and safe water for 
1,634 people.  
GCF adaptation results area A3.0 - Increased resilience of infrastructure and the built environment to climate change 
threats. Increasing average rainfall and rain intensity is expected to pose an increased risk to for flooding and landslides, 
which will result in damage to houses, roads and other infrastructure, water shortages, and power cuts. The proposed 
interventions will results in increased resilience for 7.8 km of roads, 5.4km of walking and cycling pathways, and 735 
physical structures (based on number of households, including annex buildings in community compounds).  
The project will also contribute to the following GCF adaptation outcomes: 
GCF Outcome A5: Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate-responsive planning and development. 
The project will strengthen the institutional capacity among GoR agencies to facilitate and oversee climate resilient low 
emission development of urban infrastructure and buildings. It will also blueprint the GCK and planning code for the 
GoR to promote the scale-up and replication of the project and reduce the design costs of future green city 
developments. The project will result in three institutional and regulatory system improvements.  
GCF Outcome A7: Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks. The project will result in 
strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks for 30,252 beneficiaries through the 
improvements made in physical infrastructure.  
Quantified Mitigation co-benefits:  The project also contributes to low-emission sustainable development pathways. 
GCF mitigation result M1.0: Reduced emissions through increased low-emission energy access and power generation. 
The solar street lights installed by the project will result in a savings of 76.2t CO2eq/year, and the solar PV and solar 
water heaters will result in a savings of 0.9 tCO2/year/average household.   
GCF mitigation result M2.0: Reduced emissions through increased access to low-emission transport. The project will 
result in a savings of 2,019t CO2eq/year through modal shifts in transportation compared to the BAU scenario.  
GCF mitigation result M3.0: Reduced emissions from buildings, cities, industries and appliances. The project will result 
in a carbon savings of 2,524 tCO2eq through the use of green construction materials in the roads, drainage systems, 
and TVET. The TVET will also have an operation savings of 9 tCO2eq/year due to the green measures installed.  
The project will also contribute to the following GCF mitigation outcome: 
GCF Outcome M7.0: Lower energy intensity of buildings, cities, industries and appliances. The TVET project will 
demonstrate lower energy intensity in buildings through the efficient design proposed (estimated to use less than 2,100 
kWh/month).   
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

=== PAGE 34 ===
D 
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 
 
 
The proposed activities have been designed to ensure that they will have an impact beyond a one-off project 
investment. Several activities are highlighted below to explain the potential for scaling up and replication; potential for 
knowledge sharing and learning; contribution to creation of an enabling environment; contribution to regulatory 
framework and policies; and contribution to climate-resilient development pathways. To promote scale up and 
replication, the project has focused on delivering high quality, cost-effective investments, combined with effective lesson 
learning and high visibility of strategic interventions.  
The establishment of a Technical Vocational Education Training Centre focused on training students on climate 
resilient construction methods will facilitate long-term knowledge sharing and learning. Capacity building for 
construction sector workers and professionals will lead to increased scaling up and replication of the activities 
implemented under the project.  
Awareness raising and citizen engagement in climate responsive regeneration, coupled with the knowledge 
management system will promote knowledge sharing and learning across Kigali and Rwanda. These activities will 
encourage more citizens to adopt the measures implemented in the project, such as the use of rainwater harvesting 
systems.  
Blueprinting the GCK and planning code for the GoR will support replication of the project. The project will document 
the development of the GCK. A design template, ToRs, and project(s) manual will be developed to utilize the sustainable 
design information developed during the detail design of the 16ha mixed use, sustainable and affordable housing 
project to create a design template for future developers to utilize that promote the scale up and replication of the GCK 
pilot and thereby the scale up and replication of sustainable and affordable housing projects that promote climate 
mitigative and adaptive principals, resource efficiency, local materials and labour – reducing the planning and design 
costs of future green city developments.  
Providing support relating to the planning and regulatory environment in order to develop an enabling 
environment that fosters increased investment in the green upgrade of informal settlements will support the 
broader implementation of the work demonstrated as part of this project. 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
The project is expected to result in extensive co-benefits and advances several of the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs), including (climate benefit specific in bold): 
• 
SDG 1 no poverty 
• 
SDG 3 health 
• 
SDG 5 gender equity and empowerment of all women and girls 
• 
SDG 6 water and sanitation  
• 
SDG 7 clean energy  
• 
SDG 8 decent work and economic growth  
• 
SDG 9 resilient infrastructure 
• 
SDG 10 reduced inequalities 
• 
SDG 11 sustainable cities and communities  
• 
SDG 13 climate action 
• 
SDG 17 partnerships for development  
Environmental co-benefits

=== PAGE 35 ===
D 
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31 
 
 
 
 
1. Scale up of successful approaches will increase rural-urban migration due to increasing opportunities available in 
Kigali which will reduce the pressure on Rwanda’s natural resources from farming of marginal lands.  
2. Stormwater management systems will increase groundwater recharge. Reduced stormwater runoff will also 
improve the water quality in the nearby wetland. 
3. Rainwater harvesting systems will reduce pressures on the use of surface water sources, which benefit plants and 
animals in those habitats.  
4. Improved sanitation systems will prevent groundwater contamination.  
5. The green rights of way have reduced widths with strategic pinch points, which promote walking and cycling. This 
has a positive impact on air quality and carbon emissions.  
6. Green construction methods use locally sourced materials, which reduces the transport of materials from farther 
locations, thus reducing air emissions and noise. 
7. Improved solid waste management will reduce the amount of litter in the area. 
8. Community composting allows for recovery of nutrients, reducing the need to import artificial fertilizers.  
9. Recycling allows for greater recovery of resources, which reduces the use of virgin materials.  
10. Trainings and guidelines for best practice climate change adaptive and mitigative household upgrading. 
Social co-benefits including health impacts 
11. Improved access to water will reduce the time that women and children spend collecting water, allowing them to 
engage in other activities 
12. Improved quality of water will improve the health of residents, especially children, who currently suffer from water-
borne diseases.  
13. Street lighting will improve the safety and security in the community, especially for women.  
14. Improved drainage systems will result in health benefits due to reduction in the incidence of injuries from slipping 
and from shocks associated with flooding and diseases. 
15. Clean cooking technology will result in improved health for women and children, as well as reduced time, physical 
burden and security risks involved for collecting firewood.  
16. The planned roads and pathways will promote active mobility, such as walking and cycling, which promote health. 
Also, the low degree of vehicle permeability and traffic calming measures reduce serious injuries or fatalities from 
accidents.  
17. Increase skills due to the new TVET will reduce poverty levels and reduce dependency on agriculture.  
Economic co-benefits 
18. Sustainable urbanisation has the potential to accelerate economic growth as it will encourage the movement of 
workers currently dependent on rainfed agriculture into more productive sectors raising wages and skills (urban 
workers in Rwanda earn, on average, twice the rural wage for similar work in similar sectors of employment and 
incomes in Kigali are five times higher than in rural areas37). The project will also help to integrate Kigali’s economy 
with bordering districts. 
19. Kigali is one of the fastest-growing African cities. Urbanization has already accounted for 37% of national structural 
change in Rwanda, and urban areas have accounted for 48% of national labour productivity growth over the past 
15 years38. With a blueprint for climate resilient urbanisation and successful scale up, these positive trends can be 
accelerated to enable Kigali to emerge as a strong urban economic powerhouse in the East Africa region. 
20. Scale up of well managed urbanisation will drive down transport and trade costs for goods and people, increasing 
economic density and facilitating the transmission of knowledge and ideas, increasing economies of scale and 
opportunities for specialization, and improving firms’ access to both critical services and a large pool of labour with 
a wide variety of skills leading to increased productivity. International evidence suggests that a 1 percentage point 
increase in the urban population is associated with a 3–8% increase in a country’s per capita income39. 
21. Investments in public infrastructure will raise the productivity of urban land, crowding in private investment and 
raising land values. The investments will also reduce losses and costs associated with disaster response and 
rehabilitation costs from extreme weather events.  
22. The TVET will facilitate training to enable more people, especially women, to access off-farm jobs 
23. Women will save time through improved water access, which can allow them to pursue other economic activities.  
24. The toilet biogas system will provide fuel for cooking meals at the TVET, which reduces costs for buying charcoal 
or liquified petroleum gas (LPG).  
25. Community composting system will provide job opportunities. 
26. The TVET will train students on climate resilient construction approaches and allow them to access jobs.

=== PAGE 36 ===
D 
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
 
 
 
 
27. The proposed transport infrastructure will facilitate safe, secure and active transport, with fewer injuries and 
assaults, and better overall health, which also benefits economic productivity.   
28. Stronger and more resilient homes as a result of training in household upgrade best practice.  
Gender-sensitive development impact 
The project will result in increased resilience of vulnerable households, including women and girls, and enhanced 
efficient and low emission household energy use. The following impacts are expected:  
29. Resilient and low-carbon technologies and infrastructure for improved access to water and electricity of residents, 
reducing time spent by women and girls on domestic activities (unpaid care work) and alleviate that burden. This 
will allow women to participate in other income generating activities and will solve an issue of girls dropping out of 
school. 
30. Women-friendly and safe public spaces resulting in reduced gender-based violence;  
31. Gender-sensitive community centre creating space for recreation and economic activities of women;  
32. Gender-sensitive public space and facilities; and  
33. Women’s social and political empowerment through increased participation and leadership in the community centre 
and community activities. 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Rwanda’s capacity to adapt to climate change is low. Rwanda ranks 151 out of 181 countries in the ND-GAIN 
index5 (2018) for climate vulnerability40 and 98th in terms of readiness – meaning that it is highly vulnerable to climate 
change effects, yet its readiness41 to combat these effects is moderate. Due to its dense river network and large 
wetlands, Rwanda is prone to riverine floods. There have been year-on-year increases in loss and damage from 
weather related hazards. The impacts of climate change in Rwanda are exacerbated by a range of anthropogenic 
factors including the loss of forest and vegetative cover, steep slopes and a high dependence on traditional rain-fed 
agriculture by the majority of the population.  
As women are traditionally responsible for households’ water availability and food security their burdens are 
expected to increase disproportionately due to climate change42. The future economic cost of climate change was 
estimated at an additional impact of 1% of GDP each year by 2030. About 38% of Rwanda’s population lives below the 
poverty line (with 16% of the population living in extreme poverty), with women (representing a higher 39.5% poverty 
level), disabled, widowed, and rural populations disproportionately affected43. 
Rwanda’s high rate of urbanisation increases its overall vulnerability to climate change. Urban households are 
vulnerable to climate change due to Rwanda’s hilly topography and the very high number of people living in unplanned 
settlements. Infiltration rates for storm water are low creating high runoff speeds leading to erosion and downstream 
flooding and siltation. Less than 20% of the urban population that live in areas covered by master plans had storm 
water considerations in 2016 44. Moreover, low recharge rates for groundwater tables reduce the availability of 
groundwater as a potable water resource. These problems are accentuated by climate change. The rapid increase in 
rural-urban migration has resulted in the widespread development of slums (particularly in Kigali which is the most 
popular destination for rural migrants45). At 460 persons per square kilometre Rwanda’s population density is among 
the highest in the world and is expected to increase further due to an annual population growth rate of 2.4%46. 
Many informal settlements are concentrated on sites most at risk from flooding and landslides with poor quality 
housing less able to withstand extreme weather events and a lack of risk-reducing infrastructure. Homes, possessions 
and assets for generating income are not generally covered by insurance. This problem is most acute in Kigali where 
informal settlements account for more than 70% of housing47 as most formal housing is too expensive for the average 
resident - as compared to GNI per capita, Rwanda has the most expensive housing in Sub-Saharan Africa. Moreover, 
informal settlements tend to be very dense with very little open/public space and often with corrugated iron roofs and 
poor ventilation that contribute to higher indoor temperatures. Impacts from rising maximum temperatures, more hot 
days and heat waves are greatest for infants and young children, the elderly, expectant mothers, and those with health 
problems. Rising minimum temperatures with fewer cold days is also likely to extend the range and activity of some 
disease vectors including mosquito and tick-borne diseases with populations at risk from malaria increasing by 150% 
by 205048.  
42% of the country’s area is classified as having a moderate to very high susceptibility to landslides. Rwanda’s 
steep slopes are prone to landslides, which are predicted to increase due to the high intensity rainfall events associated 
with climate change. 43% of Rwanda’s health facilities49, 25% of schools and 74% of district roads are exposed to 
landslides. Between 2010 (when a systematic recording system was established by MIDIMAR) and 2013, 74 people 
died, 22 persons were injured and over 573 houses were destroyed or damaged50. 
Rising demand for water is coinciding with periods of water stress due to prolonged dry spells, a low capture and 
storage capacity, and a high precipitation run-off rate51. There is a rising demand for water in a context of low per capita 
water availability, and increasing need for substantial amounts of water for its growing cities, irrigation and industry. 
Water demand is therefore expected to increase rapidly by 2040 further increasing the pressure on water resources as

=== PAGE 37 ===
D 
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
 
 
 
 
more homes are connected to mains water supply (currently in Kigali, only 35% of households have water piped into 
the home), irrigated agriculture increases, industries develop and the population grows 52. Residents in informal 
settlements experience greater water constraints during prolonged dry spells. Rwanda’s energy supply is also at risk 
from the increasing rainfall variability and prolonged dry spells as hydropower accounts for 50% of the power supply to 
the country53. 
The risk of landslides for housing in Kigali City is especially high due to the high and moderate slope 
susceptibility, high population density, the concentration of informal settlements and use of low-quality 
construction materials.  
The key challenges identified by the local administration include: 1) unplanned settlements; 2) poor quality of road 
network; 3) uncoordinated transport services; 4) inadequate water and waste management systems; 5) limited 
participation of the private sector; 6) limited access to electricity and low usage of solar and biogas system; and 7) low 
youth productivity and employment54. 
The Government of Rwanda’s ability to address these challenges is limited due to financial constraints.  
Existing programs and interventions are insufficient to adequately address the challenges described above. In addition, 
the COVID-19 pandemic has increased pressures on already stretched government spending. This project cannot be 
implemented without GCF support.  
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Existing national climate strategy  
Most of the country’s climate-related policy milestones and strategic frameworks have significantly been informed by 
vulnerability analyses and studies including:  
Baseline national Vulnerability index conducted in 2015 and the follow up provincial and District vulnerability index of 
2019. Since 2015, Rwanda has undertaken to assess social-economic and spatial vulnerability to climate change. The 
2019 study aimed to provide a report on a new District vulnerability assessment and comparative Index for the 30 
Districts, based on household vulnerability survey data, and on the “National Disaster Risk Atlas of Rwanda” (MIDIMAR, 
2015) and other relevant national and international reports and publications; and Policy and strategy recommendations 
to address current vulnerabilities. 
Notably in 2022, the World Bank produced a Country Climate Development Report (World Bank, 2022) for Rwanda 
which assessed Rwanda’s economy to be extremely vulnerable to external shocks, including climate change. According 
to the report, Rwanda suffered its first economic recession since 1994, with the GDP contracting by 3.4% and that the 
vulnerability is further highlighted by the low level of adjusted net savings. In response to the projected rapid increase 
in urbanization, Rwanda’s urban jurisdictions, the City of Kigali and the secondary cities have recently developed master 
plans that aim to incorporate climate change and environmental concerns.  
The analyses have consequently been embedded in Rwanda’s national development frameworks. These include:  
• 
the Vision 2050 blueprint which aspires to take Rwanda to upper- middle-income-country status by 2035 and 
high-income status by 2050. It places emphasis on developing basic infrastructure in urban centres to among 
other things aim for green/eco-friendly cities and neighbourhoods. 
• 
NST-1 (2018‐24) has identified accelerated Sustainable Urbanization’ is a key priority which includes the 
promotion of local construction materials, improved urban transportation services and the development of basic 
infrastructure for 250 km of new residential zones. The Urbanisation and Rural Settlement Sector Strategic 
Plan 2018–2024 is intended to deliver the urban component of NST 1; 
• 
Other key strategic orientation for urbanization include, but are not limited to, The Green Growth and Climate 
Resilience Strategy (GGCRS), (2023) the National Roadmap for Green Secondary Cities Development 
• 
the National Environment and Climate Change Policy enacted in 2019  
• 
National Land Use and Development Master Plan, and The National Gender Policy (2021 revision) stresses 
the importance on improvement of adaptive capacities to climate change and variability for both men and 
women.  
Rwanda Engagement with the GCF  
Rwanda has demonstrated capacity to implement a GCF-funded projects and consistently delivers results against 
targets set out in its national strategies. Rwanda has also established strong institutional frameworks and the accredited 
entity MOE has a reliable track record for implementing climate change projects. For example, MoE is implementing 
the Strengthening Climate Resilience in Northern Rwanda Project approved by the GCF Board in March 2018.  
Alignment with existing policies  
Rwanda was one of the first countries in Africa to submit to submit a tougher climate target to the UN, withwithwith a 
target to cut 38% of its emissions and at least 16% (unconditional) by 2030 compared with a business-as-usual 
baseline. With technical and financial support, Rwanda could reduce its total emissions by 4.6 million tonnes of CO2 
by 2030 through the deployment of hydro and solar energy, improved energy efficiency in industrial processes, 
introduction of vehicle emission standards, rolling out electric vehicles and promoting on-farm biogas use.

=== PAGE 38 ===
D 
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 
 
 
Rwanda’s adaptation actions in the NDC draw upon the Green Growth and Climate Resilience Strategy (GGCRS).).). 
The GGCRS is central to the achievement of the government key development target of becoming a developed climate-
resilient, low-carbon economy by 2050.  Moreover, the GGCRS directly informs and is planned to support and promote 
green urbanisation and the promotion of green innovation in industrial and private sectors; integrated approach to land 
use and human settlements; critical skills and attitudes for service and industrial sectors. ThusThusThus, the proposed 
GCP will help to deliver against key programmes of action in the GGCRS including supporting integrated approaches 
to sustainable land use planning and management as well as integrated water resource management and planning; 
diversifying energy sources with promoting green technology; green industry and private sector development; 
developing low carbon peri-urban systems; and disaster management.   
It is noted that full implementation of the GGCRSGGCRSGGCRS, the NDC and other strategic developmental areas 
including urbanization will require predictable sustainable and reliable support in the form of finance, capacity building 
and technology transfer to which this proposal has the potential to contribute.  
Capacity of Accredited Entities or Executing Entities to deliver 
Planned interventions will benefit from the existence of strong policy and institutional frameworks to address climate 
change issues. The introduction of comprehensive climate legislation in Rwanda created a critical enabling environment 
for the development and implementation of progressive institutional arrangements, policies and strategies for 
addressing climate threats and low carbon growth. Strong political will and ownership exists at the highest levels and 
there are active climate champions across national government.  The MoE (AE) and FONERWA (EE) have experience 
delivering results on GCF-funded projects, such as the on-going GCF-funded Gicumbi project in Rwanda, as well as 
successfully managing other large programs focused on climate change mitigation and adaptation. As the national 
climate and environment fund, Rwanda Green Fund, FONERWA (the nominated executing entity) already manages a 
significant portfolio of climate finance and is therefore well equipped to implement the project. FONERWA channels 
finances on a competitive basis to Government agencies, Districts, CSOs and the private sector. Delivering GCF project 
interventions through a proven and capable national institution such as FONERWA with high levels of accountability 
will therefore further strengthen country ownership. The MoE and FONERWA will draw from this experience in order to 
successfully implement this project.    
Role of National Designated Authority 
REMA (the NDA) has been actively engaged during the preparation of the proposal and will continue to be involved 
during implementation, particularly in the proposed mainstreaming activities. FONERWA routinely works closely with 
NDA and particularly had on-going consultations with REMA’s climate change unit, responsible for preparing national 
communications and representation at international climate change negotiations. This has increasingly proven 
instrumental in supporting the analysis of climate threats and vulnerability baseline included in this proposal. As such, 
the design is based on a thorough understanding of the threat and the vulnerability level and provides a comprehensive 
evidence base for action. FONERWA will continue to closely collaborate with the NDA throughout the project cycle. 
 
Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders, including indigenous peoples, women and 
other vulnerable groups  
Country ownership is rooted in high-level GoR commitment to delivering Carbon neutral and climate resilience targets 
set out in Vision 2050. This underscores the need to target all-of society partnerships in delivering on the targets. There 
is a strong emphasis on ensuring the participation of multiple stakeholders in the project including the local authority, 
civil society, the local community as well as the private sector. The project development process involved multiple 
rounds of public consultation to ensure the interventions maximised benefits for local people that benefited from 
stakeholder engagement (described in more detail in Annex 7). Working closely with the local authority will ensure that 
planning and development at the local level takes account of climate change during and beyond programme activities. 
Building capacity at the local level will ensure that future plans incorporate adaptation and mitigation. FONERWA, in 
partnership with the Rwanda Development Bank (BRD) catalyses climate investment flows to private sector through 
range of financial instruments (grants, loans, guarantees, etc. that respond to critical financial incentives and technical 
innovations to advance national climate action. By partnering effectively with the private sector and enhancing access 
to training on climate resilient infrastructure, the proposed investment will support new markets and business activities 
around infrastructure and construction services at the local and national level.  
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Without GCF support, GoR will not have adequate resources or capacity to take forward its ambitious plans to reduce 
the climate risk exposure of communities living in informal settlements. Please refer to Annex 3 and Annex 22 for details 
regarding the economic and financial analysis of the proposed interventions and the carbon calculations.  
Overview of the financial costs and benefits of the project 
Investing in the upgrade of a village to form a climate-responsive blueprint for upscaling and replication is a significant 
departure from a conventional financial model. Typically speaking, any significant infrastructure upgrade would be

=== PAGE 39 ===
D 
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 
 
 
planned and financed by local government across a 40-60 year horizon or - as in the case of significant road 
infrastructure - financed as a stand-alone project through user tolls, general taxation or government borrowing. 
Infrastructure upgrades are typically accompanied by increases in property value with follow-on increases in tax income 
which help pay for the original infrastructure upgrades. This may have the detrimental effect of pushing out the existing 
local occupants from homes they can no longer afford, who will then create new informal settlements elsewhere. 
The proposed project for climate-responsive upgrades is therefore not only important in creating a scaleable, replicable 
model which can be deployed elsewhere but also needs to carefully consider wider socioeconomic impacts affecting 
the existing population. To facilitate this, the adaptation and mitigation measures for the project have been proposed 
on the basis of providing long-term cost-savings, allowing local residents to boost their household wealth in parallel 
with the expected increases in local property value, reducing the risk of financially-induced eviction and/or migration. 
From a financial perspective, the project is a subsidy-based model where initial capital cost investment is offset by long-
term improvements in the health and wealth for local households, minimising detrimental impacts on local residents 
(formally known as economic displacement and economic deadweight). Only one (solar streetlighting) of the proposed 
interventions was monetisable at a scale benefiting the village as a whole outside of individually impacted households. 
The upgrade of streetlighting from conventional to solar-powered would typically be a cost burden borne by local 
government and financed through tax revenues. Due to data limitations and because the upgrade would be financed 
by GCF, the financial analysis is based on a BAU comparison with conventional streetlighting. 
In terms of replicability and scalability, any departure from the subsidy-based model should be accompanied by a 
detailed assessment of distributional impacts to ensure that existing households are not "priced out" of their current 
homes from the impacts of infrastructure improvements.  
Overview of economic evaluation 
Separate from a financial evaluation which only considers direct financial impacts from any proposed project or 
intervention, an economic evaluation views all potential benefits and costs, both direct and indirect, seen from both the 
local perspective and a regional/national perspective. Where these costs and benefits cannot be quantified, they are 
assessed on a qualitative basis. The economic evaluation contains the monetisable and quantifiable adaptation and 
mitigation measures for the project directly affecting a subset of households benefitting from the project. These have 
been estimated on the basis of providing long-term cost-savings, allowing local residents to boost their household 
wealth in parallel with the expected increases in local property value, reducing the risk of financially-induced eviction 
and/or migration. 
Quantified benefits have initially focussed on the following mitigation measures: 
• Water harvesting on existing homes - additional hours available for working and savings from reduction in 
purchase of water 
• Savings from generation of power by solar PV 
• Savings from use of solar water heating 
• Carbon savings 
• Savings expected from the change in land use 
The main benefit, improvement to local quality of life, could not be quantified at the present time so is not included in 
this analysis. Additionally, adaptation measures at a societal level could not be quantified at this time due to a lack of 
data for quantification and monetisation of the specific planned interventions, e.g. those improving transport and waste 
activities.

=== PAGE 40 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus 
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Scale 
Currently, there is limited capacity to 
invest in climate resilient physical 
infrastructure and limited capacity of 
vulnerable households to transition 
to resilient, efficient and low 
emission practices. 
Medium 
Enhanced capacity for low emission, 
climate-resilient upgrades reducing risks 
of landslides, flooding, and heat stress... 
Better living conditions and access to 
services... 
Sustainable upgrades of settlements, 
piloting a multi-sectoral program for 
future replication. Includes technical 
assistance for greenfield development. 
Replicability 
The Government of Rwanda (GoR), 
under its Economic Development 
and Poverty Reduction Strategy 
EDPRS (II), has pioneered this 
vision of a Green City Concept and 
will be the first of its kind in Rwanda. 
High 
Investments in resilient infrastructure, 
household energy solutions and 
community facilities in an informal 
settlement on Kinyinya hill - Ngaruyinka 
Village, to serve as a model for a 
resilient, low emission upgrade. If 
implemented successfully, the green city 
concept could be replicated in the 
development of secondary cities across 
the country with green technologies and 
innovations for green and climate 
resilient urbanization 
The establishment of a Technical 
Vocational Education Training Centre 
focused on training students on climate 
resilient construction will facilitate long-
term knowledge sharing and learning; 
Capacity building for construction sector 
workers and professionals will lead to 
increased scaling up and replication of 
the activities implemented under the 
project. Blueprinting the GCK and 
planning code for the GoR will support 
replication of the project. 
Sustainability 
GoR is an early adopter of low-
carbon resilient development, and 
climate resilient development has 
been mainstreamed into Rwanda’s 
planning and budgeting processes. 
Rwanda’s progressive environment 
and climate legislation has created a 
critical enabling environment for 
developing and implementing 
Medium 
 
The paradigm shift is possible if the 
enabling environment is improved so as 
to foster investment. The sustainability 
of the intervention is strengthened by 
institutionalizing practices and tools for 
low-carbon and resilient planning and 
building.  
Providing support relating to the planning 
and regulatory environment in order to 
develop an enabling environment that 
fosters increased investment in the 
green upgrade of informal settlements 
will support the broader implementation 
of the work demonstrated as part of this 
project.

=== PAGE 41 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
 
 
 
 
 
progressive institutional 
arrangements, policies and 
strategies. The GoR also adopted 
innovative institutional arrangements 
to improve the coordination of 
environment and climate priorities. 
However, there is a need to enhance 
the institutional and technical 
capacity to plan and develop low 
emission and resilient investments 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final1 
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities 
 
Total Direct and Indirect 
Beneficiaries reached 
Annual project reports 
 
Gender responsive 
household survey 
(See Annex 11 for 
indicators) 
 
 
 
Targets to be set at the 
Inception phase of the 
project 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
 
Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
Annual project reports 
 
 
 
1634 total  
 
 
 
Supplementary 2.6: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) living in 
buildings that have 
increased resilience 
against climate hazards   
Project Annual Reports 
Interim evaluation and 
final evaluation reports 
(See Annex 11 for 
indicators) 
 
Erosion from 
storm water is a 
significant 
problem in the 
community and 
poses a risk to 
buildings 
 
817 females 
817 males   
Technologies and practices 
are applied successfully 
 
Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
Annual project reports 
 
Gender responsive 
household survey 
Not all 
households are 
connected to 
water supply. 
 
1634 total  
  
Technologies and practices 
are applied successfully 
 
1 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the 
target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.

=== PAGE 42 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
 
 
 
 
 
(See Annex 11 for 
indicators) 
 
 
Intermittent 
water rationing 
 
 
Supplementary 2.3: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) with more 
climate-resilient water 
security 
 
 
 
 817 females 
817 males   
 
ARA3 Intrastructure 
and built environment 
 
Core 3: Value of 
physical assets made 
more resilient to the 
effects of climate 
change and/or more 
able to reduce GHG 
emissions 
- Detailed climate-
resilient and emissions-
reducing engineering 
design for Ngaruyinka 
Village (see Activity 
1.1.1) 
 
 
Entire 
community is 
vulnerable to 
extreme climate-
hazards 
resulting in 
flooding and 
landslides  
 
Detailed 
climate-
resilient and 
emissions-
reducing 
engineering 
design for 
Ngaruyinka 
Village (see 
Activity 1.1.1) 
 
5.4M USD 
(based on 
Detailed 
climate-
resilient and 
emissions-
reducing 
construction 
for Ngaruyinka 
Village (see 
Activity 1.1.2) 
based on 
independent 
engineering 
verification 
post-
construction 
 
Based on protection of 
entire village area (18ha or 
180,000m2), based on 
value of USD 30 per square 
meter (per land valuation 
conducted). 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for current 
state (baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
Core Indicator 5: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission climate-
resilient development 
There is a need for 
enhancing the    
institutional and 
technical capacity to 
plan and develop low 
emission and resilient 
investments 
medium 
Documenting best 
practices and provide 
guidance for enhancing 
national building 
standards will increase 
the institutional and 
technical capacity to 
Blueprinting the GCK 
and planning code for 
the GoR will support 
replication of the project 
Multiple sub-national 
areas within a country

=== PAGE 43 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
 
 
 
 
 
pathways in a country-
driven manner 
plan low emission and 
resilient investments 
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards  
Limited awareness of 
best practices and 
approaches to resilient, 
low carbon housing and 
infrastructure, limited 
examples of good 
practices 
low 
Increased knowledge 
and the diffusion of good 
practices results in 
deployment of the 
approaches and 
solutions developed in 
the GCK-project.  
 
The project is the first of 
its kind and limited 
effective opportunities 
for knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes without an 
example to showcase. 
Concretely, the 
Technical Vocational 
Education Training 
Centre focused on 
training students on 
climate resilient 
construction will facilitate 
long-term knowledge 
sharing and learning; 
Capacity building for 
construction sector 
workers and 
professionals will lead to 
increased scaling up 
and replication of the 
activities implemented 
under the project.  
Multiple sub-national 
areas within a country 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
 
Project/programme 
specific Indicator 
 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
1. Strengthened 
Adaptive Capacity heat 
stress mitigation and 
Reduced Exposure to 
Climate Risks 
# of households 
having access to risk 
reducing 
infrastructure and 
basic services 
Independent final 
evaluation report 
0 
 
301households 
Independent final 
evaluation

=== PAGE 44 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
 
 
 
 
 
Implement resilient 
green transport/Mobility 
networks 
 Length of improved 
streets, m 
 Detailed design and 
construction (see Activity 
1.1.1 and 1.1.2) 
0 
To be 
quantified 
through 
detailed design 
(activity 1.1.1 
7,787 
Infrastructure to be 
completed as per 
feasibility study. 
Length of improved 
pathways and 
walking & cycling link, 
m 
Detailed design and 
construction (see Activity 
1.1.1 and 1.1.2) 
0 
To be 
quantified 
through 
detailed design 
(activity 1.1.1 
5,397 
Infrastructure to be 
completed as per 
feasibility study. 
Implement resilient 
storm water 
management systems 
using nature-based 
solutions 
Area of planted green 
swales, m2 
Detailed design and 
construction (see Activity 
1.1.1 and 1.1.2) 
0 
To be 
quantified 
through 
detailed design 
(activity 1.1.1 
14,709 
Infrastructure to be 
completed as per 
feasibility study. 
 Area of planted step 
swales 
Detailed design and 
construction (see Activity 
1.1.1 and 1.1.2) 
0 
To be 
quantified 
through 
detailed design 
(activity 1.1.1 
5,052 
Infrastructure to be 
completed as per 
feasibility study. 
Number of infiltration 
ponds 
Detailed design and 
construction (see Activity 
1.1.1 and 1.1.2) 
0 
To be 
quantified 
through 
detailed design 
(activity 1.1.1 
22 
Infrastructure to be 
completed as per 
feasibility study. 
 Area of terraced rain 
gardens, m2 
Detailed design and 
construction (see Activity 
1.1.1 and 1.1.2) 
0 
To be 
quantified 
through 
detailed design 
(activity 1.1.1 
30,333 
Infrastructure to be 
completed as per 
feasibility study. 
Expand, install and 
ensure resilience of 
central water supply 
and rain water 
harvesting systems. 
Percentage of 
households with a 
water access point  
Detailed design and 
construction (see Activity 
1.1.1 and 1.1.2) 
TBC 
To be 
quantified 
through 
detailed design 
(activity 1.1.1 
100% 
Infrastructure to be 
completed as per 
feasibility study. 
Percentage of 
households 
connected to central 
water supply 
Report from water 
company based on 
Detailed design and 
construction (see Activity 
1.1.1 and 1.1.2) 
13%  
(43 out of 321) 
To be 
quantified 
through 
detailed design 
(activity 1.1.1 
100% 
Infrastructure to be 
completed as per 
feasibility study.

=== PAGE 45 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of 
households with 
rainwater harvesting 
tanks installed  
Report from RWH tank 
provider based on 
Detailed design and 
construction (see Activity 
1.1.1 and 1.1.2) 
6 
To be 
quantified 
through 
detailed design 
(activity 1.1.1 
321 
Infrastructure to be 
completed as per 
feasibility study. 
 
Promotion 
and 
Implementation 
of 
Renewable Energy and 
Energy-Efficient 
Technologies 
 
 GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Annual project reports. 
The indicator measures 
the reduction of GHG 
emissions in CO2e 
compared to baseline 
emissions. (KWh from 
solar PV, 0 kg CO2e per 
KWh, compared to grid 
emissions factor) 
Quantity of CO2e 
emitted in the 
BAU scenario 
 
Solar street 
lights: 76.2 t 
CO2eq / year 
Households: 
0.9 
tCO2eq/year/ 
average 
household 
 
Data to determine the 
baseline is available. Data 
to estimate GHG 
emissions reduced is 
available. 
Emissions reduced, 
avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Ex ante modelling. 
Household use of 
vehicles will be used as 
an indicator for 
monitoring. 
Quantity of 
CO2eq emitted in 
the BAU scenario 
 
2,019t CO2eq / 
year 
 
Improved low-
emission vehicle fuel 
economy 
Percentage of trips made 
by public 
transport/walking and 
Cycling 
 
 
80% 
 
Emissions reduced, 
avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Annual project reports A 
process-based life cycle 
assessment (LCA) has 
been conducted to 
estimate GHG emissions 
difference between the 
BAU and the Green 
scenario. 
Quantity of CO2e 
emitted in the 
BAU scenario 
 
Combined 
carbon savings 
through 
construction – 
2,524 tCO2eq 
TVET 
operation 
savings: 9 
tCO2eq / year 
Data to determine the 
baseline is available. Data 
to estimate GHG 
emissions reduced is 
available. 
Number of 
households with 
installed solar water 
heating  
Report from solar water 
heating provider based 
on Detailed design and 
construction (see Activity 
1.1.1 and 1.1.2) 
0 
To be 
quantified 
through 
detailed design 
(activity 1.1.1 
1,430 
Infrastructure to be 
completed as per 
feasibility study. 
Percentage of 
households in the 
Report from solar PV 
provider  based on 
Detailed design and 
0 
To be 
quantified 
through 
85% 
Infrastructure to be 
completed as per 
feasibility study.

=== PAGE 46 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
 
 
 
 
 
GCK pilot connected 
to the solar mini-grid 
construction (see Activity 
1.1.1 and 1.1.2) 
detailed design 
(activity 1.1.1 
Percentage of 
owners/tenants who 
are satisfied with the 
upgraded 
neighbourhood 
External Mid-term review, 
External, Final evaluation 
report based on the 
survey covering services 
delivered by up-graded 
infrastructure as provided 
by the  Detailed design 
and construction (see 
Activity 1.1.1 and 1.1.2) 
0 
To be 
quantified 
through 
detailed design 
(activity 1.1.1 
90 
Infrastructure to be 
completed as per 
feasibility study. 
Number of 
construction sector 
workers and 
professionals trained 
in best practices for 
climate-resilient and 
emissions reducing, 
green construction  
Independent engineering 
verification post-
construction based on 
Detailed design and 
construction (see Activity 
1.1.1 and 1.1.2) 
0 
To be 
quantified 
through 
detailed design 
(activity 1.1.1 
180 
Infrastructure to be 
completed as per 
feasibility study. 
Community 
centre 
upgrade 
Marketplace roof and 
frame of local timber 
inc. rain harvesting & 
solar PV m2 
Market stalls nr 
Public benches nr 
Children's play 
furniture nr 
Junior football pitch 
m2 
Public realm, parking 
& drop-off in volcanic 
stone setts with non-
permeable pointing 
m2 
Detailed design and 
construction (see Activity 
1.1.1 and 1.1.2) 
0 
To be 
quantified 
through 
detailed design 
(activity 1.1.1 
 
 
160 
 
 
 
84 
1 
 
1200 
800 
Infrastructure to be 
completed as per 
feasibility study. 
Number of events 
aiming at raising 
awareness and 
engaging citizens to 
Reports from technical 
assistance experts 
0 
To be 
quantified 
through 
20

=== PAGE 47 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
 
 
 
 
 
increase their active 
participation in 
resilient, low 
emission initiatives  
detailed design 
(activity 1.1.1 
 Number of efficient 
cook stoves 
purchased by 
households 
Household survey 
0 
 
50 
 
2. Strengthened 
Institutional and 
Regulatory Systems for 
Climate-Responsive 
Planning and 
Development 
 
Number of climate-
responsive policies, 
regulations, and 
institutional 
frameworks 
developed, adopted, 
and implemented 
Report from technical 
assistance expert 
0 
 
5 
 
Institutional capacity 
development for 
Government of Rwanda 
agencies/institutions. 
Number of 
government officials 
receiving training on 
inclusive climate-
resilient, green city 
development  
 
Report from technical 
assistance expert 
 
 
50 
 
 
 Establishment of a 
sustainably financed 
and technically 
responsive 
(engineering 
capacity, access to 
materials, spare 
parts) O&M system 
for the project area. 
Independent engineering 
verification post-
construction based on 
Detailed design and 
construction (see Activity 
1.1.1  
 
 
 
To be quantified through 
detailed design 
(activity 1.1.1 
Blueprinting the Green 
City Kigali and 
developing planning 
codes for the Special 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV). 
2.2 A design template 
for GCK developed 
Detailed design and 
construction (see Activity 
1.1.1 and 1.1.2) 
 
 
1 
 
2.3 Development of 
support program for 
recycling groups 
Report from technical 
assistance expert 
 
 
1 
 
2.4 Number of 
reports, gap analyses, 
briefs, etc on the 
Report from technical 
assistance expert 
 
 
5

=== PAGE 48 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
 
 
 
 
 
analysis of green city 
development 
standards and 
planning frameworks  
2.5 Introduction of a 
design template 
based on the project 
results in the 
development 
standards, planning 
frameworks and 
enabling regulations 
Independent engineering 
verification based on 
Detailed design and 
construction delivered in 
accordance with Activity 
1.1.1 and 1.1.2 
 
1 
2 
 
2.6 Knowledge 
management system 
established 
Report from technical 
assistance expert. Report 
from ICT provider 
 
1 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Awareness raising and 
citizen engagement for 
climate action. 
Number of 
households received 
training on improved 
greywater 
management and 
improved sanitation  
Report from technical 
assistance expert, 
Household survey 
0 
To be 
quantified 
through 
detailed design 
(activity 1.1.1 
100 
Infrastructure to be 
completed as per 
feasibility study. 
 Number of recycling 
and waste collection 
points installed 
Detailed design and 
construction (see Activity 
1.1.1 and 1.1.2) 
0 
To be 
quantified 
through 
detailed design 
(activity 1.1.1 
2 
Infrastructure to be 
completed as per 
feasibility study. 
 Number of 
households using 
community 
composting facility 
Household survey based 
on Detailed design and 
construction (see Activity 
1.1.1 ) 
0 
To be 
quantified 
through 
detailed design 
(activity 1.1.1 
100 
Infrastructure to be 
completed as per 
feasibility study. 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
Output 1.1 Resilient Transport, Water, and Energy Infrastructure 
 
 
 Develop Detailed climate-
resilient and emissions-reducing 
- Prepare technical design specifications  
- Prepare tender documents

=== PAGE 49 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 1.1.1 
Detailed climate-
resilient and 
emissions-reducing 
engineering design  
engineering design for 
Ngaruyinka Village, including 
transport and mobility, 
stormwater management, water 
supply, sanitation, energy, solid 
waste management, community 
facilities 
- Procurement and delivery of the detailed integrated design with 
specific characteristics as presented in Activity 1.1.1 of the FP. 
 
Detailed integrated design following best 
international standards to ensure climate 
resilience and emissions reduction. 
1.1.2Transport and 
mobility 
Develop a Green Rights of Way 
network using green construction 
methods and materials to ensure 
year-round and all-weather 
usability.  
- Prepare technical design specifications and detailed design 
documents 
- Prepare tender documents 
- Procurement and delivery 
- Review and evaluate one year post installation 
-  
- Detailed engineering designs completed  
- 7,787 m of climate proofed roads 
established 
- 5,397 km of climate proofed walking and 
cycling paths established  
Evaluation report prepared and 
disseminated to all stakeholders including 
the community 
1.1.3 Stormwater 
management 
Install a green, permeable 
network of swales, gullies and 
detention-filtration-percolation 
areas to prevent erosion by 
absorbing rainfall energy, 
reducing overland flow velocity, 
increasing infiltration, retaining soil 
moisture, and binding soil 
particles together. 
- Prepare technical design specifications and detailed design 
documents 
- Prepare tender documents 
- Procurement and delivery 
- Review and evaluate one year post installation 
 
- Detailed engineering designs completed 
- Installation of 14,709 m2 of planted green 
wales, 5,052m2 of planted step swales, 22 
infiltration ponds, and 30,333m2 terraced 
rain gardens  
Evaluation report prepared and 
disseminated to all stakeholders including 
the community 
1.1.4 Water supply 
Expand the Central Water Supply 
in the community and install 
rainwater harvesting and point of 
use household water treatment 
technologies 
Central water supply expansion: 
- Prepare technical design specifications and detailed design 
documents of expansion of central water supply 
- Prepare tender documents 
- Procurement and delivery 
Rainwater harvesting systems: 
- Identify buildings where RWH will be installed 
- Prepare designs, tender documents and procurement of service 
providers 
- Installation of RWH systems in consultation with HH (especially 
women members of HH) 
Point of Use Water Treatment: 
- Educate communities members about options available and assist 
with connection them to suppliers and financing.  
All: 
- Detailed engineering designs completed  
- 100% households connected to the 
Central Water Supply  
- 321 rainwater harvesting systems installed 
- 5 trainings held on point of use water 
treatment options  
Evaluation report prepared and 
disseminated to all stakeholders including 
the community

=== PAGE 50 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
 
 
 
 
 
Review and evaluate one year post installation 
 
 
 
 
1.1.5 Energy 
Support the adoption of solar PV, 
improved cookstoves, energy 
efficient lighting and appliances 
Solar PV in Pilot: 
- Prepare detailed design documents 
- Prepare tender documents 
- Procurement and delivery 
- Review and evaluate one year post installation 
 
Solar street lighting: 
- Prepare detailed design documents 
- Prepare tender documents 
- Procurement and delivery 
- Provide training on proper operation and maintenance 
- Review and evaluate one year post installation 
 
Technical assistance: 
- Provide trainings related to the use of improve cook stove, energy 
efficient lighting and appliances.  
Connect households with micro-financing options  
- Detailed engineering designs completed  
- Solar PV mini-grid serves 85% of the pilot 
households. 
- Solar water heaters installed in 1,430 pilot 
homes. 
Evaluation report prepared and 
disseminated to all stakeholders including 
the community 
Output 1.2 Improved Waste Management and community facilities 
-  
1.2.1 Sanitation 
Develop a toilet system with 
biogas recovery at the TVET / 
market area 
Provide education about latrine 
and/or septic tank options and 
greywater improvements  
Biogas system: 
- Prepare detailed design documents and confirm design and 
operation details with relevant stakeholders (Rwanda TVET Board, 
etc) 
- Prepare tender documents 
- Procurement and delivery 
- Provide training on proper operation and maintenance 
- Review and evaluate one year post installation 
Technical assistance: 
Prepare training materials for educating community members about 
latrine upgrades and maintenance, as well as about greywater 
management.  
- Detailed engineering designs completed  
- Toilets with biogas digestion system 
installed  
- Biogas system trainings and follow up 
provided 
- Sanitation improvements and greywater 
management trainings held 
- Evaluation report prepared and 
disseminated to all stakeholders including 
the community 
1.2.2 Solid waste 
management 
Community composting, 
neighbourhood collection points 
and recycling centres 
- Establish a community composting organisation 
- Prepare detailed design documents, in coordination with 
stakeholders, including the City of Kigali, waste collection company, 
community members, etc. 
- Composting organisation established 
- Detailed engineering designs completed  
- Composting facility operational and 
accessible to all households

=== PAGE 51 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
 
 
 
 
 
- Prepare tender documents 
- Procurement and delivery 
- Outreach efforts to encourage behaviour changes and public 
participation 
- Review and evaluate one year post installation 
 
- 100 households report that they compost 
organic waste 
- 2 neighbourhood waste collection and 
recycling points established 
Evaluation report prepared and 
disseminated to all stakeholders including 
the community 
1.2.3 Community 
facilities 
Establishment of a TVET, market 
improvements and other 
community facilities 
TVET Center 
- Prepare technical design specifications and detailed design 
documents, in collaboration with all stakeholders, including Rwanda 
TVET Board, etc. 
- Prepare construction tender documents 
- Construction procurement and delivery 
- Tender for provision of TVET equipment 
- Install equipment 
- Review and evaluate one year post installation 
Market Improvements and other Community improvements 
(playground, field, etc): 
- Prepare technical design specifications and detailed design 
documents, in collaboration with stakeholders. 
- Prepare tender documents 
- Procurement and delivery 
Review and evaluate one year post installation 
- Detailed engineering designs completed  
- TVET Center constructed 
- Market rehabilitated and other community 
improvements completed.  
- Evaluation report prepared and 
disseminated to all stakeholders including 
the community 
 
Output 2.1 Capacity Building and community Engagement 
2.1.1 Capacity 
building for 
construction sector 
workers and 
professional workers 
at the climate-focused 
TVET center  
Providing training and capacity-
building programs focused on 
climate-resilient construction 
practices and the use of green 
technologies ensures that the 
workforce is equipped to support 
and sustain climate-resilient 
practices. 
- 
Develop a curriculum that includes practical application of 
skills learned. 
- 
Identify the target group and conduct a training needs 
assessment. 
- 
Develop training content and materials in collaboration with 
the Rwanda TVET Board. 
- 
Obtain accreditation for training programs. 
- 
Development of a curriculum with 
practical and theoretical modules 
on climate-resilient construction 
and green technologies. 
- 
Creation of training manuals, digital 
resources, and case studies. 
- 
Report on identified target groups 
and a detailed Training Needs 
Assessment (TNA) report. 
- 
MoU with the Rwanda TVET Board 
and submission of accreditation 
application package, leading to the 
accreditation certificate(s) for the 
training programs.

=== PAGE 52 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
 
 
 
 
 
- 
Implementation plan and schedule 
for pilot training sessions with 
evaluation reports and participant 
feedback. 
2.1.1 Community 
engagement, 
ownership, gender 
equality and 
sustainability 
Establish an inclusive Community 
Sustainability Committee in the 
community and develop the 
capacity. 
Develop and operationalise an 
operation and maintenance 
(O&M) plan and provide training 
and capacity development for the 
community and local authority to 
operate and maintain the 
investments. 
Implement the gender action plan.  
- Establish an inclusive Community Sustainability Committee in the 
village 
- Assess capacity needs  
- Provide capacity support to maintain and operate infrastructure 
- Provide capacity support to enable the committee to act as a source 
of advice and information to households 
- Provide capacity support to enable the committee to act as a focal 
point for external engagement to share experiences and expertise to 
promote scale up and replication 
- Identify and support community ambassadors to promote scale up 
and replication 
- Conduct an awareness campaign with the community to promote 
separation of waste, recycling and composting 
- Suppliers of solar PV, improved cookstoves, energy efficient lighting 
and appliances monitored to ensure technical and customer support 
is provided to households to operate equipment optimally and 
maintain in good condition 
 
Gender action plan (see Annex 8 for more details): 
- Gender and leadership capacity building support 
- Establish a gender mainstreaming committee within the community 
or on-going oversight 
- Ensure women’s full and equal participation on the upgrade 
committee 
- Build the capacity of key decision makers and stakeholders involved 
in the upgrade to ensure wrap-around support for women’s greater 
engagement 
- Establish a formal complaint mechanism regarding women’s 
participation and gender equality in the upgrade process 
- Community sensitization and engagement around gender-based 
violence and women’s rights  
- Address specific safety concerns related to infrastructure upgrades 
that were raised by women as well as men 
- Establish a Women’s Safe Space (WSS) and Gender Champions 
Group (GCG) at community level to ensure sustainability of gains 
made 
- Community Sustainability Committee 
established and functioning effectively 
- O&M plan developed and operationalised 
- Community and local authority trained to 
maintain infrastructure  
For details regarding the gender activities, 
please see Annex 8. The Gender Action 
Plan details the goals and indicators for 
each of the activities listed to the left.

=== PAGE 53 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
 
 
 
 
 
- Community sensitization to promote women in higher-paying trades 
that are currently male-dominated 
Ensure women’s equal access to and benefit from community 
upgrade interventions 
2.1.2 Awareness 
raising and citizen 
engagement in 
climate responsive 
regeneration 
Awareness raising campaigns 
organised on climate resilient 
urban development. This will 
include community meetings, 
radio programmes, audio-visual 
communication materials and 
visits to Kinyinya Hill to explore 
the upgrade.  
Citizen engagement programmed 
developed to strengthen the role 
of citizens and community in 
climate responsive regeneration  
- Capacity development of target institutions to deliver high quality 
awareness campaigns  
- Awareness strategy co-developed with target institutions 
- Awareness materials prepared 
- Awareness campaigns organised 
- Social media engagement 
- Awareness events organised 
- Briefing papers prepared  
- Short video clips prepared and posted 
- Exchange visits 
- Campaign results tracked and used to extend reach 
- Campaign reviewed and updated annually  
- Citizen engagement strategy developed 
Citizen engagement tools developed and deployed to understand 
needs and priorities and engage communities in co-designing 
upgrades and regeneration schemes 
- Monthly community meetings held 
- 2 posts on social media per week 
- 1 Short video clip prepared and posted per 
month 
- 1 awareness events organised per month 
- 5 briefing papers prepared 
- 5 exchange visits 
- Citizen engagement tools developed and 
deployed 
 
2.1.3 Institutional 
capacity development 
of GoR 
agencies/Institutions 
Identify needs, develop and 
deliver capacity building 
programme for GoR staff from City 
of Kigali, Ministry of Infrastructure, 
Ministry of Environment, and 
Rwanda Housing Authority. 
 
- Identify and select participants  
- Conduct capacity needs assessment  
- Develop a capacity building programme 
- Develop training content and materials 
- Develop training and development calendar 
- Conduct capacity development activities  
Establish and implement an evaluation process 
- Training materials developed 
Capacity building programme developed, 
delivered and evaluated  
Output 2.2 Knowledge Management and development 
2.2.1Blueprinting the 
GCK and Planning 
code for SPV 
Document the development of the 
GCK. Design template, ToRs, and 
project manual developed to 
support the scale up and 
replication of GCK. 
- Develop ToRs and contract consultant 
- Develop design template, ToRs, and project manual 
 
- Design template, ToRs and project manual 
completed 
 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The project will utilise and adapt FONERWA’s established and operating framework and M&E procedures that have been used for other development funds such 
as DFID, KfW and UNDP and for other GCF projects. Detailed workplans are developed under a logical framework structure within which activities are linked to 
defined and quantified outputs, under outcome themes and connected to higher level impact statement and indicators. The M&E systems will provide systematic 
reports of progress against both process and performance indicators and will be used to identify areas for specific management attention and will result in revision

=== PAGE 54 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
 
 
 
 
 
to annual implementation plans and, where necessary in-year plans and budgets (see dashboard below). All data gathered (household survey) will by default be 
disaggregated by sex and age, as well as other variables such as disability and poverty, including in baseline survey to ensure a meaningful assessment of inclusive 
green city development. 
Implementing partners will be responsible for reporting against the agreed indicators, under the oversight of the dedicated PMU supported by the FONERWA M&E 
team. The M&E systems will also contribute to learning and review of approaches in light of experience throughout the project lifetime to optimise performance and 
impact. 
The following positions are planned for the project: 
- 
An internationally experienced M&E professional to design detailed M&E systems, develop detailed operational guidelines, assess progress and to work 
with technical specialists to develop corrective actions for “at risk” components where necessary and to provide capacity building 
• 
An M&E officer, based in the Gasabo District in Kigali at the point of service provision to undertake data collection and first level quality assurance 
The M&E officer will conduct regular field visits to validate reports from construction, waste management and solar heating / PV installation companies.  
 
Regarding the infrastructure engineering aspects related to the project deliverables, FONERWA will share with GCF the following documents: 
(a) Detailed design as specified in Activity 1.1.1 upon completion.  
(b) Independent engineering report post-construction as specified in Activity 1.1.2 
(c) Vocational training plan once designed as specified in Activity 1.2.4 
(d) O&M operations manual, including budget appropriation, engineering capacity (covering human resources, access to materials and technology), 
governance, and. 
 
FONERWA has the overall responsibility for monitoring and evaluation of the project. FONERWA will report to the GCF: 
(a) Annual performance reports, including financial management reports, which will include dates and amounts dispersed for each funded activity and compliance 
with financial covenants; 
(b) An interim evaluation and a final evaluation report. The evaluations will assess the performance of the project against expected results and outcomes. These 
evaluations will cover all activities but has not been repeated for each performance indicator in the elaborated M&E plan as in Annex 11.  
(c) The annual performance reports will provide an account, based on the performance by each indicator, based on the logical framework of the project, including 
a report on gender.  
Data collection, management and reporting system. A fit-for-purpose data collection, management and reporting system will be deployed based on existing 
routines and practices within Fonerwa. The PMU will collect and collate date on an annual and bi-annual basis throughout the project life-time. The annual reports 
will provide the basis for annual reports to GCF and will contain updates on the performance against indicators (see elaboration in Annex 11). The reports will 
provide details on the project achievements and the M&E officer will use a dashboard to indicate complete activities, unexpected successes or failures, delays and 
risk of increased costs. The table below illustrates the dashboard. This will help the PMU to prioritize efforts. 
Table 1: M&E Dashboard 
Ranking 
Description 
Criteria 
  
Above 
expectations 
Activities and results exceed workplan targets 
Results are achieved at a lower cost than expected 
Results are achieved faster than expected 
Unexpected positive results 
  
On target 
Activities and results align with the workplan

=== PAGE 55 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Below target 
Activities and results fall below workplan targets 
Results are achieved but at a higher cost than expected 
Results are achieved but with delays 
Unexpected negative side-effects 
  
Cancelled 
Activities have been cancelled 
  
Completed 
Activities have been completed

=== PAGE 56 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
High 
High 
Description 
The ongoing COVID 19 pandemic continues to disrupt movement (including travel) and supply chains that delay 
implementation of the project and result in increased costs.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
COVID 19 is a black swan event that is impossible to predict. It is hoped that overall increased vaccination against the 
disease globally will reduce the negative impacts of future surges and potential variants. However, nothing can be 
taken for granted and future lockdowns that affect movement of EE personnel, consultants and construction crews are 
possible. In addition, lockdowns both locally or at other global locations may impact supply chains that affect 
construction materials availability and/or cost. Management of these risks are proposed through the careful monitoring 
of the ongoing situation by the PMU of the EE, recording impacts and reporting back to GCF on events that may 
impact the overall implementation schedule. While it is not currently anticipated, similar extensions to those granted 
by GCF during the PPF period, may be required. Regarding costs, it is especially important, beyond the climate 
change mitigation benefits described elsewhere, that the detail designers and further contractors make use of local 
materials in construction that avoid imports and further FX risk. USD inflation, as a result of supply chain issues 
created by COVID, will need to be carefully monitored. 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
High 
Description 
Unexpected site, especially sub-surface, conditions are encountered on site. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
It is important that geotechnical and hydrological surveys of the site are carried out prior to commencement of detail 
design to determine any unforeseen site conditions as possible (topographical surveying has already been completed 
for the area as part of the FS). Further monitoring of unexpected site conditions during the construction phase by 
contractor(s) and PMU will be required, and design changes made as required. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Materials unavailability  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The proposed design concept relies upon the use of sustainably produced and locally sourced building materials. 
However, Rwanda has a limited green building materials industry. The issue of inadequate local supply has been a 
challenge faced by other contractors who must then source expensive and unsustainable materials from overseas. In 
order to mitigate this risk, the design of the project should be carefully undertaken in conjunction with local materials 
producers to ensure availability and to identify solutions where supply may be considered an issue, construction 
timeframes should allow for longer lead times that might be required for a more BAU construction project. 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact

=== PAGE 57 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
 
 
 
 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Inadequate or inappropriate infrastructure or systems and further that user fees collected do not cover operations 
costs. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The FS has relied upon engagement with various local infrastructure providers and municipal authorities to ensure 
that options being proposed are appropriate, reliable and financially sustainable. The detail design stage of the 
project will need to integrate a strong stakeholder engagement process with these providers to ensure consistent 
review of proposed systems to ensure they are appropriate and maintainable and that responsible authorities are 
ready to take over their operations and maintenance following handover. 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Low 
High 
Description 
Risk of poor planning and resource management. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The need to ensure sufficient budget, clear and detailed feasibility study and further design (schematic supplied with 
this application and further detail design), procurement of appropriate support and ongoing oversight by the EE’s 
PMU. The systems and process to build this organizational capacity to address this risk has been presented within 
this application and will be need to be provided by the EE as part of project implementation and through the PMU 
either as direct hire or via consultant experts. 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Credit 
Low 
High 
Description 
The risk of VAT rebate not being secured by AE/EE through the GoR’s Ministry of Finance (MINECOFIN) 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Current tax advice sought indicates that the project and structure qualifies for VAT rebate. However, VAT rebate 
arrangements will be reflected in an agreement between the EE and the implementing entity(s) before works proceed 
and for assurance purposes it will therefore be secured by the AE/EE from the outset. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 7 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Risk that solar PV and water heater system specified as part of the FS and application is not appropriate to final 
design of affordable housing units. In addition, avoiding risks with regard to installation of systems (implementation) 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The EE works with the urban and architectural design consultant for the design of the affordable housing units to 
ensure that systems specified and their capacities, or equivalent, are known, appropriate and inform the design. 
Further that the design and construction makes available a standard connection and roof based fitting for the future 
systems install. That there is a procurement of a contractor (s) to supply and fit the PV and SWH systems and that 
this procurement includes all the required gender, training and equality aspects. The opportunity should be marketed 
via a public education program (see training below) to the owners of the affordable homes so that they are able to 
see the benefits both in terms of climate and energy costs from having these systems fitted. Further that the defects 
liability period for the systems is enforced by EE on behalf of the owners, with the owners understanding that upon its

=== PAGE 58 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
 
 
 
 
end the systems will be the operations responsibility of each owner. Training in the use and benefits of the system 
are provided to owners.   
Selected Risk Factor 8 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
High 
Low 
Description 
Availability of the affordable housing at the GCK 16ha pilot for install of solar PV and SWH systems. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The construction timetable for the affordable housing on the pilot site is anticipated to run in parallel with this GCF 
programme. It is possible that if the later phases of the construction of the affordable homes is delayed, these will not 
be completed until post-2027. Some of these homes may be pre-sold prior to completion of construction and 
households will be able to enter into the contract prior to the 2027 end date. Arrangements should be considered to 
hold over any balance of the funds for these homes or as an extension of the timeline should there be delays that 
inhibit solar PV and SWH install. 
Selected Risk Factor 9 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Avoid damage to private property during construction of bulk infrastructure. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Learning from the World Bank financed Rwanda Urban Development Project (RUDP I), a number of unexpected 
damage was caused to homes during road construction and especially when compacting and excavating for the 
roads. Considering the poor build quality of many of the homes at Ngaruyinka upgrade site, in particular, this is a 
reasonable probability risk. With the knowledge that this was an issue at a site with homes of similar socio-economic 
background and build quality at RUDP, this is a risk that the detail design consultant, contractor(s) and the EE 
ultimately can anticipate for in their work and it will be a requirement that a plan is incorporated into their work to 
mitigate this issue as far as is possible. 
Since the 1990s Rwanda has set a social foundation for anti-corruption efforts by establishing policies and 
procedures to prevent corruption/reduce vulnerability to corruption and sanctioning misbehavior through 
prosecutions. Specifically, a reduction in administrative corruption is of note for a large project such as the one 
proposed. The systems in place will reduce the potential for prohibited activities. Additionally, commitment to 
campaigns for individuals to report corruption has created a societal norm for intolerance. As a result, Rwanda 
moved from a state of high corruption 20 years ago to a level on par with middle income countries. The 
International Monetary Fund published an assessment of Anti Money Laundering and Combating Financing of 
Terrorism in 2015 indicating that while the risk of AML/CFT is low, at that time more could be done to bolster the 
systems in place to address the issue. At present, the GoR has robust measures to fight money laundering and 
terrorist financing. This was done first by enacting the law N° 001/FIC/2022 of 16/02/2022 on Regulations relating 
to anti-money laundering, combating the financing of terrorism. The Rwanda government has also put in place a 
special agency for this purpose named Financial Intelligence Center (FIC) with a clear mission to promote 
financial system integrity by conducting effective financial intelligence to counter money laundering, the financing 
of terrorism and related financial crimes in governmental institutions, projects, and parastatal agencies under the 
supervision of the Ministry of Finance and economic planning. MoE and the GCF Project under its supervision 
will also comply with FIC regulations. The MoE also has an Internal Audit function as well as regular audit 
conducted by the Office of the Auditor General to carry out the efficiency and effectiveness of internal controls. 
Regarding higher level security threats, at present, there are no UN Security Council Sanctions against Rwanda. 
The UN Security Council Consolidated Sanctions list indicates approximately 20 individuals with ties to Rwanda, 
a small percentage of whom may live in the country. This list has been circulated to the AEs and will be cross 
checked when hiring for the project and once project sites are selected to ensure these individuals will not be 
involved in any manner with the Project or its activities, either as a counterparty, implementer, or beneficiary. To 
report and remedy any risks that may occur, the MoE will maintain a Project level grievance redress mechanism 
to which anyone can report on the occurrence of prohibited activities. Any complaints believed to contribute to 
prohibited activities will be referred to the appropriate authorities in Rwanda. Assuming all staff will be made

=== PAGE 59 ===
E 
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
 
 
 
 
aware of the prohibited activities, all subcontractors/counterparties will be screened for engagement of activities 
and made aware of their obligations to alert the PMU and/or submit grievances related to such activities occurring 
as part of the Project, the overall impact of the money laundering and financing of terrorism risk on the Project 
will be LOW.

=== PAGE 60 ===
F 
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
 
 
 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
This is a Category B project according to GCF Safeguards because of the limited number of possible adverse 
impacts, the site-specific nature of these possible impacts, and that these potential impacts can be avoided or 
mitigated by adhering to generally recognized performance standards, procedures, guidelines or design criteria.  
Seven of Ten Policy Safeguards were triggered: PS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social 
Risks and Impacts, PS2: Labour and Working conditions; PS3: Resource efficiency and pollution prevention; 
PS4: Community health, safety and security and PS5: Land acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement. PS6: 
Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural resources and PS 8: Cultural 
heritage. 
Potential positive and negative impacts that will affect the existing environmental in the village direct and direct area 
of influence have been analysed in the ESIA report (Chapter 7). The proposed interventions such as rainwater 
harvesting, stormwater management will increase drought resilience, groundwater recharge, ecosystem services and 
heat island. Stormwater management will substantially improve the sanitation challenges affecting water quality water 
quality. Roads network upgrading will have high resilience to network disruption and minimize flood and erosion risks 
in the community.  
Involuntary displacement and resettlement. Assessment of the project sites indicates that implementation through 
the right of way (RoW) will affect certain households and associated economic activity in the area. These impacts are 
currently being studied as part of the ESIA and RAP that are underway. The RAP provides detailed documentation of 
all affected individuals and properties, encompassing residences, land, crops, and other pertinent assets. It includes 
transparent valuation procedures and accurate compensation estimates. Furthermore, the RAP delineates 
compensation methodologies, outlines a livelihood restoration plan, and elucidates the mechanisms for its 
implementation in accordance to national legal framework and international best practices. 
Fulfilment of the action items included in the attached E&S Management Plan (ESMP), adherence to the national 
laws and regulations, internationally recognized standards, the WBG/IFC EHS general Guidelines applicable to the 
project will facilitate the project implementation in a sustainable manner. 
The ESIA (Annex 6) considered the environmental and social management planning process and documentation for 
the Project and gaps between these and GCF’s requirements. Where necessary, corrective measures, intended to 
close these gaps within a reasonable period of time, are summarized in the Environmental and Social Management 
Plan (ESMP). Through implementation of these measures, the Project is expected to be designed and operated in 
accordance with Performance Standards objectives. 
The project has been designed to achieve international standards on general occupational Health safety for workers 
including traffic management plan, SEAH-related risks, environmental protection and, operations savings to adhere to 
programme EDGE of IFC among other standards. A  
GoR’s social framework for resettlement planning is based on a cost-, risk- and an impact-based approach to 
protecting people, the environment, and public resources with a strong emphasis is on risk management and 
achieving sustainable development outcomes. The urban upgrading scheme is designed in a way to ensure minimal 
resettlement to avoid social disruption and minimise costs. In the event that any households and businesses are 
affected the following general principles and timing apply.  
In planning phase:  
• 
Community members to be solicited during pre-construction, construction and post-construction to discuss their 
fears, expectations and suggestions about how subsequent phases of upgrading can be informed;  
• 
Landowners are financially compensated for land, structures and crops as provided for by the expropriation law 
no. 32/2015 of 11/06/2015 relating to Expropriation in the Public Interest article 3 stipulates that only Government 
shall carry out expropriation and only in the public interest and with prior and just compensation and follow the 
guidelines in the High-level RPF;  
• 
Landowners and tenants will be expected to find alternate accommodation preferably in the neighbourhood.  
• 
A notice period of at least 3 months to find alternative accommodation for both property owners and tenants shall 
be respected. This is particularly relevant for projects which have been initiated through an externally proposed 
program and not by the resident community themselves. For projects initiated by resident communities, tenant 
households shall be given a 3-month notice period if any private rental contract cannot be continued.  
• 
Business owners may continue to operate and their employees should expect to continue to work, but the District 
will be in communication with them to ensure that by the time construction begins, they have relocated to another 
site.  
• 
A clear schedule of construction works shall be posted at the sector and cell offices and shared with the 
community on a weekly basis.

=== PAGE 61 ===
F 
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
 
 
 
 
During construction:  
• 
Businesses, the operations of which will be disturbed by construction works, have to relocate to a temporary site.  
• 
Local authority will closely monitor works by the Contractor if applicable and ensure minimum disturbances and 
maximum safety measures for the community.  
• 
A specialized Grievance Redress Committee will be formed for the project's purpose, aiming to support advocacy 
efforts and promptly address any community-raised concerns. 
After construction:  
• 
Continued monitoring of the project impact shall be performed in order to make any adjustment of the National 
program when necessary.  
• 
Continued community consultations. 
Resettlement - Involuntary resettlement will be minimised but may be required to install measures to increase 
resilience such as the Right of Way. Resettlement will be managed in a way that the affected households jointly 
agree on a minimum notice and effect period; if not agreed, 3 month-notice period shall be seen reasonable; and is 
able to install their livelihood in an alternative location at comparable or improved level, in line with IFC PS5. A 
detailed compensation framework, a livelihood restoration plan, Grievance Redress Mechanism and Resettlement 
implementation plan which include a preliminary budget and schedule are provided.  
Indigenous Peoples 
The GCF PS 7 related to Indigenous People will not be triggered by this project. As per the 2003 post genocide 
constitution, revised in 2015, demonstrated that there is no indigenous people in Rwanda and all forms of 
discrimination based upon ethnicity are prohibited while guaranteeing all people equal rights. Provisions are to pay 
particular attention to the needs of vulnerable groups, landless, elderly, women and children.  
 
With that said, taking into consideration the scope of application of the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy, this is to 
confirm that there are no indigenous people and historically marginalized groups found in the project area 
(Ngaruyinka village).   
 
PS7 only becomes relevant in Rwanda for trans-boundary projects. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
In line with the principles and rationale of the GCF Gender Policy, a gender assessment and gender action plan have 
been conducted as part of the proposal for the Ngaruyinka Village Upgrade project. The gender assessment and GAP 
were developed based on primary field research, including focus group discussions and in-depth individual interviews, 
conducted with men and women community members of various ages and backgrounds living in the target project area. 
The findings of the assessment determined numerous ways in which women and girls are uniquely vulnerable due to 
widespread gender discrimination and violence, lack of participation in decision making processes, lack of access to 
economic opportunities, the heavy burden of unpaid care work, and lack of financial control and agency, at household 
and community level. In response, the GAP outlines various holistic measures to meaningfully and sustainably address 
the scope and depth of vulnerabilities revealed in the gender assessment, cutting across individual, household, 
community and village upgrade committee levels. 
The interventions proposed in the GAP are based on best practice work in the gender and development sector to 
ensure sustainable and transformative results for maximum impact and ‘value for money’ from a fund’s investment 
perspective and have been further informed and contextualized by tried-and-tested successful approaches already 
implemented in the Rwandan context. In line with the broader project outputs and the main findings of the gender 
assessment, three key gender dimensions were developed for the GAP to ensure women’s full and equal participation 
in, and benefit from, all aspects of the upgrade outputs, in both the short and long term. 
Dimension 1: Participation and Leadership - This dimension addresses specific gaps and inequalities in the current 
context that inhibit women from effectively participating in decision making processes and leadership roles related to 
the upgrade, as well as village governance more broadly and its impact on future responses to climate change events 
and community ownership of the social and environmental gains made during the upgrade process.  
 
Dimension 2: Safety and Rights 
This dimension addresses the gender barriers women and girls currently face at the home and community level that 
directly and substantially constrain their ability to benefit from many aspects of the upgrade, as well as to have the 
free time and agency to be able to participate in decision making processes related to the upgrade.  
 
Dimension 3: Wrap-around Stakeholder Engagement for Women’s Equal Access and Benefit 
This dimension addresses gender issues across some of the larger surrounding structures, systems and key

=== PAGE 62 ===
F 
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
 
 
 
 
stakeholders that will directly influence women’s access to, participation in, and ability to safely and equally benefit 
from specific upgrade interventions. This dimension targets these areas in a multi-layered manner to ensure women’s 
safe and meaningful inclusion from end to end. 
 
Some key gender-related results to be expected include 50/50 representation from both women and men on the 
upgrade committee, as well as among community management roles, leadership positions and decision-making 
processes, as well as women’s greater influence and involvement across the board. 
The AE will ensure activities are implemented and expected outcomes will be achieved. As the chair of the project’s 
Steering Committee, the MoE will monitor project progress. with special emphasis on the developed Gender Action 
Plan. 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Financial Management 
The GoR has robust public financial management systems in place, and these will be applied to ensure the effective 
management of the project. The project will follow GoR procedures for planning, budget, and accounting, as outlined 
in the following: 
• 
Organic law n° 12/2013/ol of 12/09/2013 on state finances and property (Official Gazette n° Special of 
05/11/2013);  
• 
Ministerial order n°001/16/10/tc of 26/01/2016 relating to financial regulations (Official Gazette n° Special of 
03/02/2016); and  
• 
Supporting operational manuals issued by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (MINECOFIN). 
MINECOFIN applies the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) approach for planning and budgeting, which 
means that funds received by the MoE are “on budget” from the Government’s point of view are will be included in the 
MTEF process. This process includes the presentation of the annual budget to Parliament. GoR uses the 
International Public Sector Accounting Standard (IPSAS) related to modified cash accounting principles issued by the 
International Federation of Accountants.  
The MoE and FONERWA are the primary entities receiving and management project funds. They will use the 
Government’s financial management systems and procedures, including the computerised Integrated Financial 
Management Information System (IFMIS) which embeds key internal into operations.  The budget classification used 
within IFMIS facilitates production of Government accounts which are consistent with the internationally recognised 
UN system of national accounts Classification of the Functions of Government (COFOG).   
Project funds from the GCF will be received into a dedicated MoE bank account held at the National Bank of Rwanda 
in US Dollars.  
The selection of partner institutions / contractors will be managed by FONERWA’s Fund Management Committee.  
The tendering process will include assessment of the capacity of their financial management.  No loans will be made 
under the project.  The existing financial management systems for the project will be strengthened by the 
appointment of a number of key posts to ensure that fiduciary risk is identified and managed, including: 
1. A finance officer based in the PMU to manage financial accounting and reporting arrangements;  
2. An internal auditor (based in MoE); and 
3. A procurement specialist based in the PMU;  
All supporting financial records will be properly filed and retained to facilitate internal control systems, and the project 
will maintain its own asset register of all major items procured for the project.   
Financial reporting to MoE will take place quarterly although key internal controls (such as production of expenditure 
reports and bank reconciliations) will be monthly.  Consolidated financial reports will be presented to the Project 
Steering Committee every three months.   
Financial reports will be provided to the GCF in accordance with Clause 17 of the AMA.   
Internal and External Audits   
An internal auditor is provided for as part of MoE’s oversight role.  This will be a full time post funded through the AE 
fee.  This person will supplement MoE’s and FONERWA’s internal audit capacity, with a mandate to assess the 
internal control systems in any implementing entities in receipt of funds under the project.  Project funds will be 
subject to internal audit, which will be implemented through a compliance based annual Internal Audit (IA) workplan.   
In line with the AMA, the project will be audited annually by independent external auditors in consultation with the 
Office of the Auditor General.   
Procurements 
Procurements will be conducted under the regulatory regime in Rwanda which applies to all Government entities 
including MoE and FONERWA.  Relevant regulation includes:   
• 
Law n° 62/2018 of 25/08/2018 on public procurement as amended to date;

=== PAGE 63 ===
F 
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
 
 
 
 
• 
Ministerial order n° 002/20/10/TC of 19/05/2020 establishing regulations on public procurement, standard 
bidding documents and standard contracts and as amended to date.   
 Embedded within these regulations are fundamental principles such as fairness, transparency, accountability, and 
the promotion of a competitive economy. By adhering to these regulations, the procurement process mitigates the 
risk of market distortions by fostering a level playing field for all participants. Transparent procedures, including open 
bidding processes and clear evaluation criteria, ensure that contracts are awarded based on merit and value 
proposition rather than favoritism or undue influence. Furthermore, the promotion of competition within the 
procurement ecosystem drives efficiency and innovation, as vendors are incentivized to deliver high-quality goods 
and services at competitive prices. This not only benefits the project by maximizing value for money but also 
contributes to the broader economic development agenda by stimulating market dynamism and entrepreneurship. For 
further insights into the procurement plan and specific strategies employed to ensure adherence to regulatory 
principles, stakeholders are encouraged to refer to Annex 10, 
• 
 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
 
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
• 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
• 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 64 ===
H 
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
 
1 Based on population of Kigali, 2012 Census.  
2 Calculated as percentage of Rwanda’s population (12,955,736): http://www.statistics.gov.rw/publication/size-resident-population/ 
Accessed 28 October 2021. 
 
 
2 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects.  
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☒  Others – Resettlement Action Plan, Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment  
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☒ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☐ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☐ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☒ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☐ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting-projects)2 
☒ 
Annex 23 
Land Development Plan (Additional Annex per GoR requirements)

=== PAGE 65 ===
H 
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
 
 
 
 
 
3 In terms of rainfall, there was a small reported decline in the number of rainy days between 1961 and 2016 (with a reduction of between 
54 and 250 mm in mean rainfall across the country). However, rainfall is expected to be more intense in the rainy seasons while dry 
seasons will be longer and dryer. Third National Communication: Report to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
Republic of Rwanda, Kigali. 
4 Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey 5 (EICV 5) 
5 Gasabo District (2013). District development plan, Gasabo (2013-18) 
6 Overview of linkages between gender and climate change; UNDP, 2017. 
7 IPCC (2022) Final Draft IPCC WGII Sixth Assessment Report Chapter 9 
8 Ranked no. 8 according to the Climate Risk Index 2020: https://germanwatch.org/sites/default/files/20-2-
01e%20Global%20Climate%20Risk%20Index%202020_14.pdf 
9 In terms of rainfall, there was a small reported decline in the number of rainy days between 1961 and 2016 (with a reduction of between 
54 and 250 mm in mean rainfall across the country). However, rainfall is expected to be more intense in the rainy seasons while dry 
seasons will be longer and dryer. Third National Communication: Report to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
Republic of Rwanda, Kigali. 
10 Based on an analysis of geocoded population data where settlements are classified as urban if they contain a minimum of 5,000 persons 
living at a minimum density of 1,000 persons per square kilometre (WB 2019). EICV5 figures (based on census data) which use a different 
classification of urban area (based on the presence of infrastructure which risks overlooking densely populated areas on the edge of 
planned areas), report that 18.4% of the population currently lives in urban areas. 
11 Based on an analysis of geocoded population data where settlements are classified as urban if they contain a minimum of 5,000 persons 
living at a minimum density of 1,000 persons per square kilometre (WB 2019). EICV5 figures (based on census data) which use a different 
classification of urban area (based on the presence of infrastructure which risks overlooking densely populated areas on the edge of 
planned areas), report that 18.4% of the population currently lives in urban areas. 
12 In 2014, 57% of Rwanda’s population had migrated to Kigali at some point in their lives in REMA (2019).“Assessment of climate change 
vulnerability in Rwanda - 2018”, Rwanda Environment Management Authority, Kigali, 2019. 
13 REMA (2019).“Assessment of climate change vulnerability in Rwanda - 2018”, Rwanda Environment Management Authority, Kigali, 2019 
14 MININFRA (2017). Water and Sanitation Sector Strategic Plan 2018 - 2024. Kigali: MININFRA. 
15 SEI (2009): Economics of Climate Change in Rwanda 
16 The current water availability per capita has been reduced to 504 m3/annum (CM/annum), which is close to the definition of absolute 
water scarcity. Almost all of the country’s water resources are lost through evaporation or run-off to downstream countries. RWFA’s 
Baseline Study: Water Users and Water Uses in Level 2 Catchments in Rwanda, 2017 and RWFA (2015) Rwanda’s National Integrated 
Water Resources Master Plan 
17 EICV (2017). The Fifth Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey, EICV5 (2016/17). 
18 REMA (2019) Climate Change Vulnerability, page 17 and MIDIMAR (2015) The National Risk Atlas of Rwanda, page 103 
19 Gasabo District (2013). District development plan, Gasabo (2013-18) 
20 NISR (2012). District profile: Gasabo. 
21 NISR (2012). District profile: Gasabo. 
22 Readiness measures a country’s ability to leverage investments and convert them to adaptation actions by considering economic, 
governance and social readiness. 
23 Vulnerability measures the country’s exposure, sensitivity, and ability to cope with the negative effects of climate change by considering 
vulnerability in six life-supporting sectors: food, water, ecosystem service, health, human habitat and infrastructure. 
24 Health facilities include health posts, health centres, VCT centres, community-owned health facilities, private clinics, private dispensaries, 
prison dispensaries, police/military hospitals, district hospitals and national referral hospitals. 
25 MIDIMAR (2015). National risk atlas of Rwanda.  
26 REMA (2019).“Assessment of climate change vulnerability in Rwanda - 2018”, Rwanda Environment Management Authority, Kigali, 2019 
27 The current water availability per capita has been reduced to 504 m3/annum (CM/annum), which is close to the definition of absolute 
water scarcity. Almost all of the country’s water resources are lost through evaporation or run-off to downstream countries. RWFA’s 
Baseline Study: Water Users and Water Uses in Level 2 Catchments in Rwanda, 2017 and RWFA (2015) Rwanda’s National Integrated 
Water Resources Master Plan 
28 EICV (2017). The Fifth Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey, EICV5 (2016/17). 
29 Droughts reduce the generating capacity of hydroelectric dams, while ﬂoods increase soil erosion and siltation, which can damage dams. 
The drought in 2004 reduced hydropower capacity so much that the government was forced to rent diesel power plants to meet domestic 
demand in Republic of Rwanda (2011): Green Growth and Climate Resilience. http://www.uncsd2012.org/content/documents/364Rwanda- 
Green-Growth-Strategy-FINAL.pdf. 
30 SEI (2009): Economics of Climate Change in Rwanda 
31 World Bank (2019). https://data.worldbank.org/country/RW  
32 https://www.nationsonline.org/oneworld/human_development_low.htm 
33 World Bank (2021) Protect and Promote Human Capital in a post-COVID-19 World. 16th edition of the World Bank Rwanda Economic 
Update. January 2021 
34 Caldwell, D., Dyszynski, J., Roland R (2015) Climate compatible development in the ‘Land of a Thousand Hills’: Lessons from Rwanda. 
By Debbie Caldwell, CIDT Associate; Jillian Dyszynski, CIDT Associate; Rachel Roland, CIDT  
35 EICV (2017). The Fifth Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey, EICV5 (2016/17). 
36 World Bank. 2019. “Future Drivers of Growth in Rwanda: Innovation, Integration, Agglomeration, and Competition.” Conference Edition. 
World Bank, Washington, DC. License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO 
37 World Bank. 2019. “Future Drivers of Growth in Rwanda: Innovation, Integration, Agglomeration, and Competition.” Conference Edition. 
World Bank, Washington, DC. License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO 
38 World Bank. 2019. “Future Drivers of Growth in Rwanda: Innovation, Integration, Agglomeration, and Competition.” Conference Edition. 
World Bank, Washington, DC. License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO 
39 
 Ibid 
40 Vulnerability measures the country’s exposure, sensitivity, and ability to cope with the negative effects of climate change by considering 
vulnerability in six life-supporting sectors: food, water, ecosystem service, health, human habitat and infrastructure.

=== PAGE 66 ===
H 
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
 
 
 
 
 
41 Readiness measures a country’s ability to leverage investments and convert them to adaptation actions by considering economic, 
governance and social readiness. 
42 NEPAD (2012): African Gender, Climate Change and Agriculture Support Program (GCCASP) – Rwanda Consultation Report. 
http://www.nepad.org/system/files/Rwanda%20National%20Consultation%20Report.pdf 
43 EICV5 (2018). The Fifth Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey, EICV5 (2016/17). 
44 MININFRA (2017). Water and Sanitation Sector Strategic Plan 2018 - 2024. Kigali: MININFRA. 
45 In 2014, 57% of Rwanda’s population had migrated to Kigali at some point in their lives in REMA (2019).“Assessment of climate change 
vulnerability in Rwanda - 2018”, Rwanda Environment Management Authority, Kigali, 2019. 
46 EICV5 (2018). The Fifth Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey, EICV5 (2016/17). 
47 REMA (2019).“Assessment of climate change vulnerability in Rwanda - 2018”, Rwanda Environment Management Authority, Kigali, 2019 
48 SEI (2009): Economics of Climate Change in Rwanda 
49 Health facilities include health posts, health centres, VCT centres, community-owned health facilities, private clinics, private dispensaries, 
prison dispensaries, police/military hospitals, district hospitals and national referral hospitals. 
50 MIDIMAR (2015). National risk atlas of Rwanda.  
51 The current water availability per capita has been reduced to 504 m3/annum (CM/annum), which is close to the definition of absolute 
water scarcity. Almost all of the country’s water resources are lost through evaporation or run-off to downstream countries. RWFA’s 
Baseline Study: Water Users and Water Uses in Level 2 Catchments in Rwanda, 2017 and RWFA (2015) Rwanda’s National Integrated 
Water Resources Master Plan 
52 EICV (2017). The Fifth Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey, EICV5 (2016/17). 
53 Droughts reduce the generating capacity of hydroelectric dams, while ﬂoods increase soil erosion and siltation, which can damage dams. 
The drought in 2004 reduced hydropower capacity so much that the government was forced to rent diesel power plants to meet domestic 
demand in Republic of Rwanda (2011): Green Growth and Climate Resilience. http://www.uncsd2012.org/content/documents/364Rwanda- 
Green-Growth-Strategy-FINAL.pdf. 
54 Gasabo District (2013). District development plan, Gasabo (2013-18)

=== PAGE 67 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 68 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Green City Kigali: a new model for urban development in 
Rwanda 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
Ministry of Environment of Rwanda (MOE Rwanda)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
Location – specific location(s) 
of project or target country or 
location(s) of programme 
Kigali City, Republic of Rwanda 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website 
Friday, September 20, 2024 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English  
Explanation on language 
English is an official language of Rwanda. As per country 
officials, disclosure in English only is sufficient. 
Link to disclosure** 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFile
&t=f&f=107519&token=c317704e7b32218059f41cc4acd027
ec173329e3 
 
Other link(s) 
MOE Rwanda ESS Disclosure Website: 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/reports  
(All subsequent documents will be permanently and publicly 
accessible via the link provided.) 
 
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the ESS package of “Green City Kigali: 
A New Model for Urban Development in Rwanda” Project.  
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website 
Monday, September 9, 2024 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English  
Explanation on language 
English is an official language of Rwanda. As per country 
officials, disclosure in English only is sufficient. The ESMP 
table is included in the ESIA. 
Link to disclosure** 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFile
&t=f&f=107519&token=c317704e7b32218059f41cc4acd027
ec173329e3 
 
Other link(s) 
MOE Rwanda ESS Disclosure Website: 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/reports  
(All subsequent documents will be permanently and publicly 
accessible via the link provided.) 
 
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment of the project”.

=== PAGE 69 ===
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) (if applicable) 
Description of report/disclosure 
on accredited entity’s website 
RAP, SESA, RPF, ESMF, SEP, Gender Assessment Report, GAP / 
Friday, September 20, 2024 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English 
Explanation on language 
English is an official language of Rwanda. As per country 
officials, disclosure in English only is sufficient. 
Link to disclosure** 
Individual Document links1 
 
Annex 6b Resettlement Action Plan (RAP): 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFile
&t=f&f=107518&token=864119d711e1eaa209a64c60f0e1ec
421d12ba78  
 
Annex 6c Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
(SESA): 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFile
&t=f&f=107401&token=a419abe8d56d9ac0f85172bbd96fda
0ce4633546  
 
Annex 6d Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF): 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFile
&t=f&f=107400&token=002f3b4a521279233aa83d0a344fce
bcf46e1523  
 
Annex 6g Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF)*:  
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFile
&t=f&f=107515&token=e181e01f7592f812ffc4098608c6d5a
7cb5fd027  
 
Annex 7 Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP): 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFile
&t=f&f=107399&token=094f3f31a57c3f9ff1368e6ea0794b0f
68af1a56  
 
Annex 8a Gender Assessment Report: 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFile
 
1 Please note due to the architecture of the MOE Rwanda website, individual document hyperlinks may 
become inaccessible after general website updates. However, all documents remain accessible through 
the index page: https://www.environment.gov.rw/reports

=== PAGE 70 ===
&t=f&f=107513&token=cde153108659a238079bf0d8f91e4a
84c132b1c3  
 
Annex 8b Gender Action Plan (GAP): 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/index.php?eID=dumpFile
&t=f&f=107517&token=e89abe9386e1557b9f43fc074df491
8e33403fcd 
Other link(s) 
MOE Rwanda ESS Disclosure Website: 
https://www.environment.gov.rw/reports  
(All subsequent documents will be permanently and publicly 
accessible via the link provided.) 
Remarks 
Other disclosed ESS documents related to the project include 
the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF), Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF), the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), 
Gender Assessment Report, the Gender Action Plan (GAP) and 
The Strategic Environment and Social Assessment (SESA).  
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Monday, September 9, 2024 
Place 
Rwanda Green Fund 
Career Centre Building, 
5Th Floor, KG 541 St, 
Kigali, Rwanda 
info@greenfund.rw  
 
Ministry of Environment 
Pension Plaza, 
KN 3 Rd, Kigali 
info@environment.gov.rw 
 
The hard copies of the ESS documents have also been made 
available to the local administration offices (Kigali City and 
Gasabao District). 
 
Kigali City 
KN 3 Ave, 8, Kigali  
P.O. Box 3527 Kigali 
info@kigalicity.gov.rw 
 
Gasabo district (including in the Ngaruyinka village) 
KG 7 Avenue, Kigali 
P.O. Box 237, Kigali 
info@gasabo.gov.rw 
 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s Board 
meeting 
 N/A 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  
Monday, October 21, 2024 
 
* An updated Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be disclosed on 
the MOE website under the link provided and in the physical locations of the project sites, after

=== PAGE 71 ===
the first disbursement, which is scheduled on 24 November 2024 and prior to the second 
disbursement, which is scheduled on 25 December 2024. 
 
** Subsequent to the disclosure of the form to the Board and active observers on 20 September 
2024, the following update has been made: The links to the disclosure have been revised due to 
a general website update related to the architecture of the MOE Rwanda website. 
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 72 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 72 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP245 
Proposal name: 
Green City Kigali: A new model for urban development in 
Rwanda 
Accredited entity: 
Ministry of Environment 
Country: 
Republic of Rwanda 
Project size:  
Small 
I. 
Overall assessment of the Secretariat 
1. 
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks: 
Strengths 
Points of caution 
The project consistently scores medium to high 
across all impact criteria (confirmed by iTAP) 
and delivers climate impact to the urban poor 
in Rwanda. 
Give additional emphasis to the 
development of regulation, standards and 
urban designs as a key methodology for 
replication and scale-up of the initiative. 
The project counts on the strong involvement 
of local communities in the planning and 
development process. The strong community 
structures will ensure that integrated 
infrastructure investments will be implemented, 
well-managed and maintained, effectively 
addressing local climate resilience needs. 
Systematically explore future financing 
models for scaling up the project results, 
particularly public-private collaborations, 
alongside project execution; and 
The project activities include improving the 
planning and policy frameworks for enabling 
scalability and replicability of the 
interventions. By creating a blueprint for green 
city development, the project aims to reduce 
future design costs and promote the adoption of 
similar initiatives in other areas of Kigali and 
nationwide.  
 
Capacity-building and knowledge-sharing: A 
Technical and Vocational Education Training 
Centre is to be established to provide training in 
climate-resilient construction methods. This will 
facilitate long-term knowledge-sharing and 
capacity-building among the community, 
construction sector workers and government 
officials. 
 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal in accordance with the 
term sheet agreed between the Secretariat and the accredited entity (AE) and, if considered 
appropriate, subject to the conditions set out in annex II of document GCF/B.40/02. 
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment

=== PAGE 73 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 73 
 
 
 
 
2.1 
Project background  
3. 
Rwanda is among the most climate-vulnerable countries, already experiencing 
significant impacts from climate change. These impacts include increased incidence of drought, 
flooding and landslides. Climate variability has already led to heavy rainfall events causing 
infrastructure damage, loss of livelihoods and lives. The challenges faced by Rwandan 
communities, particularly those in informal settlements, are compounded by absent or 
inadequate climate risk-reducing infrastructure and limited capacity to manage climate risks. 
Upgrading these settlements in a climate-resilient and low-carbon manner is essential for 
securing the well-being of the population and supporting sustainable development. 
4. 
The proposed project aims to address these climate challenges through a 
comprehensive approach that includes upgrading informal settlements with climate-resilient 
networked infrastructure and improving access to low-carbon decentralized basic services and 
building local capacity. By integrating these interventions, the project seeks to create a scalable 
model for climate-resilient urban development in Rwanda and the region. The project presents 
strong adaptation impacts with significant mitigation co-benefits for over 30.000 men and 
women among the most vulnerable populations. 
5. 
The project has strong climate benefits, as well as social, health, economic and 
environmental co-benefits. The climate benefits include a reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2) 
emissions by 125,032 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) over the lifetime of the 
investments. The targeted interventions are expected to benefit 30,252 direct and 1,132,686 
indirect beneficiaries. The beneficiaries will gain from comprehensive resilience building 
interventions and enhanced capacity to manage climate risks.  
6. 
 The total project financing is USD 35,1 million. GCF is requested to provide a grant of 
USD 27,9 million and grant co-financing of USD 7,1 has been secured from the Government of 
Rwanda. The project is categorized under environmental and social safeguards category B and 
is set to be implemented over 5 years, with a total lifespan of 40 years. 
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis 
Outcome 1: Strengthened Adaptive Capacity, Heat Stress Mitigation, and Reduced Exposure to 
Climate Risks (total cost: USD 28.6 million; GCF cost: USD 24.3 million) 
7. 
Outcome 1 focuses on strengthening the adaptative capacity of the community by 
comprehensively upgrading the entire project area (18ha) with climate-risk-reducing 
infrastructure, and improving community access to decentralized resilient and low-carbon basic 
services and community to enhance resilience to climate risks such as flooding, landslides, and 
heat stress. Key interventions include developing green rights of way to improve transport and 
mobility, implementing stormwater management systems using green, permeable networks and 
rainwater harvesting, and expanding the central water supply. 
8. 
Moreover, the project addresses sanitation by installing biogas recovery toilets and 
providing sanitation training, along with promoting low-emission technologies, such as solar 
photovoltaic (PV), and improved cookstoves to reduce carbon emissions. Solid waste 
management will be improved through community composting and recycling centres, and 
community facilities will be enhanced by constructing a Technical and Vocational Education and 
Training (TVET) centre to serve as a hub for learning and innovation. 
9. 
The project ensures active community involvement through an inclusive sustainability 
committee that will oversee infrastructure maintenance and promote waste separation and 
recycling. The TVET centre will provide vocational training for climate-responsive upgrades, 
fostering a skilled workforce.

=== PAGE 74 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 74 
 
 
 
 
10. 
Output 1’s strengths lie in its holistic approach to infrastructure upgrades, active 
community involvement and comprehensive capacity-building. It integrates resilient transport 
and water systems, sustainable energy solutions and effective waste management, setting a 
benchmark for future sustainable developments in Rwanda. 
Outcome 2: Strengthened Institutional and Regulatory Systems for Climate-Responsive Planning 
and Development; Enhancing the capacity of governmental and institutional bodies to plan, 
regulate, and implement climate-responsive and low-emission development strategies. (total cost: 
USD 2.9 million; GCF cost: USD 2.4 million) 
11. 
Outcome 2 focuses on building institutional capacity and creating an enabling 
environment for climate-resilient, low-emission investments. This component aims to prepare 
the enabling environment to scale up and replicate the climate-responsive approaches piloted in 
Outcome 1. This includes enhancing the capacity of Rwandan government agencies through key 
activities such as conducting capacity needs assessments and developing targeted training 
programmes for the City of Kigali, the Ministry of Infrastructure, the Rwanda Housing Authority, 
and other similar entities.  
12. 
Further , Outcome 2 seeks to establish an enabling environment for sustainable 
investments by integrating green city standards into regulatory and planning frameworks. This 
involves regulatory reforms and developing mainstreaming solutions to align with national 
strategies like the Green Growth and Climate Resilience Strategy. A robust knowledge 
management system will also be developed to store, manage and disseminate information on 
climate-responsive urban development. 
13. 
These efforts will ensure that sustainable urban development practices are deeply 
embedded within government institutions, promoting consistent application and enabling 
future investments in green city projects. By focusing on institutional training, regulatory 
integration and knowledge-sharing, Outcome 2 lays a solid foundation for the widespread 
adoption of climate-resilient urban practices across Rwanda. 
Project management (total cost: USD 1.5 million; GCF cost: USD 1.27 million) 
14. 
The Ministry of Environment (MOE) will oversee the overall management, reporting and 
supervision of the project. FONERWA, the Rwanda Green Fund, will execute the project, 
leveraging its extensive experience in managing climate finance since 2012. A Steering 
Committee chaired by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Environment and including 
senior representatives from multiple sectors will coordinate stakeholder involvement, approve 
work plans and budgets, and ensure necessary resources and support. The programme 
management unit (PMU), established within FONERWA, will handle day-to-day operations, 
collaborate with relevant government entities, and ensure high-quality delivery through 
consultant support.  
15. 
A Technical Advisory Committee, comprising representatives from affiliated entities like 
the Water and Sanitation Corporation, Rwanda Energy Group, and the Rwanda Housing 
Authority, will provide specialized guidance to the PMU and Steering Committee. Sector 
working groups will facilitate continuous improvement through dialogue with development 
partners, while bimonthly planning coordination meetings will ensure alignment with existing 
plans and public engagement. Additionally, a Community Upgrading Committee in Ngaruyinka 
will engage residents, facilitate information sharing and oversee local project activities.  
16. 
The GCF portion of this project management cost is less than 5 per cent of the total 
requested GCF funding and is compliant with the GCF Policy on Fees 
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria

=== PAGE 75 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 75 
 
 
 
 
3.1 
Impact potential                                                                               Scale: N/A 
17. 
The project demonstrates significant potential to contribute to GCF objectives in 
adaptation, with also significant mitigation co-benefits. The project comprehensively 
enhances climate resilience of 30.252 men and women in vulnerable and poor informal 
settlements. Further, the project will contribute to sustainable development in Rwanda, 
improve livelihoods of the urban poor, improve living conditions and enhance the health and 
well-being of the residents, potentially positively impacting further 1,132,686 indirect 
beneficiaries. The project will also achieve notable reductions in greenhouse gas emissions 
through the provision of resilient and low-carbon basic services in the energy sector 
(installation of solar streetlights, solar PV and water heaters), promoting low-emission 
transport, and using green construction materials, collectively resulting in a reduction of 
125,032 t CO2 eq over the lifetime of the investments.  
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
                                                   Scale: N/A 
18. 
The project is a paradigm shift in upgrading climate-vulnerable informal settlements. 
Supporting planning and regulatory environments will change the paradigm of public sector 
investments into poor urban neighbourhoods and develop an enabling environment for 
increased green investment, aiding broader implementation of the project’s demonstrated 
work. The proposed activities have been designed to ensure an impact beyond a one-off project 
investment, focusing on scaling up and replication, knowledge-sharing, enabling environment 
creation, regulatory framework contributions and climate-resilient development pathways. The 
establishment of a TVET Centre will facilitate long-term knowledge-sharing on climate-resilient 
construction methods, while capacity-building for construction workers will enhance scaling up 
and replication. Awareness-raising, citizen engagement, and a knowledge management system 
will promote knowledge-sharing across Kigali and Rwanda, encouraging citizens to adopt 
measures implemented in the project. Blueprinting the GCK and planning code for the 
Government of Rwanda will support project replication, with a design template and project 
manual promoting scalable sustainable housing projects.  
3.3 
Sustainable development potential                                           Scale: N/A 
19. 
The project aims to achieve extensive co-benefits across several Sustainable 
Development Goals (e.g. 6, 7, 8, 9, 11 and 13). It will result in environmental benefits such as 
enhancing groundwater recharge, improving water quality, promoting walking and cycling to 
reduce emissions, and strengthening the local economy and industry. Additionally, improved 
solid waste management, community composting, and recycling efforts will conserve resources 
and reduce pollution. The project will improve water access and quality, enhancing health 
outcomes, especially for women and children. Street lighting, better drainage systems and clean 
cooking technologies will further enhance community health and safety. Economic benefits 
include accelerating economic growth by shifting workers from agriculture to more productive 
sectors, through public infrastructure investments. The project will also provide job training, 
particularly for women, and create job opportunities through composting and climate-resilient 
construction. Gender-sensitive impacts include reducing domestic burdens on women, creating 
safe public spaces, and promoting women's participation and leadership in community 
activities. Overall, the project's co-benefits include environmental preservation, social well-
being, economic growth, and gender equity. 
3.4 
Needs of the recipient                                                                  Scale: N/A

=== PAGE 76 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 76 
 
 
 
 
20. 
The project effectively addresses the vulnerability and financing needs of Rwanda by 
targeting its high susceptibility to climate impacts such as increased rainfall variability, 
prolonged dry spells, landslides and rising temperatures. The proposed interventions, including 
constructing climate-resilient infrastructure, improving water and sanitation systems, 
enhancing stormwater management and promoting low-emission transport solutions, are 
designed to help Rwanda transition to a low-emission, climate-resilient development pathway 
while addressing the immediate needs of its vulnerable populations. Rwanda's limited domestic 
financial resources and high poverty rates (53%) exacerbate this vulnerability. The country's 
economic constraints and high poverty levels complicate attracting private investment for 
climate-compatible development. Thus, international climate finance, such as the GCF grant, is 
vital for Rwanda to meet its climate resilience and adaptation needs without increasing its debt 
burden.  
3.5 
Country ownership 
                                                                Scale: N/A 
21. 
The project aligns with the nationally determined contribution of Rwanda and 
contributes to its targets, such as reducing CO2 emissions and enhancing community resilience. 
The project addresses issues in the National Informal Urban Settlement Upgrading Strategy and 
the City of Kigali Master Plan. It integrates with the country’s broader development agenda and 
builds institutional capacity for sustainable urban development. Leveraging the enabling policy 
and institutional frameworks of Rwanda, the project also aligns with existing strategies like the 
National Strategy for Transformation and the National Adaptation Plan. The involvement of key 
government agencies, including the Ministry of Environment (AE), and the executing entity (EE) 
FONERWA, ensures strong country ownership and alignment with Rwanda's climate and 
development agenda. The project was developed through extensive stakeholder consultations, 
ensuring it reflects the needs and priorities of the most vulnerable.  
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness                  
                            Scale: N/A 
22. 
The total cost for this project is USD 35.1 million, with a GCF contribution of USD 27.9 
million in grant, with additional funding from the Rwanda Ministry of Finance amounting to 
USD 7.1 million, resulting in a leverage ratio of approximately 1:0.26.  
23. 
The economic analysis for this project is conducted at the household level, evaluating 
the broader impacts of the project, including cost-effectiveness, household benefits, carbon 
savings and the value of forestry savings. The CO2 reduction cost for GCF is approximately USD 
86/t CO2 which is on the higher end of the GCF portfolio, however this is compensated by the 
adaptation benefits including improved infrastructure, enhanced living conditions and 
significant environmental impacts, which are not monetized in its economic analysis.  
24. 
Full grant is requested from GCF as the populations targeted by this project are among 
the most economically vulnerable in Kigali (2/3 living in extreme poverty). They lack the 
financial capacity to afford the upfront costs of critical infrastructure. Reliable access to basic 
services is absent, therefore providing electricity and clean water is crucial for improving 
resilience - in particular in crisis situations - living conditions, health and economic 
opportunities in an area where the climate change impact has been felt. These services are 
fundamental for the targeted populations to achieve a basic standard of living and participate in 
the local economy. By providing the necessary asset through grant funding, the aim is to ensure 
that they receive necessary services without additional financial burden. 
 
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies

=== PAGE 77 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 77 
 
 
 
 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
25. 
The review of the Green City Kigali Project has confirmed the AE’s suggested 
categorization of the Project into Category B in terms of GCF’s environmental and social 
safeguards policy and system. The project will have multiple positive impacts for improved 
social conditions and elements of environmental protection (green-right-of-way, nature-based 
adaptation solutions). The ESS Annexes and other documents are well prepared, with sound 
methodology and comprehensively cover environmental and social risks and impacts. However, 
the preparation of the ESIA, RAP and SEP seems to have taken place upon the project’s 
submission to GCF in 2021. Due to the timeframe of the appraisal process, these documents are 
now 2-3 years old. The Secretariat and the Accredited Entity together have agreed to contract 
an update and revision of the core ESS documents immediately after project start and the 
second disbursement to be conditional upon the delivery of such updated documents.  
26. 
Project overview. The Project will upgrade an existing informal settlement in 
Ngaruyinka Village that extends over 18ha on Kinyinya hill in Gasabo district in Kigali city, 
Rwanda with low emission infrastructure that is resilient to climate change. The proposed 
project will also support the installation of a solar PV mini-grid to pilot renewable energy 
supply to a 16ha mixed-used greenfield project near the Ngaruyinka Village. The GCF 
investments in both sites are part of a much larger development scheme (a 600ha Green City 
Kigali” project) designated by the Government of Rwanda to demonstrate a model of climate 
responsive upgrading of informal settlement and green urbanisation, which can be scaled up 
and replicated across Rwanda and the region. The project will also include activities to build 
awareness and develop institutional capacity for providing affordable housing and resilient 
infrastructure for vulnerable urban communities. The project is expected to generate positive 
environmental and social co-benefits, such as increasing groundwater recharge through 
stormwater management and rainwater harvesting systems, improved access to water and 
electricity, and increased resilience of vulnerable households, including women and girls. The 
review of the Green City Kigali Project has confirmed the AE’s suggested categorization of the 
Project into Category B in terms of GCF’s environmental and social safeguards policy and 
system. The project will have multiple positive impacts for improved social conditions and 
elements of environmental protection (green-right-of-way, nature-based adaptation solutions). 
The ESS Annexes and other documents are well prepared, with sound methodology and 
comprehensively cover environmental and social risks and impacts. However, the preparation 
of the ESIA, RAP and SEP seems to have taken place upon the project’s submission to GCF in 
2021. Due to the timeframe of the appraisal process, these documents are now 2-3 years old. 
The Secretariat and the Accredited Entity together have agreed to contract an update and 
revision of the core ESS documents immediately after project start and the second 
disbursement to be conditional upon the delivery of such updated documents. 
27. 
Environmental and social risk category. The project is categorized by the AE as 
moderate risk (Category B) given that the likely environmental and social impacts of the project 
will be restricted to the project’s influence area and are readily addressed through the 
implementation of mitigation measures. The Secretariat confirms the assigned risk category, 
which is within the E&S risk accreditation scope of the AE. As the project proposed for the GCF 
funding is part of a broader urban development scheme under which there are simultaneous 
investments and various funding partners, the AE has prepared an environmental and social 
safeguard package that contains documentation scoped at the broad scheme level which 
involves higher E&S risk activities. In addition to an environmental and social management 
framework (ESMF) prepared at the master planning stage for the entire 600ha GCK project, the 
AE submitted documentation scoped specific to the GCF project. That is an environmental and 
social impact assessment (ESIA) with associated environmental and social management plan 
(ESMP), resettlement action plan (RAP) and stakeholder engagement plan (SEP). The ESIA

=== PAGE 78 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 78 
 
 
 
 
identifies the main environmental and social risks and impacts of the GCF project. The ESIA also 
includes an exclusion list to ensure that no Category A activities are funded under the project. 
28. 
ESS1 (assessment and management of environmental and social risks and 
impacts). The ESIA identifies that the potential negative impacts and risks are mostly confined 
to the local area, including: land acquisition and land use; physical and economic displacement; 
pollution of soil and water sources; air quality; noise and vibration; impact on surface and 
groundwater supplies; hazardous waste and pesticide risks; risks to cultural heritage; 
community health, safety and security risks; potential adverse socio-economic impacts; and 
labour and occupational health and safety (OHS) risks. Regarding the conflict sensitivity 
analysis, the ESIA envisions land tenure conflicts in the project area and develops conflict 
resolution strategies and resettlement action plan to ensure that the project will engage with 
community leaders and residents to facilitate dialogue and mediation, work with local 
authorities to clarify land ownership and usage rights, implement compensation and 
resettlement action plans where necessary, and ensure that all conflict resolution processes are 
transparent, inclusive, and fair. Secretariat acknowledges that the safeguards documentation is 
prepared in high quality, however, the scope of the interventions proposed for GCF financing 
goes beyond the upgrading of informal resettlements in the Ngaruyinka Village. Funding from 
GCF is also proposed for supporting renewable energy deployment in the GCK pilot site, which 
is a new greenfield commercial and residential project located outside the Ngaruyinka Village. 
Therefore, further work on the ESIA (Annex 6a) is required to ensure the scope of the 
environmental and social due diligence matches with the activities proposed for GCF financing 
in both sites (18ha upgrading and 16ha greenfield). It is also noted that ESIA, RAP and SEP were 
developed in 2021. While the specific risks and impacts of proposed activities will not have 
changed, some baseline information and contextual circumstances may have changed in the 
past three years (such as valuation of land/assets, and community attitudes etc.). Hence, the AE 
is recommended to conduct further consultation to confirm whether there is any major change 
in the project’s operating environment.  
29. 
ESS2 (labour and working conditions). The ESIA identifies a series of risks faced by 
project workers, including injuries during construction of infrastructure and settlement 
upgrading, child labour or forced labour given the low skills required and source of income 
needed, and discrimination and gender-based violence on sites as the project is targeting 
women, youth and historically marginalized groups as beneficiaries. The AE commits to respect 
and protect the fundamental rights of workers by following the International Labor 
Organization’s (ILO) Declaration on the Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work. It will 
provide the project workers understandable documentation of employment terms and 
conditions, including their rights under national law on hours of work, wages, overtime, 
compensation and benefits. The project will exclude forced or child labour and will take OHS 
measures to establish and maintain a safe working environment including supply chain 
workers. As specified in the ESMP, the project will prepare a labour management procedure 
(LMP) and OHS plan at each site to identify physical hazards associated with the work involved 
such as operating at height, sharp materials, the use of heavy equipment and possible exposure 
to dust, noise and hazardous substance that may be present in the demolition waste, 
construction materials and construction machinery. 
30. 
ESS3 (resource efficiency and pollution control). The ESIA identifies that the project 
may lead to dust and noise during the construction; wastes such as soil, wood chips, metal 
scraps and paper wrappings, among other, generated throughout construction and during the 
project operation; clearance of 34,303sqm vegetation covered by crops and cut of 2,164 trees; 
pollution from leakage of hazards substances used by construction machineries; and 
contamination and odour nuisance from biogas system connected with sanitation facilities. To 
minimize these risks, the project will put into place a waste management plan to collect and 
segregate wastes and ensure safe storage; ensure vegetative cover on unpaved surfaces to main 
the soil structure in the project area; maintain low dust levels during construction; install

=== PAGE 79 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 79 
 
 
 
 
scrubbers on the exhausts of emitting machinery; use noise absorbent padding in flexed plant 
installations, retain and continue planting greenbelts; manage any liquid and solid wastes to 
ensure that they do not contaminate the surface water in the stream and the underground 
waters; implement a revegetation plan to restore cleared areas by the contractor. As possible 
accidents or emergencies may occur on any of the project activities, the AE will provide for 
emergency management plans that will apply to all worksites and be available to project 
workers, subcontractors and others involved in the project in case of emergencies. The 
emergency management plan will also cover the implementation of occupational health and 
safety requirements.  
31. 
ESS4 (community health, safety and security). The project aims to decrease risks of 
natural disaster emergencies, such as flooding and landslides, for communities. The ESIA 
identifies potential negative impacts to communities, including exposure to diseases, effects on 
ecosystem services and hazardous materials, and possible accident or emergencies on any of the 
project activities. An ESMP is devised to address these challenges by developing and 
implementing an emergency management plan and include security requirements in the 
community health, safety and security plan, that will be developed by the contract and approved 
by the AE. The project will also avoid vehicle movements at night, use of silencers for machinery 
work, verify drivers’ behaviour with regards to driving speed and safety, and plan vehicle routes 
to avoid settlements where possible. The ESMP also requires including the security 
requirements in the Community Health, Safety and Security Plan based on a risk assessment and 
ensure that the Voluntary Principles on Human Rights and ESS4 requirements are addressed. In 
case the Project activities include prevention of malaria spread, pesticides might have an impact 
on the surrounding habitats and community health and safety. 
32. 
ESS5 (land acquisition and involuntary resettlement). The ESIA identifies land 
acquisition and resettlement risks and impacts that will result from project activities, including 
displacement of 11 residential houses, 15 commercial structures, 7 structures will be partially 
affected, and 394 households will be economically displaced. The AE has submitted a separate 
resettlement action plan (RAP) (Annex 6b of the funding proposal) and estimated the cost of 
resettlement to be mobilised for the expropriation and all accompanying measures for the 
project affected people. The resettlement plan addresses detail compensation for land and 
structures, resettlement of displaced persons (DPs) or persons affected by the project (PAPs), 
and loss of livelihood opportunities. All DPs identified in the census survey, which encompasses 
all individuals having formal legal rights to the land lost and occupants, regardless of ownership 
of the land lost are entitled to compensation, assistance and rehabilitation as provided in the 
project’s resettlement plan. All DPs will be given notice in sufficient advance and will be 
requested to vacate premises and dismantle affected structures prior to project implementation. 
The DPs will be   compensated according to the official compensation rates. The acquisition of 
the land and private properties will be carried out in accordance with Rwanda Expropriation 
law for public interest. All the affected people will be compensated before commencement of 
Construction works. The RAP is of high quality and comprehensively covers issues that would 
be required under good international practice. The AE is suggested to resolve any potential 
issue regarding the land tenure conflicts and monitor land tenure issues throughout the project 
lifecycle, including to set up grievance mechanisms for affected residents and continuously 
assessing the effectiveness of the set conflict resolution strategies. The AE is also suggested to 
ensure all categories of affected households and communities should be consulted, full 
compensation for land and other assets, including those with customary claims to land; and 
those with no legally recognized claims (for the informal settlements); and adequate restoration 
and improvement of livelihoods (for the informal settlers). 
33. 
ESS6 (biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural 
resources). The ESIA identifies that the project will fund small scale activities in an urban 
neighbourhood and will not have any significant impact on biodiversity or ecosystem services. 
The ESIA briefly discusses the protected areas and critical habitats in the vicinity of the project

=== PAGE 80 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 80 
 
 
 
 
site and concludes that these are not present withing the project area. The project interventions 
will all take place in an urban neighbourhood of Kigali. The ESIA also notes that although no 
critical habitat was identified in the project area, land will be occupied permanently and 
temporarily during construction requiring clearance of existing vegetation and possible removal 
of habitats and species of nature conservation interest. The AE is suggested to update the 
analysis following the revision of the ESIA, and where needed, to create and maintain a buffer 
between the project and other land uses to mitigate microclimate modification. 
34. 
GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy & ESS7 (Indigenous Peoples). The AE has undertaken 
a review taking into consideration the Indigenous Peoples Policy scope of application and 
confirmed that there are no historically marginalized groups found in the project area. 
35. 
ESS8 (cultural heritage). While the AE has assessed that there are no physical cultural 
heritage sites in the project area, for any chance finds that may be cultural heritage, the ESMP 
states that stakeholder engagement should be part of the mitigation measures on how to 
manage cultural heritage. The AE has therefore prepared a dedicated annex on chance find 
procedures to ensure all chance finds of cultural heritage (e.g. graves, old ceramic, old building 
fragments) are reported immediately to the relevant authority. Where possible, the project 
should avoid excavation in the ultimate neighbourhood of a chance find, fence the chance find 
and await instructions from the competent authority. The ESIA also specifies that the project 
should also allow people’s access to them during the project implementation.  
36. 
Implementation arrangements. The ESIA describes the roles and responsibilities 
among the AE and the executing agencies on the implementation of the project’s safeguards 
instruments. It is noted that the executing entity, FONERWA, will establish a project 
management unit (PMU) consisting of a project manager who will be in charge of the overall 
project coordination including the implementation of safeguards instrument. An Environmental 
and Social Management (ESS) Specialist will be hired to oversee the environmental and social 
safeguards implementation for the entire project, conducts further screening on all sub-
components, ensures all project staff are appropriately trained on environmental and social 
safeguards implementation, and liaises with specific staff to meet these obligations. FONERWA 
will also monitor the implementation of all safeguard documents and ensure that the 
environmental and social risks are avoided or minimized. 
37. 
Stakeholder engagement and grievance redress mechanism (GRM). The AE has 
conducted stakeholder consultations during the design phase of the project from 2019 to 2021. 
These consultations were documented in Annex 7 of the Funding Proposal. The ESIA and SEP 
outline the key stakeholders identified, the organization and feedback from the stakeholder 
engagement activities, and a proposed stakeholder engagement plan to be followed by the AE 
and EE throughout the project implementation. As the safeguards due diligence extends to the 
GCK pilot site, the AE is suggested to keep the SEP updated and incorporate findings of all 
project sites in the updated documentation. Given the scope and scale of the proposed project, 
the appropriate structure for handling grievances includes the AE’S GRM which is the umbrella 
structure as well as GRMs hosted by the EE that are independent of government judicial 
procedures, provide a survivor-centred process to accommodate serious grievances, and 
facilitate access to the GCF’s independent redress mechanism. For this project, the EE will have 
a survivor-cantered project-level GRM process available to all project staff, participants and 
beneficiaries that will seamlessly integrate with that system for sharing of grievances as 
appropriate. All project staff, participants and beneficiaries will be made aware of the grievance 
process through public notices in the local language through mechanisms deemed appropriate 
through consultations with the stakeholders for distributing the information most effectively.  
38. 
Sexual Exploitation, Sexual Abuse, and Sexual Harassment (SEAH). The revised GCF 
Environmental and Social Policy adopted by decision B.BM-2021/18 requires safeguarding 
from sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEAH) in GCF-financed activities. The AE has 
identified potential SEAH-related risks that could arise from the recruitment of temporary and

=== PAGE 81 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 81 
 
 
 
 
permanent workers for the construction and operation of the project. The screening process 
will ensure that the sub-component does not exacerbate the risks of gender-based violence, 
including SEAH. In case of SEAH-related occurrences, the AE outlines the procedure for 
addressing SEAH-related grievances - that includes the AE GRM, which serves as the 
overarching framework, and independent GRMs hosted by the EE. The AE has committed to 
ensure that the GRM is survivor-centered and provide a streamlined process for accessing the 
GCF's independent redress mechanism.  
39. 
To ensure the smooth flow of information regarding grievances, the EE will implement a 
project-level GRM process that prioritizes the needs of survivors and is accessible to all project 
staff, participants, and beneficiaries. This process will be fully integrated with the existing 
system for sharing grievances. In addition, all key stakeholders of the project will be informed 
about the grievance processes through public notices in the local language. The information will 
be shared after consulting with stakeholders for effective communication. GBV and SEAH 
complaints will be addressed at specialized referral centres called Isange One-Stop Centres 
(IOSC). These centres provide comprehensive services to GBV survivors, including medical care, 
psychosocial support, police and legal assistance, and collection of legal evidence. The project's 
safeguard staff will work closely with the Grievance Redress Committee (GRC) representative to 
ensure the proper handling and reporting of GBV and SEAH-related complaints. The EE will 
establish a project-level GRM accessible to all project personnel, participants, and beneficiaries. 
This mechanism will integrate with the existing system to address grievances as needed.  The 
project will monitor gender mainstreaming and efforts to fight against GBV. All SEAH-related 
activities that require budgetary support are mapped and budgeted for in the gender action 
plan. The AE will hire a gender specialist with expertise in SEAH safeguarding who will provide 
technical assistance to the project.  
4.2 
Gender policy  
40. 
The AE has provided a gender assessment and action plan and therefore complies with 
the GCF gender policy. The project aims to provide a new model for urban development in 
Rwanda that increases the resilience of vulnerable households, including women and girls.  
41. 
The project will address several key challenges faced by women, including poverty, 
limited access to resources and basic services, and restricted financial services and employment 
opportunities. Gender norms are significant barriers that limit women's agency, decision-
making power and access to education and health care, as are issues of gender-based violence, 
unpaid care work and the unequal division of labour. Women also face limited participation in 
decision-making processes and leadership roles, compounded by safety concerns in public 
spaces and inadequate access to essential facilities and services. These challenges are further 
exacerbated by gender disparities in decision-making, financial autonomy and mobility 
restrictions, all of which are influenced by entrenched gender stereotypes.  
42. 
To tackle these issues, the project will implement a range of activities focused on gender 
and leadership capacity-building, establishing a gender mainstreaming committee, and ensuring 
women's participation in decision-making bodies. Key initiatives include building the capacity 
of decision-makers and stakeholders, establishing a formal complaint mechanism for 
accountability and addressing gender-based violence through community engagement. The 
project will invest in a village-wide street lighting system, establish a Women’s Safe Space and 
Gender Champions Group. It will engage various stakeholders to promote women's equal access 
to benefits, higher-paying trades, and community resources. Additional efforts will include 
trainings and providing women and girls' with essential skills, such as riding bicycles, to 
enhance their mobility and autonomy.  
43. 
The gender action plan defines activities, indicators and targets for women's 
participation and benefit with corresponding timelines, budget and gender expertise.

=== PAGE 82 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 82 
 
 
 
 
4.3 
Risks  
4.3.1. 
Overall programme assessment (low risk)  
44. 
The project aims to upgrade the Ngaruyinka Village informal settlement on Kinyinya Hill 
with climate-resilient infrastructure and promote renewable energy in the nearby GCK pilot 
development, covering a combined area of 34 hectares. Its objective is to establish a scalable 
climate-responsive model applicable across Rwanda and the region, emphasizing community 
resilience and low-emission urban development. The project activities are structured around 
two main outputs: (i) climate-responsive investments to upgrade the informal settlement, 
provide critical transport links, and support renewable energy investments in the GCK pilot 
project; and (ii) increased capacity for inclusive climate-responsive upgrades and enabling an 
environment for climate-resilient, low-emission investment. The project, with a total cost of 
USD 29,929,602, will be funded by USD 23,602,590 from GCF as a grant, with additional co-
financing totalling USD 6,327,012 from the Rwanda Ministry of Finance, resulting in a co-
financing ratio of 1:0.26. 
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(low risk) 
45. 
The Ministry of Environment (MOE), serving as the AE for this project, will assume 
responsibility for overall project management, supervision and reporting to GCF. FONERWA, 
acting as the EE will implement and execute the project. FONERWA was established in 2012 and 
acts as the national fund for environment and climate change. It plays a pivotal role in the  
environmental and climate finance landscape of Rwanda, channelling, programming, disbursing 
and monitoring funds in this sector. The AE has two approved projects with GCF under 
implementation, namely FP217 Building Resilience of Vulnerable Communities to Climate 
Variability in Rwanda’s Congo Nile Divide through Forest and Landscape Restoration, and 
FP073 Strengthening Climate Resilience of Rural Communities in Northern Rwanda. Based on 
the proven track record, the AE is expected to implement this project in accordance with the 
requirements of its accreditation master agreement (AMA) and the legal terms of the funded 
activity agreement, which is still under development. FONERWA has a proven track record and 
is currently the EE for FP023, which is under implementation in the country.  
4.3.3. 
Programme-specific execution risks (low risk) 
46. 
Materials sourcing and compatibility challenge. Based on the project scope as 
outlined in the funding proposal, it is noted that the project may face challenges due to the 
limited availability of local green building materials and potential mismatches in solar PV and 
water heater systems for affordable housing. These mismatches may arise from initial system 
specifications not fully aligning with final design needs or installation complexities. The AE 
acknowledges this risk and proposes mitigation measures, including: (i) engaging local 
providers to source suitable materials; (ii) ensuring stakeholder input for system adjustments; 
and (iii) integrating appropriate capacities and fittings through design consultants. 
47. 
Project viability (and concessionality). The use of grants (100 per cent 
concessionality) is reasonable given the country context. The funding proposal highlights that 
Rwanda is highly vulnerable to climate change, facing increased temperatures, intensified 
rainfall, and prolonged dry seasons, which exacerbate rapid urbanization challenges. 
Additionally, the funding proposal reflects that the country's steep slopes and high rainfall 
intensity make it prone to landslides and floods, impacting housing, health facilities, schools and 
infrastructure. The limited availability of affordable housing and local green building materials 
further complicates sustainable urban development. As mentioned in the funding proposal, 
Rwanda's dependence on international climate finance due to constrained domestic finances

=== PAGE 83 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 83 
 
 
 
 
and the economic impact of the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic underscores the necessity 
of GCF funding. GCF support is crucial to ensure sustainable urbanization, build climate-resilient 
infrastructure, and transition to a low-emission pathway.  
4.3.4. 
Compliance risk (medium risk)  
48. 
As described above, this project is being implemented through a governmental entity, 
the Ministry of Environment (MOE). As part of the government itself, the MOE is subject to the 
public accountability laws and regulations of Rwanda. Other public agencies, such as the Office 
of the Attorney General and Public Auditors have authority over the MOE with respect to any 
potential irregularities that might occur. The MOE itself has indicated that it has a team within 
its agency that will manage and oversee activities undertaken; the MOE has been accredited by 
GCF and has at least one other project under implementation. 
49. 
Most of the proposed activities will be implemented through local units or 
municipalities, which are also subject to the public accountability laws of Rwanda. The proposed 
activities, themselves, do not suggest any elevated level of compliance risks. The AE has 
indicated that its own risk assessment is in the low or medium range. 
50. 
While the MOE is an AE for GCF and has policies and procedures acceptable to GCF, the 
MOE did indicate during the course of review of this proposal that it would like some additional 
training and capacity-building for its staff in terms of anti-money laundering and related issues. 
In fact, the MOE has agreed to have some of those training and capacity-building measures 
integrated into its project activities. 
51. 
Based on a review of the proposed activities, along with a review of the measures the 
MOE intends to undertake in this project, the compliance risk is rate as medium. 
4.3.5. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)  
52. 
In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of results area and single proposal is immaterial. 
4.3.6. 
Recommendation 
53. 
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.  
Summary risk assessment 
Rationale 
Overall programme 
low 
The funding proposal has an overall 
risk assessment of low based on the  
issues highlighted. It is recommended  
that the Board consider the above  
factors in its decision. 
Accredited entity (AE)/executing entity 
(EE) capability 
low 
Project-specific execution 
low 
GCF portfolio concentration  
low 
Compliance 
 
Medium 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
54. 
The Rwanda MOE will serve as the AE and will implement the project through the 
Rwanda Green Fund (FONERWA), which is the EE for all activities of the programme. The AE 
will be accountable for the overall management of the project, including project 
implementation, supervision, financial management and project monitoring and reporting. The 
AE, together with the EE, will establish a project management unit within the EE. The AE will 
oversee the project through its Single Project Implementation Unit.

=== PAGE 84 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 84 
 
 
 
 
55. 
The AE will open a GCF account for the project to receive the GCF proceeds and reflowed 
funds (e.g. tax refunds), if applicable, in accordance with the AMA. The project funds will be 
received into a dedicated MOE bank account held at the National Bank of Rwanda in USD. These 
funds will then be transferred to the EE. 
56. 
The project will follow the Government of Rwanda procedures for planning, budgeting, 
and accounting. In its accounting system, the government has adopted the International Public 
Sector Accounting Standards, which are based on modified cash accounting principles issued by 
the International Federation of Accountants. The AE and EE will use the Government of Rwanda 
financial management systems and procedures, which are embedded in their internal 
operations. The procurement process will also be conducted in accordance with the regulatory 
regime in Rwanda, which applies to all government entities, including the AE and EE. 
57. 
The project funds will be subject to an internal audit based on the annual internal audit 
workplan. There will be a full-time project-funded internal auditor (funded by the AE fee) to 
supplement the internal audit capacity of the AE and EE. In addition, there will be an annual 
external audit for the project in line with the AMA. 
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
58. 
This is an adaptation project that will contribute to GCF ARAs 1, 2 and 3. In addition, the 
project has a strong mitigation co-benefit. The project is expected to reach 30,252 direct 
beneficiaries, and 1,132,686 indirect beneficiaries. It also anticipates a GHG impact of 125,032 
tCO2 eq.  
59. 
The results management arrangements proposed under the project were refined over 
four rounds of review and intensive engagement with the AE. Specifically, the project was re-
conceptualised to an adaptation project with a mitigation co-benefit, whereas it was originally 
proposed as a cross-cutting project. Changes were made to the project theory of change to 
ensure that it was clear, logically coherent, and linked to the climate rationale and activities 
proposed under the project.  
60. 
The project logical framework was also refined over multiple rounds to ensure that the 
proposed indicators and targets were realistic and linked to the proposed theory of change. The 
AE was also provided advice for refining the supporting annexes, including the Budget, 
Implementation Timetable, Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, beneficiary calculations and 
mitigation calculations. 
61. 
A consistent observation throughout the project was the need to ensure consistency 
across different sections of the proposal, including the FP narrative (sections B2 and B3), theory 
of change, logical framework, timeline, and monitoring and evaluation plan. Intensive 
engagement was undertaken with the AE to address this point throughout the review process. 
4.6 
Legal assessment 
62. 
The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 23 June 
2016, and it became effective on 1 August 2017, which was amended and restated pursuant to a 
first amendment and restatement agreement which was signed and became effective on 14 May 
2019, and was further amended and restated pursuant to a second amendment and restatement 
agreement dated 23 November 2022 and became effective on 26 January 2023 (the “AMA”). 
63. 
The accredited entity has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has 
obtained all internal approvals, and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.

=== PAGE 85 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 85 
 
 
 
 
64. 
The proposed project will be implemented in the Republic of Rwanda. GCF has signed a 
bilateral agreement on privileges and immunities with the Government of Rwanda. on 8 
November 2022. It became effective on 25 May 2023. 
65. 
To address the matters raised in this section, it is recommended that any approval by 
the Board is made subject to the following conditions: 
(a) 
Submission by the accredited entity to the Fund of a certificate or legal opinion, in form 
and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, within 120 days after Board approval 
confirming that the accredited entity has obtained all final internal approvals needed by 
it and has the capacity and authority to implement the proposed project; 
(b) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date the accredited entity has provided a 
certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has obtained all final internal approvals; 
and 
(c) 
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 86 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 86 
 
 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP245 
Proposal name: 
Green City Kigali: A new model for urban development in 
Rwanda 
Accredited entity: 
Ministry of Environment 
Country: 
Republic of Rwanda 
Project size:  
Small 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Overview  
1. 
Rwanda is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change due to its geographic 
location, topography, and reliance on rain-fed agriculture. The country has seen significant 
climatic changes in recent decades, with rising temperatures and increasingly erratic rainfall 
patterns. According to the Rwanda Environment Management Authority, the average 
temperature has increased by approximately 1.4 °C since the 1970s, which has serious 
implications for agriculture, water resources, and public health. The Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change projects that these trends will continue, leading to more frequent and severe 
extreme weather events, such as droughts and floods. 
2. 
Agriculture, which forms a substantial part of Rwanda’s gross domestic product (GDP) 
and employs about 70 per cent of the population, is particularly at risk. Droughts reduce 
agricultural productivity, increase food insecurity, and deepen poverty, especially among 
smallholder farmers dependent on rain-fed crops. In urban areas like Kigali, the capital city, 
drought exacerbates water scarcity, stressing the city’s water supply, and combines with rising 
temperatures to increase the frequency of heat stress, particularly in informal communities. 
These challenges disproportionately affect low-income households, women and children. 
3. 
Flooding, another major hazard exacerbated by climate change, is particularly severe in 
Rwanda due to the country’s hilly terrain and insufficient drainage infrastructure. Floods 
destroy homes, infrastructure and agricultural land, causing displacement and economic losses. 
Kigali faces unique challenges related to flooding, with rapid urbanization leading to the 
expansion of informal settlements in flood-prone areas. The resulting floods cause significant 
damage and pose public health risks, such as outbreaks of diseases like cholera, especially in 
overcrowded informal settlements. 
4. 
Climate change has also intensified the risk of landslides, particularly in Kigali, where 
deforestation and urban expansion into hilly areas have increased the threat. Landslides result 
in loss of life, property destruction, and displacement, with the most vulnerable populations 
residing in informal settlements on steep slopes. The compounded effects of drought, flooding 
and landslides disproportionately impact the most vulnerable populations, deepening poverty 
and making recovery challenging for affected communities.  
5. 
Against this background, the Ministry of Environment (MOE) of the Government of 
Rwanda as accredited entity (AE) has submitted this funding proposal, requesting USD 
27,995,786 in grant funding from GCF to co-finance the project entitled “Green City Kigali: a new 
model for urban development in Rwanda” (the “GCK Ngaruyinka Project”).

=== PAGE 87 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 87 
 
 
 
 
6. 
The central objective of the project is to achieve a sustainable infrastructure 
enhancement of the Ngaruyinka informal settlement (located on Kinyinya Hill in Kigali) by 
implementing a practical, climate-resilient, and adaptive multi-sectoral action plan. The project 
is intended to serve as a prototype for future upgrading efforts in comparable communities 
across Kigali and secondary cities in Rwanda and possibly the wider East African region. In 
addition to the sustainable infrastructure improvements, the project encompasses technical 
assistance programmes aimed at supporting the broader application of these upgrading 
strategies in the future and fostering the development of new sustainable greenfield housing 
initiatives in Rwanda and beyond. The proposed project is part of the Green City Kigali (GCK) 
initiative which has been designed by Government of Rwanda with support from the 
Government of Germany through KFW, and seeks to develop a sustainable and climate-resilient 
urban community on a 600 hectare plot on Kinyinya Hill in Kigali, featuring eco-friendly 
housing, renewable energy, efficient waste management, and green infrastructure. 
7. 
The project will be co-financed with USD 7,111,989 by the Government of Rwanda 
through its Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. Under the terms of the funding 
proposal, the MOE acts as AE, while implementation of the project will be delegated to 
FONERWA (the Rwanda Green Fund) as executing entity (EE). FONERWA is the national 
financing mechanism established to support green and climate-resilient initiatives in Rwanda, 
and is overseen by the MOE.  
8. 
The proposed project consists of two main components: 
(a) 
Component 1: Climate responsive investments to upgrade an informal settlement; and 
(b) 
Component 2: Increased awareness and capacity for inclusive climate responsive 
upgrades and enabling an environment for climate resilient, low emission investment. 
9. 
The project is led by the MOE, which oversees overall management, with FONERWA 
executing the project through a project management unit (PMU). A Steering Committee, chaired 
by the MOE’s Permanent Secretary and including senior representatives from various 
government agencies, is expected to provide coordination and decision-making support, while a 
Technical Advisory Committee and Sector Working Groups are intended to offer specialized 
guidance and facilitate stakeholder engagement. The project governance will also include a 
Community Upgrading Committee (already established) at village level in Ngaruyinka to 
facilitate information sharing and community participation. 
1.2 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
Scale: Medium-High 
10. 
The funding proposal highlights a range of anticipated impacts, most significantly in the 
adaptation result areas (ARAs) but also encompassing notable mitigation benefits. Specifically, 
the funding proposal defines the following two main project outcomes: 
(a) 
Strengthened adaptive capacity, heat stress mitigation, and reduced exposure to 
climate risks. The specific project activities aim to enhance infrastructure and services 
to better endure climate-related hazards, including flooding, landslides and heat stress 
in the project area (Ngaruyinka Village). This involves the modernization of public 
infrastructure and the application of nature-based solutions for effective stormwater 
management; and 
(b) 
Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate-responsive 
planning and development. Specific project activities are designed to strengthen the 
ability of governmental and institutional entities to design, oversee and execute 
development strategies that are climate-responsive and promote low-emission growth, 
thus facilitating a scale-up of the proposed model project at Ngaruyinka Village. 
11. 
These two outcomes map to the GCF results areas as follows:

=== PAGE 88 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 88 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
GCF Outcome Metric 1: Total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries among 
vulnerable people and communities, with the overall target to be defined at project 
inception (ARA1) but currently estimated to be 30,252 direct and 1,132,686 indirect 
beneficiaries who will benefit from improved infrastructure, access to reliable water 
supply, renewable energy, and enhanced capacity to manage climate risks; 
(b) 
GCF Outcome Metric 2: 1,634 beneficiaries benefiting from improved living 
environments that are resilient to climate-related hazards and with access to climate-
resilient water supply (50 per cent women) (ARA2, Core 2 and Supplementary 2.6 and 
Supplementary 2.3), including via the installation of rainwater harvesting tanks, the 
expansion of the central water supply system, as well as the increased climate resilience 
of 7.8 kilometres (km) of roads, 5.4 km of walking and cycling pathways, and 735 
physical structures; and 
(c) 
GCF Outcome Metric 3: Value of assets that are more resilient to climate change 
increased by approximately USD 5.4 million (ARA3). 
12. 
In terms of enhancing the enabling environment, the AE expects that the project will 
strengthen institutional and technical capacity for planning low-emission, climate-resilient 
investments by documenting best practices and providing guidance for the improvement of 
national building standards (Core Indicator 5). In addition, the AE posits that the dissemination 
of knowledge and best practices by the project will result in the widespread adoption of the 
approaches and solutions developed through the GCF-supported project (Core Indicator 8). 
13. 
The project is also expected to support low-emission sustainable development by 
achieving significant mitigation co-benefits. This shall include reduction of emissions through 
the installation of solar streetlights (saving 76.2 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent per annum 
(t CO2 eq/p.a.), as well as distribution of solar photovoltaic (PV) and water heater systems to 
community households (saving 0.9 tCO2/p.a. per household). Emissions are also expected to be 
cut by 2,019 t CO2 eq per annum via a shift to low-emission transport and by 2,524 t CO2 eq as a 
result of the use of green construction materials. Additionally, the project’s Technical Vocational 
Education and Training (TVET) initiative will lower building energy intensity and operational 
emissions, demonstrating an efficient design with energy use under 2,100 kilowatt-
hour/month. 
14. 
The AE and EE expect to accomplish these outcomes via eight outputs across the two 
main outcome areas, namely: 
15. 
Outcome 1: Strengthened adaptive capacity, heat stress mitigation and reduced 
exposure to climate risks. 
(a) 
Output 1: Strengthened adaptive capacity, heat stress mitigation and reduced exposure 
to climate risks; 
(b) 
Output 2: Implement resilient green transport/mobility networks; 
(c) 
Output 3: Implement resilient storm water management systems using nature-based 
solutions; 
(d) 
Output 4: Expand, install and ensure resilience of central water supply and rainwater 
harvesting systems; and 
(e) 
Output 5: Promotion and implementation of renewable energy and energy-efficient 
technologies. 
16. 
Outcome 2: Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate-responsive 
planning and development. 
(a) 
Output 6: Institutional capacity development for Government of Rwanda 
agencies/institutions;

=== PAGE 89 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 89 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
Output 7: Blueprinting the Green City Kigali and developing planning codes for the 
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV); and 
(c) 
Output 8: Awareness-raising and citizen engagement for climate action. 
17. 
The logical framework presented in the funding proposal is comprehensive and 
straightforward. However, the independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) considers there 
are various factors that may negatively impact the ability of the proposed project to generate 
the projected impact results, including the following considerations: 
18. 
Potential for land and property speculation. The AE proposes to fully finance the 
Ngaruyinka Village upgrade project with grants to prevent passing the cost of infrastructure 
investments onto local taxpayers, which could lead to adverse socioeconomic impacts, including 
the displacement of residents unable to afford increased taxes. At the same time, the upgrade 
will very likely have a positive impact on land and property prices due to improved living 
conditions and better access to public services. This could result in a significant shift in 
ownership over time, as some community members may choose to sell their land or homes to 
take advantage of the higher property values. It may also trigger land and property speculation 
in and immediately around the target project area. As a result, the benefits of the project may 
only partially reach vulnerable communities (who might decide to capitalize on the increased 
property prices instead, for example). During the question and answer (Q+A) process, the AE 
clarified that they are aware of this potential challenge and noted that mechanisms such as 
community land trusts or long-term lease agreements are currently being explored to mitigate 
that risk. This is an issue that should be further explored in the early phase of project 
implementation, both to determine the potential scale of the problem as well as mitigants. 
19. 
Calculation of indirect beneficiaries. The calculation of indirect beneficiaries in the 
funding proposal (annex 24) identifies all residents of Kigali as potential indirect beneficiaries 
of the project. In the view of the iTAP, extending the pool of indirect beneficiaries to residents of 
Kinyinya Hill – whose inhabitants are potentially able to benefit indirectly from infrastructure 
improvements and various service offerings provided by the project in Ngaruyinka Village – 
seems justifiable, whereas including all residents of Kigali entirely rests on the notion that (i) 
the technical assistance provided will eventually result in a replication of the project in other 
informal settlements across Kigali; and (ii) that Kigali residents will be able to enrol in the TVET 
school that will be developed as part of the project. GCF encourages conservative and realistic 
estimates to avoid over-claiming the number of beneficiaries. The iTAP recommends that the 
calculation methodology for indirect beneficiaries be reviewed prior to project commencement.  
20. 
Operation and maintenance (O&M) plan and long-term financing for maintenance. 
The AE, in the funding proposal as well as during the Q+A process with the iTAP acknowledges 
the central importance of proper maintenance of the new infrastructure that is being put in 
place through the proposed project. The proposal, however, lacks a detailed strategy of how 
long-term maintenance will be ensured and by whom, and how the gradual process of handing 
over responsibility to local stakeholders while ensuring monitoring of compliance will work in 
practice. The development of this O&M plan, with a clear delineation of roles and 
responsibilities, should be a key priority during the early project execution phase. The City of 
Kigali will be responsible for shouldering the bulk of the maintenance costs in future, without 
being able to increase revenues correspondingly, as the target community is not expected to 
financially contribute (e.g. via increased taxes or user fees). For this proposed pilot project, 
these additional costs may be manageable. Any future scale-up of the project as envisioned by 
the AE will have to consider a sustainable strategy for financing O&M of new public 
infrastructure. 
21. 
 Sustainability of solar PV systems, solar water heaters, improved cookstoves 
component and model for scale. As part of the proposed project design, 224 households in the 
Ngaruyinka Village will receive solar PV systems, solar water heaters and improved cookstoves

=== PAGE 90 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 90 
 
 
 
 
free of charge; these installations are then supposed to drive some of the key mitigation co-
benefits highlighted above. While the iTAP recognizes the limited ability of the target 
households to pay, experience with programmes in developing countries where such systems 
were provided free of charge to communities highlight some key challenges, including:  
(a) 
Sustainability of systems: Free provision has frequently resulted in lack of ownership, 
where communities may not invest their own resources in replacing the technology at 
the end of its life, and may not even maintain the systems properly, leading to 
degradation and failure of systems over time. Access to spare parts and technical 
support is often limited, exacerbating this issue; 
(b) 
Inadequate training and awareness: In some cases, insufficient training and awareness-
raising among recipients have resulted in the improper use of the systems or a failure to 
maximize their potential benefits. Communities may lack the technical know-how to 
handle minor repairs or optimize system usage; 
(c) 
Funding and scalability: Programmes typically require substantial upfront investment, 
often supported by development partners, as is the case here. However, scaling up such 
initiatives to reach larger populations can be challenging, especially when concessional 
funding is limited or inconsistent; and 
(d) 
Social marketing: Supply-side subsidies, such as providing goods or services for free, can 
lead to the distribution of items that may not be wanted or needed by the recipients. In 
contrast, demand-side subsidies, when combined with 'social marketing' or awareness 
campaigns highlighting the benefits of the product or service, are more likely to be 
adopted and pose fewer risks of market distortion and saturation. For example, 
promoting the advantages of fuel-efficient cookstoves – both for household savings and 
forest conservation – can encourage households in the region to purchase and use these 
appliances. Through demand-side subsidies, households can receive financial support to 
buy a cookstove that meets their specific needs, potentially from a local producer, 
thereby fostering a market relationship. 
22. 
In conjunction, the challenges identified above may mean that the expected mitigation 
co-benefits may not occur at the scale currently envisioned. When scaling the project beyond 
the initial pilot area, additional issues around dependency and market distortion would have to 
be considered. Providing systems or appliances free of charge can create dependency and 
undermine the development of a local market for these technologies. It can also distort the 
market by discouraging private sector investment and local entrepreneurship, as people may 
wait for free systems rather than purchasing them. This is especially so in the context of Kigali 
where multiple private sector service providers (including PAYGO providers) already operate 
and compete. 
23. 
Finally, the funding proposal makes reference to the establishment of a mini-grid based 
on solar PV. It is not clear to the iTAP what the precise scope of the mini-grid project would 
entail, and the AE also did not provide more granular detail during the Q+A process. There is 
also no line item in the proposed project budget that would provide resources for establishment 
of a mini-grid. If such a mini-grid were to be developed to provide electricity to households 
beyond the immediate project area, it will be important to properly scope such a project, given 
the inherent complexities of developing, financing and operating mini-grids. 
24. 
Overall, the iTAP rates the impact potential for the project as medium-high, with 
potential for improvement if the issues highlighted above are adequately clarified and 
addressed prior to the start of programme implementation. 
1.3 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
 
Scale: Medium

=== PAGE 91 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 91 
 
 
 
 
25. 
Overall, the AE outlines a plausible approach for the project to catalyse a paradigm shift 
by fostering conditions for scaling and replication, essentially via the following “transmission 
belts”: 
(a) 
Establishing a Technical Vocational Education Training Centre that is focused on 
climate-resilient construction will enhance long-term knowledge-sharing and capacity-
building, driving the scaling and replication of project activities; 
(b) 
Raising awareness and engaging citizens in climate-responsive regeneration, alongside a 
knowledge management system, will encourage broader adoption of project measures, 
such as rainwater harvesting, across Kigali and Rwanda; 
(c) 
Documenting and creating a design template for GCK will support replication, providing 
future developers with sustainable design tools to scale up affordable, climate-resilient 
housing projects; and 
(d) 
Enhancing the planning and regulatory framework will create an enabling environment, 
attracting investment for the green upgrade of informal settlements, and supporting 
broader implementation of the project’s initiatives. 
26. 
Knowledge-sharing, awareness-raising, design templates and an enhanced enabling 
environment will be important contributors to replication of the project results but may not be 
sufficient to achieve these results at scale, for all informal settlements. The iTAP would like to 
highlight some aspects that may further improve the project’s potential to effect paradigm shift: 
27. 
Exploration of public-private collaboration models. Scaling the project on Kinyinya 
Hill, in Kigali, and across the country (and for that matter, in the broader East African region) 
will require substantial financial investment. While the factors mentioned above may enhance 
the enabling environment and lower investment costs (e.g. through improved regulatory 
infrastructure), the funding proposal lacks a clear strategy for mobilizing future investment for 
replication. During the Q&A process, the AE acknowledged that the private sector will need to 
be involved, as public sector resources alone will not suffice. Although the AE indicated during 
the Q+A process that potential public-private collaboration models would be explored during 
the project, the proposal does not provide details on how this will be achieved. The iTAP 
recommends systematically exploring future financing models, particularly public-private 
collaborations, alongside project execution. 
28. 
Urban design and regulation. For the purposes of regulation, the iTAP would also like 
to emphasise the importance of ‘Activity 2.1.3: Strengthening planning and regulatory 
frameworks to support an enabling environment’. This should be an area where the AE and the 
project Steering Committee should have significant insight and influence. Developing, 
disseminating and enforcing (predictable and realistic) regulations, standards and urban 
designs stands to be the most direct way for establishing pathways “to ensure replication and 
scale-up across the country” (as indicated in the theory of change statement). 
29. 
Area-based monitoring. The project emphasizes a holistic approach, aiming for 
comprehensive changes across various levels and sectors rather than focusing on individual 
interventions. However, the monitoring plan, as reflected in the budget allocations presented in 
annex 4, focuses on monitoring of individual activities, which may not effectively capture the 
overall impact and potential synergies. The AE did consider an area-based monitoring approach 
(using satellite data combined with ground sensors) during project planning as clarified during 
the Q+A process. In the iTAP’s view, this method would align better with the "green city" 
concept and enable real-time monitoring of total impacts of the project. The AE chose a more 
traditional activity-based monitoring approach for this pilot phase, most likely due to budget 
constraints. However, the iTAP believes this may be a missed opportunity, as an area-based 
monitoring approach could provide more compelling data and evidence to demonstrate the 
project's overall impact.

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 92 
 
 
 
 
30. 
Overall, the iTAP rates the potential for the project to effect paradigm shift as medium. 
1.4 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
        Scale: High 
31. 
The funding proposal highlights a broad range of sustainable development benefits: 
32. 
Environmental co-benefits, including (but not limited to): 
(a) 
Stormwater management: Enhancement of groundwater recharge and wetland water 
quality; 
(b) 
Rainwater harvesting: Reduction of pressure on surface water sources; and 
(c) 
Green mobility: Promotion of walking and cycling, improving air quality. 
33. 
Social co-benefits, including (but not limited to): 
(a) 
Water access: Reduction of time and money women and children spend on 
collecting/purchasing water; 
(b) 
Clean cooking: Improving health by reducing reliance on firewood; and 
(c) 
Street lighting: Enhancing safety, especially for women. 
34. 
Economic co-benefits, including (but not limited to): 
(a) 
Urbanization: Driving economic growth and increasing productivity; 
(b) 
Infrastructure investment: Raising land values and attracting private investment; and 
(c) 
Job creation: TVET and composting initiatives create employment opportunities. 
35. 
Gender-sensitive development impact, including (but not limited to): 
(a) 
Energy access: Freeing up time for women to engage in economic activities; 
(b) 
Safe spaces: Reduction of gender-based violence through women-friendly public spaces; 
and  
(c) 
Empowerment: Increasing women's participation in community leadership. 
36. 
The funding proposal does not provide a detailed exposition of how in practice these co-
benefits will materialize. The Monitoring + Evaluation Plan (annex 11) does not provide 
sufficient detail to determine whether these potential co-benefits will be tracked during project 
implementation to facilitate a proper evidence-based review. During the Q+A process, the AE 
clarified that the project will leverage FONERWA’s established M&E framework; it is unclear 
however whether that framework also allows tracking of these additional co-benefits or 
whether that framework will have to be amended. The iTAP recommends that this be clarified 
early on in project execution. 
37. 
Overall, the iTAP rates the sustainable development impact potential of the project as 
high. 
1.5 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
     Scale: High 
38. 
Rwanda faces a high intensity of exposure to climate risks due to its mountainous 
terrain, reliance on rain-fed agriculture, and increasingly significant variations in rainfall 
patterns. As noted above, the country is particularly vulnerable to extreme weather events such 
as floods, landslides and droughts, which are becoming more frequent and severe due to climate 
change. Additionally, Rwanda is exposed to slow onset events like prolonged droughts and 
temperature increases, which threaten water resources, agricultural productivity and overall 
food security. The country's degree of vulnerability is exacerbated by its economic dependence

=== PAGE 93 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 93 
 
 
 
 
on agriculture, the high density of rural populations, and limited adaptive capacity, making it 
especially sensitive to the impacts of climate change. 
39. 
Rwanda is classified by the World Bank as a low-income country, with a gross national 
income per capita of approximately USD 830 in 2022. Over the past two decades, Rwanda has 
achieved robust economic growth, averaging 7 to 8 per cent annually, although this momentum 
was significantly disrupted by the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. In recent 
years, Rwanda's public debt has increased, driven by borrowing to finance development 
projects and address the economic challenges posed by the pandemic. As of 2023, public debt 
was estimated at about 73 per cent of GDP. While both the World Bank and International 
Monetary Fund consider this level of indebtedness sustainable, it underscores the need for 
prudent debt and financial management to sustain economic stability and growth. 
40. 
Rwanda’s climate finance needs are outlined in its nationally determined contributions 
(NDCs), where it estimates the total cost of implementing its climate action plans (both 
mitigation and adaptation) by 2030. According to Rwanda’s updated NDC, submitted in 2020,1 
the country estimates that it will require approximately USD 11 billion by 2030 to fully 
implement its climate action plans. This would amount to 7 per cent of GDP each year during the 
ten-year period. The overall financing gap for the plan is estimated at USD 6.5 billion for the 
2020-30 period.2 This amounts to roughly 46 per cent of Rwanda's annual GDP (based on 2023 
figures). 
41. 
The Government of Rwanda has made a pledge to finance 40 per cent of the expected 
climate adaptation and mitigation investments from internal resources. The government is also 
implementing various initiatives to enhance domestic resource mobilization and to drive 
efficiency in public budgeting and execution. However, following the COVID-19 pandemic, the 
government had to lay out a fiscal consolidation path to stabilize the country’s debt to GDP ratio. 
Pursuing Rwanda’s ambitious climate agenda may pose risks to debt sustainability and could 
potentially limit the availability of resources for other developmental investments. 
42. 
Rwanda's development partners, including GCF and the multilateral development banks, 
are playing an important role in supporting the country's climate adaptation and mitigation 
efforts. During the past decade, they have provided significant financial resources, technical 
assistance and policy advice to help Rwanda implement its climate agenda. These efforts include 
funding for climate-resilient infrastructure, sustainable agriculture, renewable energy projects, 
and capacity-building initiatives. Additionally, partners have supported the establishment and 
strengthening of Rwanda's national climate financing mechanisms, including FONERWA 
(Rwanda Green Fund), to ensure that climate investments are effectively managed and can be 
scaled up. The AE is receiving financial support from the German Government via KfW for other 
components of the broader GCK project which encompasses the development of a 600 hectare 
area at Kinyinya Hill. However, despite these efforts, there remains a significant climate finance 
gap that will have to be filled to ensure NDC commitments can be implemented. 
43. 
Against that backdrop, while relatively modest in overall terms, the proposed GCF 
funding for the GCK Ngaruyinka Project can make an important contribution to promoting 
Rwanda’s ambitious climate agenda. Overall, the iTAP rates the potential for the project to serve 
the needs of the recipients as high. 
 
1 Rwanda's Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) Update 2020, Government of Rwanda, accessible at 
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-06/Rwanda_Updated_NDC_May_2020.pdf, downloaded 24 August 
2024.  
2 International Monetary Fund (2023), ‘Challenges and Policy Options to Financing Rwanda’s Climate Agenda’, 
accessible at Challenges and Policy Options to Financing Rwanda’s Climate Agenda in: IMF Staff Country Reports 
Volume 2023 Issue 423 (2023), downloaded 24 August 2024.

=== PAGE 94 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 94 
 
 
 
 
1.6 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
Scale: Medium-High 
44. 
Coherence with existing policies. The proposed project is well aligned with national 
climate change strategies of the Government of Rwanda, notably its NDC, and the Green Growth 
and Climate Resilience Strategy. The required no-objection letter has been submitted by the 
NDA. 
45. 
Capacity of the EE. FONERWA, the Rwanda Green Fund, has established itself as the key 
player in the country's climate finance landscape, with several accomplishments in driving 
climate resilience and sustainable development. For example, FONERWA has been successful in 
attracting significant international climate finance, securing funds from key development 
partners such as the UK’s International Climate Fund and indeed the GCF (FP073, 
“Strengthening Climate Resilience of Rural Communities in Northern Rwanda”). This has 
enabled the financing of a wide range of climate-related projects across Rwanda. The iTAP is 
therefore confident that FONERWA will be an effective EE for the proposed project. In the 
context of the proposed project there are two areas in which FONERWA’s capacity could be 
reviewed and potentially strengthened, early on during project implementation: 
(a) 
Monitoring and evaluation. The suitability of FONERWA’s monitoring and evaluation 
processes should be reassessed and potentially enhanced. While FONERWA’s 
Monitoring and Evaluation Manual is thorough,3 the current system seems to prioritize 
capturing immediate project outputs rather than deeply assessing long-term outcomes 
and systemic changes. Considering the earlier discussion on the use of area-based 
monitoring techniques, it may be beneficial to update and improve FONERWA’s 
monitoring and evaluation processes and tools for the proposed project; and 
(b) 
Private sector engagement. Although FONERWA has made strides in engaging the 
private sector (including in the renewable energy, agriculture and tourism sectors), the 
level of private sector investment appears to remain relatively low compared to the 
overall climate finance needs of the country. There is potential to further explore 
innovative financing mechanisms and incentivize greater private sector participation in 
climate action, including in the context of the proposed project, and FONERWA could 
potentially benefit from additional capacity development in that area, especially with a 
view to developing a credible and realistic strategy for scaling and replication of the 
proposed project. 
46. 
Environmental and social action plan (ESAP) and resettlement action plan (RAP). 
An initial environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) and RAP were concluded as part 
of project planning in 2021 and submitted as annexes to the funding proposal (annexes 6a and 
6b). In addition, the AE and EE implemented a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
(annex 6c), a High-level Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Report (annex 6d), a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (annex 6e), a Stakeholder Engagement Framework (annex 6f), 
and an Environmental and Social Management Framework (annex 6g), with annexes 6c to 6g 
covering not just the GCK Ngaruyinka Project but the broader GCK project.  
47. 
The ESIA and RAP are now three years old. As part of the project, the ESIA will have to 
be updated, and an environmental and social action plan (ESAP) will have to be produced. In 
addition, the RAP will have to be updated (including communication of a new cut-off date); both 
the ESAP and RAP will have to be implemented. The project budget (annex 4) does not include a 
dedicated line item for these activities. The AE underscored in the Q+A process that the ESAP 
and RAP implementation are both critical to the project’s success and explained that funding for 
these activities will be mobilized from the Project Management Component of the budget. In 
 
3 FONERWA (2021), Monitoring and Evaluation Manual, accessible at 
http://www.fonerwa.org/sites/default/files/2021-12/FONERWA%20M%26E%20Manual.pdf, downloaded 22 
August 2024.

=== PAGE 95 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 95 
 
 
 
 
that context, the iTAP would like to stress that the development of the ESAP and the updating of 
the RAP are important opportunities for additional stakeholder consultations, including 
importantly with affected communities. The last structured engagements with stakeholders that 
are recorded in the funding proposal package date back to 2021 (annex 7). 
48. 
The iTAP considers the alignment of the project with the priorities of the host country 
government to be high and assesses the track record of the EE as medium-high. Overall, the 
iTAP rates country ownership of the funding proposal as medium-high. 
1.7 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
 
Scale: Medium 
49. 
The economic analysis for this project focuses on evaluating its broader impacts at the 
household level, including household benefits, carbon savings, and the value of forestry 
preservation (through reduced charcoal use). Payback periods for the various components 
differ, ranging from about one year for water harvesting systems, 3.5 years for solar water 
heaters, and up to 30 years for solar PV installations. The CO2 reduction cost for GCF is around 
USD 224 per tonne of CO2 (calculated on the GCF financing amount and with an expected 
125,032 t CO2 eq reduced over the lifetime of the investments) which is very high. However, the 
core focus of the project is on the anticipated adaptation benefits such as improved 
infrastructure, better living conditions, and substantial positive environmental impacts, which 
are not quantified in the economic analysis. 
50. 
In terms of financial performance, the project follows a subsidy-based model, where 
initial capital costs funded by grants (rather than user fees or taxes) are justified by long-term 
health and economic benefits for target households, reducing negative impacts on residents. 
Among the proposed interventions, only solar streetlighting offers monetizable benefits at the 
level of the community. As already pointed out, there are potentially negative consequences to 
this grant-based funding model that need to be carefully evaluated (see paragraph 21 above, 
“Potential for land and property speculation.”). 
51. 
The feasibility study (attached as annex 2) does not contain detailed designs and 
associated bills of quantities which would have formed the basis for the project’s cost estimates 
and is also now three years old. The project budget (annex 4) does contain cost estimates, but 
these also appear to date back to 2021. Since then, price levels across all industries have 
significantly shifted upwards (due to supply chain disruptions, increased demand and 
inflationary pressures). During the Q+A process, the AE noted that the project team members 
are aware of the issue and that the project team is closely monitoring the situation, arguing that 
any potential cost increases will be addressed through budget revisions. Based on experience in 
other projects, the iTAP deems it likely that overall price levels for construction input materials 
may have likely increased between 15 and 25 per cent in recent years. Thus, the iTAP 
recommends that a detailed costing exercise should be conducted in the early stages of project 
implementation to consider the overall impact this may have on the project budget and 
potential need for recalibration of project activities.  
52. 
The iTAP therefore considers the efficiency and effectiveness of the programme as 
medium.  
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
53. 
Overall, the funding proposal is comprehensive, and although there are various risks 
and weaknesses (as highlighted above) it shows a credible pathway to achieving notable 
impacts.  
54. 
The iTAP recommends that the AE:

=== PAGE 96 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 96 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Assess the potential for land and property speculation in the early phase of project 
implementation, to determine the potential scale of the problem and, if necessary, 
establish mitigant mechanisms such as community land trusts or long-term lease 
agreements; 
(b) 
Reviews the calculation methodology for indirect beneficiaries prior to project 
commencement and ensure a conservative methodology is applied; 
(c) 
Develop the O&M plan for new infrastructure built, as well as for solar PV and solar 
water heater household systems distributed for free, with a clear delineation of roles 
and responsibilities, as a key priority during the early project execution phase; 
(d) 
Give additional emphasis to the development of regulation, standards and urban designs 
as a key methodology for replication and scale-up of the initiative; 
(e) 
Systematically explore future financing models for scaling up the project results, 
particularly public-private collaborations, alongside project execution; and 
(f) 
Conduct a detailed costing exercise in the early stages of project implementation to 
consider the overall impact that increased construction costs may have on the project 
budget and potential need for recalibration of project activities.  
55. 
The iTAP recommends that the Board approve this funding proposal.

=== PAGE 97 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 97 
 
 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP245) 
Proposal name: 
Green City Kigali: A new model for urban development in 
Rwanda 
Accredited entity: 
Ministry of Environment 
Country: 
Republic of Rwanda 
Project size:  
Small 
 
Impact potential 
The iTAP assessment of the impact potential of the project as medium-high is well 
acknowledged and the AE will make sure that most of the challenges highlighted are clarified 
and address during the start of the project implementation. 
Paradigm shift potential 
The iTAP assessment of the Paradigm shift potential of the project as medium is well 
acknowledged and the AE has no further comments on this. 
Sustainable development potential 
The iTAP assessment of the Sustainability potential of the project as high is well acknowledged 
and the AE will make sure that the tracking mechanism of the project co-benefits is established 
and clarified project execution leveraging the FONERWA’s existing M&E framework.  
Needs of the recipient 
The iTAP assessment of the Paradigm shift potential of the project as High is well 
acknowledged and the AE has no further comments on this. 
Country ownership 
The iTAP assessment of the Paradigm shift potential of the project as Medium-high is well 
acknowledged and the AE has no further comments on this. 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
The iTAP assessment of the Paradigm shift potential of the project as medium is well 
acknowledged and the AE has no further comments on this.

=== PAGE 98 ===
GCF/B.40/02/Add.07/Rev.01 
Page 98 
 
 
 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
The AE acknowledges iTAP overall assessment and recommendation for the Board 
approval.

=== PAGE 99 ===
GREEN CITY KIGALI: A NEW MODEL FOR URBAN 
DEVELOPMENT IN RWANDA 
ANNEX 8A: GENDER ASSESSMENT 
Gender documentation for FP245

=== PAGE 100 ===
© 2021 SWECO 
All rights reserved 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Produced by Sweco GmbH 
Hanauer Landstraße 135-137 
60314 Frankfurt am Main 
Germany 
Tel: +49 69 95921 0 
www.sweco-gmbh.de 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The consultant wishes to thank all the individuals and organizations for their contribution who completed surveys, 
participated in interviews and were consulted as part of the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GREEN CITY KIGALI

=== PAGE 101 ===
Table of Contents 
LIST OF ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS ....................................................................................................................... 1 
LIST OF TABLES .............................................................................................................................................................. 2 
1. INTRODUCTION & CONTEXT ........................................................................................................................................ 3 
2. THE LINK BETWEEN GENDER AND CLIMATE CHANGE .................................................................................................... 4 
2.1 GENDER AND CLIMATE CHANGE IN RWANDA ................................................................................................................................. 6 
3. THE GENDER CONTEXT OF RWANDA ........................................................................................................................... 7 
3.1 OVERVIEW .............................................................................................................................................................................. 7 
3.2 KEY METRICS ........................................................................................................................................................................... 8 
4. POLICY AND STRATEGY ENVIRONMENT ..................................................................................................................... 13 
4.1 INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR GENDER MAINSTREAMING IN RWANDA......................................................................................... 13 
4.2 THE GREEN CLIMATE FUND GENDER POLICY ................................................................................................................................ 15 
5. NGARUYINKA VILLAGE UPGRADE: OVERVIEW AND PROPOSED INTERVENTIONS .......................................................... 16 
5.1 VILLAGE OVERVIEW ................................................................................................................................................................. 16 
5.2 PROPOSED INTERVENTIONS FOR THE NGARUYINKA VILLAGE UPGRADE .............................................................................................. 17 
6. METHODOLOGY OF THE GENDER ASSESSMENT FOR NGARUYINKA VILLAGE ................................................................ 18 
6.1 BASELINE DATA COLLECTION .................................................................................................................................................... 18 
6.2 FOCUS GROUP DISCUSSIONS...................................................................................................................................................... 19 
6.3 IN-DEPTH INTERVIEWS ............................................................................................................................................................. 19 
6.4 SUMMARY OF COMPLETE FIELD DATA COLLECTION PROCESS ............................................................................................................ 19 
7. KEY FINDINGS........................................................................................................................................................... 20 
7.1 GENDER NORMS IN THE VILLAGE ................................................................................................................................................ 20 
7.2 GENDERED DIVISION OF LABOUR AND UNPAID CARE WORK .............................................................................................................. 20 
7.3 FINACIAL AGENCY AND DECISION MAKING .................................................................................................................................... 21 
7.4 PERMISSION AND MOBILITY...................................................................................................................................................... 23 
7.5 GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE ....................................................................................................................................................... 24 
7.6 WOMEN’S AND MEN’S DIFFERENT USES AND PERCEPTIONS OF VILLAGE SPACES IN DAILY LIFE .................................................................. 26 
7.7 WOMEN’S AND MEN’S LEADERSHIP AND DECISION MAKING AT VILLAGE LEVEL ..................................................................................... 32 
7.8 WOMEN’S PARTICIPATION IN THE VILLAGE UPGRADE COMMITTEE ..................................................................................................... 33 
7.9 WOMEN’S SAFETY IN THE COMMUNITY ....................................................................................................................................... 34 
8. SEX-DISAGGREGATED FEEDBACK ON PROPOSED INTERVENTIONS ............................................................................... 40 
9. WOMEN’S PERSPECTIVES: SHAPING THE GENDER ACTION PLAN ......................................................................................... 44 
10. CONCLUSION .......................................................................................................................................................... 44 
LIST OF REFERENCES ..................................................................................................................................................... 46 
ANNEX: DATA COLLECTION TOOLS ................................................................................................................................ 47

=== PAGE 102 ===
1 
 
List of Acronyms and Abbreviations 
 
DHS 
Demographic and Health Survey 
EDPRS 
Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy 
EICV 5 
Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey 5 
FFRP 
Rwanda Forum for Women Parliementarians 
FGDs 
Focus group discussions 
FHH 
Female-headed Households 
GBS 
Gender Budget Statement 
GBV 
Gender-Based Violence 
GCF 
Green Climate Fund 
GMO 
Gender Monitoring Office 
GRB 
Gender Responsive Budgeting 
KII 
Key Informant Interview 
MIGEPROF 
Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion 
NTS1 
National Strategy for Transformation 
NWC 
National Women's Council 
PV 
Photovoltaic 
REMA 
SDGs 
Rwanda Environment Management Authority 
Sustainable Development Goals 
TVET 
Technical and Vocational Education and Training 
UN 
United Nations 
WSA 
Women's Safety Audit

=== PAGE 103 ===
2 
 
List of Tables 
Table 1: The links between gender and climate change ..............................................................................4 
Table 2: Key metrics reflecting the current gender gap in Rwanda .............................................................9 
Table 3: List of proposed Interventions for the Ngaruyinka Village Upgrade ............................................ 18 
Table 4: Summary of complete field data collection process .................................................................... 19 
Table 5: Women’s and men’s different uses and perceptions of village spaces in daily life ..................... 28 
Table 6: Sex-disaggregated feedback on proposed interventions ............................................................. 40

=== PAGE 104 ===
3 
 
1. Introduction & Context 
Gender assessments and gender action plans are an integral part of proposals submitted to the Green 
Climate Fund (GCF). The purpose of a gender assessment is to ensure adequate and appropriate 
attention is given to gender issues and dynamics across and within projects. A gender assessment is 
meant to ensure the project proposal design is informed by a thorough understanding of gender roles, 
power relations and dynamics within the target community, as well as to ensure the disaggregation and 
nuanced understanding of women’s and men’s specific roles, responsibilities, knowledge, needs, 
interests, and priorities in order for women’s rights and gender equality to be increasingly enhanced 
throughout the project lifecycle. 
A gender assessment uses participatory methods of gender analysis to understand relationships 
between men and women, their access to resources, their daily activities, and the constraints they face 
relative to each other. A comprehensive gender analysis involves the examination of the different roles, 
rights, needs, and opportunities of women and men, boys and girls within the specific project or program 
context. In the context of climate change projects and/or programs, a robust gender analysis helps to 
identify multiple causes of climate vulnerability that are driven by gender inequality. The process of a 
gender analysis also helps to identify and build on the diverse knowledge and capacities within 
communities and households that can be used to make them more resilient to climate-related shocks 
and risks, and works to clearly identify gender gaps and opportunities where the effective and influential 
participation of women and girls must be proactively championed and secured in order for climate- 
responsive projects to support and benefit them in equal measure to men and boys. 
 
The Gender Policy of the GCF (reviewed and updated in November 2019) explicitly recognizes that 
gender relations, roles and responsibilities exercise significant influence on women’s and men’s access 
to and control over decisions, assets and resources, information, and knowledge.1 The Policy also 
recognizes that the impacts of climate change can exacerbate existing gender inequalities, and 
acknowledges that climate change initiatives are more sustainable, equitable and more likely to achieve 
their objectives when gender equality and women’s empowerment considerations are integrated into 
the design and implementation of projects. The updated GCF Gender Policy also recognizes that women 
and vulnerable communities are part of the solution to climate change and should, therefore, be 
effectively engaged in all discussions and decisions that affect them. 
 
In line with the principles and rationale of the GCF Gender Policy, this gender assessment has been 
conducted as part of the proposal submitted to GCF for the Ngaruyinka Village Upgrade project in Kigali, 
Rwanda. This report maps the gender dynamics within the project focus area of Ngaruyinka Village, 
draws links between these gender dynamics and climate vulnerablities for women in the community, 
gathers men’s and women’s feedback on the proposed project intervention areas, and further identifies 
the specific gender gaps that are affecting the active participation of women in decision-making 
processes, as well as future project outcomes, related to the proposed village upgrade. The findings of 
this report inform the subsequent Gender Action Plan that accompanies this document, which seeks to 
directly address the gender barriers and gaps outlined in this assessment. 
 
 
 
1 Updated Gender Policy and Gender Action Plan 2020-2023; Green Climate Fund, November 6, 2019.

=== PAGE 105 ===
4 
 
2. The Link Between Gender and Climate Change 
There is a direct and well-documented link between gender equality, women’s empowerment and 
climate change. Research shows that women are disproportionately more vulnerable to the effects of 
climate change, which can result in existing gender disparities becoming even more pronounced and 
harmful over time.2 Rapidly advancing climate change will amplify chronic environmental threats, such 
as water scarcity and land degradation, which hits the poorest communities the hardest. Due to gender 
bias and inequalities related to education, economic empowerment, violence and other forms of 
oppression and vulnerability, women are more likely to be poor than men. Among other disadvantaged 
groups who experience poverty, women are often the poorest of the poor, particularly if they face other 
challenges such as having a disability. 
 
Poor women are especially vulnerable to climate change as their incomes are often highly dependent on 
natural resources that are sensitive to climate shocks and variability, and in general, women possess 
fewer assets. Women are predominantly involved in subsistence agriculture, through which they are 
negatively affected by climate change. They receive less education than their male counterparts, have 
less economic independence, and are not involved in political or household decision making processes 
to the same degree that men are. Where they are involved, as baseline data gathered for this report will 
reveal, they are often engaged in a tokenistic manner and their views and experiences are not considered 
as valuable or significant as those of men. 
The global gender gap is vast and distinct. Nearly 70% of those who live on less than $1 a day are women. 
Women also account for 75% of the world’s 876 million adults who are illiterate. While women work 
two-thirds of the world’s total working hours, they receive only 10% of the world’s income, and although 
women predominate in global food production (approximately 50% - 80%), women own less than 10% 
of the world’s land. In Africa, the proportion of women affected by climate-related crop changes could 
range from 48% in Burkina Faso to 73% in the Congo. Every year, there are 2 million deaths, mainly 
women and children, related to the burning of biomass fuel indoors. 
 
A robust body of evidence clearly demonstrates that women and men do not experience climate change 
equally. The table below captures some of the key ways in which women are uniquely affected by climate 
change as a direct result of gender roles and inequality.3 
Table 1: The links between gender and climate change 
 
Food production 
• Weather patterns change, agricultural work becomes more labour intensive, 
with women increasingly carrying the burden of additional work while 
having the least access to necessary inputs 
• Climate change increases likelihood of crop failure, with women facing the 
most negative economic implications, having fewer assets to fall back on 
and limited access to alternative sources of income or other livelihoods 
 
 
2 Overview of linkages between gender and climate change; UNDP, 2017. 
3 Gender and Climate Change Overview Report. Skinner, E.; BRIDGE, 2011.

=== PAGE 106 ===
5 
 
Food security 
• Women’s lack of entitlement to and/or control over productive resources 
such as land, livestock, agricultural implements and financial credit makes 
them more vulnerable to food shortages 
• Women’s and girls’ lower status in society has a direct impact on their 
nutritional security and decisions made at the household level regarding the 
allocation of food, particularly when food is scarce 
• As fuel and water required for cooking and preparing food becomes more 
scarce, women and girls are forced to walk longer distances to find both, 
exposing them to ever greater risk of harassment and sexual assault 
Energy poverty 
• Cooking and food production are primarily managed by women in the 
home, making them the primary users of household energy 
• Women are most adversely affected by lack of electricity, as well as having 
to rely on other forms of fuel that have harmful health impacts, such as 
wood or charcoal 
• As public and private investment is increasingly funneled into renewable 
forms of energy, there is a risk of women being unable to afford the 
additional costs of these services, as they are typically poorer than men and 
have fewer economic opportunities 
Water scarcity 
• Women and girls spend a total of 40 billion hours annually collecting water, 
and with increasing variablity and intensity of rainfall, women and girls will 
have to travel farther and farther to access water or be forced to cope with 
chronic water shortages 
• Crop production and food security will also be affected by water scarcity, 
and purchasing water is more difficult for women and girls due to their lack 
of access to and control over income in the household, as well as lack of 
economic opportunities 
• Lack of water and access to basic sanitation also impacts women and girls in 
unique ways, making it more difficult to maintain hygiene and comfort 
during monthly menstruation cycles 
• Women are also typically excluded from decision-making processes related 
to water and land use programs 
Health impacts 
• As climate change impacts the frequency and intensity of floods, freshwater 
supplies will likely become contaminated and water-borne diseases may 
become more prevalent (i.e. cholera, diarrhea, malnutrition, etc.) 
• Due to inequalities in access to education, information and healthcare, 
women and girls may be more exposed to disease and have less access to 
medical services, as well as restricted time and mobility to access care due 
to the heavy burden of domestic responsibilities 
• Women may also be more uniquely vulnerable to climate-related illnesses 
if/when they are pregnant or lactating

=== PAGE 107 ===
6 
 
Climate-related 
disasters 
• Research shows that women and children are up to 14 times more likely to 
die in natural disasters than men, due to their weaker asset base and the 
lack of resilience they experience as a result 
• Women’s degree of vulnerability in natural disasters is directly related to 
their economic and social rights; data on climate disasters in 141 countries 
shows that in countries with greater gender equality, this differential in 
vulnerability disappears 
Poverty and 
vulnerablity 
• Social vulnerability in the context of climate change can be defined as “the 
characteristics of a person or group that influence their capacity to 
anticipate, cope with and recover from the impact of a natural hazard” 
• Poverty and vulnerability are directly linked to climate change; gendered 
patterns of poverty as well as women’s unique social vulnerability put them 
at a significant disadvantage, exacerbating their climate vulnerability 
 
While women and girls undeniably face unique vulnerabilites related to climate change, and these 
vulnerablities are critical to consider and respond to, it is equally important to recognize their agency in 
adapting to and mitigating climate change. In practical terms, this means recognizing women and girls 
as equally valuable participants in decision making processes, as well as designing and implementing real 
world solutions for climate change adaptation or mitigation. There is already significant evidence of 
women playing a vital role in effectively mobilizing communities for risk management, responding to 
climate disasters and driving social movements to end harmful practices that significantly contribute to 
climate change.4 
 
2.1 Gender and Climate Change in Rwanda 
Climate variability due to global warming is already posing specific challenges for Rwanda, including 
more frequent and intense extreme weather events such as floods and droughts, which have a significant 
negative impact on natural resources, the economy, food security, and differentiated impacts on women 
and men.5 Women and men are disproportionately affected by adverse environment risks. In general, 
women are more impacted by climate change and natural disaster impacts on land tenure and in 
settlements.6 An individual’s access to assets and resources largely determines their climate vulnerability 
and capacity for resilience and adaptation. In Rwanda, women tend to have more limited access to 
resources compared to men, access which would enhance their capacity to adapt to climate change - 
including land, credit, agricultural inputs, access to markets, decision-making bodies, technology and 
training services. Having less access to assets and control over resources makes women in Rwanda more 
vulnerable and less resilient to the impacts of climate change.7 
 
Women’s ability to cope with climate change remains limited due to higher poverty rates for women 
than for men, lower literacy rates among women, limited access to extension services and different 
 
4 Overview of linkages between gender and climate change; UNDP, 2017. Gender and Climate Change Overview Report. Skinner, E.; BRIDGE, 2011. 
5 Transforming Eastern Province through Adapatation, Rwanda. Gender Assessment for the Green Climate Fund; June 2021. Accessed at: 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gender-assessment-fp167-transforming-eastern-province-through-adaptation 
6 Gap Analysis of Gender–Environment and Climate Change Mainstreaming in National Policies and Strategies; REMA, December 2019. 
7 Transforming Eastern Province through Adapatation, Rwanda. Gender Assessment for the Green Climate Fund; June 2021. Accessed at: 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gender-assessment-fp167-transforming-eastern-province-through-adaptation

=== PAGE 108 ===
7 
 
cultural norms, traditional roles, and power relations between men and women. When clean drinking 
water is not available, women and girls must walk longer and more often over rough terrain to find it. If 
food is scarce, a woman is the last in the family to eat. As a result, climate change exacerbates existing 
gender disparities and uniquely disadvantages women and girls in Rwanda, and over time will continue 
to adversely and disproportionally affect women, in particular women smallholder farmers and 
pastoralists. In response to this identified need, the Government of Rwanda has taken steps to integrate 
gender considerations within and across national environmental and climate change efforts, in particular 
the strategic framework for Rwanda’s National Strategy on Climate Change and Low-Carbon 
Development, though REMA’s recent analysis of gender gaps in the environment and climate change 
sector indicate that more needs to be done to ensure the enforcement of gender equality indicators in 
mainstreaming tools and guidelines, as well as improved collection of sex-disaggregated data, increased 
use of gender-sensitive indicators and the avoidance of relying on ‘gender-neutral’ indicators and 
approaches.8 
3. The Gender Context of Rwanda 
3.1 Overview 
Over the last two decades, the Government of Rwanda has made considerable efforts to mainstream 
gender equality and women’s empowerment within and across national priorities of the country, 
including Vision 2020/2050, the Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EDPRS) that 
later became the National Strategy for Transformation (NST1), and through the revised National Gender 
Policy (2021), among other Sector Strategies. These goals have been translated into implementable 
actions to enhance the equal participation of and benefits to both men and women within the country’s 
development. The 2003 Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda (amended in 2015) emphasizes gender 
equality by conferring at least 30% of positions to women in decision-making organs, and other gender 
sensitive laws have been enacted including matrimonial regimes, donation and successions, and land 
access as well as the Law on the Prevention and Punishment of Gender-based Violence (GBV) . 
To ensure Gender Responsive Budgeting (GRB) in public institutions, Gender Budget Statements (GBS) 
have been made a requirement for all budgeting institutions. This has been institutionalized through the 
promulgation of the Organic Law N° 12/2013/OL of 12/09/2013 on State Finances and Property. The law 
is implemented and spearheaded by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, through planning 
and budgeting process. This has enabled actors specifically public institutions to use public resources to 
benefit both men and women and boys and girls. The institutional mechanisms for gender equality and 
empowerment of women are led by the Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion (MIGEPROF), Gender 
Monitoring Office (GMO), National Women’s Council (NWC) and Rwandan Forum for Women 
Parliamentarians (FFRP), and play a major role as gender machinery institutions for coordinating policy 
implementation, monitoring gender mainstreaming and the fight against GBV as well as the 
empowerment of women and girls for their active participation in the national development process. 
Despite these important legal reforms, patriarchal gender norms remain pervasive within Rwandan 
society, as this assessment will further illustrate. Rwanda, both historically and presently, is a deeply 
 
 
 
8 Gap Analysis of Gender–Environment and Climate Change Mainstreaming in National Policies and Strategies; REMA, December 2019.

=== PAGE 109 ===
8 
 
patriarchal culture and society.9 Despite the country being lauded for its progress in recent years in terms 
of legislation, women in government, and national narratives promoting gender equality and the 
empowerment of women and girls, patriarchal belief systems continue to dominate Rwandan society, 
particularly at the grassroots level (i.e. households and communities). Gender norms in the Rwandan 
context perpetuate the idea that men are superior to women in most facets of life, and support and 
reinforce the subjugation of women in various ways as well as men’s dominance over them.10 Women 
are generally expected to be submissive to men and prioritize becoming a wife and mother, as well as to 
be responsible for virtually all of the domestic and childcare duties, or what is otherwise known more 
broadly as ‘unpaid care work’. Men are considered heads of households as well as primary decision 
makers and breadwinners, while women often have little time, energy or freedom to engage in paid 
work outside of the home, or other opportunities for personal growth and development. When women 
do make money, most of the decisions around how, when and why it is spent are made by the husband. 
Girls as well as boys are prepared from a young age to fulfill these gender roles as adults, perpetuating 
and further solidifying the validity of such gender norms, which are in fact reproducing deep and harmful 
inequalities over time. 
 
Gender inequality has an impact on all aspects of society, from economic growth to the health and well- 
being of a country’s population more broadly, as well as to climate change mitigation and adaptation.11 
Despite the importance of gender equality for development, discrimination against women and girls is 
pervasive around the world, and Rwanda is no exception. While Rwanda’s prominent international image 
is as a champion of gender equality, especially in terms of women in parliament and leadership roles, 
men continue to outnumber and outrank women at almost every level of leadership across vital sectors 
such as health, education, the judiciary, local government, and national government.12 Further, violence 
against women and girls is another serious concern that has severe negative consequences for their 
agency, health and well-being and remains widespread in Rwandan society, with 24% of adolescent girls 
aged 15-19 and 28% of young women aged 20-24 having experienced violence at least once since the 
age of 15.13 In fact, the gendered normative attitudes that support and perpetuate violence against 
women and girls in Rwanda are still incredibly high; the 2014/15 Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), 
a nationally representative study conducted periodically by the National Institute of Statistics in Rwanda 
(NISR), reveals that 45% of girls aged 15-19 and 42% of young women aged 20-24 believe that a husband 
is justified in beating his wife for at least one or more of six common scenarios in the Rwandan context, 
including burning food, disagreeing with him or refusing to have sex with him (detailed findings from the 
most recent DHS 2019/20 survey are still pending). 
 
3.2 Key Metrics 
The table below outlines key metrics in Rwanda related to the current gender gap in different areas of 
social and economic life, with data drawn from recent gender assessments conducted for GCF 
 
 
 
 
9 Time allocation, gender and norms: Evidence from post-genocide Rwanda; Schindler, K., 2009. Gender and development: Working with men for gender 
equality in Rwanda; Carlson, K. and Randell, S., 2013. Gender Inequality Prevents Abused Women from Seeking Care Despite Protection Given in Gender- 
Based Violence Legislation: A Qualitative Study from Rwanda. Umubyeyi, A. et al., 2016. 
10 Gender Inequality Prevents Abused Women from Seeking Care Despite Protection Given in Gender-Based Violence Legislation: A Qualitative Study from 
Rwanda. Umubyeyi, A. et al., 2016. 
11 HIV/AIDS and Gender Issues. Interagency Coalition on AIDS and Development, July 2006. 
12 The State of Gender Equality in Rwanda. Gender Monitoring Office, March 2019; Statistical Yearbook 2017. NISR, 2017. 
13 DHS 2014-2015; NISR, 2015.

=== PAGE 110 ===
9 
 
applications.14 Many of these areas overlap significantly, as gender inequality is primarily a result of 
unequal power dynamics that cut across multiple facets of life. 
 
Table 2: Key metrics reflecting the current gender gap in Rwanda 
 
Poverty 
Despite supportive legislation, women continue to face considerable disadvantages 
in terms of poverty, particularly the very poor and women living in rural areas. 
Women are significantly less likely than men to be in decent paid employment, 
working mainly as dependent family labourers, and working significantly longer 
hours than men on a daily basis, particularly when unpaid care work is taken into 
account. Female-headed households (FHH) and households with many children face 
even greater challenges. According to EICV5, 39.5% of female headed households 
are poor compared to 37.6% of male headed households in Rwanda.15 
Agency and 
decision- 
making 
Findings from this assessment as well as other similar studies specific to Rwanda 
indicate that patriarchal gender norms continue to dominate in terms of the agency 
and decision making power women are able to access within their homes and 
communities.16 Women have limited agency in terms of making decisions 
independently without the need for a husband’s permission or approval, and their 
decision making power is typically relegated to areas where men consider women 
to have the most relevant interests, such as a childcare or domestic work.17 Men 
remain primary decision makers when it comes to household finances and are able 
to make decisions and take action without the involvement of their wives at all, 
even in such cases as buying parcels of land or livestock without the wife’s 
knowledge and forging her signature if necessary.18 Though Rwanda has a high 
number of women in parliament, women’s representation and leadership at the 
local level and other levels of government is significantly lower and relegated to 
lower levels of authority compared to men.19 There has been some positive 
progress in private sector decision-making, in terms of women’s participation in 
economic decision-making bodies. In 2018, women represented 25% of board 
members, 31% of CEOs, 25% of senior management staff, and 36.5% of women 
employees in the private sector.20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 Transforming Eastern Province through Adapatation, Rwanda. Gender Assessment for the Green Climate Fund; June 2021. Accessed at: 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gender-assessment-fp167-transforming-eastern-province-through-adaptation 
15 Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey 5 (EICV5); NISR, 2016/17. 
16 Gender Assessment for the CD4 Program; Land O’Lakes Venture37, March 2019; also reflected in key findings from this gender assessment. 
17 Transforming Eastern Province through Adapatation, Rwanda. Gender Assessment for the Green Climate Fund; June 2021. Accessed at: 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gender-assessment-fp167-transforming-eastern-province-through-adaptation 
18 Gender Analysis for USAID/Rwanda: Valuing Open and Inclusive Civic Engagement Project; USAID, 2015; also reflected in key findings from this gender 
assessment. 
19 The State of Gender Equality in Rwanda; Gender Monitoring Office, March 2019. Statistical Yearbook 2017; NISR, 2017. 
20 Beijing +25 Country Report; Gender Monitoring Office, May 2019.

=== PAGE 111 ===
10 
 
Health care 
The 2014/15 DHS indicates that only 23% of women reported being empowered 
to make decisions independently regarding their own health care, while 16% 
reported that decisions were mainly made by their husbands. Sexual and gender- 
based violence (SGBV) also poses serious health risks to women. Due to gender norms 
related to sex within the context of marriage, as well as religious influences, men tend 
to control decisions around sexual and reproductive health within marriage and both 
men and women feel that women cannot easily refuse to have sex if the husband 
demands it.21 
Gender-Based 
Violence 
In the DHS 2014/15 survey, 44% of women reported ever having experienced 
physical or sexual violence, and 36% reported having experienced injuries due to 
intimate partner violence in the past twelve months. Despite strong policies and 
legislation in Rwanda against gender-based violence (GBV), dominant gender 
norms that stress male authority and female submission significantly affect 
women’s likelihood of reporting when they experience male partner violence. 
Access to 
finance 
Women’s access to finance continues to lag behind men’s and is hindered by power 
dynamics in the home and society that affect a woman’s ability to access finance 
without relying on permission from husbands or having collateral to offer up for a 
loan. Targeted efforts in this regard have helped to increase women’s financial 
inclusion from 39% in 2013 to 86% in 2016. Currently, women with savings accounts 
are estimated at 39.7% and the number of women who borrowed from the banking 
sector more than tripled from 10,254 in June 2011 to 38,282 in June 2016.22 Men 
continue to access formal financial services at higher rates than women, while 
women rely on informal financial services (savings groups, etc.) at higher rates than 
men. Women’s higher illiteracy rates, lack of access to collateral and limited time 
also affects their ability to access credit programs and services.23 
Unpaid care 
work and 
division of 
labour 
Women in Rwanda do vastly more unpaid care work than their male counterparts 
with 77.2% of women versus 22.8% of men contributing to unpaid care work in the 
home.24 Women remain the primary providers of all care work in the home, while 
men are considered financial providers and breadwinners. Women manage all 
aspects of childcare, as well as domestic work including cleaning, cooking, fetching 
water and firewood, washing clothes, and taking family members and children to 
and from health centres and schools, as well as providing much of the agricultural 
labour for the family plot and caring for livestock. Men have significantly more rest 
and leisure time than women do, and except in rare cases, generally do not 
contribute to the domestic work load, even when they are unemployed or are only 
able to access temporary, part-time work. 
 
 
 
21 Men, Faith and Masculinities: Rwanda; Tear Fund, July 2016. 
22 Beijing +25 Country Report; Gender Monitoring Office, May 2019. 
23 Transforming Eastern Province through Adapatation, Rwanda. Gender Assessment for the Green Climate Fund; June 2021. Accessed at: 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gender-assessment-fp167-transforming-eastern-province-through-adaptation 
24 National Gender Statistics Report; NISR, 2019.

=== PAGE 112 ===
11 
 
Education 
School attendance at the primary level is relatively high for both boys and girls in 
Rwanda in recent years, while men and women in the older generation have far 
fewer years of schooling than young people do today, with women having lower 
levels of schooling than men and higher rates of illiteracy. Strong governmental 
policies in the education sector related to school attendance for girls have helped 
to close the gender gaps in education, but barriers persist. Trades embraced by 
girls are still reflective of the traditionally patriarchal division of labour and gender 
stereotypes; for example, males dominate within transportation services (93.6% 
for males versus 6.4% for females), in manufacturing and mining services (females 
hold 14.4% compared to 85.6% of males), in construction and building services 
(females hold 16.4% compared to 83.6% of males), and in enegrgy (females hold 
20.6% compared to 79.4% held by males.)25 
The drop out rate diverges significantly around age 16, with girls dropping out of 
school at higher rates than boys, particularly in rural areas, and their re-entry 
rates are much lower.26 Girls also face unique challenges related to puberty, 
missing multiple days of school each month due to lack of access to menstrual 
hygiene products. 
Employment 
Women in Rwanda are generally concentrated in unpaid family work, due to 
gendered expectations related to their roles as wives and mothers. Even if 
employment is available, women’s access to paid jobs is not equal to that of men’s. 
Men’s lack of involvement in unpaid care work creates an additional burden for 
women, and lack of affordable childcare further prevents women from being able 
to access paid employment. While women account for 44.8% of Rwanda’s labour 
force, they remain concentrated in small, low-paying jobs, mainly as crop farm 
labourers, domestic cleaners, market salespeople, and small shopkeepers. Among 
employed individuals with managerial positions, only 32% are women. 
Unemployment rates are higher in rural areas than urban, and higher for women 
than men. These unemployment rates have worsened during COVID-19, where the 
overall unemployment rate increased by 9.1%; the impact was higher among 
women (25%) than men (19.6%) and much higher among young people (32.9% for 
girls between 16-24 years and 22.9% for boys in the same age category) than adults 
(17.7%) of 31 years old and higher.27 
Women’s livelihoods were significantly negatively affected by the COVID-19 
pandemic. The majority of women in Rwanda are employed in informal sectors such 
as small businesses, tourism (accommodation and food services), in-country retail 
trade and cross-border trade, all of which have been severally impacted by the 
restriction of movement due to the spread of COVID-19 and the closure of borders. 
This has resulted in loss of business and a significant number of job losses for 
women, while others were compelled to divert capital toward basic needs of the 
household. 
 
25 Education Statistical Yearbook; MINEDUC, 2019. 
26 Assessment of repetition and drop out in basic education; Ministry of Education & UNICEF, 2017. 
27 Labour Force Survey; NISR, May 2020.

=== PAGE 113 ===
12 
 
Land 
Recent data shows that reforms in the Land Law and Inheritance Law have 
enabled more women to own land and, to some degree, use land for collateral. 
Currently, 59.9% of registered land is owned by married couples, 24% is owned by 
women and 16% is owned by men.28 About 39.9% of women have acquired loans 
and credit using their land as collateral and 25.5% women accessed agriculture 
loans using their land as collateral.29 However, while women are legally entitled to 
own and inherit land, gender norms continue to play a role in hindering their 
access to and control over land for use as collateral and other means. In addition, 
their limited control over land affects how decisions are made related to which 
crops should be grown, where women’s interest in growing food crops for family 
subsistence competes with men’s interests in growing primarily cash crops.30 
Agriculture 
While the agriculture sector provides many of the employment opportunities for 
men and women in Rwanda, there is a significant gender gap; women make up 
just 39.5% of those employed in agriculture, and occupy mostly lower paid, 
informal jobs and far fewer professional or managerial positions than men.31 75% 
of women are self-employed in agriculture, compared with just 63% of men.32 Due 
to women’s time and energy poverty driven by the heavy burden of unpaid care 
work, women also struggle to access training, resources and opportunities related 
to agricultural development, and have limited access to and control over financial 
resources to purchase inputs for improvements in crop production. There is also a 
distinct gender gap in women’s access to agricultural loans, with women 
representing just 25.5% and men representing 74.5% of those accessing loans for 
agriculture.33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 State of Gender Equality in Rwanda; Gender Monitoring Office, March 2019. 
29 Beijing +25 Country Report; Gender Monitoring Office, May 2019. 
30 Transforming Eastern Province through Adapatation, Rwanda. Gender Assessment for the Green Climate Fund; June 2021. Accessed at: 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gender-assessment-fp167-transforming-eastern-province-through-adaptation 
31 State of Gender Equality in Rwanda; Gender Monitoring Office, March 2019. 
32 Transforming Eastern Province through Adapatation, Rwanda. Gender Assessment for the Green Climate Fund; June 2021. Accessed at: 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gender-assessment-fp167-transforming-eastern-province-through-adaptation 
33 State of Gender Equality in Rwanda; Gender Monitoring Office, March 2019.

=== PAGE 114 ===
13 
 
Climate 
Vulnerability 
About 40% of Rwanda’s population lives below the poverty line, with women, 
disabled, widowed, and rural populations disproportionately affected. Adult 
women are more likely to be living in poverty (34.8%) than adult males (31.6%), 
and heavily involved in subsistence farming with limited access to improved 
agriculture inputs due to their low economic capacity.34 Women’s often 
challenging situation in terms of land tenure security and access to options for 
climate change adaptation means they will likely be increasingly and 
disproportionately affected by climate change. Unequal gendered power 
dynamics between men and women cause women to bear most negative effects 
of (climate change-induced) disasters. Changes in rainfall and temperature with an 
increase in floods and droughts will impact food security and water availability in 
Rwanda. The fact that women are primarily responsible for households’ water 
availability and food security indicates that their burdens will increase 
disproportionately due to climate change.35 
84.7% of women in Rwanda depend on firewood as their main source of cooking 
energy, largely due to limited accessibility and affordability to the high cost of 
alternative sources of energy (i.e. cooking gas and biogas).36 As a result of social 
cultural beliefs and gender norms, women and children are mainly responsible for 
providing cooking fuel in their homes. Limited access to alternative energy sources 
increases their workload and limits their engagement in other productive 
activities, compounding their climate vulnerability. 
4. Policy and Strategy Environment 
4.1 Institutional Framework for Gender Mainstreaming in Rwanda 
In addition to some of the key legal reforms noted above, Rwanda’s policy and strategy environment is 
in many ways considered favourable for promoting and mainstreaming gender equality and the 
participation and leadership of women and girls. There are a number of national policies and strategies 
that support gender equality and affirm the equal rights of women and girls, both as a targeted priority 
as well as a cross-cutting theme. 
 
4.1.1 Vision 2050 
Vision 2050 serves as an extension and refocusing of the previous Vision 2020, with the aim of Rwanda 
achieving upper middle-income status by 2035 and high-income status by 2050. Some of the target goals of 
Vision 2050 include sustained food security and better nutrition status, universal, sustainable, and reliable 
household access to improved water and sanitation, and universal access to quality health care and services. 
Both Vision 2020 and Vision 2050 highlight gender equality and women’s empowerment as an area of critical 
and cross-cutting importance. 
 
 
 
 
34 Beijing +25 Country Report; Gender Monitoring Office, May 2019. 
35 Climate Change Profile Rwanda; Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Government of the Netherlands, April 2018. 
36 Beijing +25 Country Report; Gender Monitoring Office, May 2019.

=== PAGE 115 ===
14 
 
4.1.2 National Strategy for Transformation (NST1) 
Rwanda’s National Strategy for Transformation (2017-2024) provides overarching guidance and focal areas 
for the accelerated social, political and economic transformation of the country. The NST1 includes various 
different interventions to promote gender equality and foster women’s empowerment, including 
mainstreaming gender in employment and job creation, improving women’s access to finance and continuing 
to combat gender-based violence (GBV). 
 
4.1.3 Strategic Plan for Agriculture Transformation 2018 - 2024 (PSTA IV) 
The Strategic Plan for Agriculture focuses on the intensification and commercialization of the agriculture 
sector in Rwanda, as a necessary precursor for poverty reduction and economic growth. The plan includes 
specific strategies to address gender inequality in the agriculture sector. It is further complemented by the 
Agriculture Gender and Youth Strategy (2019) which provides a gender analysis of the agriculture sector and 
mainstreaming guidance for greater gender equality and women’s participation and empowerment across 
all government agricultural programs and projects. 
 
4.1.4 Revised National Gender Policy 2021 
Rwanda’s National Gender Policy, under the Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion (MIGEPROF), was 
recently revised and approved in February 2021. The new policy specifically addresses a number of key 
gender issues, including the burden of unpaid care work and its impact on women’s health, well-being 
and economic independence, as well as the importance of women being involved in climate adaptation 
and mitigation strategies and solutions. 
 
4.1.5 National Land Policy (2019) 
This policy ensures that equal land rights for all citizens (women and men) are in place and enforced. 
Since the completion of land registration in 2013, there has been some improvement in gender parity 
with respect to land ownership between men and women. Currently, 59.9% of registered land is owned 
by married couples, 24% is owned by women and 16% is owned by men. 
 
4.1.6 National Environment and Climate Change Policy 2019 
One of the formal guiding principles of the National Environment and Climate Change Policy is 
‘inclusiveness’, naming women and youth as essential actors in environmental management and climate 
change intervention decision-making, and promoting the targeted involvement of women and youth in 
developing green technologies and designing climate change adaptation and mitigation solutions. 
 
4.1.7 National Housing Policy 2015 
This policy highlights the importance of including women and other marginalized groups in socio- 
economic development, as well as improving their access to resources and off-farm jobs. The policy also 
emphasizes the need to encourage female participation in the design of neighborhoods and settlements, and 
in the planning of social amenities and facilities. 
 
4.1.8 National Urbanization Policy 2015 
Within the National Urbanization Policy, Guiding Principle #8 underscores the importance of gender- 
sensitive commitments in Rwanda’s approach to urbanization. Gender equality and women’s 
empowerment are further highlighted in the policy, including the importance of supporting women as 
part of the urban economic force, promoting women’s and girls’ participation in urban planning, design

=== PAGE 116 ===
15 
 
and management at city and neighbourhood levels, and strengthening the prevention of gender-based 
violence in urban areas. 
 
4.1.9 Sectoral Policy on Water and Sanitation 2004 
Sitting under the Ministry of Environment, this policy acknowledges the insufficient participation of 
women in water infrastructure, the need for women and men to equally participate in water resource 
protection and management, and the need for the integration of a gender perspective into all levels of 
water management. 
While the overall policy and strategy framework for gender equality in Rwanda is generally supportive, 
there are notable exceptions, such as the National Informal Urban Settlement Upgrading Strategy of 
2017, which does not acknowledge or analyze the unique situation of women and girls in urban 
settlements, or make any explicit mention of the importance of gender equality and the empowerment 
and equal participation of women and girls in all matters related to urban settlement upgrades. 
 
4.2 The Green Climate Fund Gender Policy 
The GCF Gender Policy outlines the Fund’s clear commitments to ensuring effective gender 
mainstreaming across all of its work and funded projects. The GCF commits to consistently 
mainstreaming gender issues in its implementation arrangements as well as frameworks for its 
projects.37 
The Gender Policy of the GCF (reviewed and updated in November 2019) explicitly recognizes that 
gender relations, roles and responsibilities exercise significant influence on women’s and men’s access 
to and control over decisions, assets and resources, information, and knowledge. The Policy also 
recognizes that the impacts of climate change can exacerbate existing gender inequalities, and 
acknowledges that climate change initiatives are more sustainable, equitable and more likely to achieve 
their objectives when gender equality and women’s empowerment considerations are integrated into 
the design and implementation of projects. The updated GCF Gender Policy also recognizes that women 
and vulnerable communities are part of the solution to climate change and should, therefore, be 
effectively engaged in all discussions and decisions that affect them.38 
 
The GCF Gender Policy is closely aligned with the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which make 
explicit commitments to gender equality, both as a stand-alone goal on gender equality and women’s 
empowerment (SDG5) and as a cross-cutting theme for all of the SDGs. The Gender Policy is also guided 
by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, which acknowledges that in the 
process of addressing climate change, principles of gender equality and the empowerment of women 
should be respected, promoted and considered. The Gender Policy is also guided by the Paris Agreement, 
which reflects the commitment by Parties that adaptation action should be “gender-responsive”, and 
when taking action to address climate change, Parties must respect, promote and consider their 
respective obligations on human rights, the right to health, the rights of indigenous peoples, local 
communities, migrants, children, persons with disabilities and people in vulnerable situations and the 
 
 
37 Updated Gender Policy and Gender Action Plan 2020-2023; Green Climate Fund, November 6, 2019. 
38 Updated Gender Policy and Gender Action Plan 2020-2023; Green Climate Fund, November 6, 2019.

=== PAGE 117 ===
16 
 
right to development, as well as gender equality, the empowerment of women and intergenerational 
equity. 
5. Ngaruyinka Village Upgrade: Overview and Proposed Interventions 
5.1 Village overview 
Two pilot projects have been identified to be taken forward in the first phase of the implementation 
process for Green City Kigali. They are located close to each other in the north-westerncorner of Kinyinya 
Hill, creating opportunities for shared infrastructure and enabling works. Both pilot projects are founded 
on the four pillars of sustainable development and will deliver on the overall objectives of the GCK 
project. One of these two pilot projects is an 18 ha urban upgrade of an existing informal settlement in 
Ngaruyinka village. 
The Ngaruyinka village pilot has been selected to provide a model for climate responsive upgrading of 
an informal settlement. The objective is to create a model approach which can be upscaled and applied 
to multiple situations across Rwanda to maximize positive climate impacts on both men and women in 
line with the GCK approach. 
 
Ngaruyinka village lies on a steep north-facing slope. For the most part the land falls to the north at a 
gradient of around 15%. The slope gets shallower at the southern and northern ends and is steepest in 
the central area. Building foundations, roads and pathways have been manually levelled. Most buildings 
have poured concrete foundations, and some have concrete retaining walls. Roads and pathways are 
often shored up with sandbags as makeshift retaining structures. 
The resident population of the Ngaruyinka Village study area has been calculated at 1,634 persons. This 
has been calculated through a house-by-house count undertaken by a local survey team with assistance 
from local community leaders and representatives. The average household size is 4-5 persons. The oldest 
living person in Ngaruyinka is 90 years old. The built footprint of the village consists mainly of single 
family and multi-family homes. Together they total 321. In addition to this there is one primary 
commercial area at the foot of the hill along the main access road and a secondary commercial area 
within the village itself. 
 
There is a nursery school located halfway up the slope on the western boundary of the village, adjacent 
to the Ministry of Health site. Primary and Secondary schools are located in Kinyinya centre. Murama 
sector has recently procured an ambulance that will service four villages in Kinyinya, including 
Ngaruyinka. There are three community health workers in the village. The closest Primary Health Clinic 
is Kinyinya Health Centre about a 40-minute walk away, and there is a health post in Rwankuba around 
a 20-minute walk away. The commercial area is supplied every morning by truck from Kinyinya center 
and consists of the following local shops and services: 
• 2 x small restaurants serving local food, milk and tea 
• A small market square selling locally harvested vegetables and charcoal 
• A small canteen serving tea and bread 
• A men’s hair salon (there is no salon for women) 
• Several small shops and kiosks selling vegetables, milk, grains 
• Butcher shop (opening soon)

=== PAGE 118 ===
17 
 
Local community meetings and events are often held under trees in a clearing in the middle of the village 
which is also used as a market place. The New Life in Jesus church lies about 35min walk away from 
Ngaruyinka. Other religious buildings are located up the hill about 25 minutes walk away, toward 
Kinyinya Centre. Virtually the entire 18ha study area is within a 200m catchment of either a commercial 
area or the nursery school. The remainder of the area is a mix of grassland, formal farms and informal, 
domestic level farming. Further development in the village has been halted until infrastructure can be 
improved. 
 
Most of the buildings in the village are single story homes and/or commercial premises constructed of 
mud/clay bricks, typically with corrugated steel roofs and steel framed doors and windows. Many 
buildings have concrete foundations and facing render. There are occasional concrete brick buildings. 
Many buildings are in a poor state of repair on facades and around foundations, particularly in high 
erosion risk spots. For the most part, many streets and pathways in the village are rarely trafficked and 
in effect they act as pedestrian controlled public space and play areas. There are a few specific places 
that are currently used formally as ‘public spaces’, the most significant of which is the market area. Every 
house located along the streets and pathways in the village is required to have a light facing the street 
to act as public lighting, though coverage is very limited. There is no evidence of formal street furniture 
or public waste bins in the village. 
Approximately 60% of the population of the village rent their homes. It is typical that the landowners 
are also residents and that they might receive rent from around 10 households on their land. According 
to interviews with local residents at Ngaruyinka Village, most crimes in the area are petty thefts of 
phones, bags, etc. There is a community patrol in the village that is organised by a community member 
responsible for security within the local leadership structure. 
 
There are significant existing environmental and social risks in Ngaruyinka village. The increase in 
informal neighbourhoods, a direct consequence of urbanization, is largely due to market forces in the 
inner cities. Low-income earners are continually being pushed out of Kigali's city centre due to the high 
cost of living. It has been estimated that more than 340,000 housing units will be needed by 2022 to 
supply the growing number of city dwellers. Meanwhile, the desire to reside in Kigali at all costs has 
driven the development of many informal enclaves where housing structures are of poor quality. In 
Ngaruyinka village, this informal development is characterised by a lack of adequate waste and sanitation 
facilities and a lack of stormwater drainage. These gaps lead to environmental degradation and social 
risks, such as poorer health and vulnerability to climate events. The High-Level Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessment Report prepared for the Green City Kigali Project contains additional information 
regarding environmental and social risks. 
 
5.2 Proposed Interventions for the Ngaruyinka Village Upgrade 
The table below briefly outlines the different interventions proposed for the village upgrade. Discussions 
with men and women in Ngaruyinka village explored the perceptions of different community members 
related to the proposed interventions detailed below.

=== PAGE 119 ===
18 
 
Table 3: List of proposed Interventions for the Ngaruyinka Village Upgrade 
 
Sector 
Activity 
Transport / Mobility 
Construction of green rights of way 
Green road construction methods 
Stormwater Management 
Blue/Green improved stormwater management systems 
Water Supply 
Expansion of central water supply (100% connection rate) 
Rainwater harvesting (as supplement to central supply) 
Education about filters for household water treatment 
Sanitation 
Biogas system at the market 
Latrine improvements / education 
Solid Waste Management 
Community composting 
Neighbourhood waste collection point 
Recycling collection stations 
Energy 
Solar street lighting 
Education about solar PV 
Education about improved cook stoves 
Education about energy efficient lighting and appliances 
Community Facilities 
Establishment of a technical and vocational education and training (TVET) 
Centre 
Market upgrades, including new public latrines at the market 
Additional community focal points, improved football pitch, new children’s 
playground 
 
6. Methodology of the Gender Assessment for Ngaruyinka Village 
6.1 Baseline Data Collection 
The gender assessment conducted in Ngaruyinka village adopted an interactive and participatory 
approach, engaging both women and men of different ages and backgrounds to gather qualitative data 
on the gender dynamics of the village, as well as the ways in which men and women use village spaces 
and infrastructure differently. Data was collected from a diverse range of women and men, including 
married women and men, single women and men, young women and men, elderly women and men, 
adolescent girls, widows, women-headed households, male and female local leaders, community health 
workers, and those from different ubudehe categories. Names of participants have been removed and 
any identifying details have been otherwise made ambiguous or generalized in order to protect the 
anonymity of research participants. 
 
Baseline data collection began on September 6th, 2021 and was completed on September 27th, 2021. A 
total of seven site vists were conducted that captured detailed feedback from community members, 
involving focus group discussions and in-depth individual interviews. Informed, written consent was 
collected from all participants before data collection proceeded.

=== PAGE 120 ===
19 
 
Focus group discussions and interviews gathered data across the following thematics: 
• How women and men spend their time on a daily basis 
• How women and men use village spaces, infrastructure and utilities differently 
• Gender dynamics within the village, at the community level 
• Gender dynamics within the village, at the household level 
• Women’s participation in leadership and decision making in the home and community 
• Women’s participation in leadership and decision making related to the village upgrade 
consultations and planning process 
• Women’s and men’s perceptions of the proposed upgrade interventions 
• Women’s public safety in the village 
 
6.2 Focus group discussions 
Focus group discussions (FGDs) were conducted with both men and women to assess their different 
experiences, roles and perceptions. Four focus groups were conducted with women, and two with men; 
each FGD focused on different thematics and utilized a variety of approaches for gathering data related 
to gender dynamics in the village as well as different perceptions of the proposed upgrade interventions. 
Focus groups brought together men and women of different ages and backgrounds to gather a diverse 
range of perspectives. Focus groups aimed to have 8-10 participants at most, but some groups ended up 
with higher numbers due to the discussion participants inviting others they knew, as well as local leaders 
adding additional people to groups at the last minute without informing the field team. 
 
6.3 In-depth interviews 
Three additional in-depth interviews were conducted with women and girls of different ages and 
backgrounds, including adolescent girls, community health workers and widows/women-headed 
households, to dig deeper into key gender issues from their unique perspectives and gather individual 
feedback on the proposed interventions for the upgrade. 
 
6.4 Summary of complete field data collection process 
 
Table 4: Summary of complete field data collection process 
 
Data collection 
method 
Target group 
Thematic focus 
Number of 
participants 
FGD 
Men 
Daily itinerary mapping 
14 
FGD 
Men 
Deep dive into norms, behaviours and gaps 
8 
FGD 
Women 
Daily itinerary mapping 
9 
FGD 
Women 
Gender community mapping 
10 
FGD 
Women 
Deep dive into norms, behaviours and gaps 
13 
FGD 
Women 
Women’s safety audit 
6 
KII 
Women 
Deep dive into norms, behaviours and gaps 
1 
KII 
Women 
Deep dive into norms, behaviours and gaps 
1 
KII 
Adolescent girls 
Deep dive into norms, behaviours and gaps 
1

=== PAGE 121 ===
20 
 
7. Key Findings 
Under this title, the consultant need to explain the senarios by using statistics/ data from the findings 
to clarify the issue or the best practices that can be documented.This comment is applied in all sub 
titles of this part. 
7.1 Gender norms in the village 
Gender norms in Ngaruyinka village broadly reflect the typical patriarchal roles and gender expectations 
that are commonly seen across the rest of Rwanda. Men are considered to be providers and leaders, and 
women’s primary role is to remain in the domestic sphere and prioritize being a wife and a mother. Men 
lead when it comes to decision making in both the household and community, and women often feel 
uncomfortable speaking up, giving their opinions or disagreeing with others; when they do speak up, 
they do not feel their voices are valued or respected the way men’s are. Details on these norms and roles 
across different areas of daily life at the home and community level are outlined below. 
 
7.2 Gendered division of labour and unpaid care work 
Feedback from focus groups and interviews with women and men clearly indicate a significant and 
unbalanced divison of roles and labour within households and communities that runs along distinct 
gender lines. Both men and women report that women spend the majority of their time in the domestic 
sphere on unpaid care work, including cooking, cleaning, childcare (bathing, feeding, managing), washing 
laundry, fetching water and firewood/fuel, accompanying children to schools and health centres and 
running domestic errands. Men are expected to work outside of the home to earn money, but often 
struggle to find full-time employment, and most work in part-time or temporary roles for other 
companies or as individual contractors/entrepreneurs, such as carpenters or masons. Most women who 
earn some money on their own do so by selling agricultural produce in the market or along the roadside, 
and are expected to spend this money on household needs first and foremost, whereas men have much 
greater discretion over spending, and can choose to spend their income on themselves before 
considering the family’s needs. 
 
Younger women and adolescent girls also face barriers in this regard, reporting that small jobs available 
to young people are mostly dominated by young men, such as local construction jobs. If girls are able to 
access a paid job in such a role, they often face harassment and discrimination, including the heightened 
risk of sexual harassment and violence on the road to and from the work site. Jobs that girls and young 
women are expected to fill instead, such as nannys or housekeepers / cleaners for other homes, put girls 
even more at risk due to sexual violence from employers. Young women’s lack of access to safe, paid 
work also contributes to their further victimization in the community from older men who exploit their 
poverty and economic vulnerability through transactional sex and sexual violence. The quote below best 
illustrates in vivid detail the complex, interconnected nature of the norms and circumstances that make 
women’s and girls’ lived experience in the home and at work uniquely disempowering. 
 
“Girls don’t have access to money; we always have to ask our parents, even for anything small, like a candy, 
etc. We don’t have access to small jobs to even get some small money for ourselves; girls are doing the 
vast majority of chores and taking care of siblings, or elder family members. The problem with small jobs 
is that you have to walk far to access them, and they often pay so little that it’s not even worth the time. 
One of those could be working as a cleaner in someone’s home, or a nanny, but that’s also the place of 
biggest risk, because you get pregnant there; the men in the home will rape you and there’s nothing you 
can do.

=== PAGE 122 ===
21 
 
Many girls got pregnant in this village because of Covid; they were at home and had few opportunities, 
and men would take advantage of them, ask them to come to their homes, and sometimes rape them or 
coerce them. Some girls would be removed from school by their families, in order to go work and make 
money, because Covid was so hard financially. Young boys usually get construction work, carrying heavy 
loads, etc. but for girls there are often consequences; if you join a construction site, it’s risky. If there are 
only one or two other girls there then the men are always making fun of you, harassing you, saying girls 
shouldn’t be doing this. And that money is never yours, you have to hand it over to the family. Also, it 
happens a lot that men expect you to give them sex if they give you a job, especially with young girls who 
have become mothers, they are alone, abandoned by their families, and the men know this and exploit 
them because they fear they can’t feed their kids if they don’t get that job – this happens on construction 
sites as well as on the farms.” 
- young woman, research participant 
 
Men rarely contribute to domestic work in the home even if they are not currently employed or working, 
and tend to have significantly more leisure or rest time than women do, due to the heavy burden of 
domestic responsibitlites women are expected to manage. Both women and men report that men 
consider their parenting role to be primarily financial, and are not actively involved in the day to day 
activities of parenting or childcare in the home. Women report that the extremely heavy burden of 
unpaid care work has very serious consequences for women’s physical, mental and emotional health 
and well-being. 
“It’s very painful, it makes you sad… you’re dirty all the time, you don’t even have time to bathe, even if 
you had soap, you still feel dirty and sweaty.” 
- woman, FGD participant 
“It also makes us unhappy, we don’t have time for friends, emotional support, etc. People lose weight, 
they’re constantly stressed, depressed.” 
- woman, FGD participant 
 
7.3 Finacial agency and decision making 
Households have to engage in a range of different activities in order to earn enough income for the 
family, including small side jobs for cash, part-time or temporary work, selling crops from their local 
plots, or engaging in small business such as running a local shop / kiosk or specific trades such as welding, 
carpentry, etc. Of those interviewed, all of the men reported having some kind of paid work, while only 
3 women reported having access to paid work; when asked, all women responded enthusiastically that 
they would like to have access to paid work. Overall, women have very limited access and agency when 
it comes to finances and decision making, both in terms of being able to secure paid work or start a 
business, but also in terms of having control or influence over the money in their own households. Most 
women do not know the amount of money their husbands are earning; out of 12 women in a focus 
group, only 1 of the women knew the amount of money her husband was bringing into the home. In 
contrast, all of the men in the focus groups knew whether or not their wives had paid work, and the 
exact amount she was earning every month. 
 
In terms of being able to control or influence where and how household money is spent, women have 
very little agency. Women report that men make decisions about money in virtually all cases, as this is

=== PAGE 123 ===
22 
 
the general expectation based on the gender norms of Rwandan culture; in some rare cases, husbands 
will inform their wives of their plans for spending, but at the end of the day, the husband has the final 
say in how, where and why household income will be spent, saved or otherwise. In some instances, 
women can spend money on small things for the household, such as soap or small food items, but this 
typically involves women relying on whatever small cash they may earn selling vegetables or other goods 
on the road or at the market to cover those costs themselves. If women don’t have any cash, which is 
often the case, they will ask their husbands. Women’s overwhelming response is that, even when men 
do have cash in hand, they can often choose not to give some to the wife for household spending, making 
women and children in the home even more vulnerable. Quotes from participants below help to 
illustrate these circumstances in more detail. 
 
“Rarely, the husband will inform the wife he has money and ask her advice. Most times, the husbands will 
do what they want, buy things they want, even if it’s not useful to the family. And if the wife says she 
disagrees, it doesn’t matter – if the husband wants to spend it, he will do it, even if the wife does not want 
that.” 
- woman, FGD participant 
 
“It's better to stay quiet; if you insist and ask too many questions it can lead to conflict. And then he can 
even get mad and withhold cash from you that he would normally give you for buying food. Men can 
withhold cash as a way of punishing you if they are mad at you. This happens a lot.” 
- woman, FGD participant 
 
Male participants tended to present a more favourable picture when discussing how financial decisions 
are made. Some men reported that husbands and wives have to discuss things together first, especially 
for major purchases such as livestock, land or other significant household investments. However, women 
reported that because men earn most of the income outside of the household and control how it is 
spent, they often make major household purchases on their own, without ever informing their wives. 
“If there is any conversation about it, the husband will tell the wife about it, they can discuss, but in the 
end he will make the decision. Otherwise, what is more common is that husbands will buy something and 
tell their wives afterward, or sometimes they won’t tell them at all. It’s not everyone, but it happens in 
many families here. It happens a lot where men buy land or other things, even get loans from banks, and 
the wife is not even involved; then there are legal issues and women get involved afterward, when it 
becomes a problem.” 
- woman, FGD participant 
 
“When land is purchased, a lot of times, women are not involved; we don’t even know about it, and 
sometimes the husbands can forge the wife’s signature. Husbands can take our ID cards and do the whole 
transaction without us; the husband will tell the authorities that the wife agrees, and unless it’s absolutely 
necessary for the wife to physically be there in person, the husbands can do whatever they want.” 
- woman, FGD participant 
When it comes to women being able to start their own businesses or work outside of the home to earn 
income, additional challenges arise. The heavy load of unpaid care work is a major barrier for women in 
this regard, as reported by both men and women in the village. Women also cite limited access to

=== PAGE 124 ===
23 
 
opportunities, lack of self-confidence and a general lack of skills and experience as additional barriers to 
their economic independence. In addition, due to gender norms around money and business being the 
domain of men, women report that husbands create additional barriers for women and in general are 
not supportive. 
 
“Women are taking care of the home; even if they were offered jobs, maybe outside of the village or the 
region, they can’t take those jobs because they have to take care of the home. There is also the problem 
of a lack of start up capital to start that business. Some initiatives try to help women with start up capital 
but they don’t reach all women.” 
- man, FGD participant 
 
“We can’t easily use land for collateral to get loans to start businesses, unless the husband approves. There 
is maybe a 30% chance the husband would ever agree.” 
- woman, FGD participant 
 
“Depending on the husband, if he trusts his wife, then he might allow it; but otherwise they are very 
suspicious.” 
- woman, FGD participant 
Women’s distinct, but not uncommon, lack of financial agency and decision making only serves to 
exacerbate their climate vulnerablity. 
 
7.4 Permission and Mobility 
Due to the gendered power dynamics between men and women in the home, women typically have to 
ask for permission from husbands to be able to go out or do other activities they want or need to 
undertake. Women have to move about during the day for various reasons, to fetch water, visit the 
market or accompany children, and must inform their husbands of where they are going each time they 
go out. For smaller tasks related to domestic work and childcare, women can move about more easily, 
but if the husband has alternate plans and wants them to stay home, they will have to rearrange their 
day in order to accommodate his wishes and plans. At the very least, women must always inform 
husbands of their plans to go out, and in many cases, they must also seek his formal permission to do so. 
 
If women want to travel farther out to visit friends or family, or to leave the village for another purpose, 
they must plan this well in advance and ensure the husband gives his approval, especially since childcare 
plans must be put in place and men are generally not the ones to manage these responsiblities. If the 
husband says no, the wife cannot go ahead with her plans; if she were to do this, it would create conflict, 
and could even lead to violence. Husbands also consider that women will need money for traveling if she 
has to go beyond the village, and so everything must be planned well in advance so that they can arrange 
to provide her with cash, a situation that further highlights how little control women have over 
household income. 
 
“If he says no, then we don’t go. If we went, it would create conflict. Also, culturally we are expected to 
‘respect’ our husbands and do what they say.” 
- woman, FGD participant

=== PAGE 125 ===
24 
 
“If they need to go far, it has to be well planned in advance; planning for the spending, transportation, 
giving gifts to those you will be visiting, etc. She can’t just wake up and go, men also have to give money 
to their wives for them to travel.” 
- man, FGD participant 
 
Both men and women report that husbands use their financial power in the home to keep wives from 
going out or doing things the husband doesn’t agree with or want them to do. Men will refuse to give 
their wives money for transport if they don’t want her to go out, and women report having to be careful 
not to upset or offend their husbands in advance of a trip or a request to go out, so that he will not refuse 
them access to household income to make the trip. 
 
“Sometimes a woman may want to go somewhere, but you don’t feel comfortable with it; you will have to 
talk to her and convince her otherwise, so she might stay or she might go, but if she goes, there will be 
consequences after. It will create conflict.” 
- man, FGD participant 
 
“If I don’t want her to go there, I will definitely not give her the money for transport to go.” 
- man, FGD participant 
 
“If you have a trip planned, you have to be on your best behaviour so that he doesn’t get mad and refuse 
to give you transport.” 
- woman, FGD participant 
Alternatively, both men and women report that husbands never have to ask for permission to go out or 
engage in activities of their choosing, and they never have to rely on their wives for income to access 
transport or risk having their plans cancelled. 
 
“We never ask permission, we just inform them. If the wife does not want us to go somewhere or do 
something, then she will say, “in future you can’t refuse me to go somewhere I want”; she will bargain with 
him. But she can never stop him. She might say she doesn’t have any money, to try to keep me there, but 
me as a man I will go find that money from somewhere else; that’s the difference, women can’t get that 
money somewhere else to go if they want, but men can.” 
- man, FGD participant 
“Men never ask for permission. It’s only men informing us, not asking for permission, and even then that 
is rare.” 
- woman, FGD participant 
 
Women also report that men have much more freedom and control to spend household income on 
personal things, such as going to bars with friends to drink and socialize. All women reported that many 
men spend a lot of time drinking in their community, and will often become aggressive and violent 
towards those in their households, further damaging the family’s development. 
 
7.5 Gender-Based Violence 
Violence takes many forms, including physical, sexual, emotional and economic. Both women and men 
participants reported high levels of violence in the village, ranging from verbal abuse, domestic conflicts,

=== PAGE 126 ===
25 
 
and street harassment to sexual coercion, marital rape and extreme intimate partner violence resulting 
in the deaths of women. In addition, economic violence is widespread, as demonstrated in the detailed 
feedback from men and women around financial control, decision making and paid work among men 
and women and between spouses. Women reported that in just the first nine months of 2021 alone (up 
to the time of the focus group), two women had already been killed by their husbands in Ngaruyinka 
village, beaten to death. Women shared additional stories of different women in the village also being 
attacked by husbands wielding machetes and hammers. 
 
Reporting of violence is very low, which is not unusual in general or in the Rwandan context, even in 
extreme cases. The woman who had been attacked by her husband and hit in the head with a hammer 
asked other community members not to report what had happened. Women tend not to report for a 
variety of reasons, including being blamed for the violence, shamed or ostracized by others, and 
struggling to financially provide for their children in the husband’s absence if he is arrested. 
“A husband attacked his wife and hit her in the head with a hammer; she asked them not to report him, 
but if she had, he would have been arrested.” 
- woman, FGD participant 
“If it was less severe, like the husband slaps her, she might report it or not, but women fear that they will 
have no money if he gets arrested; men are the breadwinners, and if they are in prison then the wife has 
no money and has to bring him food every day while he is in jail.” 
- woman, FGD participant 
 
Due to women’s significant economic dependence on their husbands, they are uniquely vulnerable in 
both scenarios; if women report violence, they risk not being able to feed their children, and if they do 
not report violence, they remain in abusive situations where they experience signficant physical and 
psychological trauma, suffer serious and even debilitating permanent injury, or lose their lives entirely. 
Even for women who are widowed or single mothers and not living with a male partner, violence is an 
ever-present reality. 
“Violence affects the children, and the families. Women die, they are killed by their husbands. It destroys 
the family. This year, two women have died in this village from being beaten to death by their husbands. 
Last year, another man murdered his wife and abandoned her body in the home, and even abandoned the 
children, one who was even breastfeeding; he just left the kids behind with her dead body.” 
- woman, FGD participant 
 
“It makes women so depressed, they can’t work even if they did have a job. Overall, it destroys women’s 
well-being. We haven’t yet seen women comitting suicide, but a lot of women are very depressed and not 
able to cope.” 
- woman, FGD participant 
 
I think there is a lot of violence here, My house is close to a main road and I can hear women being beaten, 
yelled at, women screaming nearby in the night; I want to say this happens every day, but on average, it’s 
at least about 5 nights a week. It’s not safe to walk at night, because there are so many men here drinking 
all the time, day and night, so it’s risky for women to be out at night, and even in the day. Compared to 
where I lived before, I have never seen or experienced this much chronic violence; the crazy things that

=== PAGE 127 ===
26 
 
happen in people’s households, women being killed, the harassment on the streets, it’s very high risk here. 
I have thought about moving, but am still considering where to go next, and the potential safety risks of 
other places.” 
- single mother, research participant 
 
Girls and young women are also targets of men’s violence in the village; adolescent girls are at a unique 
disadvantage due to their age, limited independence and agency, and economic vulnerability. 
“In general, there is very little safety in this village. Even before you got here today, there was a fight on 
the road in front of the bar there; many people came and it was a huge mess. There are a lot of drunken 
men around here. There is a term that men use here to refer to boarding school girls – they call them 
‘grasshoppers’, because they go to and from boarding school, so when they come back to the community, 
the men say ‘it’s grasshopper season’, and they try to have sex with them. Right now it’s holiday time, we 
have a break from school, we should be able to go somewhere and see friends and play, but there is no 
safe space in the community, there is nowhere for us to go; we are secluded in the home, and this is also 
why there is a high pregnancy rate. Men invite girls to their homes because there is nothing else for those 
girls to do, so the men see this as an opportunity to take advantage of them. It’s most often older men, 
even those who are married. Sometimes young men who have small jobs and make some small money also 
do this, or unemployed men who are sitting around the street usually catcalling women and girls; it is even 
those men who seem respectable but don’t have work, so they ask girls to come home and ‘have tea with 
them’ and that’s how it starts.” 
- girl/young woman, research participant 
 
 
7.6 Women’s and men’s different uses and perceptions of village spaces in daily life 
In order to understand how women and men spend their time on a daily basis and use village spaces and 
resources differently, community members mapped their daily itineraries as part of the baseline data 
collection process, and gave feedback on the positive and negative aspects of different actvities in and 
around different village spaces. Their feedback reveals that men and women use many of the same 
spaces in Ngaruyinka village, but in different ways and to different degrees. 
 
Men work outside of the home wherever possible, and have the option of moving around by moto, 
bicycle, car, bus or foot, whereas women stay closer to home and primarily travel by foot. If women need 
to travel farther distances, they rely more on bicycles (i.e., they pay a fee to ride on the back of a bicycle), 
whereas men tend to rely more on motos or cars. Women’s reliance on getting around on foot presents 
unique vulnerabilities for them in terms of their safety in the village, particularly in light of the lack of 
street lighting in the village and reported high rates of violence. Due to the constraints on their time in 
any given day, women often choose to take the shortest routes to get to their destination, even if it 
means it may come with higher risk than other routes. 
Women access the local market every day, and often multiple times per day, whereas men spend much 
less time at the market. Similarly, women are spending significantly more time per day fetching water 
and firewood or fuel for the home compared with men. Women spend significantly more hours in the 
home per day than men, managing domestic work and childcare, and while both men and women 
perform agricultural work, overall women spend more time on this task on a daily basis, as well.

=== PAGE 128 ===
27 
 
Men’s and women’s perceptions of the positive and negative aspects of their daily activities in and 
around different village spaces are captured in the table below in their own words. While men and 
women have much of the same feedback on key problem areas (such as bad roads or the need for market 
improvements), issues that affect women and men differently in distinctly gendered ways are 
highlighted in bold. In addition, concerns directly related to the village upgrade intervention areas 
and/or climate change and resilience are highlighted in green.

=== PAGE 129 ===
28 
 
Table 5: Women’s and men’s different uses and perceptions of village spaces in daily life 
 
Village spaces / 
activities 
Men’s perceptions 
Women’s perceptions 
Market, food 
shopping 
Positive: We like that the market is close to our homes. 
Negative: The space is not renovated, so we don’t have 
enough sellers there, because it’s not a nice / well equipped 
space; the supply chain is very low because of the access 
road; most of the products get to the market by bikes – cars 
can’t access the market via road when the roads are 
especially bad – so we have to rely on bikes; food 
preservation is an issue, food goes bad quickly because 
there are no areas for refrigeration, this affects food 
security 
Positive: We like that it’s close to us, but it doesn’t have much to offer. 
Negative: Not bult for purpose; not enough to offer; because it’s poorly 
constructed, people can’t use it easily and so it doesn’t attract many merchants; 
it’s not a modern market – it’s dirty, the roof leaks, no walls, it’s not appealing for 
so many reasons; because it’s dirty – people don’t want to sell or buy there; when 
there are heavy rains, they close the market, merchants leave and people have to 
wait for them to come back; also the floor is muddy and unsafe; the roads to and 
from are bad, so it’s difficult to get access – and there’s not a huge consumer base 
here, so that, combined with the terrible market infrastructure, doesn’t give people 
an incentive to come here and bring more and better and different goods to sell 
Schools 
Positive: None. 
Negative: Most schools are outside of the village. The 
nursery school here is not in good condition; we’re 
concerned about the school collapsing on the kids, 
especially during rainy season. We need better schools and 
schools that are closer to us. Roads to get to and from 
other schools in Kinyinya are also bad. 
Positive: It’s good that we have some access, and it’s not very far away, but the 
roads are the main issue. 
Negative: The roads are terrible, if it’s raining and we don’t have moto access we 
have to walk, or if you have small children you have to carry them, and it’s very 
difficult; we don’t have access to school buses, the bus leaves at 6:15 am from the 
bus station in Kinyinya, so that means we have to get up extremely early and 
escort the kids; capacity of the school is too small, overcrowded, some kids sit on 
the floor, not enough chairs, if it rains you can’t hear anything with the tin roofs, 
and when it’s hot it’s so hot kids can’t focus; there are not enough school materials 
for all kids (pens, notebooks, etc.); nursery schools don’t have the right toys or 
tools for kids that age. 
Health centres / 
hospitals 
Positive: The health centre (the Kinyinya health centre) is in 
good condition, we don’t mind it, the problem is getting 
there. 
Negative: Getting to and from the health centre, the roads 
are bad and dusty. 
Positive: It’s not very far away, it’s good to have at least some access. 
Negative: The roads here are bad and motos don’t want to use them, especially 
at night; traveling time is long on foot, especially for pregnant women; you end 
up in worse condition than when you started, walking there and the roads are 
exhausting; we put off going there if we can, because it’s difficult with the roads

=== PAGE 130 ===
29 
 
Football pitch / 
community 
spaces 
Positive: None. 
Negative: In general it’s not a good space, it’s dusty, there 
is lots of debris around there from the market, it’s 
dangerous for kids. 
Positive: None. 
Negative: The football pitch we have now is used as a community space, it’s not 
very useful as it is now though. 
Agricultural work 
/ kitchen gardens 
Positive: It helps with malnutrition, to have a garden close 
to home, and eating fresh produce that hasn’t traveled 
miles to get here or wilted in the market. 
Negative: We can only grow small items, like spinach, 
cabbage, green eggplants, carrots, etc.; but things that are 
actually nutritional, we can’t plant those; there is a lack of 
fertilizers, lack of nutritious soil, and lack of space; also 
lack of easy access to water, especially in dry season; we 
have small plots, there is a lack of space 
Positive: We have easy access to some food, it’s convenient; for some of us who 
rent, it’s not our land, so it’s like investing in something that is not your own, but 
we do have free and full access to that food we grow; sometimes we can rent land 
from others down in the marsh to grow some of our own food; but then you have 
to pay them in cash or harvest; depends on your agreement with the land owner 
Negative: Water is the main challenge; unless it’s rainy season you have to buy 
water to water the garden and it gets expensive, and requires a lot, especially in 
dry season; access to fertilizer is difficult; no cattle nearby so difficult to get 
manure, other things we would get are commercial fertilizers that we have to buy; 
not everything grows here because of the soil quality – we can only grow beans, 
casava, sorghum, cabbage, etc. - everything else we have to buy 
Collecting water 
Positive: Nothing positive about the current system. 
Negative: Sometimes even the public pump does not have 
water at all, so we have to collect it downstream; 
sometimes we have don’t have water for even 3 days, 
maybe 10 in 100 people have access to piped water here, so 
if we want to drink the stream water we have to boil it, 
otherwise it’s used for other chores; people get sick from 
drinking that water even if it’s boiled, and kids also get 
sick, worms, etc.; rainwater harvesting will help but we 
also need piped water. 
Positive: We’re happy we have natural streams nearby, because it’s always 
reliable; the water kiosk is useful for those who don’t have water in their homes; 
it’s closer than the natural streams. 
Negative: Kiosk always has super long lines and you have to pay; streams are only 
reliable source; most households don’t boil the water, we just drink it as it is; 
there are some cultural beliefs that stream water is cleaner than pipe water – 
because it ‘comes from the land’; also charcoal is expensive, and it takes time to 
boil that water; people do get sick, but they refuse to believe that it’s from that 
water.

=== PAGE 131 ===
30 
 
Fetching 
firewood/fuel 
Positive: Nothing really positive here, we all want to move 
to the use of gas. 
Negative: We all mostly use charcoal, but trucks can’t 
access the market, so sellers have to go the market in 
Batsinda by bicycle and bring it here, which then makes it 
more expensive for us to buy locally; so instead we end up 
collecting firewood from the marsh, sticks from bushes, 
etc.; sometimes we can also buy firewood in the market; up 
the hill there is also a lot of debris we can use for fuel if we 
need; 5% population here uses firewood, 75% uses 
charcoal, and the other 20% uses gas stoves 
Positive: Only positive thing here is that the market is closer, there is easier access 
than going all the way up to the top of the hill. 
Negative: For people who use gas, you have to go all the way to Kinyinya to get it; 
for charcoal, we also have to go up to the top to get charcoal because the trucks 
don’t bring them down; it’s much cheaper to buy it from up top from the 
wholesaler, buying it from those few in the village who sell it is much more 
expensive and you have to buy in smaller amounts; Firewood is scarce, difficult to 
find, not easy to use, we have to go far to find it. 
Business / 
employment 
Positive: Nothing really positive here. 
Negative: Transport is difficult, the roads to and from 
where we work are a problem; people who use computers 
for work, there isn’t reliable electricity in our shops / 
homes; security issues – thieves, getting mugged, etc. - this 
is most prominent at night because of lack of lighting; lack 
of lighting at night also makes it difficult to move around 
the village after dark, especially with bad roads; when it 
rains, we have flooding, which isolates certain areas; 
homes collapse, there’s no proper space for people to 
shelter; water is not well channeled which damages roads 
even more and make it dangerous to walk, very slippery 
Positive: No positive feedback. 
Negative: Difficult finding startup capital to begin work; access to finance is an 
issue; finishing school is a challenge, if you don’t finish it’s difficult to go back and 
get more education, but more education can help you get a better job, so it’s a 
vicious cycle; we all want to work but there’s not a lot of incentive for people to 
do business in this area so even starting something is a challenge; it would be good 
to have access to any kind of work, even if you can escape the domestic work 
load, the opportunities are few 
Meeting friends / 
leisure time 
Positive: We leave the village for this and go into Kinyinya; 
there are gardens, bars, restaurants, food and drink, etc. 
Negative: It’s too far away – we usually have to walk, or 
sometimes take a moto; we would prefer if we had more 
community spaces here 
Positive: Usually we just meet at church or other worship places, or we’d visit them 
in their homes or ours. 
Negative: There are no spaces where we can meet in the community and 
socialize. We can only meet at the market or go to the market together, but 
otherwise there is nothing. Sometimes we can leave the village to meet friends in 
Kinyinya, but not often, maybe once or twice a month at most.

=== PAGE 132 ===
31 
 
Latrines, public 
and private 
Positive: Right now there is nothing positive. 
Negative: Not hygienic, either in the home or the public 
ones, we want to be modern in this way, to have modern 
bathrooms. When it floods, sometimes they collapse, but 
others are okay. 
Positive: We don’t have any proper public latrines at the moment. 
Negative: People who live near the market don’t like having others always using 
their latrines, because if they fill up, that person can’t easily build another one; 
seated toilets are harder to maintain, squat toilets would be better; paying 
someone to clean it must be there, someone to manage it, taking payments, etc.; 
we need changing tables for babies there, many merchants sell stuff and spend 
all day there, and they bring their children; most merchants at the market are 
women, because men can bicycle to other places and sell their things

=== PAGE 133 ===
32 
 
7.7 Women’s and men’s leadership and decision making at village level 
When it comes to taking on leadership roles and participating in decision making processes at the village 
level, the gender divide here is significant. Feedback from focus group discussions as well as in-depth 
interviews with individual community members reveal that men continue to dominate and set the 
agenda in terms of leadership roles and community decision making processes, while women participate 
to a much lesser degree, and are overall less influential than men. Women and men reported that it is 
difficult for women to even attend community meetings in most cases, because they are always busy 
with domestic work and taking care of children; men reported that it is more the exception than the 
norm that women are present at such meetings. The main meeting women can attend is the Evening 
Forum of Families, which is intended to gather all community members together once a month at village 
level, to discuss community issues; this is a result of the expectation that women should be the primary 
caretakers and main parental figure for children in daily life, which unfortunately only serves to reinforce 
the status quo around men’s lack of involvement in childcare and domestic issues. 
 
“The majority of these meetings are attended by men because women are busy; it’s more the exception 
that women are there. Most decisions get made by men. And women are often attending the parents’ 
meetings, they don’t have much free time, so men end up making most of the decisions.” 
- man, FGD participant 
“Men do most of the talking and deciding. The majority are men attending those committee meetings or 
community meetings. For the parents’ evening meetings, these are mostly attended by women; they have 
now changed the name to ‘household evening meeting’ to try to pressure men to attend more.” 
- woman, FGD participant 
 
“In most cases, women will talk to one another while sitting in the crowd, but not very often do they raise 
their hands and speak up, unless someone who is leading singles them out and asks their opinion; this 
typically only happens when they want to ask something about the domestic sphere.” 
- woman-headed household, research participant 
 
Even when women are present and participate, they generally only speak up if they are asked a direct 
question, and many of these questions or conversation points that are put to women tend to revolve 
primarily around domestic responsibilities, an area where men consider women to be able to have more 
relevant input. Due to gender norms around men being de facto leaders and women being discouraged 
from speaking in public, women are also more shy and less confident than men, so they do not speak up 
freely or share their opinions to the same degree. Women report that even when they do speak up, men 
will make the final decisions about what will be done regardless of women’s input, in the vast majority 
of cases. 
 
Men also tend to interrupt women quite often when they are speaking (a common phenomenon in 
patriarchal contexts that was also observed and directly experienced by the research team itself during 
the data collection process), and often ignore what women have to say. Throughout the baseline data 
collection, multiple women community members repeatedly expressed that they were extremely 
grateful and happy that a gender assessment was being conducted, where women were separated from 
men in such discussions and thus were able to speak more freely and share their opinions and ideas 
without feeling ignored, dismissed or uncomfortable with men in the room.

=== PAGE 134 ===
33 
 
“I am really thankful that you’re doing these discussions and separating women and men in these 
discussions, because this allows women to speak more freely and be honest about what we experience and 
how the situation is; when we are mixed, everyone wants to make everything seem fine and great, and 
men interrupt women when we are talking, or they ignore us. It’s not equal and we can’t speak freely in 
that space.” 
- woman, research participant 
 
“Since you are doing this gender assessment, then I feel that women’s voices will be included, because you 
made a space for that to happen freely. Without the gender assessment, women’s voices wouldn’t really 
be involved at all, and more importantly, now that we have been really engaged, we feel more comfortable 
with the project and more at ease with speaking up.” 
- woman, research participant 
 
Interviews and discussions with adolescent girls and young women further echo these experiences and 
women’s lack of meaningful involvement in key decisions and leadership spaces. 
“First of all, women don’t attend most of these meetings. In my experience, men are making the decisions; 
women can sometimes give their opinions, but men are the one making the decisions. Women give opinions 
mostly when it comes to ‘women’s work’ (water issues, childcare, etc.), and then maybe men might listen. 
But in terms of women being leaders or anything really major, men are the ones making the decisions.” 
- girl/woman, research participant 
Some men’s perceptions of this situation illustrate their limited awareness of women’s lived realities in 
this regard, with men reporting that there are some women leaders in other sectors nearby, and so 
women feel more confident to become leaders and to participate as community members in their own 
community, which is not the case reported by women. Men also indicated in different sessions that 
women are always included to some degree because of the government mandates around gender 
equality and the 30% minimum participation quota for women in decision making bodies, with the 
implication that this is sufficient to ensure women’s presence and equal involvement. In Ngaruyinka 
village, of five local village leaders, two are women. 
 
7.8 Women’s participation in the village upgrade committee 
The evident imbalance in women’s leadership and participation at village level is also at play in the village 
upgrade committee. Of the ten community members on the village upgrade committee, four are women. 
Men report that the committee was selected based on who was most capable, those with education and 
‘street smarts’ (life experience), which by default would lead to men making up the majority of the 
committee, in light of existing gender biases related to men being natural leaders and their greater access 
to education and life opportunities overall compared with women. In a meeting with the Green City Kigali 
team and the village upgrade committee, when asked why there was not a 50/50 split of men and 
women on the committee, a male committee member spoke up and said that there is more than 30% 
women on the committee, thus the mandatory quota has been met and the situation is fine as it is. It is 
also worth noting that in this meeting, of all members present, men vastly dominated the conversation; 
only two women spoke up for the entirety of the meeting, and each of them spoke only once.

=== PAGE 135 ===
34 
 
This perception of involving women in a tokenistic way to meet a government mandated quota was 
echoed in other discussions with men, and acts as a key barrier for women’s voices and contributions to 
be seen as equally valuable, important and useful in all aspects of village life. One of the research 
participants who is involved in the village upgrade committee directly addressed this issue in an 
interview, sharing that after this meeting in particular, women on the committee had discussed amongst 
themselves how they had not spoken up and raised important issues with the Green City Kigali team in 
this meeting, because men in the room (particularly those in positions of local leadership) dominate the 
conversation, consistently interrupt women and only want to discuss issues on a surface level, rather 
than having conversations about deeper problems in the community, particularly if there are village 
outsiders involved in such meetings. This situation is a distinct red flag in terms of the village upgrade 
process moving ahead without reflecting the needs, views and experiences of women and girls in a 
meaningful way. 
 
When asked about how the committee was formed, women reported that, like most other committees 
in the village, women were considered and informed only at the last minute, as an afterthought. Women 
also report that, though there are women on the committee, they do not have much influence, even if 
they do speak up, and men tend to be the final decision makers. 
“The information about the creation of the committee wasn’t shared to women as extensively as it was to 
men; I didn’t even know when I joined the meeting that it was a committee creation process. Most of these 
committees have few women, and women have low self-esteem, so they don’t feel they can partake, and 
they are always involved at the last minute, without much information.” 
- woman, FGD participant 
 
“I can’t say that we haven’t been allowed to participate at all, but most of the concerns, questions, 
changes, etc. have primarily been raised by men and the upgrade plans then changed to reflect that – even 
if some of these are things we also wanted, we didn’t have a voice there. If we had a disagreement about 
a certain issue, sometimes the men would call us and try to persuade us of their views. Women’s opinions 
mostly don’t matter in these things; for example, if women didn’t want something to happen, and the men 
did, it would go the men’s way, and they can out vote us because they are more in the community 
leadership and on the upgrade committee.” 
- woman, interview participant 
 
7.9 Women’s safety in the community 
In addition to FGDs and interviews, a Women’s Safety Audit (WSA) was conducted with women 
community members of different ages and backgrounds in Ngaruyinka village. This process involves 
women community members identifying different routes through the village and assessing the safety of 
each different neighbourhood area based on six different safety criteria: lighting, sightlines, movement 
predictors, neighbourhood risks, maintenance and overall design. This assessment considers women’s 
safety in terms of violence in its various forms (physical, sexual, emotional, harassment, etc.), as well as 
additional safety risks related to petty theft, etc. Each area is detailed below with the accompanying 
assessment of its overall safety based on these factors. Numbered areas correspond with those on the 
map to give a better idea of the surroundings and set up of the area in question; area names are 
nicknames or reference points provided by the community members.

=== PAGE 136 ===
35 
 
 
 
Area #1 – Nursery school and immediate surroundings 
 
Lighting: No public lighting, no visible or sufficient street lighting from homes. 
Sightlines: There are many places where a potential attacker could hide and various structures 
blocking sightlines (narrow corridors and footpaths with blind corners, large gate structure in 
front of the school courtyard). 
Movement predictors: There are different paths/routes someone could take to escape a 
potential attacker, but they are narrow and hazardous. 
Neighbourhood risks: There is a bar nearby where many men go to drink, even from very early 
in the morning. It faces the school and the main street and increases the risk of this area, 
however, overall it is not considered to be a high risk area in the village. 
Maintenance: The area is not well maintained, there is a lot of erosion and crumbling 
infrastructure, seating, etc. 
Overall design: The area is complicated to navigate, there is no signage to inform someone 
where to find certain places/services and how to get there, if they are not familiar with the 
village. 
 
Area #2 – Rutobo, just down the hill from the nursery school

=== PAGE 137 ===
36 
 
Lighting: No public lighting; only 3 homes on this route have a lightbulb to offer as street 
lighting, which is dim and insuffienct for the need. The main footpath here is extremely 
narrow, treacherous and uneven; in the dark it is even more difficult to navigate. 
Sightlines: Limited visibility here, even in the daytime. The main footpath has a banana grove 
on one side and homes on the other. There are many dark corners and spaces where potential 
attackers could hide. 
Movement predictors: There are no alternative routes to take in this area until you reach the 
end of the narrow path. It would be easy for an attacker to predict the movements of an 
intended victim. 
Neighbourhood risks: The only structures nearby are a few homes and a banana grove. This 
path is considered a high risk area in the village due to its isolation, lack of lighting and spaces 
where potential attackers could easily hide. 
Maintenance: The area is not well maintained, and the footpath is extremely treacherous; 
community members traversing these paths at night could easily injure themselves. The 
precariousness of the path also makes it more difficult for an individual to run to safety if they 
face a threat. 
Overall design: The area is comprised primarily of a long, narrow footpath; there is really only 
one way to move about. 
Area #3 – Minani, near open field in village centre 
 
Lighting: No public lighting; only one home at a distance has an exterior lightbulb, and there 
is a tree nearby that can block the light from this one bulb. There is an open field in the middle 
of the area which makes the area darker and riskier at night. 
Sightlines: Limited visibility here, especially at night. There are numerous bushes, shrubs and 
trees in all directions that block sightlines; including fences made of brush that limit visibility. 
Movement predictors: There are clear alternate routes here in 3 directions, but the uneven 
ground makes it difficult for someone to quickly and safely escape a dangerous situation. 
Neighbourhood risks: There are homes nearby but they are far apart and the large empty field 
in the middle of the area creates an additional risk, particularly at night. There is almost no 
lighting, even from homes; this area is considered a high risk area. 
Maintenance: The area is not well maintained, and there is a lot of erosion causing hazardous 
footpaths and streets. 
Overall design: There is no signage or clear direction of pathways; it’s not easy to find your 
way around. 
 
Area #4 – Salon 
Lighting: No public lighting; there are a few homes here that have lightbulbs outside but 
community members report that they don’t work. 
Sightlines: Limited visibility here, winding footpaths and lots of trees in the area blocking 
sightlines. There are many places where someone could hide, and there are often people 
around this area. 
Movement predictors: There are only two narrow corridors in this area where someone could 
escape a potential attack.

=== PAGE 138 ===
37 
 
Neighbourhood risks: This area is not considered a high risk area compared to other parts of 
the village. Houses are closer in proximity here than in other areas. 
Maintenance: The area is not well maintained, it is considered a ‘dump site’ for community 
garbage, there is a lot of plastic waste about. 
Overall design: The design of this area is very confusing, and pathways out of the area are not 
easily visible. There is no public signage. 
Area #5 – Underneath HV lines 
 
Lighting: No public lighting; there is one bulb from a nearby home which provides insufficient 
lighting. 
Sightlines: Limited visibility here, there are farming plots nearby and community members 
report that visibility is very poor and the area is high risk when crops are high. There are many 
other trees and shrubs that also limit visibility. 
Movement predictors: There is only one pathway out to the main road, but it is not easily 
visible. 
Neighbourhood risks: There are some homes nearby, and empty plots for farming. There are 
no bars in the area. This place is considered a high risk area when crops are high, allowing for 
more places for attackers to hide, very well camouflaged and close to the pathway. 
Maintenance: The area is not well maintained, pathways are not clear and there is a lot of 
erosion. 
Overall design: The design of this area is very confusing, and pathways out of the area are not 
easily visible. There is no public signage. 
Area #6 – JMV (neighbourhood bar) 
 
Lighting: No public lighting; there is one outdoor lightbulb over one of the bars (there are two 
bars side by side in this area). The lighting is dim and insufficient for the space. 
Sightlines: There is limited visibility here, with lots of trees in the area blocking sightlines, and 
this becomes more of an issue when the crops have grown high. There are many places where 
someone could hide, and there are often people around this area due to the bars. 
Movement predictors: There are some alternate routes here, but they are not clear; the main 
pathway is deeply eroded down the middle due to heavy rainfall and very difficult to navigate, 
even in the day time. 
Neighbourhood risks: This area is is considered a high risk area due to the two bars nearby. 
Maintenance: The area is not well maintained, there is deep erosion on the main footpath, 
and community members report that these paths never get repaired; the main route/footpath 
in particular is reportedly used as a gutter to channel rain water. 
Overall design: The layout of the area is confusing and community members report that it only 
makes sense to those who have lived in the village for some time. There is no public signage 
to indicate different pathways or services. Even the two bars here are not externally marked 
and could easily be mistaken for someone’s household. 
Area #7 – Market section 1, along main access road

=== PAGE 139 ===
38 
 
Lighting: No public lighting; there are a few homes here that have lightbulbs outside but they 
are not sufficient for the need. 
Sightlines: There are many places here (blind corners, narrow footpaths, various structures) 
where potential attackers could hide. 
Movement predictors: There is only one main road that runs along the bottom of the village 
near the marshlands, community members report that someone would have to run up the hill 
on a narrow footpath to find help if you were at risk; the footpaths leading down to the market 
are deeply eroded and often packed with uneven sandbags, making movement difficult and 
prone to injury, particularly in the dark. It would be easy for the attacker to predict your 
movements. 
Neighbourhood risks: This area is considered a very high risk area, due to the amount of bars 
nearby, as well as different shops selling alcohol and people congregating on the roads and 
near the local shops. There are four different bars in this area. 
Maintenance: The area is not well maintained and does not feel cared for. 
Overall design: There is no public signage here to guide people, and one main road going in 
and out of the village. 
 
Area #8 – Market section 2, along main access road (main vegetable market site) 
Lighting: There are two single lightbulbs along the top of the market stall structure; there is 
no other public street lighting and few shops nearby have any outdoor lighting. 
Sightlines: There are many places here (blind corners, narrow footpaths, various structures) 
where potential attackers could hide. 
Movement predictors: There are no clear and visible alternative routes aside from the main 
road, and the set up of the various shops and structures create many blind corners. 
Neighbourhood risks: This area is considered a very high risk area in the village. There are 
many bars and shops selling alcohol nearby, and community members report that there are 
often groups of drunk people around, and many fights that break out as a regular occurence. 
Maintenance: The area is not well maintained and does not feel cared for; the road is quite 
eroded and creates a significant risk in terms of tripping and falling, injuring yourself, etc. 
Overall design: There is no public signage here to guide people, and one main road going in 
and out of the village. 
Area #9 – The Corridor 
Lighting: There is no public lighting along this main corridor, which is narrow and dark. Only 
one home has an outdoor light for this entire area. 
Sightlines: There are many places here (blind corners and narrow footpaths running 
perpendicular to the corridor) where potential attackers could hide, as well as various trees 
and shrubs that limit visibility. 
Movement predictors: There are not many clear or visible alternative routes along this 
pathway, but community members report this area has more homes nearby where you could 
potentially seek help if you were at risk. 
Neighbourhood risks: This are is considered the most high risk area in the village. There is one 
bar nearby (as well as those along the main market road) and the path is often used by village 
residents to access the market area.

=== PAGE 140 ===
39 
 
Maintenance: The area is not well maintained and is difficult to navigate on foot. 
Overall design: There is no public signage and many confusing smaller pathways that intersect 
with the main corridor. 
 
Area #10 – Area just above the Corridor 
Lighting: No public lighting; none of the nearby homes have outdoor lights. 
Sightlines: There are many places here (blind corners around houses, bushes, trees) where 
potential attackers could hide. Sightlines are not clear. 
Movement predictors: There are a few alternative routes in this area but they are not clear 
unless you are very familiar with the area. 
Neighbourhood risks: This area is not considered a high risk area in general, but it is riskier 
than other areas due to its close proximity to the Corridor. 
Maintenance: The area is not well maintained and there is quite a lot of plastic waste and 
garbage along the ground and pathways. 
Overall design: There is no public signage here; it is not considered easy to find your way 
around the area unless you are well familiar with it already. 
Women had additional commentary on the lack of public lighting in the village and surrounding areas. 
Women reported that the village at night is very unsafe, and isolating. Access to and from the village 
after dark is difficult and transportation is hard to find. Even though the community is expected to 
provide some outdoor lighting, especially for those homes on the roads and pathways, it is far from 
sufficient. After the sun goes down, most women do not leave their homes or walk about the village. At 
the top of the hill where housing is scarce, the landscape is dark and isolated; there are often robberies 
that happen in that area, after dark or early in the morning before there is daylight. Farmland areas are 
also dark and unsafe, there are no streetlights or houses nearby; women also report that the lower exit 
road is also unsafe, it is a large space with a lot of empty fields and no lighting. 
 
In light of the safety insights gathered in the WSA as well as focus groups and interviews for the target 
community in Ngaruyinka village, it will be critical for the overall approach to the village upgrade to 
consider and meaningfully respond to women’s and girls’ unique vulnerabilities and experiences. In 
particular, the aspects of the village upgrade that relate to improvements in roads and footpaths, 
improved community spaces and street lighting in the village should take into account the high risk areas 
and specific factors of risk that have been highlighted by community members in this assessment. 
 
In addition to engagement made for women in Ngaruyinga village, the project will also get support from NGOs 
that help men on masculinity and addressing SGVB which will include targeted outreach to mobilize their 
participation in household and parental responsibilities to ease women’s responsibilities and sensitization 
on the importance of fair access and control of resources, including income. The engagement of community 
leaders and women and men community influencers to further promote equal and fair control of resources between 
men and women will further mitigate the risk of men taking over control of incomes earned and targeted for women. 
Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and community-based organizations (CBOs) were engaged and committed 
to be sources of local knowledge, sounding boards for project design and mitigation, conduits for consulting with 
sensitive groups, and partners in planning, implementing, and monitoring various project-related programs. The 
Project will actively engage with Project Area, national, and provincial NGOs for potential collaboration on livelihood 
and vulnerable programs.

=== PAGE 141 ===
40 
 
8. Sex-disaggregated feedback on proposed interventions 
In separate groups, women and men in the target community were asked to provide detailed feedback on the proposed interventions for the village 
upgrade. The table below captures their diverse perceptions and concerns related to each intervention area and highlights areas in need of 
consideration for the village upgrade process; men’s and women’s perspectives are presented below side by side to help illuminate the areas where 
their views overlap as well as where they differ. 
Table 6: Sex-disaggregated feedback on proposed interventions 
 
Intervention area 
Feedback from women 
Feedback from men 
Transportation / 
mobility – 
improving roads 
and green rights 
of way 
Perceived benefits: Improved access to the village and from the 
village to Kinyinya, i.e. being able to use moto taxis, 
transportation will become easier; walking distance will shorten 
because the roads are better; costs for things will decrease, both 
in terms of transportation for the community, but also the costs 
for what women need to buy locally 
Concerns/drawbacks: People having to move from their homes 
to make room for new / improved roads. 
Questions: If people are moved, will there be compensation for 
those families? 
Perceived benefits: Better roads makes access easier, travel time 
decreases, motos will be cheaper because the roads won’t be as 
rough and take as much time; the public lighting will also help with 
security and robberies; there will be improved access to the market, 
which should bring new and better vendors; also an improved 
connection to the rest of the city. Things will also be cheaper for the 
community because access isn’t so difficult; vendors usually add 
more costs for transport, so everything costs more; this will help 
people to save money. 
Concerns/drawbacks: There is a concern is about roads made from 
cheap materials that won’t last. Another drawback is that there are 
no roads within the village to be able to handle trucks with heavy 
loads, so if someone is building their home / other buildings, they 
can’t get a big truck close to the site, they have to come to the road 
down below and transport everything else by foot / bicycle, etc. 
Questions: Will the roads be paved with long-lasting materials? For 
the bicycle lanes, can they be widened to bring cars in? Some people 
have to park their cars far from their homes, so it would be good to 
have an access road within the village, if at all possible. 
Stormwater 
management – 
improved 
stormwater 
management 
systems / gutters 
Perceived benefits: It will help prevent erosion, walking paths 
will be safer and village will be cleaner; it can also reduce 
arguments between neighbours, which sometimes happen when 
someone throws their waste water in the street. 
Concerns/drawbacks: None. 
Perceived benefits: Proper water management will be positive for 
the community; normally water is just running down the hill freely; it 
destroys property, floods garbage down the hill, creates chaos; it 
destroys existing roads and footpaths; most people in the community 
don’t have the personal resources to improve this situation.

=== PAGE 142 ===
41 
 
Questions: None. 
Concerns/drawbacks: There is still a challenge around flooding in the 
marshlands, how could this be better mitigated? 
Questions: What is the sustainability of the green approach? What 
are the gutters made of? 
Water supply – 
expansion of 
WASAC water 
supply, rainwater 
harvesting, filters 
for households 
Perceived benefits: WASAC water access will help to reduce the 
physical strains of fetching water, and also help to reduce 
security risks by not having to go out on bad roads, or go out in 
the dark, etc. to fetch water. 
Rainwater harvesting will also be very helpful when WASAC 
water isn’t reliable, without having to collect water at streams, 
or buying it from the kiosk. Women do the vast amount of 
fetching water. 
Education on household water treatment will help to save 
money from buying charcoal to boil water, reduces waterborne 
illness, and provides easier access to drinking water. 
Concerns/drawbacks: None. 
Questions: None. 
Perceived benefits: Having access to WASAC water is helpful. 
Rainwater harvesting is also good because it doesn’t cost anything. It 
will improve hygiene in the household, save time from fetching 
water, improve people’s health; household water treatment methods 
will also be helpful; if there is clean water in the home then people 
won’t spend the time walking to the streams. 
Concerns/drawbacks: It’s good to have WASAC, but it costs money, 
so not everyone will be able to afford this. 
Questions: Is there a way to improve stormwater capture and treat 
that water to be used in the home? 
Sanitation – 
Biogas system at 
the market, 
education on 
household latrine 
improvements 
Perceived benefits: A biogas system could be useful but it’s not 
very clear how it could work and whom exactly will benefit. 
Education on latrine improvements in the home is also valuable, 
so that households don’t have to keep digging new pits, they will 
eventually run out of space. 
Concerns/drawbacks: None. 
Questions: More information about the proposed biogas system 
and its benefits, etc. would be useful. 
Perceived benefits: Improving latrines will help everyone. If the 
biogas approach is used, people will not be familiar with it, but they 
will learn with time, and it can be beneficial. 
Concerns/drawbacks: Possible challenge is raising awareness and 
doing proper training, the community will need targeted support. 
Questions: None.

=== PAGE 143 ===
42 
 
Solid waste 
management – 
Community 
composting, 
neighbourhood 
waste collection 
point, recycling 
collection stations 
Perceived benefits: It will be good for cleanliness in the home 
and village; the compost will be useful for the farmers; not 
having trash on the crops or on the streets will be good. 
Concerns/drawbacks: It might pose a problem for those who live 
farther away; there may also be challenges around separating 
items in the home, having enough bags to be able to separate 
properly; there is also a problem with having enough space for 
all the bags, and women wil be the ones doing all this work in 
the home. 
Potential solution: Households could have two bags only – one 
for organic matter, one for all other things (glass, plastic, etc.), 
and then separate the mixed waste bag at the site. 
Questions: None. 
Perceived benefits: Waste management will improve the general 
cleanliness of the public spaces; at the moment people throw their 
garbage anywhere. Composting will help with the agricultural work 
and kitchen gardens for fertilizer, and the site is a good location, 
away from houses. 
Concerns/drawbacks: Make sure it’s mandatory by the local leaders 
for people to take their trash down to the collection site, so that they 
are not still throwing it on the road. Sorting garbace and recyclables 
are different; organic matter is usually used for farming, but people 
throw plastics, bottles, etc. on the ground. Some people already 
know about sorting and recycling, and other places with garbage 
collection require sorting, so it’s not entirely new; the local 
government can help in sensitizing people to do so and to 
understand how to do it. 
Questions: None. 
Energy and 
lighting – Solar 
PV, improved 
cook stoves, 
education around 
energy efficient 
lighting and 
appliances 
Perceived benefits: For solar street lighting, this will be very 
good for security and it is much needed. Regarding improved 
cook stoves and energy efficient lighting – women feel 
biogas/biofuel is better than gas because gas can be more 
hazardous in the home; biofuel pellets will be useful and help 
women save time with cooking, as they don’t need to wait for 
charcoal to light; biofuel stoves could also improve health issues 
from charcoal smoke, which affects women and children the 
most. 
Concerns/drawbacks: The problem with solar street lighting is 
that it’s solar, it’s often dim and unreliable, and it will turn off at 
some point when the energy runs out. 
Questions: What can be done about the significant drawbacks of 
relying on street lighting that is solar powered only? Can 
mainline power be factored in as a back-up system? 
Perceived benefits: Street lighting will be very positive, especially 
within the community on the footpaths, not just on the main roads. 
Regarding improved cook stoves and energy efficient lighting, 
education aroiund the use of these will also be beneficial, as long as 
they are cost efficient. 
Concerns/drawbacks: Consideration of solar power – will there be 
back up electrical access? If the sunlight is not strong, then the light 
will burn out quickly and for half the night the lights will be off. 
Questions: Can the streetlights be powered by REG if the solar 
finishes? 
Community 
facilities – TVET 
centre, improved 
football pitch, 
playground for 
Perceived benefits: The market upgrade will make a big 
difference for women; the market itself will improve as a result 
of the roads being improved, it will attract better and more 
vendors, resulting in improved food access and nutrition; also for 
Perceived benefits: It will be vert positive to have recreational 
space; sports fields are almost always only in schools, so they’re not 
accessible to the community. Having a proper playground will be 
good, too, right now children spend a lot of time at home because 
there isn’t much for them to do here.

=== PAGE 144 ===
43 
 
children, market 
improvements, 
new latrines at 
market 
vendors, it will provide more jobs, and there may be a reduced 
need to travel far to other markets like Kimironko. 
TVET – The proximity is very positive, it will help create jobs and 
push people to get better educations; women want to also learn 
tailoring, aesthetics, etc. and women will be able to be sensitized 
to the value of higher paying jobs, too, (such as welding, 
carpentry, masonry, etc.), since they live so close to the TVET 
centre; there could be community advocacy for promoting 
women to do those jobs that men only do now. 
Playground – This will be very good for women because they 
end up looking after children a lot; a playground would give 
women more time off from childcare, especially if the 
playground is safe. 
Football pitch – Women are keen on sports, despite stereotypes 
about this, they also play sports. If women had more access to 
spaces for sports, they would play sports more. 
Latrines at the market will be very useful. They will create jobs 
for the people who will be hired to clean them, and then other 
community members can stop using the latrines at private 
homes near the market, which creates a burden for those 
homes; proper latrines are also important for women’s hygiene, 
during menstruation, etc. so that women don’t have go back to 
their homes to change pads, etc. 
Concerns/drawbacks: Women really want a community garden, 
a space for people to relax in a nice place, with grass and trees, 
etc. Women need resting space, not just spaces that are mostly 
designed for children or for shopping; women would also like 
anti-harassment campaigns so men don’t harass them in those 
spaces. 
For market latrines, they need to be well managed, properly 
maintained, and people should pay a small fee to use them so 
they can be kept clean and tidy. They should also have changing 
tables for women who have babies, since most of the merchants 
at the market are women. 
Questions: How will they be managed? 
TVET – having the TVET close by will be good, the closest one to the 
village is very far away, this will help improve youth employment and 
young people starting trades, etc.; they would like to see trainings in 
construction, welding, electrical, mechanics, etc. 
Market improvements are much needed, especially for merchants to 
lock their stuff up when they go home, this will also improve the 
number and quality of vendors, which will help improve the local 
economy. 
Concerns/drawbacks: Even though the school is not included, it 
would be good to consider how it could be improved. 
Questions: None.

=== PAGE 145 ===
44 
 
9. Summary of Gender Issues and proposed solutions  
 
There are three key gender-based themes that influenced the design of the Gender Action Plan 
 
a. Change negative gender and social norms. The most profound barrier for this project is norms about 
the roles of men and women. Whilst the Government of Rwanda has made many advances and has 
implemented many policies to achieve gender equality, particularly in national-level representation and 
inclusion, patriarchal privilege and decision-making remains embedded in both rural and urban society 
(IUCN, 2021). The consequences of this for this project is far-reaching. Men are generally seen as the 
head of household with the decision-making powers over all assets, resulting in male appropriation of 
household and farm or property-based assets (IUCN, 2021; Kiyani et al., 2017). Though female headed 
households face the same issues and challenges as male headed households, they are disproportionately 
impacted because of prevalent gender inequality issues (GMO 2017). Men in the Ngaruyinka village are 
positioned to be significantly more involved in programs that result in monetary benefits, such as fern 
clearing, casual labor, and construction projects. Although under Rwanda law, sons and daughters 
receive equal inheritance rights (Law/nº 22/99 of 12/11/1999) the focus groups highlighted that due to 
cultural practices, parents favor sons in land inheritance, leaving young women in a position where they 
depend on marrying a man to gain access to farmland; without a formal marriage, these women have 
no land or asset tenure. Broadly, these gender and social norms leave most women with little decision-
making power and no real control over assets. The threat of sexual and gender based violence (SGBV) 
at the household level where women try to assert independence and achievement is high. 
 
As a result, this program will focus heavily on social and behavior change communications (SBCC) as a means 
to positively change perceptions towards gender equity. Community members, including community leaders 
and women and men community influencers specifically will be targeted for sensitization on gender equity 
in order to shift their attitudes and to build a conducive environment for women to be able to participate in 
project activities. Women have been engaged in the development of this project to ensure time constraints, 
work burden and reproductive responsibilities do not impede their ability to engage in the various activities 
designed by the project. Women will be regularly consulted throughout project implementation to ensure 
they are able to actively participate in project activities and activities take place at times which are convenient 
for them and at locations that are safe and contextually appropriate. Furthermore, a fair remuneration will 
be offered to enable women to cover household expenses and save for future investments. 
 
Lastly, the project will clearly explain participant selection, intended benefits and how participants can help 
monitor benefits and risks and reduce risks if necessary, including reducing the risk of men taking over control 
of incomes targeted for women. The project will have a safe, accessible Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) 
for all project stakeholders, particularly women, to access to pursue redress as needed. The project will also 
collaborate with existing Isange One Stop Centers in the project area in GBV prevention and immediate 
assistance to victims. All project staff will be trained and project beneficiaries informed on the purpose and 
use of the GRM, including reporting gender-based violence. The project will ensure confidentiality of the 
information and identity of the complainant. The grievance process will include options for victims to remain 
anonymous which will add a layer of protection for individuals who may be subject to gender-based violence. 
Throughout project implementation, project staff will disseminate information to beneficiaries on how they 
can use the GRM and solicit feedback on how the mechanism can be improved if needed 
a. 
Provide access to skills building, leadership and programmatic inclusion. Because of existing gender 
norms, there is much to do to build technical skills of women in the project area to be able to participate in

=== PAGE 146 ===
45 
 
the project. In addition to that, finding women leaders and building their leadership skills to be at the 
forefront of urban gender equity is crucial for addressing the root causes of women’s exclusion in land and 
asset use planning and decision-making. This project will also ensuring that women play a strong role at all 
levels of climate programming in the country is important. Thus developing professional networks and 
internships to provide opportunities to strengthen leadership and technical skills will be incorporated into 
the program. 
 
b. 
Facilitate women’s financial autonomy. In order to support women in Ngaruyinka village to capture 
financial benefits of this project, this project will incorporate three activities: financial skills building, support 
in joining cooperatives; and facilitating access to entrepreneurship through financial/entrepreneurship 
training, access to village savings/loans and small grants, and mentoring. The project will ensure all trainings 
are gender-responsive and inclusive. Gender considerations will be integrated into training curriculum, 
content and delivery methods. Flexible training schedules and convenient venues will be selected to 
accommodate women's needs. Staff in charge of gender aspects will ensure gender mainstreaming and 
ensure the project addresses barriers to women's participation. Training will also use participatory 
approaches to create an inclusive learning environment and incorporate components on women's 
empowerment and leadership development, promoting gender equality and active participation. By 
facilitating independent access to financial services, women’s income can be managed independently until 
shifting norms and household situations reach gender equity for households in adapting to climate change. 
Within the project, microenterprise, access to finance, urban agriculture, and poultry farming, carpentry, 
trading in the new constructed market were chosen as key activities because they are feasible livelihoods 
within the target households and help strengthen resiliency of the rural economy. 
 
10. Youth Analysis and Key Issues 
 
     According to the Fifth Rwanda Population and Housing Census there are 3,595,670 persons aged 
between 16 and 30 years living in Rwanda, out of a total resident population of 13,246,394 which 
constitutes 27.1% of the total resident population of the Country. The youth population consists of 
1,767,063 males and 1,828,607 females who are slightly more than males.. The pattern is similar in other 
population groups, whereby the youth population in Rwanda remains predominantly rural, with 
2,431,776 living in rural areas, compared to 1,163,894 in urban areas (Table 3. 1). The majority of the 
youth reside in the Eastern Province (942,370), followed by the Western Province (757,749), Southern 
Province (746,908), and Kigali City (584,290). 
 
The Youth Assessment for this project highlighted key priority areas that youth identified for achieving their 
goals: 
● Livelihoods and skills development for productive self-employment activities 
● Education and skills for entering into the formal work sector 
● Reproductive autonomy and health to avoid early pregnancy which is a key hurdle towards economic 
self-sufficiency 
As a result, 2 key topics influenced the action plan: 
a. Access to skills building. Many youth attend schools, but training in practical financial management 
and entrepreneurship. This program intends to target youth for diversifying their skill sets and 
strengthening their resilience to adapt to climate change. 
b. Youth leadership and Programmatic Inclusion. Many youths voiced their concerns over not being 
included in decision-making processes and programming, resulting in key stakeholders not being

=== PAGE 147 ===
46 
 
engaged in civil society. In order to engage the new generation of urban entrepreneur and 
consumers, this project will identify and work with youth leaders in the Ngaruyinka village to use 
Social and Behavior Change Communications (SBCC) to engage youth to benefit and support long-
term financial initiatives. With youth involved in decision- making processes, innovative ideas to 
involve youth with best practice on government lands and to get youth to appropriate long-term 
thinking through off-farm initiatives as future investments. 
 
 
11. Internal program considerations 
 
 In addition to programmatic activities with women and youth, this project will also have an internal focus to 
ensure best practices. These include: 
a. 
Build partnerships. This GCF project provides a unique opportunity to engage civil society at national 
and local levels. The team will work with men’s, women’s, and youth organizations to build their capacity 
and facilitate their engagement with project beneficiaries and local government actors. 
b. 
Gender and Diversity training. Training will be an important component of this project. Building online 
training modules that can be viewed across Ngaruyinka village, and using new platforms like WhatsApp to 
communicate with project staff will ensure that static, one-off training is avoided. 
c. 
Staffing. Diversity and inclusion are important for the project, and hiring practices at all levels of the 
program will be reflected in hiring policies. The program management unit will hire a full-time dedicated 
gender expert and associated costs are included in the project budget.  This staff will participate in all 
management meetings to support inclusion goals across the project, and will lead and oversee the 
implementation of the Gender, Youth, and Social Inclusion Action Plan.  Another key role of this position will 
be to engage civil society partners, particularly women’s, men’s, and youth groups to build capacity and 
increase the sustainability of achievements during the entire project timeline. Furthermore, this staff 
responsibilities include reviewing site specific barriers faced by women to participate in project activities, 
ensuring these barriers are addressed in order to support full participation of women, ensuring gender equity 
in all project activities and where needed help women access the Grievance Redress Mechanisms to pursue 
redress and connect women with Isange One Stop Centers in the project area to prevent gender-based 
violence and provide immediate assistance to victims.   
 
d. 
M&E. Many stakeholder meetings highlighted the lack of community engagement as a key reason for 
project failures in the past. This project will incorporate suggestions from our stakeholder engagement 
meetings to ensure best practice is followed. This includes not only deeper local government engagement 
but also using a rights-based approach to ensure that communities are at the heart of planning our 
interventions. Targets for youth and gender are incorporated into the Gender and Youth Action Plan and are 
set to ensure women and youth are equally targeted where possible and encouraged to actively participate. 
Exceptions include situations where group composition, such as government agents or community leaders, 
are outside the project’s control or the activity solely targets men, such as masculinity sessions held with 
men to improve gender equity in program participation and benefits will take male participants several 
weeks away from their homes. 
 
e. 
Continuous gender assessment and case study development 
 
Based on the experience and lessons learned from implementing the $32 million, six-year GCF project 
"Strengthening Climate Resilience of Rural Communities in Northern Rwanda," we will employ key strategies 
to monitor the implementation of gender aspects, particularly the Gender and Youth Action Plan. An annual

=== PAGE 148 ===
47 
 
Gender and Youth Assessment will be conducted to capture the implementation status each year, document 
key gaps to address in the following year, and highlight success stories or case studies from each 
implemented project. This assessment will specifically involve:  
 
➢ Asses gender considerations in all project activities against planned targets outlined in the Gender 
and youth Action Plan. 
➢ Create detailed case studies showcasing best practices and lessons learned in integrating gender 
considerations across diverse project activities. 
➢ Integrate insights from case studies into broader project recommendations and propose adjustments 
to activities based on gender and youth-related findings. 
➢ Facilitate stakeholder discussions with project beneficiaries to assess the adoption of gender-
responsive approaches in project implementation. 
➢ Assess the impact of the project on women and youth empowerment through case studies 
highlighting key activities. 
➢ Review the implementation of the project Gender Action Plan and recommend improvements for 
future project phases. 
 
 Our experience with the Green Gicumbi project has allowed us to effectively implement the Gender Action 
Plan and identify gender gaps that can be promptly addressed in subsequent project activities. We believe 
this approach will ensure that this upgrade project is carried out in the most gender-sensitive manner.  
12. Women’s Perspectives: Shaping the Gender Action Plan 
In light of the tremendous gender barriers that women and girls face in Ngaruyinka village, ensuring their 
full and equal participation and influence in the village upgrade process is paramount for the success and 
sustainability of the project and the well-being of the community overall. When asked about the kinds 
of support that would help them to equally access, participate in and benefit from the village upgrade, 
women and girls offered the following ideas and suggestions, which have further informed the design of 
the gender action plan and shaped the distinct thematic areas for intervention. Concrete activities put 
forth in the Gender Action Plan are further informed by best practice in the sector and tried-and-tested 
successful approaches to gender equality and women’s empowerment, participation and leadership in 
the Rwandan context. 
 
➢ Ensure that women have a safe space to voice their opinions and influence decision making 
processes 
➢ Ensure that women are more equally involved in the village upgrade committee and that their 
contributions are meaningfully included in the decision making process 
➢ Provide coaching and training for women in the village, to be able to claim their rights and engage 
in leadership roles and activities 
➢ Sensitize the community to gender equality and violence, and the rights of women and girls; this 
is considered crucial for women’s participation and involvement in leadership 
➢ Ensure that jobs made available in the process of the village upgrade are as equally available to 
women as they are to men, and that women do not end up occupying the lowest level jobs at the 
lowest pay grade 
➢ Invest in community sensitization around TVET education, to engage and empower women to 
take on trades that are higher paying but typically male-dominated, such as carpentry, welding, 
mechanics and masonry 
➢ Don’t assume that women will jump at available opportunities without additional support and

=== PAGE 149 ===
48 
 
capacity building; women reported that high levels of trauma and emotional distress and low 
self-esteem among women in the village will prevent them from stepping forward if they don’t 
receive additional support or capacity building 
13. Conclusion 
It is clear there are significant and harmful gender inequalities in Ngaruyinka village, and many of them 
can be tied directly to the degree of climate vulnerability women and girls face. Women’s lack of free 
time, limited agency and their extremely constrained ability to be economically independent puts them at 
greater risk, as they overwhelmingly lack the social and financial capacities and resources to be able to 
cope effectively with the impacts of climate change, such as poor crop yields or houses being washed away 
by floods. Their significant lack of financial control and decision making power in the household leaves 
them and their children economically and socially vulnerable to the priorities, perspectives and decisions 
of others, particularly husbands and male leaders. The significant violence and discrimination they 
experience as part of daily life further diminishes their self-esteem and overall health and well being, 
inhibiting their already limited capacity to be able to earn their own income and respond to the various 
challenges that climate change presents across different areas of life, including food security, poverty, 
healthcare and climate-related disasters. Further, their considerable lack of influence andlimited 
participation at the community level means that effective responses to climate change impacts are very 
likely to be designed and implemented without the needs, perspectives or positive contributions of women 
and girls ever being factored in. 
 
In light of the key findings of this assessment, it is critical that women’s meaningful participation in the 
village upgrade is prioritized, and that the proposed interventions intentionally consider the unique 
needs and circumstances of women and girls and proactively involve them in every step of 
implementation, in order for them to benefit fully and equally from the village upgrade on par with their 
male counterparts.

=== PAGE 150 ===
49 
 
List of References 
1. Beijing +25 Country Report; Gender Monitoring Office, May 2019. 
2. Climate Change Profile Rwanda; Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Government of the Netherlands, April 2018. 
3. DHS 2014-2015; NISR, 2015. 
4. Gap Analysis of Gender–Environment and Climate Change Mainstreaming in National Policies and 
Strategies; REMA, December 2019. 
5. Gender Analysis for USAID/Rwanda: Valuing Open and Inclusive Civic Engagement Project; USAID, 2015. 
6. Gender and Climate Change Overview Report. Skinner, E.; BRIDGE, 2011. 
7. Gender and development: Working with men for gender equality in Rwanda; Carlson, K. and Randell, S., 
2013 
8. Gender Assessment for the CD4 Program; Land O’Lakes Venture37, March 2019.fministry 
9. Gender Inequality Prevents Abused Women from Seeking Care Despite Protection Given in Gender-Based 
Violence Legislation: A Qualitative Study from Rwanda. Umubyeyi, A. et al., 2016. 
10. HIV/AIDS and Gender Issues. Interagency Coalition on AIDS and Development, July 2006. 
11. Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey 5 (EICV5); NISR, 2016/17. 
12. Men, Faith and Masculinities: Rwanda report; Tear Fund, July 2016. 
13. National Gender Statistics Report; NISR, 2019. 
14. Overview of linkages between gender and climate change; UNDP, 2017. 
15. Statistical Yearbook 2017; NISR, 2017. 
16. The State of Gender Equality in Rwanda; Gender Monitoring Office, March 2019 
17. Time allocation, gender and norms: Evidence from post-genocide Rwanda; Schindler, K., 2009. 
18. Transforming Eastern Province through Adapatation, Rwanda. Gender Assessment for the Green 
Climate Fund; June 2021. 
19. Updated Gender Policy and Gender Action Plan 2020-2023; Green Climate Fund, November 6, 2019.

=== PAGE 151 ===
50 
 
Annex: Data Collection Tools 
Session #1 for men: Daily Itinerary Mapping 
Time: Approx. 2 hours 
Location: In the village, meeting room with tables and chairs 
1. Recruit a group of 8-10 men of different backgrounds who live in different parts of the village 
(vulnerable/ubudehe categories, PWD, fathers, young men, adolescent boys) 
2. Gather the group together in a safe space and set ground rules for engagement. 
 
3. Ask them to consider what they do in an average 24 hour period, both inside and outside of the 
home. 
4. Ask them to individually list the tasks they accomplish INSIDE and OUTSIDE their houses on a 
daily basis, using the forms provided for this exercise: 
 
INSIDE:  
• Cooking 
• Cleaning 
• Taking care of children 
• Washing clothes 
• Other domestic work 
 
OUTSIDE:  
• Food shopping / going to the market 
• Accompanying children 
• Visits to schools or health centres 
• Agricultural work (unpaid, for the home) 
• Fetching water 
• Fetching firewood/fuel 
• Running errands 
• Business / employment, can include (anything earning cash, etc.) 
• Meeting friends, leisure time 
 
5. For each of the tasks, ask them to consider and write down: 
• the time needed to complete each of these tasks 
• the people with whom they carry out activities (alone, with children, with spouse, or 
with friends) 
• the mode of transport they use to travel (prompt – by foot, moto, car; do they ever 
use bicycles?), and; 
• the space where these activities take place (such as market, square or a street 
corner)

=== PAGE 152 ===
51 
 
6. After completing the list, ask some participants to share their forms and describe the 
favourable aspects (such as a tree that offers shade or a calm and pedestrian-friendly street) or 
unfavourable aspects (such as the lack of public transport or the lack of lighting of a public 
space) of the public environment that affects his daily routine. 
 
Market / food shopping 
• Like: 
• Don’t like: 
 
Accompanying children (mostly school, clinic/hospital, football pitch): 
• Like: 
• Don’t like: 
 
Agricultural work (unpaid, for the home): 
• Like: 
• Don’t like: 
 
Collecting water: 
• Like: 
• Don’t like: 
 
Fetching firewood/fuel: 
• Like: 
• Don’t like: 
 
Business / employment, anything earning cash, etc. 
 
Work activities: 
• Like: 
• Don’t like: 
 
Meeting friends, leisure time: 
• Like: 
• Don’t like: 
 
Latrines: 
• Like: 
• Don’t like: 
 
Bicycles:  
• Like: 
• Don’t like:

=== PAGE 153 ===
52 
 
Session #2 for men: Deep dive into gender dynamics (focus group discussion) 
Time: 2-3 hours, with breaks 
Location: In the village, meeting room with tables and chairs 
 
Date of interview: 
Interview Start and 
End Time: 
Total duration: 
Location: 
Number of 
participants: 
Age range: 
Other notes: 
Part A: Gender and leadership in the village: 
Explain the objective of the visit and tell the group that you are going to have a conversation for about 
2 hours, with a short break halfway through. Let them know that they are welcome to speak freely and 
that there is no right or wrong answer. Respectful disagreement among members is welcome. Everything 
shared is strictly confidential and anonymous. Remind them that the FGD is a ‘safe space’ where 
everyone’s voice matters equally and everyone’s opinion counts. Explain to them the concepts of 
anonymity and confidentiality, and ask them not to share what is said in the group discussion with other 
community members. 
1. Tell us a bit about what men and women do in leadership roles in your village. 
 
i. Who makes decisions in the village, what is the process like? Number of women / men 
involved? 
ii. Who leads? Who speaks most? Do you think men and women fully and equally participate 
in every activity? Why or why not? 
iii. Are some people’s opinions more valued than others? If so, who are they, and why? 
iv. Number of local leaders, how many are women / men? 
v. What about women as regular community members? How often are they involved in 
making decisions about the village? How often do they speak up? How are their 
contributions valued? 
vi. How was the village upgrade committee selected? Why are there not 50/50 men and 
women? 
vii. Do you think men are natural leaders? Is this why there are more men than women in 
leadership roles?

=== PAGE 154 ===
53 
 
viii. Do you think it’s very important for women to be actively involved in the village upgrade? 
For example, through making decisions about the upgrade but also by directly benefitting 
from jobs that may become available in the process of the upgrade? Why or why not? 
Please share your thoughts on this. 
 
Part B: Gender at the household / individual level 
2. Division of responsibilities and work loads (paid work and unpaid care work) 
i. 
How many of you work outside of the home? How many of you bring money into 
the home? 
ii. 
What is the situation like with household work? Who does most of the household 
work? (cooking, cleaning, fetching water, fetching firewood, washing clothers, etc.) 
On average, how much of this work are women doing per day (hours)? 
iii. 
Who does most of the childcare (feeding, bathing, taking kids to school, to the 
doctor etc.)? On average, how much childcare are women doing per day (hours)? 
iv. 
How much free time do you have in a day? i.e. resting, visiting friends, going to a 
bar, etc. 
v. 
Why do you think women are not more involved in community leadership? Or paid 
employment, starting a small business, etc.? 
3. Decision making and finances 
i. 
What are the main activities through which your households generate income? 
ii. 
If your wife also works outside of the home, are you aware of all the sources of 
income of your wife and their average amount? Why or why not? 
iii. 
Who makes decisions about finances in the home, and why? 
iv. 
If there is a disagreement between husband and wife, who has the final say on 
what will be done? 
v. 
When spending in general, who (husband or wife) do you feel makes decisions 
about: 
1. Major household expenditures (cow, bicycle, animals, school fees...) 
2. Minor household expenditures (food, clothing, soap, etc .... ) 
vi. 
If the husband and wife have a fight, will the husband ever refuse to give her money? 
vii. 
Who owns land or assets (other property, livestock, etc.) in your households? 
Whose name are they in? Can women use them freely (i.e. land for collateral, 
purchasing livestock without husband’s permission)? Why or why not? 
 
4. Permission and mobility 
i. 
Do you have to travel to do things you need to get done in a day? If so, which 
things and how far (in minutes, i.e. 30 mins, an hour)? 
ii. 
If a woman wants to go out of the home, does she have to ask her husband first? 
iii. 
If a woman wants to travel to visit friends, does she have to ask her husband first? 
iv. 
If the husband doesn’t agree, will the woman do what she wants anyway, without 
his permission? 
i. 
If the husband and wife have a fight, will the husband ever refuse to allow her to go 
out? Or refuse to give her money for transport?

=== PAGE 155 ===
54 
 
v. 
Do men ever have to ask their wives for permission to do anything? If so, what 
things, and why? If not, why not? 
 
5. Gender-based Violence 
i. 
Let’s talk a bit about violence in the village. EXPLAIN: this can mean different forms of 
violence. These include physical violence (beating, slapping, etc.); emotional violence 
(verbal abuse, calling someone bad names, threatening someone, treating them badly); 
sexual violence (rape, sexual assault, harassment, touching/groping); and economic 
violencer (not having control over money in the home, not being allowed to make 
decisions about spending or saving, earning income that their husbands then take, 
husbands not allowing wives to work, etc.) 
ii. 
From your own observations / experience, do many women in this village experience 
violence? Please explain. 
i. What kind of violence? How often? 
ii. What about violence outside of the home? Street harassment, abusive men in 
the village, etc. How often does this happen? 
iii. What happens when someone faces violence in the village – do most women 
report it? If they do report, what is done about it? 
- 10 MINUTE BREAK - 
 
Part C: Proposed project interventions with a gender lens 
 
One by one, dicuss each individual intervention, describing where and how it will be implemented, and 
gather the men’s feedback on them: 
 
➢ Transportation / mobility – improving roads and green rights of way 
a) What do you like about this idea? 
b) What could maybe be done better? 
c) What do you think is missing / what additional aspects should be considered or 
incorporated? 
d) How will this intervention benefit men / affect your lives? 
e) How might it benefit women, or other people in the village (consider vulnerable 
groups, PWD, children, etc.)? 
f) Do you see any possible drawbacks or problems? 
 
➢ Stormwater management – improved stormwater management systems / gutters 
a) What do you like about this idea? 
b) What could maybe be done better? 
c) What do you think is missing / what additional aspects should be considered or 
incorporated? 
d) How will this intervention benefit men / affect your lives? 
e) How might it benefit women, or other people in the village (consider vulnerable 
groups, PWD, children, etc.)?

=== PAGE 156 ===
55 
 
f) Do you see any possible drawbacks or problems? 
 
➢ Water supply – expansion of WASAC water supply, rainwater harvesting, filters for 
households 
 
a) What do you like about this idea? 
b) What could maybe be done better? 
c) What do you think is missing / what additional aspects should be considered or 
incorporated? 
d) How will this intervention benefit men / affect your lives? 
e) How might it benefit women, or other people in the village (consider vulnerable 
groups, PWD, children, etc.)? 
f) Do you see any possible drawbacks or problems? 
➢ Sanitation – Biogas system at the market, latrine improvements at the market / TVET 
education about biogas, etc.? 
a) What do you like about this idea? 
b) What could maybe be done better? 
c) What do you think is missing / what additional aspects should be considered or 
incorporated? 
d) How will this intervention benefit men / affect your lives? 
e) How might it benefit women, or other people in the village (consider vulnerable 
groups, PWD, children, etc.)? 
f) Do you see any possible drawbacks or problems? 
 
➢ Solid waste management – Community composting, neighbourhood waste collection 
point, recycling collection stations 
a) What do you like about this idea? 
b) What could maybe be done better? 
c) What do you think is missing / what additional aspects should be considered or 
incorporated? 
d) How will this intervention benefit men / affect your lives? 
e) How might it benefit women, or other people in the village (consider vulnerable 
groups, PWD, children, etc.)? 
f) Do you see any possible drawbacks or problems? 
➢ Energy and lighting – Solar PV, improved cook stoves, energy efficient lighting and 
appliances 
 
a) What do you like about this idea? 
b) What could maybe be done better? 
c) What do you think is missing / what additional aspects should be considered or 
incorporated? 
d) How will this intervention benefit men / affect your lives?

=== PAGE 157 ===
56 
 
e) How might it benefit women, or other people in the village (consider vulnerable 
groups, PWD, children, etc.)? 
f) Do you see any possible drawbacks or problems? 
 
➢ Community facilities – TVET centre, additional community focal points and market 
squares 
a) What do you like about this idea? 
b) What could maybe be done better? 
c) What do you think is missing / what additional aspects should be considered or 
incorporated? 
d) How will this intervention benefit men / affect your lives? 
e) How might it benefit women, or other people in the village (consider vulnerable 
groups, PWD, children, etc.)? 
f) Do you see any possible drawbacks or problems?

=== PAGE 158 ===
57 
 
Session #1 for women: Gender-based Community Mapping 
Time: Approx. 2 hours, with breaks 
Location: In the village, meeting room with tables and chairs 
1. Introductions and explanation of visit 
2. Establish a safe space and set ground rules for engagement. 
3. Present a large map of the village and pin it to the wall. 
4. Ask the group the following questions, record their responses in English, and draw them on the 
map as you go: 
• What neighbourhood spaces do you use most / least? 
 
MOST: 
 
LEAST: 
• Why do you choose certain streets to walk? 
• Where do you meet friends? 
 
• Where do you choose to rest? 
• Where do you go shopping? 
 
• Is there a certain space that you do not use because you do not like it? Why or why not? 
• Where do you feel unsafe? Why? Where do you feel safe (if any) and why? 
• Do you feel more or less safe at different times of the day (such as morning, afternoon, 
evening, or night), or on different days of the week (such as weekdays versus weekends)? 
• Where do you go with your children? 
• What places have a special meaning to you (such as a good memory or a historical place, a 
place of cultural or community significance, etc.)? 
• Where are the closest facilities and services, and how do you get there - including: 
o health services 
o churches or mosques, other religious places 
o public transport 
o sport facilities 
o schools / educational facilities

=== PAGE 159 ===
58 
 
o What are some of the barriers to accessing these places (permission, mobility, 
transportation)? What would you like to see instead / what would you want to 
be done differently? 
 
5. Discuss their feedback with a focus on the ‘gaps’ or undesirable aspects of the village space, 
and ask the group what they would recommend for improvements; refer to some of the specific 
project interventions to gather insights on the usefulness of these interventions for women and 
any additional considerations that should be taken into account.

=== PAGE 160 ===
59 
 
Session #2 for women: Daily Itinerary Mapping 
Time: Approx. 2 hours, with breaks 
Location: In the village, meeting room with tables and chairs 
 
1. Recruit a group of 8-10 men of different backgrounds who live in different parts of the village 
(vulnerable/ubudehe categories, PWD, fathers, young men, adolescent boys) 
2. Gather the group together in a safe space and set ground rules for engagement. 
 
3. Ask them to consider what they do in an average 24 hour period, both inside and outside of the 
home. 
 
4. Ask them to individually list the tasks they accomplish INSIDE and OUTSIDE their houses on a 
daily basis, using the forms provided for this exercise: 
 
INSIDE:  
• Cooking 
• Cleaning 
• Taking care of children 
• Washing clothes 
• Other domestic work 
 
OUTSIDE:  
• Food shopping / going to the market 
• Accompanying children 
• Visits to schools or health centres 
• Agricultural work (unpaid, for the home) 
• Fetching water 
• Fetching firewood/fuel 
• Running errands 
• Business / employment, can include (anything earning cash, etc.) 
• Meeting friends, leisure time 
 
5. For each of the tasks, ask them to consider and write down: 
• the time needed to complete each of these tasks 
• the people with whom they carry out activities (alone, with children, with spouse, or 
with friends) 
• the mode of transport they use to travel (prompt – by foot, moto, car; do they ever 
use bicycles?), and; 
• the space where these activities take place (such as market, square or a street 
corner) 
6. After completing the list, ask some participants to share their forms and describe the 
favourable aspects (such as a tree that offers shade or a calm and pedestrian-friendly street) or

=== PAGE 161 ===
60 
 
unfavourable aspects (such as the lack of public transport or the lack of lighting of a public 
space) of the public environment that affects his daily routine. 
 
Market / food shopping 
• Like: 
• Don’t like: 
Accompanying children (mostly school, clinic/hospital, football pitch): 
• Like: 
• Don’t like: 
Agricultural work (unpaid, for the home): 
• Like: 
• Don’t like: 
 
Collecting water: 
• Like: 
• Don’t like: 
 
Fetching firewood/fuel: 
• Like: 
• Don’t like: 
 
Business / employment, anything earning cash, etc. 
 
Work activities: 
• Like: 
• Don’t like: 
 
Meeting friends, leisure time: 
• Like: 
• Don’t like: 
 
Latrines:  
• Like: 
• Don’t like: 
 
Bicycles:  
• Like: 
• Don’t like:

=== PAGE 162 ===
61 
 
Session #3 for women: Deep dive into gender dynamics (focus group discussion) 
Time: 2-3 hours, with breaks 
Location: In the village, meeting room with tables and chairs 
 
Date of interview: 
Interview Start and 
End Time: 
Total duration: 
Location: 
Number of 
participants: 
Age range: 
Other notes: 
Explain the objective of the visit and tell the group that you are going to have a conversation for about 
2 hours, with a short break halfway through. Let them know that they are welcome to speak freely and 
that there is no right or wrong answer. Respectful disagreement among members is welcome. Everything 
shared is strictly confidential and anonymous. Remind them that the FGD is a ‘safe space’ where 
everyone’s voice matters equally and everyone’s opinion counts. Explain to them the concepts of 
anonymity and confidentiality, and ask them not to share what is said in the group discussion with other 
community members. 
Part A: Gender and leadership in the village: 
6. Tell us a bit about what men and women do in leadership roles in your village. 
 
i. Who makes decisions in the village, what is the process like? Number of women / men 
involved? 
 
ii. Who leads? Who speaks most? Do you think men and women fully equally participate in 
every activity? Why or why not? 
iii. Are some people’s opinions more valued than others? If so, who are they, and why? 
 
iv. What about women as regular community members? How often are they involved in 
making decisions about the village? How often do they speak up? How are their 
contributions valued?

=== PAGE 163 ===
62 
 
v. How was the village upgrade committee selected? Why are there not 50/50 men and 
women? 
 
vi. Do you think it’s very important for women to be actively involved in the village upgrade? 
For example, through making decisions about the upgrade but also by directly benefitting 
from jobs that may become available in the process of the upgrade? Why or why not? 
Please share your thoughts on this. 
 
Part B: Gender at the household / individual level 
7. Division of responsibilities and work loads (paid work and unpaid care work) 
 
i. 
How many of you work outside of the home? How many of you bring money into 
the home? If not already doing so, whom among you would like to have a paid job 
/ small business? 
 
ii. 
What is the situation like with household work? Who does most of the household 
work? (cooking, cleaning, fetching water, fetching firewood, washing clothes, etc.) 
On average, how much of this work are men/women doing per day (hours)? 
iii. 
Who does most of the childcare (feeding, bathing, taking kids to school, to the 
doctor etc.)? On average, how much childcare are men doing per day (hours)? 
 
iv. 
Women seem like they are always busy. Do women struggle to get everything 
done in a day? Why or why not? 
 
v. 
Do women often have free time to rest, visit friends, etc.? Why or why not? What 
do you think about this? 
vi. 
Would you consider childcare and/or domestic work as one of the main factors 
that holds women back from equally participating in community leadership roles 
or finding paid work / running a business, etc.? Why or why not? 
 
vii. 
What else holds women back from earning their own income or being a leader in 
the village? Probe here around gender discrimination, lack of free time, low self 
confidenc, etc. 
 
8. Decision making and finances 
i. 
What are the main activities through which your households generate income? 
Are you aware of all the sources of income of your husband and their average 
amount? Why or why not? 
ii. 
Who makes decisions about finances in the home? Do women have a voice, and if 
so, on which topics? Do men listen to women’s views?

=== PAGE 164 ===
63 
 
iii. 
If there is a disagreement between husband and wife, who has the final say on 
what will be done? 
 
iv. 
When spending in general, how are decisions made / who (husband or wife) do 
you feel makes decisions about: 
1. Major household expenditures (cow, bicycle, animals, school fees...) 
 
2. Minor household expenditures (food, clothing, soap, etc .... ) 
v. 
If the husband and wife have a fight, will the husband ever refuse to give her money? 
 
vi. 
Who owns land or assets (other property, livestock, etc.) in your households? 
Whose name are they in? Can women use them freely (i.e. land for collateral, 
purchasing livestock without husband’s permission)? Why or why not? 
 
9. Permission and mobility 
i. 
Do you have to travel to do things you need to get done in a day? If so, which 
things and how far (in minutes, i.e. 30 mins, an hour)? 
ii. 
Do women need to ask for permission from their husbands for certain things? 
What kinds of things? (spending money, going out, traveling somewhere, buying 
livestock or other household expenses, etc.) 
 
iii. 
If a woman wants to go out of the home, does she have to ask her husband first? 
 
iv. 
If a woman wants to travel to visit friends, does she have to ask her husband first? 
v. 
If the husband doesn’t agree, will the woman do what she wants anyway, without 
his permission? 
i. 
If the husband and wife have a fight, will the husband ever refuse to allow her to go 
out? Or refuse to give her money for transport? 
vi. 
Do men ever have to ask their wives for permission to do anything? If so, what 
things, and why? 
 
10. Gender-based Violence 
i. 
Let’s talk a bit about violence in the village. EXPLAIN: this can mean different forms of 
violence. These include physical violence (beating, slapping, etc.); emotional violence 
(verbal abuse, calling someone bad names, threatening someone, treating them badly); 
sexual violence (rape, sexual assault, harassment, touching/groping); and economic 
violencer (not having control over money in the home, not being allowed to make 
decisions about spending or saving, earning income that their husbands then take, 
husbands not allowing wives to work, etc.)

=== PAGE 165 ===
64 
 
ii. 
From your own observations / experience, do many women in this village experience 
violence? Please explain. 
 
i. What kind of violence? How often? 
 
ii. What about violence outside of the home? Street harassment, abusive men in 
the village, etc. How often does this happen? 
 
iii. What happens when someone faces violence in the village – do most women 
report it? If they do report, what is done about it? 
iv. How do you feel about this situation? How does this affect women’s quality of 
life? 
 
- 10 MINUTE BREAK - 
 
Part C: Proposed project interventions with a gender lens 
One by one, dicuss each individual intervention, describing where and how it will be implemented, and 
gather the women’s feedback on them: 
 
➢ Transportation / mobility – improving roads and green rights of way 
 
g) What do you like about this idea? 
h) What could maybe be done better? 
i) What do you think is missing / what additional aspects should be considered or 
incorporated? 
j) How will this intervention benefit men / affect your lives? 
k) How might it benefit women, or other people in the village (consider vulnerable 
groups, PWD, children, etc.)? 
l) Do you see any possible drawbacks or problems? 
➢ Stormwater management – improved stormwater management systems / gutters 
g) What do you like about this idea? 
h) What could maybe be done better? 
i) What do you think is missing / what additional aspects should be considered or 
incorporated? 
j) How will this intervention benefit men / affect your lives? 
k) How might it benefit women, or other people in the village (consider vulnerable 
groups, PWD, children, etc.)? 
l) Do you see any possible drawbacks or problems? 
➢ Water supply – expansion of WASAC water supply, rainwater harvesting, filters for 
households

=== PAGE 166 ===
65 
 
g) What do you like about this idea? 
h) What could maybe be done better? 
i) What do you think is missing / what additional aspects should be considered or 
incorporated? 
j) How will this intervention benefit men / affect your lives? 
k) How might it benefit women, or other people in the village (consider vulnerable 
groups, PWD, children, etc.)? 
l) Do you see any possible drawbacks or problems? 
 
➢ Sanitation – Biogas system at the market, latrine improvements at the market / TVET 
education about biogas, etc.? 
 
g) What do you like about this idea? 
h) What could maybe be done better? 
i) What do you think is missing / what additional aspects should be considered or 
incorporated? 
j) How will this intervention benefit men / affect your lives? 
k) How might it benefit women, or other people in the village (consider vulnerable 
groups, PWD, children, etc.)? 
l) Do you see any possible drawbacks or problems? 
➢ Solid waste management – Community composting, neighbourhood waste collection 
point, recycling collection stations 
g) What do you like about this idea? 
h) What could maybe be done better? 
i) What do you think is missing / what additional aspects should be considered or 
incorporated? 
j) How will this intervention benefit men / affect your lives? 
k) How might it benefit women, or other people in the village (consider vulnerable 
groups, PWD, children, etc.)? 
l) Do you see any possible drawbacks or problems? 
➢ Energy and lighting – Solar PV, improved cook stoves, energy efficient lighting and 
appliances 
 
g) What do you like about this idea? 
h) What could maybe be done better? 
i) What do you think is missing / what additional aspects should be considered or 
incorporated? 
j) How will this intervention benefit men / affect your lives? 
k) How might it benefit women, or other people in the village (consider vulnerable 
groups, PWD, children, etc.)? 
l) Do you see any possible drawbacks or problems?

=== PAGE 167 ===
66 
 
➢ Community facilities – TVET centre, additional community focal points and market 
squares 
 
g) What do you like about this idea? 
h) What could maybe be done better? 
i) What do you think is missing / what additional aspects should be considered or 
incorporated? 
j) How will this intervention benefit men / affect your lives? 
k) How might it benefit women, or other people in the village (consider vulnerable 
groups, PWD, children, etc.)? 
l) Do you see any possible drawbacks or problems?

=== PAGE 168 ===
67 
 
Session #4 for women: Women’s Safety Audit 
Time: Half day, approx. 4 hours 
Location: Meet at a central location, consult a village map and decide the route together 
 
1. Explain the purpose of the safety audit and briefly explain the 5 different areas we want to 
consider when looking at safety, listed below. 
 
➢ LIGHTING 
• Is there any nighttime lighting? 
• If so, is the lighting bright enough, even and in good repair? 
• Are walkways, directional signs or maps sufficiently illuminated? 
• Do trees or bushes obscure the lighting? 
 
➢ SIGHTLINES 
• Are there places someone could hide in? 
• Does the design of the space, corner, and residual areas prevent the visibility of 
the complete spaces? 
➢ MOVEMENT PREDICTORS 
• Are there clear and visible alternative routes? 
• How easy would it be for an attacker to predict your movements? 
• How easy would it be to get away if you were threatened? 
➢ MAINTENANCE 
• What is the level of maintenance in the area? 
• Does the area feel cared for? 
➢ OVERALL DESIGN 
• Is it easy to find your way around the area? 
• What are your general impressions? 
 
2. Consult a large map of the village and determine the route together – designate 2 community 
members to lead the walk. The route should be reasonable for all participants to walk. 
3. Decide amongst the group how many areas of the village will be assessed along the walk. Each 
area will be labeled with a unique name and number on the map and assigned it’s own checklist 
form with corresponding name and number. 
 
4. As the group proceeds along the route, review each area according to the checklist, consulting 
with the group as you go. 
5. Return to the central meeting point and discuss any additional feedback or insights, summarize 
the key findings and sense check with the group.

=== PAGE 169 ===
68 
 
Key informant interview template 
 
Name: 
 
Age:  
 
Sex:  
 
 
Children (#):  
 
Married / Widowed / Single:  
 
 
Other distinctions?  
(disability, vulnerability, etc.) 
Explain the objective of your visit and tell the interviewee that you are going to have a conversation for 
about 45-60 minutes. Let him/her know that they are welcome to speak freely and that there is no right 
or wrong answer. Let him/her know that his/her opinions will remain completely anonymous, and will 
appear in the report as the opinions of ‘a stakeholder’ or ‘a community member/leader’. 
 
1. Please tell us more about yourself and your role in the community (especially for those with 
official leadership roles or community influencers, like CHWs). 
2. How long have you lived in the village, and how long have you been in this position (for those 
with a formal position)? 
 
3. What do you know so far about the proposed upgrades to the village? (If needed, brief the 
interviewee on the proposed interventions in greater detail.) 
4. How many women leaders are in your village? How many men? Who is more active? Does one 
or the other voice have more influence? 
 
5. What about women community members – how active are they in making decisions about the 
village? Are they as active as men, and why/why not? 
6. What role have women played so far in participating in conversations about these village upgrade 
interventions, as far as you know? What roles have women played in raising issues or making 
decisions related to the village development? 
7. What are the gender inequality issues in your village? What do you see / hear / experience as a 
community member in this village, when it comes to gender inequality? (probe: GBV, street 
harassment, discrimination, low value placed on women and girls, being confined to the domestic 
realm, lack of financial control, lack of control over their SRH, etc.) 
 
8. Are there specific groups of women / girls that face even more barriers? (i.e. PWD, very poor 
households, widows / WHH, young girls, etc.) 
9. Based on your perspective within the community, what do you think should be done so that 
women and girls are more involved in leadership and governance in the village, in general but 
also related to this village upgrade project?

=== PAGE 170 ===
69 
 
10. Any additional feedback on the project interventions from your perspective?

=== PAGE 171 ===
1 
ANNEX 8B - GENDER ACTION PLAN | GREEN CITY KIGALI: A NEW MODEL FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT IN RWANDA 
 
Green City Kigali: a new model for urban development in Rwanda 
Annex 8b - Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan 
 
 
Project impact statement: Increased resilience of vulnerable households, including women and girls, and enhanced efficient and low emission household energy use. Resilient 
and low-carbon technologies and infrastructure for improved access to water and electricity of residents, resulting in reduced time and labour required by women and girls for 
household tasks; women-friendly and safe public spaces resulting in reduced gender-based violence; gender-sensitive community center creating space for recreation and 
economic activities of women; gender-sensitive public space and facilities; women’s social and political empowerment through increased participation and leadership in the 
community centre and community activities. 
Project outcome statement: Increased resilience to climate change events for women and girls within the project area. 
Project outputs: 
Output 1: Public infrastructure is upgraded to increase resilience to flooding, landslides and pro-longed dry spells and household energy use is efficient and low emission, 
including stormwater management, solid waste management, water supply, sanitation, transport and mobility, energy, community buildings, and project management and 
technical supervision of works. 
Output 2: Increased awareness and capacity for inclusive climate responsive upgrades, including community ownership and sustainability, TVET operationalised to serve as a 
learning and innovation centre for climate responsive upgrades, capacity building for construction sector workers and professionals, institutional capacity development of GoR 
agencies, awareness raising and citizen engagement in climate responsive regeneration, blueprinting the GCK and Planning code for SPV, development of recycling value 
chains, and market facilitation to catalyse increased uptake of low emission, climate resilient approaches and technologies. 
Output 3: Enabling environment for climate resilient, low emission investment, including mainstreaming green city development standards and approaches into 
regulatory and planning frameworks, and knowledge management system developed on climate responsive regeneration. 
Purpose of the Gender Action Plan (GAP) 
Guidance documentation provided by Green Climate Fund regarding the purpose and preparation of a Gender Action Plan outlines the following key elements to be included 
in a GAP. The Gender Action Plan for the Ngaruyinka village upgrade strives to address each of these important aspects. 
• 
Preparatory work undertaken to address gender issues in the project/program; 
• 
Quotas, targets, design features, included in the project/program to address gender inclusion and facilitate women’s involvement and/or ensure tangible benefits to 
women; 
• 
Mechanisms to ensure implementation of the gender design elements; 
• 
Gender monitoring and evaluation indicators.

=== PAGE 172 ===
2 
ANNEX 8B - GENDER ACTION PLAN | GREEN CITY KIGALI: A NEW MODEL FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT IN RWANDA 
 
Gender dimensions of outputs: Based on the broader project outputs and the key findings of the gender assessment in Ngaruyinka village, the following 
gender dimensions have been developed to ensure women’s full and equal participation in, and benefit from, all aspects of the village upgrade outputs, 
in both the short and long term. These dimensions cut across all three outputs to varying degrees, though they are primarily relevant to Outputs 1 and 2. 
They have been organized in the action plan to reflect the cross-cutting nature of gender inequities and the need for taking a holistic approach to gender 
equality efforts, in order to ensure sustainability of outcomes and long-term community ownership that equally involves women and girls in all aspects 
of climate resilience related to the upgrade. 
Dimension 1: Participation and Leadership 
This dimension addresses specific gaps and inequalities in the current context that inhibit women from effectively participating in decision making 
processes and leadership roles related to the village upgrade, as well as village governance more broadly and its impact on future responses to climate 
change events and community ownership of the social and environmental gains made during the upgrade process. This dimension prioritizes capacity 
building and awareness raising among both men and women, as well as specific community-led accountability mechanisms, to ensure women will have 
a meaningful voice throughout the entire lifecycle of the village upgrade in planning and decision making processes that will directly influence the 
success and positive, inclusive impact of the upgrade. 
Dimension 2: Safety and Rights 
This dimension addresses the gender barriers women and girls currently face at the home and community level that directly and substantially constrain 
their ability to benefit from many aspects of the village upgrade, as well as to have the free time and agency to be able to participate in decision making 
processes related to the upgrade, whether in a specific leadership role or as a community stakeholder. Unpaid care work and gender-based violence, as 
well as community attitudes and beliefs about women’s roles and capabilities, directly affect the degree to which women are able to participate (if at 
all), to have their needs and views be respected and included, and to fully and equally benefit from key aspects of the upgrade such as (although not 
limited to) TVET education, job creation, street lighting, bicycle lanes, and community management roles. The underlying drivers of women’s exclusion 
and the unique gender barriers they face are thus addressed through targeted efforts in this dimension, and include community-led sustainability 
mechanisms to ensure women are effectively included and able to equally benefit from upgrade interventions consistently over time. 
Dimension 3: Wrap-around Stakeholder Engagement for Women’s Equal Access and Benefit 
This dimension addresses gender issues across some of the larger surrounding structures, systems and key stakeholders that will directly influence 
women’s access to, participation in, and ability to safely and equally benefit from specific upgrade interventions. This includes women’s ability to 
benefit from intervention such as TVET as well as employment opportunities; even if women are enabled to have the free time to engage in such 
activities, gender norms around what is expected and appropriate for them will influence whether or not they pursue opportunities or access resources 
to the degree that men do. In addition, gender-based violence and discrimination in workplace settings and community management roles will create 
additional burdens for women and prevent them from participating and benefitting equally. This dimension targets these areas in a multi-layered 
manner to ensure women’s safe and meaningful inclusion from end to end. 
*Note: Budget amounts include all estimated costs for design and development of activities / materials, implementation of activities, and logistical costs 
related to implementation, i.e. venue rentals, etc. In the Annex 4 Budget, these costs are covered by certain consolidated line items.

=== PAGE 173 ===
3 
ANNEX 8B - GENDER ACTION PLAN | GREEN CITY KIGALI: A NEW MODEL FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT IN RWANDA 
 
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Responsibilities 
Timeline 
Costs/Approx. 
budget* 
(US$) 
1. DIMENSION: Participation and Leadership 
Women’s ability to participate in decision making processes and to occupy leadership roles on par with men, as well as to be respected and influential when they do engage, is 
extremely constrained in the current gender context of Ngaruyinka village. Intentional measures must be put in place to ensure women have a meaningful voice within the 
village upgrade committee in the immediate term and for the project lifecycle, and in village governance processes more broadly in the long-term, to ensure sustainability and 
impact of the upgrade intervention areas. 
1.1 Gender and leadership capacity building support 
1.1.1 Participatory training with women on 
women’s leadership, rights and self-confidence 
Number of sessions conducted 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 3) 
Number of women trained 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 60) 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist 
Year 1; 
beginning mid- 
year approx. 
$2,400.00 
1.1.2 Gender equality and rights training with 
local leaders and the village upgrade committee 
in separate groups (men and women in separate 
sessions), with an emphasis on the importance of 
women’s experiences being incorporated into 
project intervention areas, particularly in relation 
to those areas where women are heavily 
involved or affected (i.e. water access and 
management, waste management / sorting) 
Number of sessions conducted 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 2 sessions with men, 2 sessions with 
women) 
Number of men trained 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 10-15; dependent on number of men in 
village leadership roles and on the upgrade committee) 
Number of women trained 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 10-15; dependent on number of women 
in village leadership roles and on the upgrade committee) 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist 
Year 1; 
beginning mid- 
year approx. 
$3,000.00 
1.1.3 Conduct climate literacy seminars for local 
government and civil society organizations, 
aimed at increasing women and youth 
participation  
number of CSOs and government agencies trained to build 
capacity of urban people, specifically women and youth, to 
participate in climate change mitigation and adaptation 
processes 
(baseline: 0, target: (50 people from local government and civil 
society organizations trained-50% male, 50% female)  
Gender Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist 
Year 1; beginning 
mid- year approx. 
$4,000 
1.1.3. Provide organizational/technical/financial 
capacity building to women, youth, and CSOs 
(such as cooperatives or VSLA) with focus on 
financial literacy and provide long-term coaching 
to beneficiaries 
Number of CSOs/VSLAs members trained (baseline:0, target: 
100 members of CSO/VSLs members trained:60% are women 
and youth) 
Gender Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist, 
FONERWA 
Y1,2 &3 
$5,000 
1.2 Establish a gender mainstreaming committee within the village for ongoing oversight

=== PAGE 174 ===
4 
ANNEX 8B - GENDER ACTION PLAN | GREEN CITY KIGALI: A NEW MODEL FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT IN RWANDA 
 
1.2.1 Establish a community-led committee to 
ensure oversight and accountability at the village- 
level for women’s effective participation and 
gender equality; committee will be co-designed 
with the community, with the support of the 
gender technical team for the upgrade; 
committee members will be those whom have 
received capacity building on gender equality, 
women’s rights and equal leadership 
Number of co-design sessions conducted 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 2) 
Number of committees established 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 1) 
Number of women and men on the committee 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 5 women, 3 men) 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist 
Year 1; 
beginning mid- 
year approx. 
$1,800.00

=== PAGE 175 ===
5 
ANNEX 8B - GENDER ACTION PLAN | GREEN CITY KIGALI: A NEW MODEL FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT IN RWANDA 
 
1.2.2 Liaise with the gender mainstreaming 
committee on a quarterly basis to monitor 
progress and address any problems or sticking 
points effectively and efficiently as they arise; 
document results and feedback to project team 
Number of check-in sessions conducted 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 1 per quarter) 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist 
Year 1; quarterly 
from launch of 
committee, 
beginning mid- 
year approx. 
$1,800.00 / 
quarter 
1.3 Ensure women’s full and equal participation on the village upgrade committee 
1.3.1 Ensure active women’s participation on 
the village upgrade committee, to combat 
tokenistic approaches to women’s involvement 
and leadership 
Number of community engagement sessions hosted to 
discuss quota system: 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 1) 
Number of quota systems established 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 1) 
Number of women and men on the village upgrade 
committee 
(Baseline: 6 men, 4 women, Target: 5 men, 5women, or 6 
men, 6 women)4 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist, 
FONERWA 
Year 1; 
beginning mid- 
year approx. 
$1,800.00 
1.4 Build the capacity of key decision makers and stakeholders involved in the village upgrade to ensure wrap-around support for women’s greater engagement 
1.4.1 Participatory gender and women’s rights 
training sessions for village upgrade 
implementing team and key actors within 
FONERWA to ensure understanding of key 
concepts and targets in the gender action plan 
for greater compliance, accountability and 
support for women’s engagement 
Number of sessions conducted 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 2 sessions with men, 2 sessions with 
women) 
Number of people trained 
(Baseline: 0, Target: at least 
60% of trained people are 
women  
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist, 
Village upgrade 
project staff, 
FONERWA 
Year 1; 
beginning mid- 
year approx. 
$2,700.00 
1.5 Establish a formal complaint mechanism regarding women’s participation and gender equality in the village upgrade process 
1.5.1 Establish a formal complaint mechanism 
and chain of reporting to ensure accountability 
at all levels for the gender action plan targets 
and goals; system will be co-designed with 
community, with the support of the gender 
technical team for the upgrade 
Number of co-design sessions conducted 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 2 sessions per year) 
Number of complaint mechanisms established and 
operational 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 1 complaint mechanisms established and 
operational ) 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist, 
FONERWA 
Year 1; 
beginning mid- 
year approx. 
$3,600.00

=== PAGE 176 ===
6 
ANNEX 8B - GENDER ACTION PLAN | GREEN CITY KIGALI: A NEW MODEL FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT IN RWANDA 
 
2. DIMENSION: Safety and Rights 
The findings of the gender assessment in Ngaruyinka village revealed alarmingly high rates of violence in the home and community (physical, emotional, sexual and economic 
violence), which has a tremendous impact on women’s mental and physical health, women’s sense of self-esteem and self-efficacy, and women’s ability to engage in leadership 
roles, access paid work or control household income; these factors contribute significantly to women’s climate vulnerability in various ways, as well as their ability to influence, 
participate in and benefit from the village upgrade process, and thus must be intentionally addressed in the gender mainstreaming and accountability efforts of the project. 
Women’s right to paid work, participation in leadership meetings, access to TVET education and other benefits of the upgrade also cannot be achieved if women don’t have 
the free time to engage in such activities, thus gender barriers at the household level must be addressed. 
2.1 Community sensitization and engagement around gender-based violence and women’s rights 
2.1.1 Participatory training with men and 
women around gender equality and gender- 
based violence, in separate groups 
Number of sessions conducted 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 4 sessions with men, 4 sessions with 
women; 20 individuals per cohort, 2 cohorts that receive 
both sessions) 
Number of men trained 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 40) 
Number of women trained 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 40) 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist 
Year 1; 
beginning mid- 
year approx. 
$7,200.00 
2.1.2 Participatory training with married / 
domestic couples to address household dynamics 
that limit women’s free time for participation and 
leadership activities and increase their climate 
vulnerability; address power sharing and decision 
making in the home, financial control and agency, 
unpaid care work, etc. (engaging women and 
men who have already received baseline training 
in gender and GBV) 
Number of sessions conducted 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 2 sessions with men and women 
together; 3 cohorts, for a total of 6 session)) 
Number of men trained 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 20) 
Number of women trained 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 20) 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist 
Year 1; 
beginning mid- 
year approx. 
$6,000.00 
2.1.3 Community education campaign to raise 
awareness around women’s rights and prevent 
gender-based violence 
Number of public communications tools/materials 
developed and disseminated (community banners, posters, 
etc.) 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 15-20) 
Number of community village meetings that highlight the 
campaign and discuss GBV 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 10) 
Number of weeks where active campaigning is ongoing 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 8) 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist, 
Ngaruyinka 
village 
leadership 
Year 1; 
beginning mid- 
year approx. 
$1,500.00

=== PAGE 177 ===
7 
ANNEX 8B - GENDER ACTION PLAN | GREEN CITY KIGALI: A NEW MODEL FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT IN RWANDA 
 
2.2 Address specific safety concerns related to infrastructure upgrades that were raised by women as well as men 
2.2.1 Implement an adequate, village-wide street 
lighting system that ensures sufficient, consistent 
lighting 
Percentage of main roads that have sufficient and 
consistently reliable street lighting 
(Baseline: 0, Target 100%) 
Percentage of footpaths and small streets that have 
sufficient and consistently reliable street lighting 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 100%) 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist, 
FONERWA 
Year 2 
2.3 Establish a Women’s Safe Space (WSS) and Gender Champions Group (GCG) at village level to ensure sustainability of gains made 
2.3.1 Establish a women’s safe space (WSS) in the 
village to support women to report violence, 
speak out about violence, educate other women 
about their rights, and combat a culture of 
impunity related to all forms of violence women 
face in Ngaruyinka village (physical, sexual, 
emotional and economic violence); founding 
members of the WSS will have received baseline 
capacity building in gender, GBV and gender 
equality in the home 
Number of sessions conducted to support women to report 
violence 
(Baseline: 0, Target: at least 3 sessions organized every year ) 
Number of safe spaces established and operational 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 1) 
Number of women engaged as founding members of the WSS 
(Baseline: 0, Target: at least 60% of founding members for WSS 
are women) 
Number of women engaged as community members of the 
WSS 
(Baseline: 0, Target: At least 60% of community members of 
WSS are women) 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist, 
Ngaruyinka 
village 
leadership 
Year 1; 
beginning mid- 
year approx. 
$1,800.00 
2.3.2 Establish a gender champions group (GCG) 
in the village to promote gender equality, engage 
and educate other men and women, speak out 
against gender-based violence and champion 
women’s participation and leadership; founding 
members of the GCG will have received baseline 
capacity building in gender, GBV and gender 
equality in the home 
Number of co-design sessions conducted 
(Baseline: 0, Target: at least 3 sessions are organized) 
Number of gender champions groups established 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 1) 
Number of women and men as founding members 
(Baseline: 0, Target: at least 5 women, 5 men) 
Number of women and men engaged as community 
members of the GCG 
(Baseline: 0, Target: at least 60% of engaged community 
members of GCG are women) 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist, 
Ngaruyinka 
village 
leadership 
Year 1; 
beginning mid- 
year approx. 
$2,400.00 
3. DIMENSION: Wrap-around Stakeholder Engagement for Women’s Equal Access and Benefit 
In order for women to access and benefit from the different village upgrade interventions in equal measure with men, systems must be put in place to address community- 
level gendered attitudes and beliefs about women’s value and capabilities, particularly those related directly to the village upgrade intervention areas. 
3.1 Community sensitization to promote women in higher-paying trades that are currently male-dominated

=== PAGE 178 ===
8 
ANNEX 8B - GENDER ACTION PLAN | GREEN CITY KIGALI: A NEW MODEL FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT IN RWANDA 
 
3.1.1 Community education campaign to 
normalize and promote women taking on higher- 
paying male-dominated trades in TVET 
Number of women that participate in the community 
village meetings that highlight the campaign and promote 
women in unconventional TVET trades 
(Baseline: 0, Target: at least 60% of the participants are 
women) 
Number of women that are taken in higher- paying male-
dominated trades in TVET 
(Baseline: 0, Target: at least 40% of considered workers in 
higher- paying male-dominated trades in TVET are women) 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist, 
Ngaruyinka 
village 
leadership 
Year 2; 
6 months 
before the 
launch of the 
TVET centre 
$1,500.00 
3.1.2 Participatory sensitization sessions with 
women of all ages to encourage and promote 
them to take on higher-paying trades in TVET, 
which women typically avoid as they are 
considered masculine trades and are male- 
dominated 
Number of sessions conducted 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 3) 
Number of women engaged 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 90) 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist 
Year 2; 
3-6 months 
before the 
launch of the 
TVET centre 
$3,600.00 
3.2 Ensure women’s equal access to and benefit from village upgrade interventions 
3.2.1 Ensure active participation of women for 
paid positions within the upgrade intervention 
areas, working directly with suppliers/partner 
companies 
Percentage of companies who have been sensitized on the 
importance of  gender equality in hiring (Baseline: 0, 
Target: 100%) 
Percentage of companies with with consideration of at least 
40% of women in the hired personnel   
(Baseline: 0, Target: 100%) 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist, 
FONERWA 
Year 2; before 
supplier 
procurement 
begins 
N/A 
3.2.2 Ensure that companies involved in the 
village upgrade interventions have in place 
policies related to sexual harassment and gender 
discrimination in the workplace and a formal 
Code of Conduct; technical support to develop 
policies and Codes of Conduct for those 
companies without them 
Percentage of companies with relevant policies in place 
(Baseline: 0/unknown, Target: 100% of hired companies have 
relevant code of conduct on GBV and sexual harassment) 
Percentage of staff who have been briefed on such policies 
and signed off on the Code of Conduct 
(Baseline: 0/unknown, Target: 100% of staff are briefed on GBV 
and sexual harassment ) 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist, 
FONERWA 
Year 2; before 
suppliers / 
partner 
companies 
begin work at 
village-level 
$4,200.00 
3.2.3. Ensure access and enrollment of women 
and youth in  the technical and vocational 
education and training   
Percentage  of women enrolled in the technical and vocational 
education and training center 
(Baseline: 0/unknown, Target: At least 50% of women will be 
enrolled in the TVET that will be constructed  
Gender Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist, 
FONERWA and 
Local authority 
N/A

=== PAGE 179 ===
9 
ANNEX 8B - GENDER ACTION PLAN | GREEN CITY KIGALI: A NEW MODEL FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT IN RWANDA 
 
3.2.4. Develop and implement strategies to 
ensure that women, youth, and other 
marginalized groups benefit from rural 
livelihoods and financial services 
% Women beneficiaries and % Youth beneficiaries 
(baseline:0, target 50% of beneficiaries are women 
50% of beneficiaries are youth 
Gender Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist, 
FONERWA 
Y1 & Y2 
$10,000 
3.2.5. Ensure access of women and women 
headed households on benefit form energy 
facilities like PV and solar hot water heaters 
% Women beneficiaries and % women headed households 
beneficiaries 
(Baseline: 0, target: At least 60% of beneficiaries are women and 
out of those women 50% are women headed households) 
Gender Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist, 
FONERWA 
Year 2 
Include in the 
project costs 
3.2.6. Ensure equal access of men, women and 
youth on the recreational areas (sport fields, 
green spaces etc.)   
% of women, youth, and men using sports and recreation 
facilities 
(baseline: 0, Targets: 50%quota share for men, women and 
youth) 
Gender Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist, 
FONERWA and 
local authorities 
Continuous even 
after the project 
completion  
Include in the 
project costs 
3.2.7 Conduct sexual abuse and exploitation 
prevention training (SEA) for all companies 
engaged in implementation of upgrade activities 
in the village (approx. 20 companies) 
Number of sessions provided 
(Baseline: 0, Target: Minimum of 1 session for each company 
implementing upgrade activities) 
Percentage of companies trained 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 100% of contracted companies are trained 
on SEA) 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist 
Year 2: before 
suppliers / 
partner 
companies 
begin work at 
village-level 
$12,900.00

=== PAGE 180 ===
10
ANNEX 8B - GENDER ACTION PLAN | GREEN CITY KIGALI: A NEW MODEL FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT IN RWANDA 
3.2.8 Set up a community-led training program to 
teach women and girls how to ride bicycles and 
encourage men and boys to support them, so 
they can equally use and benefit from bike lanes 
in the village; program can be led by women and 
men community members who have received 
baseline education in gender equality, GBV- 
prevention and women’s rights, and co-designed 
with the gender technical support team 
Number of co-design sessions conducted 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 2 sessions with men/boys and 
women/girls together) 
Number of community members engaged to run the 
program 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 5 men, 5 women 
Number of women / girls trained to ride bicycles 
(Baseline: 0, Target: at least 50% of the women who 
participated in the sessions are trained to ride bicycles ) 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist, 
Ngaruyinka 
village 
leadership 
Year 4 or 5; in 
advance of 
completion of 
bike lanes 
$2,400.00 
3.2.9 Community sensitization to ensure women 
and men are equally involved in managing 
ongoing intervention areas, such as community 
composting; this is also necessary to avoid 
women becoming entirely responsible for key 
aspects of labour (i.e. sorting and carrying waste), 
while men are primarily occupying leadership / 
management roles in the same area. 
Number of sessions conducted 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 4) 
Number of women and men engaged 
(Baseline: 0, Target: 40 women, 40 men) 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist, 
Ngaruyinka 
village 
leadership 
Year 2 or 3; 
before 
implementation 
activities begin 
at community 
level 
$4,800.00 
3.2.10 Host community feedback discussions on 
a periodic basis to ensure gender action plan 
goals are being met and gather community 
feedback on the positive impact on women and 
girls; this also helps to ensure the gender 
mainstreaming committee is accurately 
representing the needs, concerns and voices of 
the wider community and that any problems are 
being addressed in a timely and productive 
manner; document results and feedback to 
project team 
Number of community discussions conducted 
(Baseline: 0, Target: At least 1 community discussion per 
quarter) 
Gender 
Specialist + 
Community 
Engagement 
Specialist? 
Year 2; 
quarterly from 
completion of 
Year 1 gender 
activities 
$1,800.00 / 
quarter 
__________
