=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 24.2.20895
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 24.2.20895
creationDate: D:20240714224112+09'00'
modDate: D:20240715163451+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
15 – 18 July 2024 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 10 
GCF/B.39/02/Add.16/Rev.01 
15 July 2024 
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum XVI 
Funding proposal package for FP241 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following six parts: 
a)
A funding proposal summary titled “Financing Mitigation and Adaptation Projects (FMAP)
in Indian MSMEs” submitted by Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI);
b)
No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s);
c)
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure;
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
e)
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's
assessment; and
f)
Gender documentation of the funding proposal.
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated authority(ies) or 
focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure Policy of the Fund, the funding 
proposal titled “Financing Mitigation and Adaptation Projects (FMAP) in Indian MSMEs” submitted by Small 
Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board 
Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged or 
commercially sensitive information of the entity.
 Disclaimer: 
The boundaries and names shown and the designations used including maps, references and citations in this 
Funding Proposal do not imply any official endorsement or acceptance by the Green Climate Fund. The final  
status of Jammu and Kashmir is yet to be decided.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.16/Rev.01 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
104 
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure 
105 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
107 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
115 
Gender documentation 
122

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
Financing Mitigation and Adaptation Projects (FMAP) in 
Indian MSMEs 
Country(ies): 
India 
Accredited Entity: 
Small Industries Development Bank of India  
Date of first submission: 
[2024/03/18]  
Date of current submission  
[2024/06/22]  
Version number 
[V.12]

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 0 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
NOTE TO ACCREDITED ENTITIES ON THE USE OF THE FUNDING PROPOSAL TEMPLATE 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[SIDBI]-[India/South Asia]-[2024/05/01]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 1 
 
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Programme 
A.2. Public or 
private sector 
Private 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals, 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+. 
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets 
below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co-
financers’ contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 
100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively. 
 
GCF  
contribution 
Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total 
60 % 
60 % 
☒  Energy generation and access 
25 % 
25 % 
☒  Low-emission transport 
25 % 
25% 
☒  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances 
10 % 
10 % 
☐  Forestry and land use 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Adaptation total 
40 % 
40 % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities 
15 % 
15 % 
☒  Health and well-being, and food and water security 
15 % 
15 % 
☒  Infrastructure and built environment 
10 % 
10 % 
☐  Ecosystems and ecosystem services 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered) 
Indicate climate house gas 
(GHG) emission reductions or 
removals in tCO2eq over total 
lifespan of the 
project/programme2 
35.34 million tCO2 eq. 
(Over equipment lifetime) 
A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached) 
Indicate total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
10.80 million 
 
 
 
Indicate number 
of direct 
beneficiaries 
0 
 
 
Indicate number 
of indirect 
beneficiaries 
10.80 million 
 
Indicate % of 
direct 
beneficiaries vis-
à-vis total 
population 
 
0% 
Indicate % of 
indirect 
beneficiaries vis-
à-vis total 
population 
 
0.0076% 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance3)  
3792.6 million USD  
(including sub-
participation) 
A.9. Project size 
Large (Over USD 250 million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
215.6 million USD 
 
For multi-country proposals, 
please fill out annex 17.

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 2 
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
☒  Grant 
USD 15.6 million  
☒  Loan 
USD 200 million 
☐  Guarantee 
Enter number 
☐  Equity  
 
    Enter number 
☐  Results-based payment    Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
Indicate the number of years 
and months the project/ 
programme is expected to be 
implemented. 
 
13 years 
A.12. Total lifespan 
Indicate the maximum number of 
years over which the outcomes of the 
investment are expected to be 
effective, i.e. to lead to adaptation 
and/or mitigation results. 
 
15 years 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
This is the date that the 
Accredited Entity obtained/will 
obtain its own approval to 
implement the project/ 
programme, if available.  
 
8/31/2024 
 
A.14. ESS category  
Refer to the AE’s safeguard policy 
and GCF ESS Standards to assess 
your FP category. 
 
I-2  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF, 
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
If not the Accredited Entity, please indicate the full legal name of the Executing Entity(ies) and 
provide its country of registration and ownership type. Note that there can be more than one 
Executing Entity. Also indicate if an Executing Entity is the National Designated Authority. Refer 
to the definition of Executing Entity in the Accreditation Master Agreement.  
 
AE is the Executing Entity for this programme  
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 3 
 
Climate change problem 
 
India is highly vulnerable to climate change impacts and ranks 7th on the Climate Risk Index and 31st on the INFORM 
Risk Index, incurring losses worth $68 billion, annually, due to extreme weather events. 
1. In 2016 India’s total GHG emissions, excluding Land Use Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) were 2,838.89 
million tonne CO2e and 2,531.07 million tonne CO2e with the inclusion of LULUCF. Carbon dioxide continues to 
remain the most emitted GHG. Increased burning of fossil fuels, methane emissions from livestock and increasing 
aluminium and cement production are attributed to this. MSMEs generate around 110 million tonnes of carbon 
dioxide, equivalent to the energy usage of up to 50 million metric tonnes of oil per year from 200 energy-intensive 
manufacturing clusters in India, according to a 2018 report4. MSMEs also face several barriers to become climate 
resilient owing to reasons such as usage of conventional processes and technologies with unskilled / semi-skilled 
manpower, leading to higher resource consumption and associated GHG emissions. The technology advancement 
in these units is usually low due to resource constraints including availability of finance, access to technology, and 
skilled manpower. This provides an opportunity to reduce their resource consumption including electricity, fossil 
fuels, water, etc. in a cost-effective manner.  
Proposed interventions  
 
2. Considering the above, the proposed project is an attempt to sensitise the MSMEs (towards adopting climate 
/cleaner production technologies and develop/deploy adaptation technologies) and to sensitize the banks/FIs 
towards having dedicated climate finance instruments and to lend with increased confidence to meet the demand 
from MSMEs to adopt/develop the necessary climate technologies for mitigation and adaptation interventions. 
Through, SIDBI’s various climate initiatives and the learnings gained thereof, it is strongly felt that MSMEs in India 
can be an important contributor to both the mitigation and adaptation efforts of the Government of India from the 
demand side as well as supply side. The project titled ‘Financing Mitigation and Adaptation Project in Indian MSMEs’ 
is targeted at the following:  
1. Develop and deploy an ecosystem to promote Climate Financing to MSMEs- Utilizing the past learning of 
SIDBI, the programme will set up a blended finance facility targeting the reduction of carbon emissions and 
enhancing the resilience to the impacts of climate change, in line with the requirements of MSMEs. The aim is 
to provide loans at concessional terms to MSMEs either directly or through Participating Financial Institutions 
(PFIs) to develop and deploy technologies for mitigation and adaptation interventions. 
2. Undertake Technology Need Assessments for MSMEs- To facilitate the MSMEs to undertake mitigation 
interventions within their systems and operations, it is imperative to provide handholding support for technology 
needs assessment.  
3. Awareness Generation and Capacity Building of MSMEs- The technology assessment will help to build 
awareness on the climate technologies and create niche market demand for its adoption among the MSMEs. 
Further, the technology need assessment would pave the way for awareness raising and training activities for 
the MSMEs to disseminate the information about low carbon and climate-resilient technologies, as well as 
available financing amongst MSMEs. 
4. Awareness Generation and Capacity Building of Participating Financial Institutions- SIDBI will sensitise 
India's financial sector to the importance and benefits of climate finance with special emphasis on capacity 
building and creating awareness of climate risk assessment to tackle the challenges posed by climate change.  
5. Implement knowledge management and sharing on climate change adaptation and mitigation for 
MSMEs- The learning of the program will be disseminated amongst stakeholders through knowledge products 
to enable large scale replication of technologies for mitigation and adaptation interventions within MSME sector.  
6. Enabling environment for a low-emission and climate-resilient MSME sector- The project seeks to support 
MSMEs operating in the ecosystem of climate adaptation technologies in the various sectors of economy 
including agriculture, agroforestry, water resources, disaster response services, etc.  
7. Develop and implement MSME sectoral adaptation and mitigation benchmarking tools- The program will 
contribute to the upgrading and further development of the online assessment / benchmarking tools for MSMEs.  
 
Climate results/benefits  
• 
Reduction of GHG emissions- The programme will reduce 35.34 million tCO2eq of GHG emissions over 
equipment lifecycle with the adoption of low carbon climate technologies  
• 
Promoting Industrial Decarbonization- The exclusive investment in climate friendly Clean Technologies in 
MSMEs will accelerate industrial decarbonization trajectory of the country through (a) New innovations in climate 
change domain; and (b) Acceleration of the market for climate technologies.  
• 
Promotion of climate financing- A total of ~10000 climate loans will be provided to the eligible MSMEs.

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 4 
 
• 
Energy Saving- The Project will enable saving of more than 27 lakhs MWh energy. Studies indicate that the 
value of the productivity and operational benefits derived can be up to 2.5 times the value of the energy savings.  
• 
Impact on beneficiaries- The programme will impact a total of 10.80 million beneficiaries. Additionally, the 
project will create ~ 420,000 new climate jobs directly related to climate change Mitigation. 
• 
Leveraging Private Investment in climate financing- GCF fund of USD 215.6 million as loan and TA grant will 
potentially leverage USD 3577 million (Co finance of USD 800 million mobilization of 2400 million plus MSME 
promoter’s contribution of USD 377 million) it is associated public and private sector sources, hence making a 
total programme outlay of USD 3792.6 million. The fund will be utilized towards a dedicated investments in MSME 
sector for carbon emission reduction and promoting MSMEs for accelerating adaptation actions. Higher 
concessional finance would help MSMEs in overcoming the barriers of high capital cost as well as increased 
compliance cost.  
• 
Promoting Innovation- The support from the programme to new and young companies and entrepreneurs who 
often exploit technological or commercial opportunities that have been neglected by more established enterprises 
or even challenge the business models of existing companies will unleash climate innovations, and thereby 
facilitate climate low carbon industrialization. This will be done especially in the case of adaptation interventions 
which have to be locally suited and context specific  
• 
Promoting women-based entrepreneurship- Various TA activities including capacity building and financial 
literacy of women workers/civil society representatives will be conducted so that they can become an independent 
entrepreneur. These initiatives will help in increasing the existing women employment ratio in MSMEs. 
 
4 Greening of MSMEs key in India’s journey towards climate-resilience (downtoearth.org.in)

=== PAGE 9 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 5 
 
 
 
5 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41612-023-00494-0  
6 https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/  
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Country context and climate profile 
 
The Indian subcontinent encompasses varied climatic zones including the north covered by Himalayan tundra, the North-west 
covered by arid desert and the north-west, central and North-eastern parts covered by humid climate. The monsoons are crucial 
for the Indian economy and are often regarded as the backbone of the agricultural sector, which employs over half of India’s 
population. They also play a pivotal role in the management of water resources and the generation of hydro-based clean energy. 
However, the variability of the Indian monsoons and the associated wet and dry conditions have direct impacts on socio-economic 
aspects of the country, including the gross domestic product (GDP) (Gadgil and Gadgil 2006; Wang, Gadgil, and Kumar 2006; 
Gulati, Saini, and Jain 2013).  
 
Observed and projected climate change 
 
Temperature 
Observed: 
 
1. India’s average annual mean temperature during 1901-2020 showed an increasing trend of 0.62°C/100 years, with 
significant increasing trend in maximum temperature (0.99°C/100 years) and relatively lower increasing trend 
(0.24°C/100 years) in minimum temperature. Considerably greater warming of 0.14–0.25°C per decade has been 
experienced over the last 30 years. This warming trend has been highest during the post-monsoon season (0.88°C/100 
years) followed by winter season (0.68°C/100 years). India’s average temperature has risen by around 0.7°C during 
1901–2018.5 
Future: 
2. Temperatures in India are projected to increase by ~4°C by 2080-2099 under the RCP8.5 emissions scenario, and 
~1.1°C under the RCP2.6 emissions scenario. By mid-century, projections indicate increases in annual average 
temperatures of 1.5–2.5°C in subtropical regions and 1.2–2.2°C in tropical regions in the country. Warming is stronger 
in annual minimum and maximum temperatures than in the average. Under all emissions scenarios, the rise in annual 
minimum temperatures is 18-21% higher than the rise in average temperatures (Figure 1). Such temperature increases 
are also supported by regional models used for the development of the IPCC’s Sixth Assessment Report (AR6)6 Under 
the SSP2 4.5 scenario, mean temperature in the South Asia region is expected to increase by 0.6–1.3°C by 2040, relative 
to a baseline period of 1980–2010 (Figure 2). Warming on higher emissions pathways is strongly biased towards the 
winter and pre-monsoon months. Such conditions will see an increase in the duration of heat waves and ‘hot’ (when 
temperatures exceed the current average maximums and minimums by 10%) days and nights.

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 6 
 
 
 
7 https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/country-profiles/15503-WB_India%20Country%20Profile-WEB.pdf  
 
Figure 1: Projected mean temperature for India for all emissions scenarios relative to a reference period of 1986 to 2005 
 
3. As per a World Bank study, unusual and unprecedented spells of hot weather are expected to occur far more frequently 
and cover much larger areas.  Long-term predictions show that the heatwaves will affect more than 300 million people 
by 2050 and lower the quality of life for almost 600 million Indians by 2100. Under 4°C warming, the west coast and 
southern India are projected to shift to new, high-temperature climatic regimes with significant impacts on agriculture.  
Precipitation 
Observed: 
4. While the Indian monsoons, by nature, show high variability through space and time, current climate change trends 
indicate that we are likely to breach global warming records earlier than expected (WMO 2023). A decline in monsoon 
rainfall since the 1950s has already been observed. The frequency of heavy rainfall events has also increased. A very 
recent study by Council for Energy, Environment and Water a think tank based in India has highlighted the following: 
 
Figure 2:  Annual Mean Rainfall (mm) over the period 1991-20207

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 7 
 
 
5. In the past 40 years during the southwest monsoon, it was observed that India as a whole experienced 29 ‘normal’, 8 
‘above-normal’, and 3 ‘below-normal’ monsoon years. However, analysis of these trends at the district level showed that 
approximately 30 per cent of India’s districts witnessed a high number of deficient rainfall years and 38 per cent witnessed 
a high number of excessive rainfall years.. 
6. 55 per cent of tehsils witnessed an increase in southwest monsoon rainfall in the past decade (2012-2022), by more than 
10 per cent compared to the climatic baseline (1982–2011) 
7. While the decreasing trends in southwest monsoon were not statistically significant continuously over forty years, we 
found that nearly 11 per cent of the Indian tehsils (blocks) witnessed a decrease particularly in the past decade (2012-
2022), by more than 10 per cent compared to the climatic baseline (1982– 2011). These are in the Indo-Gangetic plains, 
which contribute to more than half of India’s agricultural production, northeastern India, and the Indian Himalayan region. 
These regions also host fragile but highly diverse ecosystems.  
8. In our study of localised wet rainfall extremes, we found that nearly 64 per cent of Indian tehsils experienced an increase 
in the frequency of heavy rainfall days by 1-15 days per year in the past decade during the southwest monsoon. This 
pattern is prominent in the tehsils of states with the highest GDPs.  
Future: 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3:  Projected Change in Annual Precipitation by 2040-2059 (left) and by 2080-2090 (right) vs 1986-2005  
 
9. A 2°C rise in the world’s average temperatures will make India’s summer monsoon highly unpredictable. At 4°C warming, 
an extremely wet monsoon that currently has a chance of occurring only once in 100 years is projected to occur every 
10 years by the end of the century. An abrupt change in the monsoon could precipitate a major crisis, triggering more 
frequent droughts as well as greater flooding in large parts of India. India’s northwest coast to the south-eastern coastal 
region could see higher than average rainfall.  
Climate hazards and impacts 
10. In 2022 alone, Asia witnessed over 81 natural hazards, with 83 per cent of them being hydro-meteorological. India, in 
particular, incurred significant losses, primarily due to floods caused by the monsoons (WMO 2023).  
Droughts 
11. In monsoon-dominated regions like India, droughts have been recurrent and caused major famines in the 19th and 20th 
centuries The southwest monsoon rainfall in India is the primary source of agricultural wate and groundwater recharge, 
accounting for 80% of the total annual rainfall. Droughts in India due to the weakening of the southwest monsoon are

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 
 
8 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41597-023-02856-y  
9 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41597-023-02856-y 
closely linked to Indian Ocean warming and El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO)8.  India is highly vulnerable to drought 
with about two-thirds of its area prone to drought Being an agricultural-dominant country and home to 1.4 billion people, 
droughts in India profoundly impact agricultural productivity, water resource management, and socio-economic well-
being. India has witnessed a rise in the frequency, severity, and duration of droughts over the recent decades, which is 
projected to be further exacerbated by climate cha. With the increasing food demand due to rising population and 
urbanization the impact of droughts is expected to become more severe in the future. 
 
Figure 4: Regions in India expose to extreme drought events and those exposed to compounded drought events 
 
12. Evidence indicates that parts of South Asia have become drier since the 1970s with an increase in the number of 
droughts. Droughts have major consequences. In 1987 and 2002-2003, droughts affected more than half of India’s crop 
area and led to a huge fall in crop production. Droughts are expected to be more frequent in some areas, especially in 
north-western India. Crop yields are expected to fall significantly because of extreme heat by the 2040s.9 
Floods 
13. Extreme precipitation events in India in the past caused flooding, affected economy, and resulted in the loss of lives 
(Wallemacq et al., 2015). Several extreme precipitation events occurred during the recent decades are noteworthy for 
their impacts on society and infrastructure. For instance, extreme precipitation (940 mm in 18 h) event in one of the south-
western states (July 2005) was a disaster that led to flooding affecting 20 million people and causing around 1200 deaths

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 
 
10 https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/new-updates/himalayan-glaciers-risk-losing-75-of-their-volume-by-2100-due-to-global-
warming/articleshow/101130703.cms?from=mdr  
11 https://indianexpress.com/article/technology/science/climate-change-frequent-intense-cyclones-india-west-coast-8969486/  
12 https://www.downtoearth.org.in/news/climate-change/cyclones-getting-fiercer-account-for-nearly-half-of-indias-deaths-due-to-climate-
related-disasters-85587  
(Gupta and Nair, 2011). Similarly, the same state experienced flooding in September 2017 due to extreme precipitation 
(330 mm in 24 h), which largely affected road transportation. (Boyaj et al., 2017; van Oldenborgh et al., 2016). 
 
14. Other than localized flooding, which is mostly caused by extreme precipitation, the river basin scale flooding can be due 
to extreme precipitation and other factors associated with catchment characteristics (Shah and Mishra, 2016; Mishra and 
Lilhare, 2016; Sharma et al., 2018). For instance, extreme precipitation resulted in a large flooding in north India in June 
2013 claiming more than 6000 lives and an estimated loss of $3.8 billion (Kumar, 2013). More recently, extreme 
precipitation in August 2018 in south India caused a widespread flooding and death of more than 440 people (Mishra 
and Shah, 2018; Mishra et al., 2018a). A preliminary estimate of economic loss due to this flood exceeds over $3 billion 
(Gulf News, 30 August 2018). 
 
15. Both flooding and extreme precipitation events are likely to increase under the warmer climate in India (Mukherjee et al., 
2018) posing more risk of economic loss and damage to infrastructure. Dottori et al. (2018) showed that 1.5 °C increase 
in global mean temperature from the pre-industrial level will lead to an increase in human losses from flooding by 70–
80% with a higher risk in South Asia. Rapid and unplanned urbanization further increases the risks of sea water intrusion. 
Melting of Glaciers  
16. According to a recent report, the glaciers in Asia's Hindu Kush Himalaya region are melting at an alarming rate due to 
global warming, which causes both dangerous flooding and water shortage. According to the assessment conducted by 
the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD), the glaciers in the region shed ice about 65% 
faster during the 2010s compared to the preceding decade10.The study predicts that by the end of the century, these 
glaciers could lose up to 7 5% of their volume, leading to significant flooding and water shortages for the approximately 
240 million people residing in the mountainous area. Glaciers in the northwestern Himalayas and in the Karakoram range 
- where westerly winter winds are the major source of moisture - have remained stable or even advanced. On the other 
hand, most Himalayan glaciers - where a substantial part of the moisture is supplied by the summer monsoon - have 
been retreating over the past century.  
 
17. At 2.5°C warming, melting glaciers and the loss of snow cover over the Himalayas are expected to threaten the stability 
and reliability of northern India’s primarily glacier-fed rivers, particularly the Indus and the Brahmaputra.  The Ganges 
will be less dependent on melt water due to high annual rainfall downstream during the monsoon season. The Indus and 
Brahmaputra are expected to see increased flows in spring when the snows melt, with flows reducing subsequently in 
late spring and summer. Alterations in the flows of the Indus, Ganges, and Brahmaputra rivers could significantly impact 
irrigation, affecting the amount of food that can be produced in their basins as well as the livelihoods of millions of people 
(209 million in the Indus basin, 478 million in the Ganges basin, and 62 million in the Brahmaputra basin in the year 
2005). 
Cyclones 
18. Since the middle of the 20th century (1951-2018), the frequency of very severe cyclonic storms during the post-monsoon 
season has increased significantly. During 2000-2018, the frequency of severe cyclones has been increasing at the rate 
of 1 event per decade. A zone wise analysis of cyclone hotspots conducted by Council for Energy, Environment and 
Water Resources highlights that the eastern part of India is highly exposed to extreme cyclone events. Further, the 
southern and western areas are more exposed than the northern and north-eastern zones. Various studies show that 
the warming of oceans causes sea levels to rise, causing thermal-hydro expansion, which intensifies the strength and 
frequency of cyclones in the coastal regions of India (Mimura N., 2013). A total of 283 cyclones hit the Indian coastline 
between 1877 and 2005; as many as 106 of these were extreme cyclonic events that affected a 50 km–long strip on the 
east coast of India, and 35 hit the west coast (ADRC, 2012).  Human-induced climate change is causing more frequent 
and intense cyclones on India's west coast, finds a new study11. 
 
A study by National Disaster Management Institute (NDMI)12 highlights the following:

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 
 
13 https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/03/SREX_Full_Report-1.pdf 
14 https://www.wri.org/insights/buildings-are-hidden-source-indian-cities-extreme-heat 
15 https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/INDIA_%20BUR-3_20.02.2021_High.pdf 
16https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Assessment%20of%20climate%20change%20over%20the%20Indian%20region%20
-%20A%20report%20of%20the%20Ministry%20of%20Earth%20Sciences%20%28MoES%29%2C%20Government%20of%20India.pdf 
17 https://www.unicef.org/india/what-we-do/climate-change  
19. Cyclones affect 11 states and Union territories, found an NDMI study Mapping Climatic and Biological Disasters in 
India. There are 96 districts along the coasts officially declared cyclone-prone. 
20. “Cyclones accounted for 48% of India’s overall human life loss due to climate-related disasters, followed by heat waves 
(26 per cent), 18 per cent due to floods and 8 per cent due to cold waves,” - NDMI study. 
21. Due to increase in sea surface temperature and ocean heat content, intensity of cyclones is increasing along Indian 
coasts. “Annual frequency of cyclones significantly reduced from 1951-2018; however, frequency of Very Severe 
Cyclonic Storms during post-monsoon season increased significantly,” according to the study by the researchers from 
the University Of Central Lancashire, UK, the Central University of Tamil Nadu and the University of the West of England, 
UK. 
22. Frequency is rising in Arabian Sea and reducing in the Bay of Bengal, overall. Pre-monsoon frequency is coming 
down on both sides.  
 
Heat waves 
23. In parts of Asia, there is moderate evidence of a rising trend in everyday temperature extremes13. India is amongst the 
most affected countries in Asia. In summer 2019, half of the country was hit by severe heat waves, with temperatures 
reaching above 48 degrees Celsius in numerous regions and 6,100 individuals reported to have died since 201014. Over 
the last 50 years, the length of heat waves in central and northwestern India has increased by about five days15. 
According to the Ministry of Earth Science, the occurrence of heat waves in northwest India has increased by one per 
20 years. The average total span of heat waves grew by two days every ten years, whereas the maximum duration 
climbed by roughly 1.5 days. By the end of the 21st century, the heat waves are projected to be 3 to 4 times more 
frequent, under the RCP8.5 scenario, as compared to 1976-2005 levels16. 
Climate change vulnerability and impacts 
24. In 2019, India was the 7th most affected country17 due to climate change led extreme weather events – both in terms of 
the fatalities (2,267 people) as well as the economic losses (USD 66,182 million). As per a study by Council for Energy, 
Environment and Water, extreme weather events due to climate change has led to 17 out of 20 people in India being 
vulnerable to extreme hydrological and meteorological (or “hydromet”) disasters like flood, drought and cyclone. The 
same study highlights that 75% of Indian states and Union Territories are vulnerable to extreme weather events.  
 
Figure 5: Region wise climate vulnerability in India

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 
 
25. India ranks 31st on the INFORM Risk Index, incurring losses worth $68 billion, annually, due to extreme weather events. 
The country has a very high absolute exposure to flooding (ranking joint 8th), including riverine, flash and coastal. 
Exposure to tropical cyclones and related hazards (ranking 13th), along with drought is also high (ranking 13th). India’s 
disaster risk is also driven by its vulnerability (ranking joint 31st), which is driven by high levels of social deprivation.  
 
26. According to ND Global Adaptation Initiative Index, the key components comprising vulnerability in India are: Ecosystem 
services (18% of vulnerability), food (19% of vulnerability), human habitat (15% of vulnerability), health (20% of 
vulnerability), infrastructure (10% of vulnerability) and water (17% of vulnerability). Further, India’s socio-economic 
characteristics further add to its vulnerabilities. For example, the country accounts for approximately one third of the 
global poor with ~2 million people being without shelter, ~92 million people lacking access to safe drinking water, and 
approximately one third of the population depending on biomass for their cooking and heating requirements. Accordingly, 
a large proportion of the country is dependent on climate-sensitive agricultural and ecosystem-based livelihoods. 
According to the World Bank, it is estimated that climate change is likely to impact 600 million people across India if the 
growth in GHG emissions is not contained. Therefore, adapting to impacts of climate change has been a high priority for 
India, as rightly outlined in India’s NDCs submitted to the UNFCCC. 
 
Climate house Gas (GHG) emissions profile  
27. As per the Third National Communication (TNC) and Initial Adaptation Communication submitted by India to the United 
Nation’s Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in December 2023, India’s net national emissions in 
2019 stood at 2.6 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e), marking a 4.56 per cent increase from 2016 levels 
and a 115 per cent increase since 1994. Carbon dioxide continues to remain the most emitted GHG, comprising 79 per 
cent of total emissions in 2019. Increased burning of fossil fuels, methane emissions from livestock and increasing 
aluminium and cement production are attributed to this. 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Contribution of various sectors to GHG emissions of India. 
 
28. As per India’s GHG inventory 2019, the contribution of energy sector towards the overall GHG emission stands at 75.80 
per cent, followed by Agriculture sector (13.44 per cent), Industrial Process and Product Use (IPPU) sector accounts for 
0.25 per cent and waste sector accounts for 2.33 per cent.  
 
29. The Energy sector, which includes the consumption of fossil fuels in the Country and their associated fugitive emissions, 
is the main GHG emitting sector in the Country, contributing to 75.81 per cent of the total GHG emissions in 2019 
(excluding LULUCF). The total emissions from the energy sector were 23,74,330 Gg CO2e in 2019, increasing by 11.5 
per cent since 2016, mainly due to the steady increase in the Country’s energy consumption, including the consumption 
of coal and natural gas for power generation and the consumption of liquid fuels for transportation.

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 
 
18 https://www.orfonline.org/research/climate-change-and-food-security-in-india  
30. The IPPU sector, which includes GHG emissions produced by a variety of industrial activities that transform raw materials 
by chemical or physical means, represented 8.41 percent of GHG emissions (without LULUCF) in 2019. The same year, 
their emissions reached 2,63,540 GgCO2e, increasing by 16 per cent since 2016 mainly due to the increase in the 
production of cement, aluminium, and lime.  
 
31. The main GHG emissions from the agriculture sector are methane from livestock’s enteric fermentation and rice 
cultivation and nitrous oxide from manure management and agriculture soil. The agriculture sector represented 13.44 
percent of the total GHG emissions (4,20,968 GgCO2e) in 2019, a decrease of 1 percent compared to 2016. Even though 
in absolute terms, the emissions from agriculture sector increased by 3.22 percent over 2016, the share of emissions 
from agriculture sector is progressively reducing over the years.   
 
32. Land Use and Land-Use Change and Forestry Sector removed 20 per cent of the Country’s carbon dioxide emissions in 
2019. In the same year, its emissions reached -4,85,472 GgCO2e, increasing its status as a sink by 58 per cent since 
2016. 5.3.10 In 2019, the waste sector, which includes GHG emissions accounted for only 2.34 per cent of total GHG 
emissions.  
 
Groundwater  
 
Climate change influences groundwater systems in several ways. In terms of the hydrological cycle, climate change can affect 
the amounts of soil infiltration, deeper percolation, and hence groundwater recharge. Also, rising temperature increases 
evaporative demand over land, which limits the amount of water to replenish groundwater. More than 60% of India’s agriculture 
is rain-fed, making the country highly dependent on groundwater. Even without climate change, 15% of India’s groundwater 
resources are overexploited. The comparison of groundwater extraction between the years 2020 and 2022 (as assessed by the 
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) and States) indicates decrease in extraction (on an average for the entire country) from 
around 244.92 Billion Cubic Meter (BCM) to 239.16 BCM.  
According to the Central Groundwater Board of India, 17% of groundwater blocks are overexploited, meaning that the rate at 
which water is extracted is higher than the rate at which the aquifer can recharge. Groundwater resources, which support over 
60% of irrigated agriculture and around 85% of domestic water supply in rural areas and 45% of it in urban areas, are already 
under pressure from groundwater pollution and the effects of climate change. 
Impact on Food Security 
The World Food Summit in 1996 defined food security thus: “Food security exists when all people, at all times, have physical, 
social and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food which meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an 
active and healthy life.” According to this definition, there are three main dimensions to food security: food availability, access to 
food, and food absorption.  Food security is one of the leading concerns associated with climate change. Climate change affects 
food security in complex ways. It impacts crops, livestock, forestry, fisheries and aquaculture, and can cause grave social and 
economic consequences in the form of reduced incomes, eroded livelihoods, trade disruption and adverse health impacts. 
However, it is important to note that the net impact of climate change depends not only on the extent of the climatic shock but 
also on the underlying vulnerabilities. According to the Food and Agriculture Organization (2016), both biophysical and social 
vulnerabilities determine the net impact of climate change on food security.18Even without climate change, world food prices are 
expected to increase due to growing populations and rising incomes, as well as a greater demand for biofuels. While overall rice 
yields have increased, rising temperatures with lower rainfall at the end of the growing season have caused a significant loss in 
India’s rice production. Without climate change, average rice yields could have been almost 6% higher (75 million tons in absolute 
terms). Recent studies shows that wheat yields peaked in India and Bangladesh around 2001 and have not increased since 
despite increasing fertilizer applications. Observations show that extremely high temperatures in northern India - above 34°C - 
have had a substantial negative effect on wheat yields, and rising temperatures can only aggravate the situation. Seasonal water 
scarcity, rising temperatures, and intrusion of sea water would threaten crop yields, jeopardizing the country’s food security. 
Should current trends persist, substantial yield reductions in both rice and wheat can be expected in the near and medium term. 
Under 2°C warming by the 2050s, the country may need to import more than twice the amount of food-grain than would be 
required without climate change.

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 
 
19 https://www.cam.ac.uk/stories/india-heatwaves  
20 USAID; WorldBank;  IPCC AR6  
 
 
 
Impact on Energy Security 
Climate-related impacts on water resources can undermine the two dominant forms of power generation in India - hydropower 
and thermal power generation - both of which depend on adequate water supplies to function effectively. To function at full 
efficiency, thermal power plants need a constant supply of fresh cool water to maintain their cooling systems. Climate-related 
impacts on water resources can undermine the two dominant forms of power generation in India - hydropower and thermal power 
generation - both of which depend on adequate water supplies to function effectively. To function at full efficiency, thermal power 
plants need a constant supply of fresh cool water to maintain their cooling systems. The increasing variability and long-term 
decreases in river flows can pose a major challenge to hydropower plants and increase the risk of physical damage from 
landslides, flash floods, glacial lake outbursts, and other climate-related natural disasters. Decreases in the availability of water 
and increases in temperature will pose major risk factors to thermal power generation. 
 
Climate Change and Impact on Health  
Climate change is expected to have major health impacts in India- increasing malnutrition and related health disorders such as 
child stunting - with the poor likely to be affected most severely. Child stunting is projected to increase by 35% by 2050 compared 
to a scenario without climate change. Malaria and other vector-borne diseases, along with and diarrheal infections which are a 
major cause of child mortality, are likely to spread into areas where colder temperatures had previously limited transmission. 
Heat waves are likely to result in a very substantial rise in mortality and death, and injuries from extreme weather events are 
likely to increase. Heatwaves could slow or reverse India’s progress towards Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) without 
heat impact assessments Deadly heatwaves fuelled by climate change in 2022 made almost 90 percent of Indians more 
vulnerable to public health issues, food shortages and increased risks of death19. 
Summary of climate hazards, its impacts and indicative adaptation solutions: 
Hazards20 
Impact21 
Adaptation solutions 
Increased temperatures 
and heat waves 
This increase is 
expected to be more 
pronounced in the 
northern regions of 
India 
• 
Increased heat 
stress-related 
mortality and 
morbidity, 
particularly in urban 
areas and among 
agricultural workers 
• 
Reduced grain 
yields and quality 
due to heat stress; 
reduced plantation 
productivity where 
temperature 
thresholds are 
exceeded 
• 
Diminished milk 
production due to 
heat stress 
• 
Reduced and shifted 
ranges for species, 
leading to 
biodiversity loss 
• 
Increased forest 
degradation from 
wildfires, impacting 
biodiversity and 
livelihoods 
• 
Heat-Health Action Plans: Cities like Ahmedabad have 
developed heat preparedness plans and early warning systems. 
These include public awareness campaigns, training for 
healthcare professionals, and adjustments to urban planning to 
reduce heat impacts (Knowlton et al., 2014). 
Example of specific technological intervention: Financing 
early warning systems in MSMEs located in vulnerable regions  
• 
Architectural and Urban Planning Improvements: 
Implementing building codes that enhance natural cooling and 
use reflective materials can help mitigate indoor heat. Urban 
planning that includes more green spaces and better airflow can 
also reduce urban heat island effects (Mahadevia et al., 2020). 
Example Specific technological intervention: Financing 
various climate proofing products, such as improved roofing and 
insulation. 
• 
Agricultural Adaptation: Farmers in heat-prone areas have 
begun to adopt new practices and crop varieties that are more 
resistant to heat stress. Modifying irrigation practices to reduce 
water use and increase efficiency is also critical (Taraz, 2018). 
Examples specific technological intervention: Financing 
technologies that reduce water use, increase resilience of crops 
etc   
 
• 
Enhanced Surveillance and Healthcare: Improved surveillance 
systems can track heat-related illnesses more effectively, 
ensuring timely medical interventions. Increasing the capacity of

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 
dependent on 
forests 
• 
Increased glacial 
melt in the short 
term, leading to 
flooding and 
waterlogging 
• 
Reduced 
contribution of 
glacial melt to 
Himalayan rivers in 
the long term, 
reducing water 
available for 
irrigation and 
hydropower 
• 
exacerbate heat-
related illnesses and 
increase the 
prevalence of 
diseases such as 
diarrhea and 
malnutrition 
 
healthcare systems to deal with heat-related emergencies is also 
vital (Mazdiyasni et al., 2017). 
• 
Community-Based Approaches: Community engagement and 
education about the risks of heat waves and the importance of 
hydration and cooling methods are important for increasing 
resilience, especially in vulnerable populations (Kotharkar & 
Ghosh, 2021). 
 
Increased frequency 
and intensity of heavy 
precipitation events. 
 
• 
Increased flood-
related mortality and 
morbidity including 
an increase in 
gastrointestinal 
disease from 
degraded water 
quality 
• 
Degraded crop and 
pasture land from 
flooding, erosion  
• 
by the 2040s, 
extreme river floods 
could affect an 
additional 13 to 34 
million people 
• 
Increased incidence 
of landslides  
• 
Urban Planning and Infrastructure Improvements: Enhancing 
drainage systems in urban areas to handle larger volumes of 
water can prevent flooding. Additionally, redesigning buildings to 
withstand heavy rainfall and using permeable materials in urban 
infrastructure can reduce runoff and increase water absorption 
(Kishtawal et al., 2010). 
Example of specific technological intervention:  
• 
Early Warning Systems and Forecasting: Developing 
advanced weather forecasting systems can help predict extreme 
rainfall events more accurately, providing crucial lead time for 
preparedness and response. This includes the use of high-
resolution models to better predict monsoon patterns and rainfall 
intensity (Pai et al., 2015). 
• 
Agricultural Practices: Farmers are encouraged to adopt 
rainwater harvesting and water-efficient irrigation techniques to 
manage water resources better. Crop diversification and the use 
of drought-resistant crop varieties can also help mitigate the 
effects of both excess and insufficient rainfall (Sarkar & Maity, 
2022). 
• 
Community-Based Approaches: Engaging communities in 
resilience-building activities, such as constructing flood barriers 
and raising awareness about flood risk management, is crucial. 
This includes training local communities to respond effectively to 
flooding and heavy rainfall events (Mukherjee et al., 2018). 
• 
Policy and Regulation: Implementing policies that integrate 
climate change adaptation into development planning is critical. 
This includes enforcing building codes that require flood 
resilience and managing land use to prevent deforestation, which 
exacerbates flood risk (Maharana et al., 2020). 
Drought 
• 
Reduced yields due 
to drought and water 
stress, particularly 
for rainfed 
agriculture 
• 
Water Resource Management: Implementing integrated water 
management practices, including the construction of small-scale 
water harvesting structures, rejuvenation of traditional water 
bodies, promoting efficient irrigation techniques, and enhancing 
groundwater recharge. This helps in sustaining water availability 
during drought periods (Samui & Kamble, 2011).

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 
• 
Degraded crop and 
pasture land from 
erosion and drying 
• 
Drought-induced 
water stress for 
domestic, 
agricultural and 
hydropower use 
• 
Agricultural Adaptations: Promoting drought-resistant crop 
varieties, changing planting dates, and adopting new farming 
techniques such as micro-irrigation systems to optimize water use 
efficiency. (Birthal et al., 2015). 
• 
Community-Based Approaches: Strengthening community-
based adaptation strategies, including capacity building for local 
adaptation planning and management. Engaging communities in 
drought risk assessment and in the design and implementation of 
adaptation measures helps enhance local resilience (Prabhakar 
& Shaw, 2008). 
• 
Policy and Governance: Developing policies that support 
sustainable land management, promote water conservation, and 
provide economic incentives for adopting sustainable agricultural 
practices. Policies should also focus on improving drought 
monitoring and early warning systems to ensure timely responses 
(Udmale et al., 2014). 
• 
Technological Innovations: Utilizing technology for better water 
management, including the use of satellite imagery and remote 
sensing for monitoring drought progression and assessing water 
resources. Technology can also aid in disseminating climate 
information and advisories to farmers to help them make informed 
decisions (Palanisami et al., 2010). 
• 
 
Sea level rise 
• 
Saltwater inundation 
and intrusion and 
storm surges, 
impacting coastal 
aquaculture and 
agricultural land 
productivity 
• 
Degradation/loss of 
coastal wetland 
habitats and 
mangroves 
• 
Increased flooding 
and saline intrusion, 
threatening water 
quality, agricultural 
land and 
infrastructure 
• 
By the 2070s to the 
end of the century, 
coastal flooding 
could impact an 
additional 5 to 18 
million people 
• 
Infrastructure Enhancement and Protection: Strengthening 
coastal defenses such as sea walls, levees, and storm surge 
barriers to protect against high tides and storm surges 
exacerbated by rising sea levels. This also includes elevating 
roads and bridges to maintain functionality even during floods 
(Nicholls, 2011). 
• 
Ecosystem-Based Adaptation: Preserving and restoring 
mangroves, coral reefs, and other natural buffers that absorb the 
impact of storm surges and high waves. These ecosystems not 
only protect the coastline but also provide habitat for biodiversity 
and support fisheries (Byravan, Rajan, & Rangarajan, 2010). 
• 
Relocation and Retreat: Implementing planned relocation for 
communities most at risk from sea level rise, ensuring that new 
settlements are built in safer areas. This strategy is often 
considered as a last resort but is becoming increasingly 
necessary in highly vulnerable areas (Khristodas et al., 2023). 
• 
Policy and Regulation Enhancements: Updating coastal zone 
management policies to restrict development in high-risk areas, 
promoting sustainable land use practices, and ensuring that all 
new constructions are resilient to future sea level rise. Policies 
should also ensure that adaptation efforts are integrated into 
broader urban and regional planning frameworks (Almeida & 
Mostafavi, 2016). 
• 
Community Engagement and Capacity Building: Educating 
and involving local communities in adaptation planning to ensure 
they have the knowledge and resources to cope with the impacts 
of sea level rise. Community-driven approaches can lead to more 
sustainable and accepted solutions (Natesan & Parthasarathy, 
2010). 
 
Changes in ocean 
temperature, 
dissolved oxygen, and 
acidity 
• 
Impacts plankton 
productivity with 
cascading effects up 
the food web 
• 
Enhancing Monitoring and Research: Improving monitoring 
systems to track changes in ocean temperature, dissolved 
oxygen, and acidity more accurately. This includes deploying 
more sophisticated sensors and conducting regular surveys to

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 
• 
loss of coral reefs 
and the diminishing 
of their role in the 
marine ecosystem, 
fishery productivity 
and marine 
biodiversity are 
threatened 
gather comprehensive data, which can inform adaptive 
management strategies (Mitra et al., 2009). 
• 
Ecosystem-Based Management: Promoting ecosystem 
resilience by protecting and restoring mangroves, coral reefs, and 
seagrasses that can buffer the adverse effects of acidity and 
temperature changes. These ecosystems play critical roles in 
carbon sequestration and in providing habitats that may be more 
resilient to changing conditions (George & Lugendo, 2023). 
• 
Community Engagement and Livelihood Diversification: 
Engaging coastal communities in monitoring efforts and providing 
them with the tools and knowledge to adapt. This includes 
diversifying livelihoods to reduce dependence on fisheries, which 
may be impacted by changes in ocean conditions, thus 
enhancing community resilience (Iwasaki, Razafindrabe, & Shaw, 
2009). 
• 
Technological Interventions: Implementing advanced 
technologies to enhance water quality and control pollution inputs 
that exacerbate the effects of ocean acidification and oxygen 
depletion. This includes treatment facilities and stricter 
regulations on pollutants entering the ocean (Mandal & Das, 
2021). 
• 
Policy and Regulatory Frameworks: Developing and 
implementing policies that integrate climate change adaptation 
into marine and coastal management plans. Policies should 
support sustainable fishing practices, pollution control, and 
habitat protection to enhance the resilience of marine ecosystems 
and human communities dependent on them (Das et al., 2020). 
 
Water scarcity 
• 
Reduced 
contribution of 
glacial melt to 
Himalayan rivers in 
the long term, 
reducing water 
available for 
irrigation and 
hydropower 
• 
The potential loss of 
glaciers as a result 
of climate change is 
expected to be a 
significant threat to 
water resources in 
India 
• 
Rainwater Harvesting and Storage: Implementing rainwater 
harvesting systems to capture and store rainfall for use during dry 
periods. This approach includes building tanks, reservoirs, and 
other storage facilities to collect rainwater from rooftops and land 
surfaces, which can be used for agriculture, drinking, and other 
domestic purposes (Roll & Andrade, 2016). 
• 
Improving Irrigation Efficiency: Adopting modern irrigation 
technologies such as drip and sprinkler systems, which 
significantly reduce water waste and increase water use 
efficiency in agricultural practices. These systems deliver water 
directly to the plant roots, minimizing evaporation and runoff 
(Kumar et al., 2023). 
• 
Grey Water Recycling: Implementing grey water treatment 
systems for recycling and reusing wastewater from domestic 
activities (except toilet flushing) for irrigation and industrial 
processes. This strategy reduces freshwater demand and 
pressure on existing water resources (Sushmitha, Chanakya, & 
Khuntia, 2019). 
• 
Community-Based Water Management: Engaging local 
communities in managing water resources through participatory 
governance models. This involves training and empowering 
community members to manage local water resources 
sustainably, including decisions on water allocation and 
conservation practices (Varma et al., 2021). 
• 
Policy and Institutional Support: Developing and implementing 
policies that support sustainable water management, including 
incentives for water-saving technologies, regulations on water 
use, and investments in water infrastructure to enhance supply 
and distribution systems (Basu & Shaw, 2013).

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 
Glacial lake outburst 
floods (GLOFs) 
• 
Significant GLOF 
risk exists in some 
regions of the India 
Himalayas, with 
projections of 
increased hazard 
levels due to glacial 
retreat and new lake 
formations. This 
includes a potential 
seven-fold increase 
in GLOF triggering 
probability and a 
three-fold increase 
in affected 
downstream areas in 
some regions (Allen 
et al., 2016). 
• 
In the broader Indian 
Himalayas, 
hundreds of glacial 
lakes have been 
identified, with 
certain lakes 
assessed as very 
high-risk due to 
various factors such 
as potential 
avalanches and 
rockfalls. This 
underscores the 
need for targeted 
monitoring and 
mitigation strategies 
(Dubey & Goyal, 
2020). 
• 
The 2014 GLOF in 
the Indian 
Himalayas 
highlighted the 
dynamic nature of 
these risks, with 
substantial glacier 
retreat leading to 
lake expansions and 
increased GLOF 
threats. This calls for 
ongoing risk 
assessments and 
resilience planning 
for vulnerable 
communities 
(Majeed et al., 
2020). 
• 
Risk Assessment and Monitoring: Extensive use of remote 
sensing and GIS technologies aids in monitoring glacial lakes and 
assessing their burst potential. This allows for timely updates and 
risk assessments of vulnerable areas (Dubey & Goyal, 2020). 
• 
Infrastructure Adaptation: Strengthening and designing 
infrastructure to withstand potential floods, including the 
reinforcement of existing dams and the strategic placement of 
new ones. This includes the integration of GLOF considerations 
into the design of hydroelectric projects, ensuring they account for 
possible outburst floods (Jain et al., 2012). 
• 
Early Warning Systems: Implementation of early warning 
systems that can provide immediate alerts to downstream 
communities in the event of a GLOF, enhancing community 
response and evacuation procedures. 
• 
Community Engagement and Preparedness: Educating and 
involving local communities in disaster risk reduction strategies, 
including evacuation drills and the development of local response 
plans. This also involves enhancing local capacities to respond to 
emergencies. 
• 
Artificial Lowering of Lake Levels: Techniques such as 
siphoning or controlled drainage have been proposed to lower the 
water levels in lakes deemed to be at high risk of causing GLOFs, 
thus reducing the pressure on natural or moraine dam barriers 
and lowering the risk of sudden breaches (Kattelmann & 
Watanabe, 1996). 
• 
 
Cyclones: climate 
change expected to 
potentially decrease the 
overall frequency of 
cyclones but increase 
the intensity and 
• 
Loss of Life and 
Property: Cyclones 
in the Bay of Bengal 
have historically 
caused substantial 
loss of life and 
• 
Community-Based Disaster Preparedness: Empowering local 
communities through awareness, training on rescue measures, 
and maintaining infrastructure such as cyclone shelters. Building 
local capacity is crucial for effective disaster response and 
recovery (Das, 2018).

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 
frequency of the most 
extreme events 
damage to property. 
These storms result 
in severe flooding, 
destruction of 
homes, and loss of 
life, primarily due to 
high winds, heavy 
rainfall, and storm 
surges 
(Jyoteeshkumar 
Reddy et al., 2021). 
• 
Impact on 
Livelihoods: 
Cyclones 
significantly impact 
agricultural 
productivity, 
especially in coastal 
regions. The 
associated heavy 
rains and flooding 
can lead to crop 
failures, loss of 
livestock, and 
damage to fishing 
infrastructure, which 
are critical sources 
of livelihood for 
many communities 
(Pandit et al., 2021). 
• 
Ecosystem 
Damage: Cyclones 
can cause extensive 
damage to coastal 
ecosystems, such as 
mangroves, coral 
reefs, and wetlands. 
The high winds, 
saltwater intrusion, 
and physical 
damage from debris 
can alter these 
habitats, affecting 
biodiversity and the 
ecological services 
they provide (Mishra 
et al., 2021). 
• 
Socio-Economic 
Impacts: The 
aftermath of 
cyclones often sees 
a rise in poverty, 
displacement of 
communities, and 
long-term socio-
economic 
disruptions. 
Recovery and 
rebuilding efforts can 
• 
Infrastructure Resilience: Strengthening buildings, 
communication systems, and transportation networks to 
withstand cyclonic conditions. This includes constructing cyclone-
resistant structures and improving early warning systems to 
ensure timely evacuation and response (Kakumanu et al., 2018). 
• 
Integrated Water Resources Management: Implementing 
strategies to manage water resources effectively during cyclones, 
such as rainwater harvesting, controlled release of water from 
reservoirs, and ensuring the integrity of dams and levees 
(Palanisami, 2010). 
• 
Ecological and Coastal Management: Protecting and restoring 
mangroves, coral reefs, and other natural barriers to mitigate the 
impact of storm surges and coastal erosion caused by cyclones. 
These ecosystems act as natural buffers against the force of 
cyclones (Baccar et al., 2021). 
• 
Policy and Governance: Developing policies that prioritize 
climate adaptation and disaster risk reduction. This includes land 
use planning, investment in disaster risk reduction technologies, 
and community engagement in policy-making processes to 
ensure that adaptation strategies are comprehensive and 
inclusive (Winchester, 2000).

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 
 
22 https://mst.org.br/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/Report-Loss_and_Damage_Today.pdf  
23 https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/PublicationsView.aspx?id=21071  
be costly and time-
consuming, 
impacting economic 
development and 
social stability in the 
affected regions 
(Christian et al., 
2018). 
• 
Impact on Marine 
Life: Cyclones also 
affect marine life, 
including fish 
populations and 
seabirds, disrupting 
marine food chains 
and affecting 
fisheries, which are 
vital for the 
livelihoods of coastal 
communities (Nicoll 
et al., 2017). 
 
Financial Implication of Climate Change  
33. A report revealed that in 2022, India suffered a loss of 8% in GDP compared to a hypothetical world without climate 
change22. Further, a latest report by The Reserve Bank of India predicts that up to 4.5 per cent of India’s GDP could be 
at risk by 2030 due to climate change related impacts23.   
 
34. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has focused on climate change as the primary theme in its Report on Currency and 
Finance (RCF) for 2022-23, a theme-based annual report on contemporary issues concerning central banking and 
macroeconomic issues in India. This year’s report emphasizes climate goals as a policy priority and analyses the potential 
macro-financial consequences of climate change for India. 
 
35. The theme for this report, published on May 3, 2023 is “Towards a Greener Cleaner India” and it claims that fiscal policy 
has a prominent role in driving the green transition, from fossil fuels to renewables, and highlights the urgent need for a 
green taxonomy, a classification system that determines whether an investment is sustainable or not.  
 
36. The report looks into the physical indicators of climate change and policy action globally and in India. It goes on to discuss 
the macroeconomic effect of climate change in India, climate change and the financial sector, and policy options to 
mitigate climate risks.“ India’s goal of achieving the net zero target by 2070 would require an accelerated reduction in 
the energy intensity of GDP by around 5% annually and a significant improvement in its energy mix in favour of 
renewables to around 80% by 2070-71. India’s climate financing requirement is estimated to be at least 2.5% of GDP 
annually till 2030,” says the report, quantifying the scale of the effort needed towards climate action. Financial stability, 
the core mandate of central banks around the world, can face risks due to climate change, says the RCF report, as it 
can affect the valuation of financial assets by influencing investors’ risk perceptions. 
 
37. The pressure of currency depreciation in countries frequently affected by climate disasters can cause financial instability, 
higher import costs, and negative terms of trade. In this context, central banks around the globe are gradually broadening 
their objectives beyond the original scope or focus, the report says. 
 
38. Giving other examples of how climate change can affect inflation and financial assets, the report says that climate change 
can affect price stability through supply shocks such as food and energy shortages. 
 
39. Additionally, demand shocks can arise when firms and households lose wealth on account of frequent natural disasters. 
Physical and transition risks can affect the balance sheets of financial institutions and banks, limiting the flow of credit to

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 
 
24 https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1744032  
25 https://cse.azimpremjiuniversity.edu.in/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Annual_Report_PLFS_2018_19_HL.pdf  
the real economy. The report says climate-induced uncertainty can make households save more for precautionary 
purposes, bringing down the real equilibrium interest rate, which is the interest rate at which the demand for money 
matches the supply. 
 
 
MSMEs 
40. The MSME sector plays a pivotal role from various economic and social perspectives in India. The share of gross value 
added (GVA) from the MSME sector in India’s GDP was 30.0%24 and the share of exports was 49.8% in 2019-20. The 
MSME sector provides the highest employment among the non-agriculture sectors in India, and over 90% of MSMEs in 
the country are micro-units. The informal sector (excluding the agriculture sector) employs 68.4%25 of the employable 
workforce in India as per the Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) for 2018-19. 
41. Definition and Categorisation of MSMEs in India:  
Enterprise 
Category 
Criteria based on investment in plant & machinery / Equipment & turnover 
Micro 
Investment up to INR 1 crore (~USD 125,000) and turnover up to INR  
5 crore (~USD 625,000) 
Small 
Investment up to INR 10 crore (~USD 1.25 million) and turnover up to INR 50 
crore (~USD 6.25 million) 
Medium 
Investment up to INR 50 crore (~USD 6.25 million) and turnover up to INR 250 
crore (~USD 31.25 million) 
 
42. The MSME sector in India comprising of around 63.88 million units engaged in either manufacturing or services or trading 
activities, creating employment for about 110 million people, contributing about 45% to manufacturing output and about 
40% of exports, is an energy intensive sector, which can contribute to achievement of NDC targets. There are over 7,000 
products, ranging from traditional to high-tech, that are manufactured by Indian MSMEs today. The sector is the biggest 
employer in India outside the agriculture sector. Currently, MSME sector is characterized by resource intensive 
technology profile. The sector consumes about 25% of the total energy consumed by the industrial sector in India. Trend 
analysis in the sector from 2012-13 to 2019-20 indicates that 6.8% year on year growth has been observed in energy 
consumption including both thermal and electrical energy consumption. The projected energy consumption shows a 
steep increase (by more than 100%) from 30 million toe in 2016-17 to 72.17 million toe in 2029-30. This sector faces 
barriers like limited access to technology, capacity to adopt new technologies and financing. The barriers in MSME sector 
towards adopting climate resilient technologies is also highlighted in the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) 
submitted by Government of India to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 
 
26 https://fmc.org.in/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/MSMEReport-Enabling-Emission-Reductions-in-the-MSME-sector-in-India.pdf  
 
 
Figure 7: MSME clusters (the numbers indicated in the graph) in energy intensive sectors26 
 
43. The major energy intensive MSME subsectors include: food processing, textile, pulp and paper, chemicals, glass and 
ceramics, brick kilns, foundry, sponge iron, steel re-rolling, forging, pharmaceuticals, rubber and plastic, leather, cement, 
etc.. The energy intensive MSME sub-sectors contribute significantly to India’s economy.   
 
44. Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and the informal sectors will require considerable financial support, technology 
transfer and capacity building support to achieve a just transition to low-carbon growth and to be climate resilient. Thus, 
the proposed project aims to bridge the gap in investment and technical support for upscaling climate mitigation and 
adaptation technologies in MSME landscape by providing low-cost targeted capital to prepare the MSME sector to the 
challenges and opportunities posed by the India’s low carbon and net-zero development trajectory. Although Indian 
MSMEs are a diverse and heterogeneous group, they face common problems related to, inter alia, lack of awareness, 
limited technical know-how, low technology levels, limited access to modern technologies, and high cost of capital.  
45. Most Indian companies are yet to completely grasp the implications of climate change and how it will affect them. This is 
particularly true for the Indian MSME sector where managing the immediate challenges of everyday business remains a 
higher priority than addressing long term risks. At the same time, the MSME sector is also most vulnerable to climate 
risks since most within the sector lack the financial resources to endure even a single rupture in supply or demand, 
caused for instance by an extreme weather event or a new environmental or climate regulation. 
46. The MSMEs located in vulnerable regions, prone to climate hazards are either not aware of the adaptation technologies 
that could make their units resilient or are perceived as riskier by the PFIs, thus restricting flow of capital to finance 
climate resilient interventions.  
 
MSMEs role in low carbon transition  
 
47. MSMEs in energy intensive manufacturing sectors have high potential for emission reduction by adopting renewable 
energy sources, low carbon alternative sources of energy, energy and resource efficiency measures in the production 
value chain, battery storage, and other low carbon technologies. Adoption of clean energy sources in MSMEs will be 
critical for India’s transition towards net-zero economy, in line with the announcement made by India at UNFCCC COP26. 
Thus, there has been momentum for accelerating decarbonisation of Indian industries of which MSME sector has been 
a key stakeholder by adopting appropriate technologies and solutions such as cleaner fuel, common combustion facilities 
and energy efficiency technologies.  
 
 
 
80
64
34
34
22
14
13
12
11
11
10
9
6
ENERGY INTENSIVE MSME SECTORS AND CORRESPONDING 
MSME CLUSTERS

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 
 
27 These values exclude land use emissions. The 1.5°C fair share ranges for 2030 and 2050 are drawn from the Climate Action Tracker 
(CAT), which compiles a wide range of perspectives on what is considered fair, including considerations such as responsibility, capability, 
and equality. Countries with 1.5°C fair-share ranges reaching below zero, particularly between 2030 and 2050, are expected to achieve 
such strong reductions by domestic emissions reductions, supplemented by contributions to global emissions reduction efforts via, for  
example, international finance. On a global scale, negative emission technologies are expected to play a role from the 2030s onwards, 
compensating for remaining positive emissions. The CAT’s evaluation of NDCs shows the resulting temperature outcomes if all other 
governments were to put forward emissions reduction commitments with the same relative ambition level. The 2030 projections of GHG 
emissions are from the CAT’s August 2022 update and are based on implemented policies, expected economic growth or trends in  
activity and energy consumption. 
28 https://moef.gov.in/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/Indias-LT-LEDS-2.pdf  
29 https://www.climatepolicyinitiative.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/Landscape-of-Green-Finance-in-India.pdf  
30 https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/renewables/india-misses-re-capacity-target-due-to-low-solar-rooftop-wind-energy-project-
installations-parliamentary-panel/articleshow/98870462.cms?from=mdr  
31 Lack of DISCOM initiatives in (a) executing net metering regulations, (b) streamlining processes and (c) in being part of payment  
security mechanisms are barriers in the uptake of RE systems in MSMEs, with installation of a net-metering connection taking three to six  
months in some states. Therefore, growth in the market is usually slow unless DISCOMs have a stake in the RE system implementation.  
More information available at: https://solarrooftop.gov.in/knowledge/file-62.pdf  
32 https://www.imf.org/-/media/Files/Publications/WP/2023/English/wpiea2023218-print-pdf.ashx  
33 https://www.ceew.in/sites/default/files/CEEW_Sustainable_Development_Uncertainties_India_Climate_Policy_30Apr18.pdf  
Mitigation Needs 
48. India will need to reduce its emissions to below 4,500 MtCO₂e by 2030 and to below 3,200 MtCO₂e by 2050 to be within 
its fair-share range compatible with global 1.5°C IPCC scenarios27. Through its Long-Term Low-Carbon Development 
Strategy, India has committed to a 45% reduction in the GHG emissions per unit of GDP by 2030 as compared to 2005 
levels, with the country aiming to reach net zero by 207028. It is estimated that USD 2.5 Trillion (at 2014-15 prices) will 
be required for meeting India’s climate targets between 2015 and 2030. This implies USD 170 Billion per year for climate 
action, however the average climate finance flow was USD 19 Bn per annum from 2016-1829. In the country’s energy 
sector, coal has continued to lead electricity generation, with the country having the second-most coal intensive electricity 
sector among the G20 in 2020. At sub-national level, the State Action Plan on Climate Change includes strict regulations 
toward reducing coal footprints. However, other government policies such as more than doubling the coal consumption 
limit and the one billion tonne coal production target could increase power sector emissions by an estimated 1,427 
MtCO2e. Renewable energy is being promoted, and in 2015 India set a target to install 175 GW from renewable energy 
sources by 2022, of which 100 GW will be from solar photovoltaic (PV), 60 GW from wind, 10 GW from biomass, and 5 
GW from small hydropower station30. However, the renewable energy sector added less than 60% of its targeted capacity 
in 2018-2019, highlighting the needs to strengthen policy framework and manufacturing capacity to ensure long-term 
growth of the sector. Furthermore, the cost of the solar PVs has been reduced drastically in the past decade and the 
generation cost is lesser than thermal power plants generation. The investment in large scale renewable projects is also 
slowly flowing in. However, investments for MSME sector in renewables are not forthcoming due to perceived investment 
risks, smaller scale investments, regulations for RE integrations31. Considering both aspects, banks and financing 
institution in India follows a restrictive and conservative approach. Thus, addressing investment gaps in renewables in 
MSME sector is critical for achieving the NDC targets of the country and facilitating the sector towards low carbon 
pathways. Civil society experts have noted that the next focus of India’s emission mitigation policy, cantered largely on 
electricity generation, must be expanded to the industrial sector and particularly in the MSME sector and that it is critical 
to devise ways for the sector to reduce dependence on fossil energy while ensuring rapid growth in manufacturing and 
associated jobs and enhancing international competitiveness32. In the MSME sector, emissions per unit of production is 
generally higher than that of the corresponding large enterprises partly due to use of obsolete technologies and poor 
management practices. The sector faces further barriers like non-availability of technology or limited adaptability to 
changing technology. Moreover, MSMEs often find it hard to invest in latest technology due to various technical and non-
technical limitations leading to limited priority for sustainability issues. As a result, the MSME sector consumes ~25% of 
the total energy utilised by the industrial sector while generating significant amount of total industrial emissions in India33.  
 
49. Energy consumption (thermal and electrical) in the MSME sector has been projected to increase by more than 100% 
from 30 million tons of oil equivalents (mtoe) in 2016-17 to 72.17 mtoe in 2029-2030, necessitating the application of 
resource efficient technologies and practices in the sector to reduce correlated increases in GHG emissions. Detailed 
project reports and energy audits conducted under several SIDBI / BEE programs identify low-cost technologies, which 
have demonstrated significant energy savings and the potential to reduce both direct and indirect GHG emissions. Some 
of these Low cost technologies include: installation of APFC (for PF); energy efficient lighting; VFD motors and pumps; 
energy efficient pump and motors; energy efficient compressors; compressed air leakages; fan less cooling towers;

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 
 
34https://www.giz.de/de/downloads/giz2013-en-climate-risk-study.pdf  
35 https://www.wri.org/insights/micro-small-and-medium-enterprises-key-players-climate-adaptation  
36 https://www.climatepolicyinitiative.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/02/Financing-Adaptation-India_reportannexes.pdf  
37 https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/giz2013-en-climate-risk-study.pdf  
energy efficient boilers; solar water heater; fibre-reinforced plastic (FRP) blades; condensate and waste heat recovery; 
installation of solar photovoltaic systems; energy saving by modification in process machine; thermal insulation; 
retrofitting for optimal fuel usage and increase and decrease in the contract demand. These energy saving technologies 
in energy intensive MSME sub-sectors can achieve GHG reductions in the range of 10%–50%34.  
MSME role in adoption of adaptation technologies  
 
50. Adaptation actions have enormous potential for investment from private sector tapping through potential business 
opportunities.  Adaptation actions have enormous potential for investment from private sector tapping through potential 
business opportunities. Although MSMEs are themselves vulnerable to climate change, they still have important roles to 
play in building community resilience. First, they can develop climate-resilient goods and services that are affordable to 
vulnerable populations. MSMEs are closely integrated into their communities, and as a result, have local knowledge of 
consumer demand and supply. This level of understanding can help MSMEs identify areas of need and respond 
accordingly. This may be especially useful for adaptation, since climate change impacts vary depending on where place-
specific climatic, environmental, and socio-economic factors intersect. Second, MSMEs can upgrade their current 
products. In general, small and medium firms don’t have the same governance structure as larger corporations, allowing 
them to adapt their products more rapidly to changes in the climate. Third, MSMEs can directly engage with community 
members to build adaptive practices. All of these actions can go a long way toward helping communities prepare for 
current and future climate change risks. MSMEs, with wide reaching presence across the market and employing up to 
78 percent of the population, are in a better position to get products and services to hard-to-reach populations and 
contribute to making vulnerable populations more climate-resilient 35. MSMEs being locally connected are better 
positioned to develop customized and innovative products and services in areas of agriculture and livestock sector 
including crop diversification, product value chains, and improved micro irrigation and pest management, afforestation, 
clean and affordable drinking water, water harvesting, recycling and Municipal solid waste management, etc. However, 
start-ups, innovators and MSMEs developing such climate-resilient affordable and customized goods and services with 
innovative business models require customized and dedicated financial support to meet their investment needs, which 
hitherto is not available in India.  
Adaptation Needs  
51. A study by Climate Policy Initiative highlights the following barriers to adaptation financing in India (a).  Limited knowledge 
of investment opportunities (b). Lack of capacity to develop commercially feasible projects (c) Unavailability of bankable 
projects and business models36. Also, the adaptation technologies need to be appropriate solution that are locally suited 
and in most of India the technology/service providers are usually start-ups that comes under MSMEs. Hence, the 
objective of this activity is to create a debt instrument tailored to adaptation needs for improved access to finance in 
selected MSMEs. This programme will further focus on regions in India with high climate vulnerability: coastal, eastern 
belt and Indian Himalayan regions and the focus sectors would be agriculture, water resources, agroforestry, disasters 
and services. 
52. The potential impacts of climate change on businesses can be classified as either direct or indirect: Direct impacts of 
climate change affect the physical assets of a business, such as buildings, machinery and equipment or other vital 
infrastructure and Indirect impacts of climate change affect business operations through changes in the business 
environment, such as new regulations and market demand, changes in prices and availability of inputs and financing or 
effects on stakeholders.  Companies that are not prepared to manage the direct and indirect impacts of climate change 
may face competitive disadvantages, especially if their competitors are better prepared or less affected by climate 
impacts.  This is even more true for India’s MSMEs: For most of them it is a higher priority to manage immediate 
challenges instead of long or term risks. At the same time, MSMEs are highly vulnerable to climate risks as they often 
lack the financial resources to endure even a single rupture in supply or demand, caused for instance by an extreme 
weather event or a new environmental or climate regulation37.  
Impact of Climate Change on businesses including MSMEs:  
• 
Rising temperatures: Average temperatures as well as temperature extremes have been increasing and 
projected to further increase across India. For business, temperature rises are likely to have an indirect impact 
such as reduced productivity of workers or increased energy use, as more cooling is required in manufacturing 
processes. Rising temperatures can also negatively affect crop yield and harvests.

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 
 
38 https://www.ifc.org/en/insights-reports/2023/blended-finance-for-climate-investments-in-india  
39 https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/Publications/PDFs/CLIMATERISK46CEE62999A4424BB731066765009961.PDF  
40 GCF categorizes co-benefits into six areas which are: environmental, social, economic, gender, adaptation (relevant for pure mitigation 
projects) and mitigation (relevant for pure adaptation projects). Further guidance is available in the funding proposal (FP) guidance note. 
• 
Precipitation changes: Higher precipitation in some regions, and less rainfall in others have indirect impacts 
on yield, buildings, sewerage and ground water availability  
• 
Loss of freshwater: A report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) states that water and 
its availability and quality will be the main pressures on and issues for societies and the environment under 
climate change, The industry demand for water in India is estimated to more than triple between 2000 and 2025. 
Decreasing availability, declining quality and growing demand for water are likely to have serious repercussions 
for the cost and productivity of companies. Furthermore, water being typically one of the most contentious issues 
with local stakeholder, reputational damages especially for highly water intensive industries are likely.  
• 
Price hike of energy: Climate change affects both supply and demand of electricity: while higher temperatures 
lead to an increased demand for energy, e.g., for air conditioning and cooling, it also affects supply, e.g. by 
damaging business operations of energy providers. At the same time, energy needs in India are expected to 
triple between 2006 and 2025. For all these reasons, energy prices are likely to show greater volatility and 
gradually increase over the next decades. 
• 
Regulatory requirements: Both the need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions for mitigating climate change 
and the need to adapt to the impacts of climate change has already triggered policy action, changing the 
framework conditions for business. More stringent regulation affecting business can be expected in the future, 
especially in the fields of emission reduction and resource consumption. Besides, national and state level 
regulation relevant to all the Indian business, exporting MSMEs need to also anticipate the policies of foreign 
countries.  
Leveraging Private Sector Investment for financing MSMEs  
53. India needs substantial amounts of climate finance by 2050 to achieve its ambitious sustainability goals. An estimated 
USD 10.1 trillion will be required to get to net-zero by 2070. Public investment alone will be insufficient to tackle India’s 
adaptation and mitigation targets, so financing that can bring in private sector investment is vital to scaling climate 
solutions with urgency. As per a recent consultation by SIDBI, the consulted stakeholders responded that Non-Banking 
Financial Companies (NBFCs) do not prominently incorporate the financing landscape for climate technologies into their 
stated objectives. Given the nascent nature of climate technologies, a considerable segment of Large and Medium 
NBFCs adopt a cautious "wait and watch" stance, refraining from explicit commitments to climate financing. As a result, 
the funding of climate initiatives by these NBFCs often takes place incidentally rather than through deliberate strategic 
planning38.  As per the findings of the survey by RBI vide its notification dated July 27, 2022 and also as indicated in 
RBI’s Report on Currency and Finance 2022-23 issued on May 03, 2023, it is observed that the financing flows from the 
banking sector towards climate financing  are presently quite low and there is a need for training, sensitization and 
capacity building of the banking officials in this regard as also putting in place proper systems and processes towards 
climate risk assessments and integrating suitable framework for M&E, ESG & gender, etc. Further, RBI vide its draft 
disclosure framework on climate related financial risk, 2024 vide its notification dated February 28, 2024 has indicated 
glide path with timelines for putting in place suitable systems and processes for climate related risk disclosures by the 
banks and other financial institutions39. Moreover, in the very recent G20 Delhi declaration, the leaders unanimously 
accepted the recommendation of the Sustainable Finance Working Group (SFWG) to scale up climate financing through 
innovating finance models such as blended finance, to leverage private finance and multilateral climate funds. SIDBI has 
been historically working with the PFIs under its institutional finance vertical and realizes the importance to tapping these 
to scale up climate financing for MSMEs. Further, many of these PFIs have better outreach, especially in rural areas, 
thus ensuring that units located in the rural parts of the country are able to maximize from the current intervention.  
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram) 
Present the theory of change (ToC) that contains a goal statement and describes how the proposed project/programme will contribute 
towards the goal statement by using results chain links from activities, outputs, to outcomes. By referring to the sample ToC diagram 
template available in the guidance note, present a ToC diagram (approximately 1 page) which visually represents the same logic in the 
narrative description. The ToC diagram and narrative may include a wide range of co-benefits40 as applicable in the context of the 
project/programme.

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 
Note all co-benefits will need to be further elaborated in section D.3 (sustainable development potential) and correspondent co-benefit 
indicators should be provided under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators).  
The theory of change should also include any relevant barriers (social, gender, fiscal, regulatory, technological, financial, ecological, 
institutional, etc.) that need to be addressed as well as risks and assumptions. Note that the assumptions can be elaborated further in 
sections E.3 (GCF outcome level: reduced reduced emissions and increased resilience) and E.5 (project/programme specific indicators) for 
each relevant indicator, as appropriate. 
54. The objective of the programme is to develop and demonstrate an ecosystem to promote Climate Financing to MSMEs 
in mitigation and adaptation interventions. To achieve this objective, GCF funding is sought in the form of non-
reimbursable funds (grant) of up to USD 15.6 million for technical assistance, and in the form of reimbursable funds 
(loan) in the amount of up to USD 200 million GCF reimbursable funds will be blended with co-finance from SIDBI of up 
to USD 800 million.  Out of total financing, SIDBI will on-lend (i) USD 200 million directly to MSMEs, and (ii) USD 800 
million to NBFC/FIs as on lending / refinance support. To achieve results at a scale, the project has potential to leverage 
private sector investment worth USD 2400 million. The concessional funds are expected to trigger the market towards 
climate investments.  
 
55. The proposed programme’s activities have been structured as two components, which collectively contribute to the 
achievement of three outcomes, with corresponding outputs and activities presented below. 
 
 
 
Component  
Output 
Activity  
Component 1 — Term loans 
to support climate change 
adaptation and mitigation in 
MSMEs.  
 
 
 
 
Output 1.1: MSME mitigation 
technologies financed and 
implemented. Increased access to 
mitigation finance for MSMEs 
 
Activity 1.1.1: Establish a loan instrument to 
provide concessional loans for MSME mitigation 
needs. 
Output 1.2: MSME adaptation 
technologies financed and 
implemented. Increased access to 
adaptation finance for MSMEs 
Activity 1.2.1: Establish a loan instrument to 
provide concessional loans for MSME adaptation 
needs.  
Component 2 — Technical 
support for climate change 
adaptation and mitigation in 
MSMEs through a dedicated 
PMU  
 
 
 
 
Output 2.1: Capacity built and 
knowledge management improved 
to support climate change 
adaptation and mitigation in 
MSMEs and PFIs. Capacities of 
selected MSMEs and PFIs are 
enhanced to rapidly scale their 
business and climate impact 
 
Activity 2.1.1: Undertake baseline studies for 500 
MSMEs 
Activity 2.1.2: Undertake awareness raising and 
trainings on climate change adaptation and 
mitigation for MSMEs and Financial Institutions  
Activity 2.1.3: Implement knowledge 
management and sharing on climate change 
adaptation and mitigation for MSMEs 
Output 2.2: Enabling environment 
for a low-emission climate-resilient 
MSME sector 
 
Activity 2.2.1: Develop and implement MSME 
sectoral adaptation and mitigation benchmarking 
tools 
Activity 2.2.2: Digital Green Credit Rating Tool 
(DGCRT) includes integration of Green 
parameters (Energy and Environment) with Credit 
rating tool 
 
56. Accordingly, the programme outputs of financing MSME uptake of mitigation and adaptation technologies will achieve 
the outcome of the adoption of low-emission climate-resilient technologies across MSME sectors, ultimately contributing 
to GCF results areas ARA 1 and 2, as well as MRA 1,2,3. These outputs will also generate several co-benefits, including:

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 
 
41 https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/dcf9d09d-68ad-4e54-b9b7-614c143735fb   
42 https://www.iea.org/reports/net-zero-by-2050  
43 https://theprint.in/opinion/indias-msme-sector-largest-after-chinas-but-no-one-is-talking-about-its-role-in-emissions/745629/  
i) improved water supplies; ii) enhanced job creation; iii) greater gender equality in MSMEs; iv) improved productivity and 
profitability; and v) reduced resource use and pollution. Moreover, the programme outputs of increased capacity and 
knowledge for MSMEs to upscale their climate change adaptation and mitigation activities — as well as an improved 
enabling environment for low-emission, climate-resilient initiatives in the sector — will contribute to the outcomes of: i) a 
strengthened market environment for upscaling commercialised adaptation and mitigation MSMEs technologies (PV 
units under this project for those MSMEs who want to install solar plants in their respective units); and ii) improved 
resilience of the most vulnerable populations, reduced GHG emissions in the MSME sector of India. These outcomes 
will ultimately contribute to GCF results areas ARA 1 and 2, as well as MRA 1,2,3. Similarly, as stated above under MRA 
2, the proposed Program aims strengthen the learnings from existing the EVOLVE initiative of the AE geared towards 
promoting the use of low-carbon transport in the country. The contribution of GCF shall culminate and enable quick 
replicability and scalability in the country and would bring a paradigm shift towards the adoption and uptake of the low 
emission transport. It would simultaneously help the upstream supply chain of the EVs in the country. 
57. The project’s outcomes will contribute to the achievement of the overarching goal of the programme: IF MSME mitigation 
and adaptation technologies are financed and implemented, MSMEs gain improved access to finance, knowledge 
management is improved, capacities of selected MSMEs are enhanced to upscale their business and climate impact, 
and an enabling environment is created for a low-emission climate-resilient MSME sector; THEN investment for climate 
change projects in India’s MSME sector will be unlocked and the country’s industrial decarbonization trajectory will be 
accelerated; BECAUSE MSMEs will have access to finance, technology and capacity building support to become 
resilient and developing products promoting adaptation measures. The project’s Theory of Change is described below, 
followed by a diagram summarising its causal pathways and results chains.  
 
Key barriers and challenges 
 
58. Despite the urgent imperative and scope for low carbon transition of sector, MSMEs have limited financial capacity to bear 
the transition cost associated with replacing high emitting machineries and infrastructure and adopting climate mitigation 
technologies. The current incentive and financing schemes are limited from the perspective of MSMEs especially given the 
inherent challenges and barriers of financing the MSME sector in itself. As per the study of International Finance 
Corporation41, only 16 percent of MSMEs in India are financed through formal banking systems and the credit gap to MSMEs 
is estimated to be about USD 240 billion (about INR 16.66 trillion as per 2018 estimates). In addition to inadequate access to 
finance and high cost of capital, MSMEs also lack access to markets, insurance, climate-smart inputs and services, and 
knowledge about mitigation and adaptation technologies and options. A recent International Energy Agency study42 indicates 
that technologies are readily available today to achieve most of the carbon emissions through 2030. However, MSMEs often 
use outdated technologies which are energy intensive due to inadequate access to finance and lack of technological expertise 
and knowledge. For example, small and medium sized boilers used in many MSMEs are powered by coal and are significantly 
inefficient, i.e., by up to 30-35 percent less efficient43. Due to the inherent small size and lack of skilled human resources and 
awareness of technical know-how of climate technologies, MSMEs also have limited adoption of climate resilient and low 
carbon technologies and practices. A summary of the key barriers and the corresponding programme activities that addresses 
the barriers are detailed below:  
Barrier 
Impact of the barrier  
Project intervention 
Barrier 1: 
MSMEs operating in 
climate-centric 
projects are riskier 
investments due to 
their smaller scale, 
limited 
financial 
resources, 
and 
potentially 
volatile 
market 
conditions.  
Additionally, MSMEs 
often lack sufficient 
This leads to a reluctance to provide financing or offering 
unfavourable terms, such as higher interest rates or 
shorter repayment periods. Lack of collateral further 
makes it more challenging for MSMEs to access the 
necessary funding. 
 
 
 
Provision of concessional loans to make 
financing of climate focussed projects 
fiscally viable for financial institutions

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 
collateral to secure 
loans 
for 
climate-
centric projects. 
 
Barrier 2:  
Perceived 
risk 
of 
lending to MSMEs by 
the PFIs, especially 
for those MSMEs in 
areas 
exposed 
to 
climate 
and 
environmental risks, 
and underdeveloped 
financial 
markets 
limiting the supply of 
finance for climate-
resilient, low-emitting 
businesses. 
Lack of capacity and awareness among PFIs are a 
deterrent for MSMEs to adopt climate technologies as 
they will have limited lenders providing them required 
financing to undertake these interventions. This holds 
true especially for those MSMEs located in climatic 
vulnerable regions  
 
 
This barrier will be overcome by first 
sensitising and building the capacity of 
PFIs 
towards 
understanding 
climate 
financing, encouraging them to set up 
dedicated climate focused vertical. Further,  
the project will help Indian banking system 
to identify the risks associated with climate 
financing to MSMEs and will also support 
Indian banks/FIs to formulate / customize 
their climate financing schemes 
accordingly.  
 
Barrier 3: 
Immature capital and 
financial 
markets 
which 
limits 
the 
supply of funding for 
clean technologies in 
MSMEs. 
Cost of capital and access for climate projects in MSME 
sector is one of the most significant barriers hindering 
transfer of necessary low-carbon and climate resilient 
technologies in India. The average ticket size for loans 
for climate investments in MSMEs is small, thereby 
increasing the transaction costs for lenders.  There is an 
urgent need for innovative financial solutions to fund 
such climate projects at concessional & softer terms at 
larger scale. Also, capacity building of supply and 
demand sides are equally crucial. 
 
The programme will help in complementing 
the efforts of the Reserve Bank of India in 
putting in place suitable systems and 
processes for a dedicated climate finance 
vertical in the NBFCs/PFIs which would aid 
in enhancing the confidence of these FIs 
for lending to the MSMEs for implementing 
adaptation and mitigation technologies. 
Further, SIDBI through its direct lending to 
MSMEs for climate financing also intends 
to showcase best practices to enable 
climate financing to MSMEs.  SIDBI will 
also enable a diverse set of innovative 
financial instruments such a risk sharing 
facility, financial facilities to aggregate 
smaller investment opportunities to pool 
risk and direct equity investments. 
Barrier 4: 
Knowledge 
and 
capacity barriers for 
the expansion of low-
emission, 
climate-
resilient 
practices 
across MSME value 
chains. 
MSMEs not having idea about the climate impact of their 
existing 
technologies, 
even 
if 
they 
have 
an 
understanding of their impact, lack of robust data on the 
available mitigation technologies will impede their 
uptake of these technologies.  
As the country strides towards achieving net zero, lack 
of understanding among MSMEs about environmental 
policies would result in compliance burden which will 
have impact on their future operations 
There is a growing consensus in various multilateral 
flora on the need of private sector investment focused 
on climate financing. Lack of understanding and 
capacities among PFIs will result in reduced lending to 
MSMEs to uptake climate resilient and low emission 
technologies.   
 
This barrier will be overcome by sectoral 
baseline 
studies, 
awareness 
raising 
campaigns, and implementation of a 
knowledge 
management 
and 
sharing 
system for climate change adaptation and 
mitigation options. 
Barrier 5:  
Limited adoption of 
resilient 
and 
low-
emission production 
technologies 
and 
management 
practices due to weak 
institutional 
Due to the inherent small size and limited capacities, the 
MSME promoter is involved in looking after many day-
to-day functions like production, marketing, sales, 
collection of receivables, etc. and hence, the MSMEs 
generally lack awareness and technical know-how on 
climate technologies. It is one of the most important 
factors hindering the uptake of climate projects in MSME 
sector in India. The current incentive schemes do not 
This barrier will be overcome by the 
development of sectoral adaptation and 
mitigation 
benchmarking 
tools, 
contributions to policy initiatives for Climate 
Financing 
of 
MSMEs, 
and 
recommendations for an energy savings 
certificate trading scheme for the MSME 
sector.

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 28 
 
 
environment 
and 
policy barriers. 
provide enough motivation to the borrowers for adoption 
/ enhancement of their performance with respect to the 
resource efficiency parameters. The policies / standards 
available in India prescribed the minimum performance 
standards. In case of MSMEs, there are limited 
incentives to improve their performance on a continual 
basis. Availability of Market mechanism providing 
motivation to the Indian MSMEs such as trading of 
energy savings certificates can also be another self-
enabler requires a policy change. 
 
It has been observed that generally the modern / latest 
technologies are costlier as compared with conventional 
or fabricated technologies. Further, MSMEs also face 
high transaction costs to invest in such low emission 
technologies and recover its investments from savings 
as it requires detailed energy calculations / engineering 
designs etc. Usually, such proposals take longer time, 
which leads to unexpected rejections from financial 
institutions and also delayed decisions of MSMEs to go 
for such interventions. 
 
MSMEs are slow to adopt new technologies and 
continue to use the outdated technologies which may be 
highly energy inefficient and polluting in nature. There is 
a need to build local sectoral expertise through feasibility 
studies, local/international collaborations, trainings, and 
knowledge transfers both in public and private sector. 
MSMEs need customized solutions due to their nature 
of operations. Not many reputed / large-scale Original 
Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) consider the MSME 
sector as a potential customer for certain reasons 
including the business ticket size and unavailability of 
local channel partners. Exposure of MSMEs towards 
availability of such technological options in the market is 
often limited and depends on either the Industrial 
Associations or vendors or system integrators available 
in the local market. 
 
 
 
 
59. A series of stakeholder consultations conducted as a part of this programme, highlighted the key barriers across this segment 
on adopting climate technologies across adaptation and mitigation as indicated below:  
Sector  
Key Barriers  
Solar- Open Access  
• 
Lack of partnership opportunities for large developers with MSMEs: Low 
corporate ratings & small-scale/disaggregated opportunity leads to higher risk 
preventing large developers to partner with MSMEs. 
• 
Opportunities available only to stable firms: Due to the risky nature of the 
segment, financing is only limited to small/medium sized businesses with large 
revenues (>INR 10-20 Cr). Micro enterprises aren’t able to leverage such 
financing. 
 
Roof Top Solar 
• 
Limited awareness (>50% MSMEs across clusters weren't aware of RTS) 
• 
Technical Challenges i.e., limited by availability of rooftop space 
• 
Financing Challenge (Limited by ability to put capital upfront) 
• 
RESCO model not developed given low offtaker rating and challenges in 
collection at disaggregated level 
 
Energy Efficiency  
• 
Inherent inability to access capex easily limits the degree to which they can 
adopt these interventions within their operations

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 29 
 
 
• 
Low uptake given lack of after sales support ecosystem: Installation of novel 
technology requires strong after sales support. However, the ecosystem 
currently lacks these services. 
• 
High transaction cost: One-time cost of shift to energy efficient 
technology/processes is high and difficult for MSMEs to bear. With a lack of 
collateral, a lot of them aren’t able to finance this transition. 
• 
Information failure: Inadequate data on unit level energy consumption, energy 
savings achieved till date from different interventions, and inadequate 
dissemination of knowledge make the decision of investing in energy saving 
technology difficult. 
Electric Vehicle  
• 
Economic: The price of electric vehicles is more than their ICE counterparts. 
In the case of electric buses and trucks, the initial cost is almost two to three 
times higher than their ICE counterparts. The higher upfront cost will translate 
into owning of lesser vehicles than ICE variants thereby reducing the earning 
potential of the operators.  
• 
Access to finance: At present, the financing terms are not viable for most of 
the operators willing to deploy electric variants. The scheduled commercial 
banks with better financing terms in terms of high loan-to-value ratio (LTV), 
longer tenure, and lower interest rates are reluctant to fund the operators due 
to many perceived risks. The low LTV is translating into higher upfront capital 
required for the purchase of e-vehicles especially in the case of e-bus and 
trucks, and shorter tenure are resulting in high monthly payments making the 
operations unviable.  
• 
Technical: At present, there are few products available in the market in 
comparison to diesel models. The adequate product is available in the two-
wheeler segment and three-wheeler cargo segment but are missing from the 
other product categories. The buses are used for different buses such as 
school buses, employee transport, intracity, intercity etc.  and requires models 
of different specifications with suitable price to match the business model. The 
same exists in the freight sector as well.  
• 
Regulatory: At present, the incentives for electric vehicles are available at the 
central government level only with a limited number of vehicles. The demand 
incentives are not available in every state with no clear mandate on the 
transition to electric vehicles.   
• 
Behavioral: The lower total cost of ownership is estimated for electric vehicles 
across different vehicle modes. However, due to the lack of trust in EVs and 
higher upfront cost requirements, entities are reluctant to transition to electric 
mobility. It is accentuated in the case of buses and trucks. 
• 
Structural: The vast network of diesel outlets across the country in 
comparison to meagre public charging stations is one of the major 
apprehensions among potential users. Since batteries come with a limited 
range, it is pertinent to have adequate charging stations to ensure freedom in 
the deployment of electric buses and trucks. The battery warranty available in 
the market is less than the vehicle's operational requirement for the useful life 
of the vehicle. The battery replacement cost is further increasing the capital 
cost of owning buses 
Adaptation 
Narrative and information gaps: 
• 
Information gaps (i.e., poor data and analytics) around climate risks and the 
benefits of timely adaptation, deter investments 
• 
Narrative for action is weak: 'Cost of inaction' not well quantified, existing 
perspectives narrow and mono sectoral 
Lack of/limited Bankability 
• 
Financial return/ROI from A&R projects often perceived as low or non-existent 
• 
Lack of linking A&R projects to socioeconomics returns, thus limited bankability 
• 
Many projects are 'sub scale', have high transaction costs 
• 
Due to a lack of proven effectiveness, many A&R technology solutions have 
garnered limited interest 
Project Structure and Complexity

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 
 
44 https://www.ifc.org/en/insights-reports/2023/blended-finance-for-climate-investments-in-india  
• 
Projects cut across traditional sectors, require multi stakeholder alignment 
(govts., communities, funders, etc.), increasing complexity 
• 
Projects often require multiple funders with different risk return impact 
expectations to come together, increasing structuring complexity 
Consultations with leading global DFIs has revealed a two-fold challenge in disbursing 
adaptive finance in India:  
 
There is a need for credible intermediaries who can act as a bridge between the 
DFIs and the private sector is critical – an intermediary that can bring a strong 
pipeline of investible projects and help unlock 4x-10x private investments will be 
crucial 
 
The biggest challenge to mobilize climate finance is not the availability of capital 
but the lack of innovative financial instruments 
 
 Barriers to climate finance for Indian MSMEs:  
60. India needs substantial amounts of climate finance by 2050 to achieve its ambitious sustainability goals. An estimated 
USD10.1 trillion will be required to get to net-zero by 2070. Public investment alone will be insufficient to tackle India’s 
adaptation and mitigation targets, so financing that can bring in private sector investment is vital to scaling climate solutions 
with urgency. As per a recent consultation by SIDBI, the consulted stakeholders responded that Non-Banking Financial 
Companies (NBFCs) do not prominently incorporate the financing landscape for climate technologies into their stated 
objectives. Given the nascent nature of climate technologies, a considerable segment of Large and Medium NBFCs adopt a 
cautious "wait and watch" stance, refraining from explicit commitments to climate financing. As a result, the funding of climate 
initiatives by these NBFCs often takes place incidentally rather than through deliberate strategic planning44.   
61. As per the findings of the survey by RBI vide its notification dated July 27, 2022 and also as indicated in RBI’s Report on 
Currency and Finance 2022-23 issued on May 03, 2023, it is observed that the financing flows from the banking sector 
towards climate financing  are presently quite low and there is a need for training, sensitization and capacity building of the 
banking officials in this regard as also putting in place proper systems and processes towards climate risk assessments and 
integrating suitable framework for M&E, ESG & gender, etc 
62. Consultations with the wider MSME ecosystem comprising of leading financial institutions (including SIDBI’s on-ground 
branch officers) revealed the need for financing instruments and assistance designed specifically to meet the adaptive needs 
of the Indian MSME sector as shown below:  
 
Role of the financial institutions in climate resilience financing for MSMEs is to provide timely financial support, 
customized financial products, and services, holding workshops on climate resilience for MSMEs, etc. 
 
Financial institutions felt that they will be comfortable to provide climate financing for the MSME sector if they get low-
cost funds/ cheaper sources of finance, non-sovereign loans coupled with technical assistance so that lenders can 
develop climate financing products, forbearance in NPA classification of climate finance loans, blended finance, longer 
tenure loans, default guarantee system, knowledge of reliable/proven technology, etc.  
 
To enhance climate resilience, the financial community should offer solutions which are demanded by the market, 
especially in the area of bringing out low cost MSME focused financial products 
 
FIs also suggested that all types of climate financing be included in priority sector and inclusion of climate finance in 
CSR activities 
 
In future, if financial institutions are mandated to disclose their emissions, including Scope 3 emissions, this could 
result in some difficulties in obtaining finance, which could be overcome with better preparedness and efforts on the 
part of MSMEs in curbing emissions 
 
Most stakeholders advocated for more training, building greater awareness for MSMEs on how they can see the bigger 
picture better, and contribute to arrest adverse climate change - very few MSMEs were found to know what the impact 
of their actions on climate is and they need to be made aware of how to manufacture their products more responsibly 
and without causing harm to environment irrespective of the sectors they are active in

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 31 
 
 
 
MSMEs would require handholding and support through sector-wise intervention so that the specific issues relating to 
climate change can be identified and dealt with carefully 
Targeted approach to address key technological barriers and challenges 
 
63. Basis the stakeholder consultations and SIDBI’s past experience, targeted solutions have been identified to address the issue 
of financing climate technologies in MSMEs. There are detailed as below:  
Sector 
Solution Design 
SIDBI expertise and experience 
Solar-Open Access • 
Designing mitigants for key risks involved such as low 
corporate rating: SIDBI has conducted a detailed exercise to 
identify key risks involved in the Open access market 
improving its ability to underwrite loans in this segment. For 
example, it has developed several parameters across 
technology, regulation, entrepreneur ability, etc. to determine 
the riskiness of a project. 
• 
Aggregate demand at cluster level & reduce risk via pooling: 
SIDBI can leverage its network of RMs to pool multiple 
MSMEs looking to invest in Open Access projects to reduce 
underwriting risk and enable partnership opportunities 
between large developers and MSMEs. 
 
Of the total investments in the solar 
roof top/open access market for 
MSMEs, SIDBI alone constitutes 
~10% of all funding flow. SIDBI’s 
direct lending portfolio for this 
segment stands at USD 220 million 
making it one of the largest banks 
operating in this segment in India. 
 
Roof Top Solar 
• 
Co-Lending 
partnerships: 
Increase 
awareness 
& 
penetration via partnerships with green NBFCs, regional FIs 
under 
co-lending 
model, 
and 
panel 
developers/EPC 
contractors 
• 
Customer experience: Improve experience by developing 
integrated solutions & end-to-end digital journeys 
• 
Risk-sharing facility: Develop RESCO model leveraging 
RSFs, payment guarantees and on-bill financing 
 
Energy Efficiency  
SIDBI, through the current programme intends to address all the 
aforementioned barriers from affordability (by offering 
concessional finance by blending sources) to technical 
assistance using the following mitigation measures:  
• 
Develop new deployment models to scale adoption 
• 
OEM dealer-linked point of sale financing (e.g., 
GST/cash flow based) 
• 
Corporate supply chain partnership (e.g., Crompton, 
H&M, etc.) 
• 
Partner with progressive DISCOMs in power hungry 
states 
• 
Strengthen the traditionally risky ESCO business model 
• 
Address recovery challenges basis standardization of 
savings 
• 
Rate ESCOs basis financial performance/pool ESCOs to 
reduce risk 
• 
Technical risk assessment capability development for 
partner banks 
• 
Improve payback period for technology (e.g., leveraging 
blended finance, decarb. monetization, etc.) 
• 
Demand Aggregation: SIDBI can leverage its network of 
RMs to pool multiple MSMEs looking to invest in energy 
efficiency projects to reduce underwriting risk  
SIDBI has pioneered EE loans in 
India since early 2000s and has 
extensively invested in this 
segment forming various ties and 
partnerships. Total portfolio stands 
at around USD 700 million.  
 
Electric Vehicle  
• 
The proposed programme will support mitigating the 
financial costs associated with the adoption of EVs. In this 
regard, the funding is proposed to achieve improved 
access to finance through favourable financing terms.  
SIDBI is operating several schemes 
for 
Non-Banking 
Financial 
Companies (NBFCs) and launched 
EV scheme for lending to NBFCs. 
Under the scheme, SIDBI is lending

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 32 
 
 
• 
The primary goal of the project will be to alleviate the 
financing barriers by reducing out-of-pocket costs. This 
will 
prompt 
operators 
to 
start 
electrification 
as 
government 
policies 
increasingly 
incentivize 
electrification of the transport sector. The increase in 
uptake will encourage OEMs to come up with more 
products suiting the business requirements of consumers 
while also improving the network of public fast charging 
stations due to increased demand. Thus by addressing 
the technology and structural barriers, the programme 
shall unlock increased adoption of EVs across a range of 
MSME customers, especially fleet operators.  
Furthermore, the project findings will be used to identify the gaps 
at a regulatory level which will be used to formulate relevant policy 
solutions for the sector. These policy recommendations will be 
designed on the basis of project outcomes and will be driven to 
increase availability of products (old and new), and reduction in 
battery prices in the future. 
 
to unrated/unserved NBFCs who 
are active in EV financing. The total 
portfolio stands at around USD 25 
million.  
 
Adaptation  
SIDBI aims to tackle these challenges by acting as the 
intermediary with the expertise and capabilities to unlock requisite 
financing for MSMEs in the adaptation space by offering access 
to, at scale (whether by itself or through other intermediaries such 
as NBFCs, NGOs, etc.), a range of financing instruments that can 
meet the varied needs of the various industries within the sector. 
 
The support in adaptation field for 
MSMEs is one of the key focus 
areas for SIDBI. 
 
Theory of Change diagram 
64. Based on SIDBI’s experience and learnings from financing MSMEs in India, a detailed theory of change has been devised 
to address the various barriers and challenges mentioned above while catalysing financing for climate technologies directly 
as well indirectly through PFIs.

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 33 
 
 
 
Mapping of TOC assumption with project outputs  
 
Assumption 
Related project outputs 
Conducive policy environment will help to decarbonize the MSME sector through several policies 
and incentive mechanisms will continue to persist.  
Output 1.1 and Output 2.2 
Technology landscape for low emission climate resilient pathways will continue to evolve and be 
available in the MSME sectors. 
Output 1.1 and Output 1.2 
Private sector and financial institutions will continue to invest in adaptation and mitigation measures 
in MSME sector. 
Output 1.1 and Output 1.2 
An increased demand for adaptation goods and services for the general public will continue to evolve 
owing to intensification of climate change impacts. 
Output 1.1, Output 1.2 and 
Output 2.1 
Capacity building and awareness generation activities envisaged in this project will help the SME's 
and Financial Institutions in realizing the benefits of low emission climate resilient technologies and 
they would continue investing in the same. 
Output 2.1 
MSME's will have strong financial capability in terms of adequate liquidity to continue their operations 
with minimum risk of NPA with the adoption of mitigation measures. 
Output 1.1 and Output 2.2 
 
 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization 
Fill in the GCF results area table below to map each project/programme outcome identified in section B.2(a) to the contributing GCF results 
area(s) by referring to the description of eight results areas provided in the guidance note.  
Outcome 
number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation and 
access 
 
MRA 2 
Low-emission 
transport 
 
MRA 3 
Building, 
citiies, 
industries, 
appliances 
MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use 
ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities 
ARA 2 
Health, well-
being, food 
and water 
security 
ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment 
ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services 
Outcome 1 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
Outcome 2 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
Outcome 3 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
If any co-benefits have been identified in section B.2(a), fill in the Co-benefit table below to map each co-benefit to the corresponding 
category as defined in the FP guidance note. 
Co-benefit 
number 
Co-benefit 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
Gender 
Adaptation 
Mitigation 
Co-benefit 1 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
Co-benefit 2 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
Co-benefit 3 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
Co-benefit 4 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☒ 
Co-benefit 5 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) 
 
Define the project/programme. Describe the proposed set of components, outputs and activities that will be undertaken by the 
project/programme to attain the intended outcomes elaborated in Section B.2 (a). Please also elaborate how the project/programme activities 
will address the barriers described in Section B.2.  
This section of the funding proposal should be consistent with sections C.2 (financing by component), E.5 (project/programme results level) 
and E.6 (project/programme activities and deliverables).

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 
Programme Description:  
65. SIDBI through the programme ‘Financing Mitigation and Adaptation Project in MSMEs’ aims to develop and demonstrate 
an ecosystem to promote Climate Financing to MSMEs in mitigation and adaptation interventions. To achieve this GCF 
fund is sought in the form of GCF grant (USD 15.6 million) for technical assistance and GCF loan (USD 200 million) 
which will be blended with co-finance from SIDBI of USD 800 million to finance the MSMEs for their green interventions. 
Out of this blended facility, SIDBI will directly lend USD 200 million to the MSMEs whilst USD 800 million will be given to 
various PFIs as on-lending/refinance. To achieve results at a scale, private sector investment worth USD 2400 million 
will be potentially leverage from the market and the total indicative cost of the entire project is USD 3792.6 million.  
66. The proposed activities in the programme emanates from SIDBI’s more than a decade experience of ecosystem 
strengthening aligned to climate activities for MSMEs. Based on our experience, the following elements will be considered 
as part of the programme:  
a. Handholding: Besides financing, MSMEs require technical handholding support in implementing climate 
interventions specific to adaptation and mitigation in their units.  
b. Market Creation: There needs to be a market push for the MSMEs to adopt climate technologies. Since, MSMEs 
in India work on the neighbourhood theory, financing ~10000 loans, at a concessional rate, as a part of this 
programme, would help in demonstrating the climate technologies that MSMEs can adopt within their clusters.    
c. Concessional Finance: Climate financing to MSMEs is a relatively new area, constrained with lack of awareness 
among MSMEs and FIs about the climate interventions required in MSMEs. To boost market demand, 
concessional financing based on innovative financing model will be very helpful. One of the examples of a 
blended facility model that has been very successful is that of the 4E scheme- The 4E scheme was set up with 
USD 5 million corpus (28% financed by The World Bank and 72% co-financed by SIDBI) with blended rates to 
provide concessional funding to MSMEs. The proceeds from this was further used as revolving fund to further 
finance the MSMEs for their climate interventions.  This model was very successful and at present in FY 2024, 
the total disbursement stands at USD 987.9 Million.  Based on numerous stakeholder conversations with several 
PFIs, it is felt that availability of lines of credit at concessional rates is likely to incentivize financial institutions to 
provide loans to MSMEs for adopting climate resilient measures. Adaptation measures suffer heavily from 
information gaps with unquantified risks leading to a higher risk perception for financiers. Further, financial return 
from adaptation projects is often considered to be low/ non-existent leading to their lack of bankability at the 
market rates. Thus, concessional financing can alleviate concerns about commercial viability of sector in given 
market 
d. Ease of Access: Simplified end to end process would boost demand from MSMEs to demand for climate 
financing. For example, in the 4E schemes and in other running schemes of SIDBI, digitisation and seamless 
loan application process has proven to be very helpful in the expansion of the programme on the whole.  
e. Mainstreaming climate finance in Indian Banking: There is a need to mainstream climate finance within the 
Indian Banking system, more focused on MSMEs. Currently, financing green technologies to MSMEs, especially 
those located in climate vulnerable regions is perceived as a riskier venture by the banks and hence there is a 
need to understand the climate space so as to enhance their lending portfolios focused towards climate financing 
to MSMEs.  
f. 
Capacity Building: It was seen that training and capacity building of MSMEs, developing e-modules of the 
training and disseminating these through banking and industrial associations could help manifold in raising 
awareness among not just MSMEs but also the financers. Additionally, stakeholders advocated for more training, 
building greater awareness for MSMEs on how they can see the bigger picture better, and contribute to arrest 
adverse climate change - very few MSMEs were found to know what the impact of their actions on climate is and 
they need to be made aware of how to manufacture their products more responsibly and without causing harm 
to environment irrespective of the sectors they are active in. Utilizing the lessons learnt by SIDBI in running pilot 
scale interventions in the area of energy efficiency as well as a blended finance facility, the proposed programme 
will set up a blended finance facility aimed at encouraging the Lending Institutions to take up financing of 
reduction of carbon emissions and enhancing the resilience to the impacts of climate change, in line with the 
requirements of MSMEs. The programme proposes to cover manufacturing as well as solution / service provider 
MSMEs addressing adoption of clean technologies towards emission reduction and providing solutions to 
enhance climate resilience of communities. The programme will build capacities of the select Lending Institutions 
for climate financing in MSMEs as also to facilitate networking of technology providers and facilitate technology 
customization as per the local needs and priorities of MSMEs.  
67. A substantial component of the programme is focused on leveraging the strength of PFIs to finance the MSMEs for 
their low carbon and climate resilient intervention.  The Accredited Entity, acting as the Executing Entity, will

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 
 
45 https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/561461577729300064/pdf/India-Financing-Energy-Efficiency-at-MSMEs-Project.pdf 
refinance/on-lend the GCF Reimbursable Funds, together with the Co-financing, to the PFIs.  The Programme will offer 
refinance against eligible assets created by the empanelled PFIs and originated no longer than six months prior to 
approval from the Accredited Entity for co-financing in accordance with the FAA. SIDBI has been working with banks 
and NBFCs under its institutional finance mandate. SIDBI’s continued partnership with Indian Banking System through 
its institutional finance vertical is highlighted below:  
Refinance to banks: 
SIDBI expands resources of other banks/PFIs through refinancing activities thereby boosting the flow of credit to 
MSMEs. As of March 31, 2023, the outstanding portfolio was USD 35,924 million/INR 2,98,173 crores, the year on year 
growth was a significant 79%. The portfolio is in respect of 49 banks which comprises of 12 Public Sector Banks 
(PSBs), 17 Private Sector Banks (PvSBs), 6 Foreign Banks (FBs), 10 Small Finance Banks (SFBs), 3 Regional Rural 
Banks (RRBs), and 1 Urban Cooperative Bank (UCB).  
            Refinance to Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs):  
At the end of the fiscal year 2023, the Bank’s NBFC portfolio stood at USD 4266.8 million/ INR 33,415 crores across 56 
NBFCs, an increase of 86% in outstanding. During FY 2023, sanctions and disbursements showed a growth by 67% 
and 81%, respectively over FY 2022.  
Refinance to Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs):  
SIDBI extended financial support to MFIs in the form of equity/ quasi-equity, refinance, term loans, grant support, etc., 
enabling smooth flow of credit to MFIs/ Informal Enterprises. The net outstanding portfolio stood at USD 590.36 million/ 
INR 4,900 crore as in FY 2023 as against USD 375.6 million/ INR 3,118 crores during FY 2022, registering growth of 
57% over previous FY. The disbursements during FY 2023 recorded a growth of 32% over the previous FY.  
NBFCs emerging interest towards green/climate financing: 
As per a recent stakeholder consultation conducted for NBFCs, the following are the highlights:  
o 
17 NBFCs participated in the consultation 
o 
92% of the NBFC leaders in the workshop agreed that Green Finance represents a significant opportunity for 
their business. The priority areas overwhelmingly emerged as (a). Electric Mobility (3W and 2W) (b). Solar Rooftops 
(Institutional solar and RESCOs) 
• 
Indian FI Interest in climate financing: 
There is increased interest among PFIs and NBFCs regarding climate financing. Hence, there is a need to sensitise the 
PFIs to increase their lending portfolio towards climate financing of MSMEs. Concessional loans to PFIs will further act 
as a booster to effect this objective. The programme will also build synergy and leverage from the experiences of previous 
projects undertaken on pilot demonstration scale in the country. The programme as catalyst would help scaling up of 
some of the earlier initiatives, taken by Govt of India and SIDBI towards creating momentum in climate financing 
landscape for MSMEs. Through this project, SIDBI will leverage its learning from serving MSMEs through various 
initiatives including successful implementation of GEF funded World Bank project “Financing Energy Efficiency at MSMEs 
in India”45, “Partial Risk Sharing Facility (PRSF) for Energy Efficiency Project”, and other dedicated line of credits from 
Japan International Co-operation Agency (JICA), Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW), Agence Française de 
Development (AFD), the World Bank (WB), etc.  
 
68. A joint approach of Mitigation and Adaptation is more effective than the focus only on energy efficiency. The success of 
climate/climate financing project, particularly for MSMEs require both technical handholding support and financial support 
by way of concessional loans. Further, in order to realize low hanging fruits, incentivizing the units at initial stage to create 
climate MSME ambassadors and pool of champion units helps in early investment decision by majority of MSMEs as 
they follow the “Neighbourhood Theory”.  
 
69. ‘Neighbourhood 
theory’ 
refers 
to 
the 
phenomena 
wherein 
new 
technologies 
or 
interventions 
are 
adopted/incorporated/mainstreamed within the larger industry landscape based on showcasing of individual success 
stories. This holds particularly true for the Indian MSME sectors where most constituents are reluctant first movers. In 
this regard, incentivisation of individual units to adopt newer technology/interventions primarily through financial 
mechanism followed by a real world on ground showcase of the technology/intervention’s benefits is seen to catalyse 
the unit’s ‘neighbours’ into adopting the same technology/intervention.

=== PAGE 40 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 36 
 
 
70. Thus, 
utilising 
this 
phenomena 
SIDBI 
intends 
to 
catalyse 
large 
scale 
adoption 
of 
climate 
related 
technologies/interventions within the MSME sector by first focusing on specific set of clusters/industries and technologies  
 
71. While concessional loans as an instrument for climate financing is commonly used, this project has identified several 
other avenues to tackle the risks associated with financing climate focussed projects. It has conducted deep sector level 
analysis, identified targeted technological interventions, and devised numerous financial tools to maximize the impact of 
this financing. 
 
72. The integration of the learnings of SIDBIs previous programme has been at the centre of the design of this proposal. For 
instance, in Annexure 22 regarding the impact calculation we have clearly indicated how the previous lending portfolio 
of SIDBI has helped us to extrapolate cost allocation to each sector, energy savings in each sector and the GHG impact 
of the project on the whole.  
Component  
Output 
Activity  
Component 1 — Term loans 
to support climate change 
adaptation and mitigation in 
MSMEs.  
 
 
 
 
Output 1.1: MSME mitigation 
technologies financed and 
implemented. Increased access to 
mitigation finance for MSMEs 
Activity 1.1.1: Establish a loan instrument to 
provide concessional loans for MSME mitigation 
needs. 
Output 1.2: MSME adaptation 
technologies financed and 
implemented. Increased access to 
adaptation finance for MSMEs 
Activity 1.2.1: Establish a loan instrument to 
provide concessional loans for MSME adaptation 
needs 
 
Component 2 — Technical 
support for climate change 
adaptation and mitigation in 
MSMEs through a dedicated 
PMU  
 
 
 
 
Output 2.1: Capacity built and 
knowledge management improved 
to support climate change 
adaptation and mitigation in 
MSMEs and PFIs. Capacities of 
selected MSMEs and PFIs are 
enhanced to rapidly scale their 
business and climate impact 
 
Activity 2.1.1: Undertake baseline studies for 500 
MSMEs 
Activity 2.1.2: Undertake awareness raising and 
trainings on climate change adaptation and 
mitigation for MSMEs and Financial Institutions  
Activity 2.1.3: Implement knowledge 
management and sharing on climate change 
adaptation and mitigation for MSMEs 
Output 2.2: Enabling environment 
for a low-emission climate-resilient 
MSME sector 
 
Activity 2.2.1: Develop and implement MSME 
sectoral adaptation and mitigation benchmarking 
tools 
Activity 2.2.2:  Digital Green Credit Rating Tool 
(DGCRT) includes integration of Green 
parameters (Energy and Environment) with Credit 
rating tool 
 
Component 1 — Term loans to support climate change adaptation and mitigation in MSMEs. 
 
73. Under this component, ~10000 number of loans will be provided to MSMEs as detailed below: 
a. Executing Entity (SIDBI) will lend around 20% of the loans directly and another 80% of the loans will be financed 
indirectly through PFIs.  SIDBI will provide technical handholding support to the selected Participating Financial 
Institutions (PFIs) i.e. Non-Banking Finance Companies (NBFCs), Small Finance Banks (SFBs), Micro Finance 
Institutions (MFIs) etc. to design and implement climate lending products within their asset portfolio, in line with 
the climate financial instruments of SIDBI. SIDBI will select the PFIs based on their asset portfolio and 
experience.  
b. The MSMEs manufacturing units and service providers on either supply or demand side seeking to adopt low 
carbon measures and promote climate resilient technologies/ products/ services shall be eligible under the 
project. MSMEs executing projects / providing services, related to the activities eligible under the Scheme, to

=== PAGE 41 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 37 
 
 
 
46 https://www.climatepolicyinitiative.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/02/Financing-Adaptation-India_reportannexes.pdf  
various government bodies / private entities on BOT, BOOT, BOOM, PPP, etc. models backed by suitable 
contract shall be eligible for finance for their CAPEX and or OPEX requirements. The unit should be in compliance 
with the Environment & Social Management Framework of SIDBI being utilised currently for climate projects 
MSMEs will own, operate, and manage the assets financed under the programme.  
c. The activities under this component will be carried out by engaging technical support staff/experts. 
 
Programme Outputs and Activities: 
Output 1.1: MSME mitigation technologies financed and implemented. Increased access to mitigation finance for 
MSMEs. 
  
Activity 1.1.1: Establish a loan instrument to provide concessional loans for MSME mitigation needs. 
74. Debt instrument tailored to mitigation needs for improved access to finance in selected MSMEs. The key intervention of 
technologies to be financed under FMAP are (a). renewable Energy- PV systems Mostly Captive projects, up to capacity 
of 10 Megawatt and wind turbine up to 5 Megawatt of capacity (b). Electric vehicles and charging infrastructure, all type 
of vehicles 2w,3w and 4w vehicles will be covered under this programme (c). Energy efficiency- Industrial processes and 
appliances, insulation, high performance glass, LED lighting, High-Efficiency Heat Pumps, solar water heater etc. SIDBI 
has established standard operating guidelines for selection of MSMEs involved in the Climate /sustainable projects.  The 
same SOPs would be followed while assessing an intended borrower, i.e., MSMEs for providing debt financing. A detailed 
list of relevant mitigation measures and technologies that will be eligible for finance is attached as Annexure.  
75. The programme has been designed to offer concessional loans to PFIs (NBFCs/SFBs/MFIs) and driving them to further 
leverage 3x the lending amount into climate technologies in order to ensure that results are achieved at a scale. Through 
this, the programme intends to encourage the PFIs to create an ecosystem of climate financing which would allow them 
to lend to the MSMEs with an increased understanding of the associated risks and underwriting capabilities required. 
SIDBIs direct lending to the MSMEs sets an example for the PFIs to follow to successfully lend to the MSMEs for adopting 
low emission climate resilient technologies.  
Other TA elements will include:  
• 
Carry out detailed technical assessment of potential MSME units. 
• 
Carry out credit risk rating evaluation of potential MSME units. 
• 
Selection of MSMEs according to Eligibility Criteria as well as technical and risk assessment results. 
• 
Incentivize the units to create climate MSME ambassadors and a group of champion units. 
• 
Online loan application and speedy appraisal process setup. 
• 
End to end technical and handholding support to MSMEs, PFIs, NBFCs, and other stakeholders. 
• 
Facilitate networking of technology providers. 
 
76. Activity 1.1.1 and 1.2.1 will jointly address the barriers related to: i) lack of private investment at the MSMEs level due to 
immature capital market and high upfront capital costs for climate products; and ii) limited understanding of MSME sector 
by institutional financial players. This will be achieved by (i). Offering concessional finance to MSMEs directly 
encouraging them to adopt relevant climate resilient technologies and interventions (ii). Offering concessional lines of 
capital and blended financial products to FIs which will help in reducing their risk of lending towards MSMEs thus 
encouraging them to offer additional financing  (ii). Handholding by SIDBI helping FIs understand the relevant challenges 
and risks of financing MSMEs and developing the requisite underwriting skills to finance climate technologies within the 
MSME space. Additionally, Activity 1.1.1 will address barriers related to limited climate financing provided by banks and 
the need for training bank officials, enhancing climate risk assessment processes, and integrating monitoring, ESG, and 
gender frameworks. This will be achieved by SIDBI directly lending to MSMEs to demonstrate climate financing, aiming 
to encourage other financial institutions to also engage in climate financing for MSMEs. 
Output 1.2: MSME adaptation technologies financed and implemented. Increased access to adaptation finance for 
MSMEs. 
Activity 1.2.1: Establish a loan instrument to provide concessional loans for MSME adaptation needs. 
77. A study by Climate Policy Initiative highlights the following barriers to adaptation financing in India (a).  Limited knowledge 
of investment opportunities (b). Lack of capacity to develop commercially feasible projects (c) Unavailability of bankable 
projects and business models46. Furthermore, the adaptation interventions are local in nature and within India it has been

=== PAGE 42 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 38 
 
 
observed that a large number of providers of such adaptive technologies/interventions are MSMEs. Hence, the objective 
of this activity is to create a debt instrument tailored for improved access to finance in select MSMEs that offer adaptive 
technologies/interventions for sectors such as agriculture, water resources, agroforestry, disasters and services. This 
programme will further focus on regions in India with high climate vulnerability: coastal, eastern belt and Himalayan 
regions and the focus sectors would be agriculture, water resources, agroforestry, disasters and services. An indicative 
list of relevant adaptation measures and technologies that will be eligible for loan finance is presented in Annexure 22.  
78. The adaptation intervention under this programme attempts to tackle both the demand and supply side concerns. On the 
demand side, the MSMEs located in vulnerable regions are to be targeted where financing for climate resilient 
technologies is considered risky. The concessional loans here would prove to be useful to these vulnerable MSMEs to 
increase their resilience to climate hazards which would have long term direct impact on their operations. At present 
these MSMEs have very limited knowledge of technological solutions to make them climate resilient.  
79. On the supply side, the programme targets financing those units that are value chain members and suppliers to larger 
units manufacturing technologies related to adaptation technology. Herein, focus will also be on financing MSMEs 
working on innovative solutions that manufacture or service locally suited, decentralised adaptation technologies.  
80. Adaptation projects are considered to have limited bankability due to limited financial returns, lack of linkages with socio-
economic returns, etc. In order to address these challenges this programme has been designed to offer concessional 
debt financing to bankable MSMEs who provide relevant adaptive technologies and services to wider adaptation projects.  
81. In addition to lending through concessional debt, SIDBI intends to bring its expertise of different innovative financial 
instruments for adaptation needs.  
82. Indicative list of adaptation solutions are as detailed below. The adaptation technologies are ever evolving especially 
owing to the increased number of climate induced hazards and alternative measures/technologies will be considered if 
they are deemed fit going forward.  
 
S.N
o. 
Adaptive Measure 
Sectors 
1 
More effective water treatment facilities and a range of other water related 
effort, including recycling and technologies to reduce water 
Water 
2 
Various climate proofing products such as improved roofing and insulation 
Disaster resilience 
3 
Software applications on mobile devices concerning climate related 
services 
Disaster Response 
4 
New construction materials, technologies, and processes as well as new 
approach to design and planning 
Disaster resilience 
5 
Climate-related insurance offerings, from building damage to crop losses 
and cover for perishable goods 
Disaster response 
 
6 
Other financial products from simple loans to help others pay for 
adaptation work, to climate derivatives and investment funds 
Agriculture 
7 
Risk management services 
Agriculture/ Disaster Response 
8 
Weather and other information services 
Agriculture/Disaster response 
9 
Supplying alternate raw materials for those that are at risk from climate 
change  
Disaster Response 
 
83. These indicative technologies are relevant across regions in India as showcased in the table below:  
 
Region 
Hazards 
Risk/Impact  
Adaptation 
Technological 
Interventions  
Coastal Belt  
Cyclones, 
Sea 
water 
intrusion, 
droughts, 
coastal 
floods  
• 
More than 95 per cent of coastal 
Indian districts are vulnerable to 
extreme event hotspots 
• 
Weather 
forecasting 
and 
early warning systems to 
identify the climate related

=== PAGE 43 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 39 
 
 
• 
Human-induced climate change is 
causing more frequent and intense 
cyclones on India's west coast 
• 
Damage to infrastructure  
• 
Impact on Public Health- Loss of 
lives and livelihoods  
• 
Drinking water scarcity  
• 
Impact 
on 
yield/agricultural 
productivity  
• 
Impact 
on 
the 
economy 
for 
mitigating the impact of these 
disasters  
natural hazards in advance 
and to prevent loss in lives 
and livelihood  
• 
Weather 
and 
other 
information services to predict 
natural hazards and to enable 
people to take timely adaptive 
actions  
• 
Software 
application- 
Consumer 
software 
applications and enterprise 
software 
applications 
on 
mobile devices concerning 
climate related services. For 
example; 
Soil 
moisture 
sensors, LiDAR, drones, IoT 
based 
sensors, 
wireless 
mesh network,  
• 
Crop 
breeding 
programs, 
biofertilizers and microbial 
pesticides  
• 
Flood 
mitigation 
and 
relocation,  
• 
Flood and other disaster 
response services, 
• 
Floating agriculture  
• 
Climate-smart precision 
irrigation systems and 
solutions- MSME units to be 
supported for developing and 
commercial scale 
deployment of irrigation 
solutions that reduce water 
usage and enhance the 
resilience of crops to climate 
risks. 
• 
Manufacturing 
of 
raw 
materials  
• 
Manufacturing 
of 
Climate 
innovation related products 
• 
Water Efficient technologies 
to reduce overuse of water in 
drought prone areas such as 
rainwater harvesting, surface 
water storage, bioswales for 
managing stormwater, aquifer 
recharge  
• 
Supplying 
alternative 
raw 
materials for those that are at 
risk from climate change 
• 
Glacier-covering tarpaulins to 
prevent melting of glaciers  
• 
Technologies to cater to the 
impact of climate induced 
migration 
like 
establishing 
temporary 
camps, 
manufacturing of tents, solar 
boats etc  
Himalayan  
Melting of glaciers, 
flash floods, 
cloudbursts, glacial 
lake outbursts, 
landslides  
• 
Damage to infrastructure  
• 
Impact on Public Health- Loss of lives 
and livelihoods  
• 
Water shortage  
• 
Impact on agriculture productivity  
Eastern Belt  
Floods 
• 
Two out of twelve states have highest 
vulnerability to climate change. Eight 
other States have moderate to high 
vulnerability to climate change  
• 
Impact on agricultural productivity  
• 
Impact on Public Health- Loss of lives 
and livelihoods  
• 
Displacement and migration

=== PAGE 44 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 40 
 
 
84. In addition to offering concessional finances, a range of TA activities to determine the feasibility of the adaptive 
measures/product and the associated MSMEs will be carried out. As was the case within mitigation, these activities will 
comprise of assessing the health of MSMEs viability of product in question and assisting the wider FI network in financing 
these interventions.   
 
Component 2 — Technical support for climate change adaptation and mitigation in MSMEs 
  
Output 2.1:  Capacity built and knowledge management improved to support climate change adaptation and mitigation 
in MSMEs and PFIs. Capacities of selected MSMEs and PFIs are enhanced to rapidly scale their business and climate 
impact 
 
85. The programme will extend technical support to MSMEs and PFIs to address knowledge gaps on low carbon and climate 
resilient technologies. MSMEs will also be facilitated to develop bankable business proposals and access finance through 
the Fund of the project.  
86. Capacity building and strengthening of other financial institutions is a continuous process adopted by SIDBI under various 
programmes such as PRSF wherein 15 banks/FIs/NBFCs are empanelled with SIDBI to support financing through 
performance contracting routes. While SIDBI conducts regular knowledge/capacity building programmes for other 
banks/FIs to support them in enhancing their portfolios and to strengthen their capacities to appraise loans for MSMEs, 
focused climate specific capacity building for MSMEs is the need of the hour. Hence, large scale capacity building 
programmes supporting the wider FI ecosystem in India to understand MSME climate financing landscape will be a 
critical part of the TA activities in this programme. Successful implementation of these activities is expected to play a key 
role towards the success of the larger programmes.  
87. The best practices and learning of the programmes will be shared with larger audiences including other MSMEs through 
e-modules on a digital platform. The TA component will support in development of a repository of knowledge and learning 
established under the proposed program in digital form which will be maintained by SIDBI beyond project period and will 
be accessible by all stakeholders. 
 
88. The proposed programme has been designed incorporating and building on learnings acquired by SIDBI over time (as 
showcased in preceding sections). Further, the program will build on the existing knowledge landscape developed by 
SIDBI under its ongoing schemes. 
 
89. The necessity of these activities has been determined through multiple stakeholder conversations with players across 
the climate financing ecosystems including MSMEs, PFIs, local communities etc. Basis their inputs, we have considered 
numerous TA related activities that have been included in our proposal which are designed to address climate concerns 
in the long term. The activities under this component will be carried out by engaging technical support staff/experts. 
 
Activity 2.1.1:  Undertake baseline studies for 500 MSMEs 
90. MSMEs have limited knowledge and understanding of the low carbon and climate resilient technologies and need to be 
persuaded on the potential benefits of adoption of such technologies in terms of energy saving, GHG emission reduction, 
enhanced operational efficiency, long-term monitory benefits, etc. These technologies need assessments will be 
undertaken to: 
• 
Identify the baseline parameters and current consumption of energy, water, etc. 
• 
Identify the applicable low carbon and climate-resilient technologies. 
• 
Demonstrate the savings possibilities in terms of specific energy consumption, GHG emission reductions, cost 
savings, and operational efficiency, etc. 
• 
Encourage MSMEs to adopt/manufacture these low carbon and climate-resilient technologies 
• 
Create an ecosystem for climate related services as part of their routine activity. 
  
91. The purpose of the need assessment exercise has been conceived to address the uncertainties where there is no 
awareness of the baseline and expected environmental impact of technologies to be adopted.  The need assessment 
exercise would enable an MSME to ascertain which climate technology best fits their circumstances.

=== PAGE 45 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 41 
 
 
 
47 Cover Single Pages.cdr (sidbi.in)  
48 Govt. of India. 2010. Enabling Manufacturing Sector to be Competitive through Quality Management Standards and Quality Technology 
Tools (QMS/QTT). Available at: https://msme.gov.in/sites/default/files/QMSQTT10.pdf 
92. To reach out to MSMEs working innovatively in the space of mitigation and adaptation and having potential for large scale 
impact, one of the interventions under this activity will be to hold a challenge fund to select such projects through a 
competitive process. This would also help in building the pipeline of such innovative projects under FMAP. 
93. The technology assessment studies include feasibility and technical studies of specific technologies identified for adoption 
in a particular MSME, energy audits of MSME units, lifecycle analysis of products or services that help the MSMEs to 
assess their current resource and emission footprints, identify the potential low carbon and climate-resilient technologies 
and their benefits. These baseline studies will help in building awareness on the climate technologies and create niche 
market demand for its adoption among the MSMEs.  
• 
These assessments will be built on SIDBI’s previous work on sectoral technology gap mapping of MSME 
clusters47  
• 
The technology need assessment is imperative for those MSMEs in regions of high climate vulnerability prone 
to climate hazards such as droughts, cyclones, floods etc so as to equip them with the knowledge of those 
technologies that can make their respective units resilient. The specific technologies financed under this 
programme will help the MSMEs to equip themselves against the climate hazards that they are most vulnerable 
to.  
94. Activity 2.1.1 will address barriers related to: i) lack of awareness of relevant climate resilient technologies within MSMEs 
and ii) climate related data scarcity in MSMEs.  
Activity 2.1.2: Undertake awareness raising and trainings on climate change adaptation and mitigation for MSMEs and 
Financial Institutions. 
95. This activity will address the skills and capacity gaps in MSMEs, financial institutions in adopting climate technologies, 
climate risk management and climate investments. Awareness raising and training activities will be informed by the results 
of the baseline studies undertaken through Activity 2.1.1 and will be carried out to create awareness and disseminate the 
information about low carbon and climate-resilient technologies, as well as available financing amongst MSMEs. SIDBI 
will design and operate cluster-specific climate technology pilot demonstration interventions to promote demand for 
adoption of climate technologies (low carbon and climate resilient) invoking the neighbourhood theory. SIDBI through its 
regional and branch offices and associated agencies spread across India will also organise promotional activities on 
climate technologies and their co-benefits periodically to generate demand for adoption of climate technologies. These 
activities will target a range of stakeholders including MSMEs, Industry Associations, Banks / FIs, Equipment 
Manufacturers / Suppliers / Vendors, etc. These trainings will be imparted on various topics, including: 
 
MSMEs / Industry associations: Low carbon, water efficient technologies, climate resilient technologies and their life 
cycle benefits. MSME participants will be sensitized through 16 programmes on various technological options. 
 
Banks/FIs:  Banking / MFIs / NBFCs organisations will be trained on Technical and Financial Appraisals of such proposals 
(Low carbon, water efficient technologies, climate resilient), risk mitigation measures, etc. through 8 training programmes. 
 
Equipment Manufacturers / Suppliers / Vendors: Empanelment of at least 200 Manufacturers / Suppliers / Vendors for 
their different Low carbon and water efficient technologies and connecting them with MSMEs/IAs through a minimum of 8 
technology exhibitions. Quality of equipment provided through the project’s activities will be ensured through  appropriate 
QA/QC criteria as per national quality management and technology standards for the MSME sector48 
 
96. In Indian context, the technology or machine supplier provides guarantee/ warranty of equipment along with annual 
maintenance services to MSMEs. The issues related with QA/QC are usually taken care of by MSME. Machines will be 
financed under the proposed project where QA//QC will be ensured at the supplier level. SIDBI and the empanelled PFIs 
will also ensure that the warranty coverage of the equipment is checked at the level of due diligence conducted by 
MSMEs/PFIs. Further, the technology due diligence exercise shall also ensure that only those OEMs with extensive 
experience in after sales services shall be empanelled to provide after sale services for these technologies. The lenders 
are encouraged to check whether the technology to be funded confers to the stands of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
(BIS). The ISI mark is a standards-compliance mark for industrial products in India since 1950. The mark certifies that a

=== PAGE 46 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 42 
 
 
 
49 https://prsf.sidbi.in/user/pages/viewpage/unnatee 
product conforms to an Indian standard (IS) developed by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), the national standards 
body of India. An equivalent international standard would be followed for the imported machines as well.   
 
97. Activity 2.1.2 will address barriers related to: i) lack of awareness of climate technologies and potential sources of climate 
finance; ii) lack of a strong MSME climate technology OEM ecosystem; and iii) lack in understanding of on ground 
practical benefits of climate resilient technologies. As with other TA activities, Activity 2.1.2 will address the need for 
training bank officials, enhancing climate risk assessment processes, and integrating monitoring, ESG, and gender 
frameworks.  
Activity 2.1.3: Implement knowledge management and sharing on climate change adaptation and mitigation for MSMEs 
 
98. 
The learning of the program will be disseminated amongst stakeholders through knowledge products to enable large 
scale capacity building within MSME sector. SIDBI will document the success stories, best practices and the learning 
of adoption of climate change mitigation and adaptation technologies within the MSMEs through case studies, 
documentaries, assessment studies. These multiple knowledge products including case studies, AV documentaries, 
brochures, flyers, etc. will be published and disseminated for wider circulation among MSMEs, Financial institutions, 
policy makers, and other relevant stakeholders. The learning of the programme will also be disseminated through 
workshops, trainings, information campaigns that further contribute to the uptake of low carbon technologies supported 
by the programme. The knowledge products including the reports of baseline studies developed under the  programme  
will be made available for MSME stakeholders. These Knowledge Products will also be made readily available online 
in public domain to ensure wider dissemination.  
  
Output 2.2: Enabling environment for a low-emission and climate-resilient MSME sector. 
 
99. The ecosystem for innovative and customized products and services for building adaptive resilience of communities and 
vulnerable sectors lacks adequate policy support. The programme aims to strengthen MSMEs understanding of the 
climate ecosystem and shall enable large scale adoption of relevant climate technologies through innovative business 
models, products and services.  
One of the key enabling factors for increased adoption of climate technologies is the availability of a clear taxonomy that 
defines ‘what is’ versus ‘what is not’ a relevant climate mitigating/adapting technology.  
In this regard SIDBI’s experience in financing MSMEs specially for mitigation has resulted in development of robust list 
of 900+ technologies which is attached as annexure in the Operations Manual. Similarly, through this programme, one 
of the objectives is to develop a similar list of adaptation technologies and disseminate the same for wider adoption.   
 
Having a robust database of mitigation and adaptation technologies based on the need assessment of specific MSMEs 
will also enable the PFIs to take an informed decision with regards to financing the MSMEs for adopting low carbon and 
climate resilient interventions 
  
Activity 2.2.1:  Develop and implement MSME sectoral adaptation and mitigation benchmarking tools. 
 
100. The programme will contribute to the upgradation and further development of SIDBI’s existing online MSME 
benchmarking tool (earlier developed by SIDBI under one of the GEF project 49 covering database of almost all sectors 
and 800+ project reports). The tool provides a comparison of existing climate mitigation practices and savings potential 
in a particular type of industry. In this regard, through this exercise the tool shall incorporate climate adaptation practices 
as well going forward. Ultimately, the tool will help the MSME industry make informed decisions on adoption of 
appropriate low carbon and climate-resilient climate change adaptation and mitigation technologies. 
101. The Financial Institutions will also be sensitised to use this benchmarking tool to bridge the gap in their understanding 
of applicable climate technologies within the MSME sector. Currently, lack of understanding among the PFIs about the 
mitigation and adaptation technologies applicable for MSMEs is also a deterrent for the funding of MSMEs to uptake 
these technologies by the PFIs.

=== PAGE 47 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 43 
 
 
Activity 2.2.2: Digital Green Credit Rating Tool (DGCRT) includes integration of Green parameters (Energy and 
Environment) with Credit rating tool 
 
102. This activity will support the digitization of an integrated credit rating tool (to be used across national, sub-national and 
local levels) which includes integration of climate parameters (Energy and Environment) into credit rating tool. This tool 
will provide a fair assessment to a FI of a loan applicant’s potential to invest in low carbon and climate-resilient 
technologies. In doing so, the tool will act as a risk mitigation measure for FIs — the higher the rating, the lower the risk. 
Basis our stakeholder conversations, it is clear that PFIs lack the ability to accurately determine the risk associated with 
climate initiatives within the MSME sector. Thus, such an integrated credit tool will reduce information asymmetry for 
PFIs allowing them to make more informed investment decisions. 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
Provide a description of the project/programme implementation structure, outlining legal, contractual, institutional and financial arrangements 
from and between the GCF, the Accredited Entity (AE) and/or the Executing Entity(ies) (EE) or any third parties (if applicable) and 
beneficiaries.  
Provide information on governance arrangements (supervisory boards, consultative groups among others) set to oversee and guide project 
implementation. Provide a composition of the decision-making body and oversight function, particularly for Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) 
proposals.  
Provide information on the financial flows and implementation arrangements (legal and contractual) between the AE and the EE, between the 
EE or any third party and beneficiaries.  For EEs that will administer GCF funds, indicate if a Capacity Assessment has been carried out. 
Where applicable, summarize the results of the assessment. 
Describe the experience and track record of the AE and EEs with respect to the activities (sector and country/region) that they are expected 
to undertake in the proposed project/programme.  
Provide a diagram(s) or organogram(s) that maps such arrangements including the governance structure, legal arrangements, and the flow 
and reflow of funds between entities. 
Implementation Arrangements 
(a) FAA 
The GCF and the Accredited Entity will enter into a single FAA (Loan and Grant), which will reflect the terms and conditions 
described in the Term Sheet and the AMA.  
(b) Executing Entity 
The Accredited Entity will act as an executing entity for all Activities of the Programme.  
(c) Flow of Funds  
Under the FAA, the GCF will make available to the Accredited Entity the GCF Proceeds, in the form of loan and grant, for the 
implementation of the Programme.  The GCF will disburse the GCF Proceeds into the GCF Account pursuant to the Accredited 
Entity’s Requests for Disbursement, subject to fulfillment of applicable conditions precedent to the Disbursements. 
The GCF Reimbursable Funds shall be provided by the GCF to the Accredited Entity pursuant to the key terms and conditions 
set out in the Term Sheet.  
The GCF Non-Reimbursable Funds shall be provided by the GCF to the Accredited Entity pursuant to the key terms and 
conditions set out in the Term Sheet.   
(d) GCF Reimbursable Funds (GCF Loan) 
The Accredited Entity, acting as Executing Entity, will lend the GCF Reimbursable Funds, together with the Co-financing, to the 
MSMEs via two modalities: (i) loans to MSMEs and (ii) refinance/on-lending to PFIs for subsequent on-lending to the MSMEs.  
 
(i) 
Direct Loans 
The Direct Loans (i.e. loans from SIDBI to MSMEs) shall be materially consistent with the key terms and conditions set out in  
the Term Sheet.  
 
(ii) 
Indirect Loans and Sub-Loans

=== PAGE 48 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 44 
 
 
The Indirect Loans (i.e. loans from SIDBI to PFIs) shall be materially consistent with the key terms and conditions set out in  the 
Term Sheet.   
The Sub-Loans (i.e. loans from PFIs to MSMEs) shall be materially consistent with the key terms and conditions set out in  the 
Term Sheet.  
The Accredited Entity, acting as the Executing Entity, will refinance/on-lend the GCF Reimbursable Funds, together with the Co-
financing, to the PFIs.  The Programme will offer refinance against eligible assets created by the empaneled PFIs and originated 
no longer than six months prior to approval from the Accredited Entity for financing in accordance with FAA. In addition, on-
lending to PFIs for creating eligible assets within stipulated time from the date of disbursement shall also be permitted on a case-
by-case basis, given compliance with Eligibility Criteria and Investment Criteria as outlined in the Term Sheet.   
It is proposed to follow a three-step approach. First step is to identify and empanel those eligible PFIs which have interest in 
climate financing and are willing to adopt new systems processes. One of the initial conditions for empanelment would be that 
the PFI should agree to leverage 3X of SIDBI’s financing amount.  
Second step is to provide sensitization and handholding support to these empanelled PFIs as also provide sanction of loan 
assistance at concessional terms along with the term sheet which will specify the terms as per the FMAP programme following 
the requirements set forth in the Operations Manual including but not limited to Eligibility Criteria and Investment Criteria as set 
out in the Operations Manual, Annexure 6 ESMS due-diligence and Annexure 22 climate impact.   The term sheet of the Indirect 
Loan Agreements shall also specify that PFIs would need to create 3X (during the first two years of the programme leverage of 
3X may not be insisted. However, leverage of 3X will be ensured on a programme basis) of the portfolio of new MSME loans 
meeting all the conditions of the term sheet under the programme. PFIs would be required to accept the sanction terms and enter 
into loan documentation with SIDBI.  
The third stage would be disbursement wherein PFI would be required to submit (for Refinance) all the details, copy of 
documentation, etc. to satisfy SIDBI that the conditions stipulated in the term sheet at the time of sanction have been fully 
complied with. The disbursement under on-lending could be considered, upfront, based on a declaration/ commitment by the PFI 
borrower for generating eligible portfolio/ Qualifying Assets within an agreed timeline (maximum upto 120 days from the date of 
respective disbursement) and conforming to the end use as per SIDBI’s stipulation. 
For avoidance of doubt, the GCF is taking the credit risk for its portion of the loan, with full recourse to SIDBI.  SIDBI will take on 
the FX risk arising out of GCF loan and the credit risk of sub-projects under the programme. 
SIDBI will be managing the currency risks through appropriate hedging mechanisms and may charge risk premium to the end 
borrowers 
(e) GCF Non-Reimbursable Funds (GCF Grant) 
The GCF Non-Reimbursable Funds (GCF Grant) will be used by the Accredited Entity, acting as the Executing Entity, in order 
to conduct baseline/feasibility studies, capacity building and awareness, knowledge management, contribute to policy 
initiatives, M&V, impact evaluation. SIDBI will engage services of established firms for respective activities via service contract. 
The GCF Non-Reimbursable Funds shall also cover the expenses of the PMU, which scope includes capacity building and 
monitoring of PFIs, along with the Technical Assistance activities.  
There will be no on-granting of the GCF Non-Reimbursable Funds by the Accredited Entity. 
(f) Eligibility Criteria 
 
The eligibility criteria of all the technologies (mitigation and adaptation) financed under the programme is outlined in the 
Operations Manual.  
(g) Contracting Structure 
For Direct Loans, the Accredited Entity, acting in its capacity as the Executing Entity, will enter into legally binding loan 
agreements with the MSMEs, which will pass down the relevant GCF requirements and obligations to the MSMEs, including 
policy requirements set out in the AMA and FAA, and which shall be based on the key terms and conditions set out in the 
Operations Manual.  
For Indirect Loans, the Accredited Entity, acting in its capacity as the Executing Entity, will enter into legally binding loan 
agreements with the PFIs, which will pass down the relevant GCF requirements and obligations to the PFIs, including policy

=== PAGE 49 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 45 
 
 
requirements set out in the AMA and FAA, and which shall be based on the key terms and conditions set out in the Operations 
Manual  
For Sub-Loans, the PFIs will enter into legally binding loan agreements with the MSMEs, which will pass down the relevant 
GCF requirements and obligations to MSMEs, including policy requirements set out in the AMA and FAA, and which shall be 
based on the key terms and conditions set out in the Operations Manual.  
(h) Host Country 
The host country for the Programme is the Republic of India. 
(i) Programme Management Unit 
 
Given the Pan- India expanse of the programme, it is necessary to have a centralised governance and monitoring for smooth 
implementation of the Programme. For the project’s administration and implementation, SIDBI (Executing Entity) has identified a 
multi-vertical core team which will serve as the Programme Management Unit (PMU).   The PMU, headed by the Project Director 
consists of total 15 experts and shall provide sensitisation / capacity building as well as technical hand holding support to EE and 
the PFIs regarding assessment / compliance of climate related aspects, technical eligibility norms, environment, social due 
diligence as per the management framework, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of the climate aspects and environment, social 
parameters of the sub loans. The PMU shall not be involved in origination, credit due diligence, credit appraisal, KYC, credit 
decision of sub- loans, disbursement of sub- loans, loan documentation, follow-up, monitoring, recovery, accounting, etc. The EE 
and PFIs shall utilise their own staff for all these activities. For better clarification, it may be mentioned that the PMU staff shall 
only be supporting/ providing technical hand holding for additional due diligence/compliances required for climate financing which 
are over and above the normal activities which are required to be undertaken for providing normal MSME loans. The PMU 
resources shall have adequate technical as well as fiduciary and safeguards experience. The E&S aspects will be coordinated 
and managed by an expert who shall be the part of the PMU. He/she shall be supported by an E&S specialist (ESS) dedicated 
to the safeguards function.  
The PMU shall be responsible for the execution of day-to-day activities of the programme and report to the AE about the progress 
of the FMAP. The primary responsibility of the PMU includes providing assistance to the Direct Credit Vertical (for direct lending) 
and NBFC vertical (for indirect lending) for the execution of the component 1. The PMU shall be responsible for providing technical 
assistance to the PFIs in line with the GCF guidelines and the FAA. One of the core responsibilities of the PMU includes the 
capacity building of the PFIs & MSMEs and sensitising the sector about low-emission and climate-resilient technologies. The 
team shall engage in TA activities including capacity building and knowledge management etc as well as overall co-ordination 
for the component 1 (including due diligence aspects) in the initial preparatory and loan disbursement phase. In the Second 
phase i.e. the Loan repayment phase, the team shall be responsible for the monitoring and reporting of climate, environment and 
social aspects as per the M&E log frame, technical hand holding and other necessary engagements with the stakeholder. The 
PMU shall regularly report to the AE (as described in FAA) on the progress of the FMAP programme and also of the Grievances 
or issues related to ESS or gender (if any). 
Composition of PMU is as below: 
 
 
 
 
Project Director
Project 
Manager
Project Co-
Ordinator
Climate Expert 
(2)
Gender Expert
Monitoring & 
Evaluation 
Expert
ESS Expert
Technical Expert 
(2)
Project Engineer 
(2)
Finance Expert
Procurement 
Expert
Office Manager

=== PAGE 50 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 46 
 
 
Loan Approval Process- 
 
103. The Loan Approval Process is a comprehensive three-stage procedure designed to rigorously evaluate loan applications 
and ensure adherence to the stringent criteria. The first stage, Application and Initial Screening, is conducted at the branch 
level by the Relationship Manager. During this phase, applications are meticulously screened for completeness, including 
the submission of mandatory documentation such as climate-related, environmental, and social safeguards documents. 
Incomplete applications are promptly rejected/ hand holded to be completed, as the case may be, while only those deemed 
complete undergo initial screening against the exclusion list criteria. Applications that meet the criteria are forwarded to the 
second stage, Due Diligence, while those that fall under the exclusion list are rejected. The Due Diligence stage is executed 
in parallel at the branch level and involves several crucial assessments. The Processing Officer conducts evaluations related 
to Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements, financial viability, credit due diligence and checking of ESDD checklist. 
Concurrently, the Climate Expert, Technical Expert and ESS expert at the Project Management Unit (PMU) will perform 
climate-related, technical and ESS due diligence to ensure the soundness of the proposed project from a technical and 
climate perspective. In the third stage, technically sound and financially viable applications proceed to the Credit Appraisal 
Memorandum preparation phase. The Processing team comprising of Maker and Checker compiles a comprehensive Credit 
Appraisal Memorandum, which is then presented to the Loan Sanctioning Committee for final evaluation and decision-
making. To maintain transparency and impartiality, no member involved in the Initial Application Screening and Due 
Diligence processes is permitted to be part of the Loan Sanctioning Committee. 
 
Technical Assistance Flow of Funds  
 
 
 
104. GCF will enter into a single Funded Activity Agreement with SIDBI for implementation of grant worth USD 15.6 million 
for technical assistance and  loan worth USD 200 million 
105. The objective of the technical assistance would be to conduct baseline/feasibility studies, capacity building & awareness, 
knowledge management, policy level activities, M&V, impact evaluation and SIDBI will engage services of established 
firms for respective activities. 
106. The grant shall cover the expenses of the experts/staff, Project Management Cost along with the Technical Assistance 
activities.  
 
Experience and track record of SIDBI in implementing climate schemes: 
An assessment of SIDBI’s previous experience in lending to MSMEs in climate financing is detailed out in section B2, further 
scheme specific details is given in this section. SIDBI acts as the Principal Financial Institution dedicated for the Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprise (MSME) sector as well as for coordination of functions of institutions engaged in similar activities. Apart from 
the regular business of financing to MSME units, SIDBI has also developed a special division with a focus on sustainable financing 
for the MSME sector. SIDBI has been associated with different national and international development agencies for the last 15 
years. 
 
 
 
Green Climate Fund (USD 
15.6 million as grant)

=== PAGE 51 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 47 
 
 
 
50 https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/finance/india-faces-10-trillion-funding-gap-in-bid-to-meet-net-zero-pledge-fm-
nirmala-sitharaman/articleshow/106739207.cms?from=mdr 
 
51 https://www.downtoearth.org.in/blog/climate-change/scaling-up-private-finance-is-crucial-to-bridge-funding-gap-for-climate-change-
projects-95042#:~:text=Apart%20from%20the%20staggering%20finance,or%20indirectly%20through%20public%20finance.  
52 ibid 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Explain why the project/programme requires GCF funding to address mitigation or adaptation measures, i.e. Why is the project/programme 
not currently being financed by public and/or private sector? Which market failure is being addressed with GCF funding? Are there any other 
domestic or international sources of financing?  
Explain why the proposed financial instruments were selected in light of the proposed activities and the overall financing package. i.e. What is 
the coherence between activities financed by grants and those financed by reimbursable funds? How were co-financing amounts and prices 
determined? How does the concessionality of the GCF financing compare to that of the co-financing? If applicable, provide a short market 
read on the prevailing of the pricing and/or financial markets for similar projects/programmes. 
Justify why the level of concessionality of the GCF financial instrument(s) is the minimum required to make the investment viable. 
Additionally, how does the financial structure and the proposed pricing fit with the concept of minimum concessionality? Who benefits from 
concessionality?  
In your answer, please consider the risk sharing structure between the public and private sectors, the barriers to investment and the 
indebtedness of the recipient. Please reference relevant annexes, such as the feasibility study, economic analysis or financial analysis when 
appropriate. 
Several reports have highlighted the gaps in climate finance as highlighted below:  
(a). India stares at a "funding gap" of $10.1 trillion to achieve its net zero emissions commitment by 207050 
(b). Uneven distribution of climate finance source and need to leverage private investments - Of the $44 billion raised in climate 
financing in 2020, 40 per cent was funded directly or indirectly through public finance51 
(c). Over-reliance on domestic financing, with nearly 80 per cent of funds raised coming from domestic sources52 
As per the findings of the survey by RBI vide its notification dated July 27, 2022 and also as indicated in RBI’s Report on 
Currency and Finance 2022-23 issued on May 03, 2023, it is observed that the financing flows from the banking sector towards 
climate financing  are presently quite low and there is a need for training, sensitisation and capacity building of the banking 
officials in this regard as also putting in place proper systems and processes towards climate risk assessments and integrating 
suitable framework for M&E, ESG & gender, etc. The report highlights the following:  
(a) Only 24% of respondent banks have set their timelines to achieve carbon neutrality  
(b) Few banks have taken initiative to expedite climate lending 
(c) Only 8/34 respondent banks have separate verticals for Sustainable Finance  
(d). 1 in 3 respondent banks- no internal accountability for managing climate change & sustainability 
(e). Only 53% of respondent banks have an ESG strategy in place 
As highlighted by RBI in their survey, there is a need to bring in transformation in the Indian Banking System to boost climate 
financing by PFIs especially targeted at financing low emission, climate resilience interventions in MSMEs. This programme 
aims to bring in this transformation by building the capacities of PFIs to lend to MSMEs with increased confidence. 
Catalyzing climate financing in the MSME space 
107. Today, green lending towards MSMEs are restricted to a significantly small portion of the larger lending portfolios of 
financial institutions in India – limited to ~1% of the total book size  
108. Indian FIs are reluctant to finance MSMEs in the climate space primarily due to their:  
a. Lack of understanding of tools/mechanism to underwrite the risks associated with deployment of climate 
technologies in the MSME space

=== PAGE 52 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 48 
 
 
b. Inability to create scale – individual MSMEs present very small/disaggregated opportunities – for effective 
adoption of various climate technologies (e.g. RE or EE) 
Thus, highlighting a lack of alternative risk management/underwriting tools and innovative financing instruments that are 
more tailored towards the deployment of climate technologies within an MSME‘s operating environment 
109. Under these circumstances, the landscape has witnessed the rise of medium-sized and smaller NBFCs (including 
focused Green NBFCs) that are dedicatedly financing MSMEs in the climate space. As can be observed from the figure 
above, these NBFCs are playing a critical market making role rather than larger commercial banks or general purpose 
NBFCs 
a. The MSME focused climate lending carried out by these new age BBB rated green NBFCs are primarily 
geared towards electric mobility but with increasing lending towards RE deployment particularly solar rooftop 
as well.  
110. However, these NBFCs, particularly Green focused NBFCs are stuck in a vicious cycle, inhibiting their ability to scale, 
as showcased in the figure below: 
  
111. Consultations with Green NBFCs has revealed the need for an ecosystem enabling environment that offers support 
across the following areas:  
a. Co-lending partnerships with medium/small NBFCs to expand last mile reach 
b. On-lending partnerships with medium/small NBFCs against a defined use of proceeds (e.g., financing 
fleet aggregators) 
c. Partnering with global DFIs to effect the development of a dedicated co-lending infrastructure to aid 
discovery and execution of co-lending deals  
d. Devising a securitization policy to play a market making role for securitization of climate assets all activities 
which unlock financing from larger banks and NBFCs who now start extending debt lines of capital to these 
medium/small NBFCs on the back of the market created by them 
112. SIDBI has actively taken up the role of creating this ecosystem enabling environment to help scale medium-/small-
sized NBFCs with dedicated climate lending towards MSMEs. 
113. Through this programme, SIDBI intends to scale this catalytic effect for medium/small scaled NBFCs across the 
country, by providing

=== PAGE 53 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 49 
 
 
 
53 https://www.sidbi.in/head/uploads/greenpathwayseseries_documents/green-series-de-risking-lending.pdf  
a. requisite concessional lines of credit to finance climate interventions within MSMEs thus creating an MSME 
driven market of climate technologies  
b. further build capacity of these organizations to deploy climate technologies within MSMEs on the back of 
SIDBI’s extensive knowledge, expertise and existing risk management/underwriting tools that can be used to 
effectively finance the Indian MSME sector  
114. For MSMEs, deployment of climate technologies and interventions are primarily a question of their ability to drive long-
term investments with large capital requirements – which most MSMEs in India, even with an understanding of the 
significance and necessity of these technologies, are unable to deploy primarily due to a lack of:  
a. Access to concessional capital at rates lower than traditional market rates (which is usually offered for general 
purpose projects in MSMEs) which makes climate investments unviable – for example, consultations with 
stakeholders across the MSME ecosystem has revealed that in absence of concessional finance, 60% of the 
customers are unlikely to purchase new EE machines and shall continue to resort to purchasing older second-
hand machines which are less efficient but cheaper.   
b. Innovative financing models and business practices that circumvent the need for large CAPEX investments (as 
is the norm with infrastructure projects) or risk guarantees to FIs while providing more attractive norms for 
MSMEs in the form of longer tenors, lower TATs, easier processing cycles, etc.     
c. On a broader sectoral level, a clear understanding of the on-ground, real world benefits of any climate 
technology especially in terms of financial benefits (including a translation of cost savings into potential 
revenue/profits) which makes the use of the technology in question attractive thus activating the 
“Neighbourhood Effect” amongst the wider segments 
115. SIDBI through this programme intends to tackle all of these challenges by creating a range of services through the 
concessional loans it offers, including:  
a. Direct lending to select MSMEs to create showcases of the real-world benefits of deploying climate 
interventions within the MSME landscape and disseminating success stories across the landscape to activate 
the “Neighbourhood Effect” 
b. Leverage wider FI network to create a much larger ecosystem of concessional lending towards MSMEs 
adopting climate technologies by leveraging the catalytic financing offered through the programme as well as 
creating new financial products that are designed specifically to meet the needs of the MSME sector 
c. Enable deployment of innovative facilities such as RESCOs, on-bill financing through DISCOMs, etc. designed 
to create large scale demand amongst MSMEs for climate technologies 
Concessionality of the funding investments:  
• 
To encourage the industry and businesses to choose energy-efficient equipment, which in many cases, is more 
expensive compared to conventional technology. Hence, there is a need to reduce the cost differences by providing 
concessional lending for energy efficient equipment. Although energy-efficient equipment may become economical on 
lifecycle cost basis, equipment buyers are most likely to decide solely based on investment cost, resulting in choosing 
cheaper, conventional non- energy-efficient equipment. Against this background, the Project aims to provide a low 
interest loan to the buyers so that total payment amount for energy efficient equipment (equipment cost and financial 
cost) will break even with the cost of acquiring conventional equipment.  
• 
It is felt that there is a need of 1% to 3% concessionality in the interest rate in order to breakeven the additional cost of 
interest of EE and RE/PV equipment with that of cheaper traditional equipment as well as the additional compliance costs 
pertaining to environment and social management framework. The price difference between conventional and efficient 
machines ranges from 25%-100%. 
• 
Similarly, for  EV there is a need of 3% to 5% concessionality in the interest rate in order to breakeven the additional cost 
of interest of EV with that of cheaper traditional vehicles as well as the additional compliance costs pertaining to 
environment and social management framework. The price difference between conventional and efficient vehicles ranges 
from 40 to 300% depending upon vehicle category53 
• 
In case of adaptation, most Indian companies are yet to completely grasp the implications of climate change and how it 
will affect them. This is particularly true for the Indian MSME sector where managing the immediate challenges of

=== PAGE 54 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 50 
 
 
everyday business remains a higher priority than addressing long term risks. At the same time, the MSME sector is also 
most vulnerable to climate risks since most within the sector lack the financial resources to endure even a single rupture 
in supply or demand, caused for instance by an extreme weather event or a new environmental or climate regulation. 
Concessional loans in this case would motivate the vulnerable MSME units to take up adaptation technologies to enhance 
climate resilience of their units.  
• 
The financial model (Annexure 3 of the Funding Proposal) clearly demonstrates that to ensure the feasibility of the project, 
concessional support is required from GCF to SIDBI to enable SIDBI to extend loan at the low interest to MSMEs.  
• 
Based on Capital Investment for each project ticket size – currently SIDBI is financing these loans from 75%-100% of 
total project cost. The loan amount typically ranges from INR 1 million to INR 500 million. The balance amount has to be 
borne by borrowers (say 0%-25% of the project cost).  
• 
The concessionality in terms of interest rate to MSMEs for their climate proposals with the help of blending other funds 
with GCF Funds is envisaged. The final prevailing concession in interest rate to each borrower would be decided based 
on credit rating of the MSME unit. This blending concept is a proven concept which has been earlier used by SIDBI. 
• 
The Interest Rate shall be calculated as follows: 
a. Determine the Accredited Entity’s average cost of funding at prevailing market rates for similar loans. 
 
b. Determine the blended funding cost for Direct and Indirect Loans provided under this Programme. 
 
 
c. Subtract the blended funding cost from the average market rate cost to determine the Direct and Indirect Loan  
     Concessionality Margin. 
 
d. The concessional interest rate to be charged to the MSMEs shall be the blended funding cost plus any 
     allowable administrative margin, ensuring the Concessionality Margin is passed on. 
 
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Explain how the project/programme will successfully exit once implementation is completed, including how results and benefits 
will continue beyond the project/programme period and how the contribution to paradigm shift will be maintained.  
Include information pertaining to the longer-term ownership, project/programme exit strategy, operations and maintenance of 
investments (e.g. key infrastructure, assets, contractual arrangements). In case of private sector, please describe the GCF’s 
financial exit strategy through Initial Public Offerings, trade sales, etc. 
Provide information on additional actions to be undertaken by public and private sector or civil society as part of the 
project/programme to ensure sustainability of the results attained. 
Creating a market for long-term climate lending to MSMEs  
The programme has been designed to encourage wider Indian FI landscape to increasingly finance climate technologies and 
initiatives within the MSME sector by creating a market for climate lending for MSMEs.  
To do so, the programme shall create an enabling environment that helps FIs understand the Indian MSME sector, particularly 
its risks and the underwriting skills required to finance it effectively. A range of activities including capacity development and 
training, knowledge sharing and awareness building, provision of credit risk assessment tools, etc. will be deployed to help Indian 
FIs understand and manage the risks associated with the Indian MSME landscape. Furthermore, detailed databases containing 
lists of applicable climate-related technologies (mitigation and adaptation) will further ensure that FIs are completely aware of the 
risks and benefits of the climate technologies that they are financing. 
In addition to this enabling environment, the concessional finance offered by the programme towards capitalizing small finance 
banks, NBFCs and MFIs, is expected to create a catalytic effect and potentially leverage upto an additional USD 2,400 million 
(to be ensured on a programme basis). Successful deployment of this large corpus towards climate technologies shall effectively 
showcase the bankability of the climate interventions within the MSME sector, thereby unlocking further climate financing from 
the wider Indian Fis (including large banks and NBFCs) far beyond the lifecycle of the current programme. 
Making climate technologies attractive for MSMEs 
The programme has been designed to tackle the challenges faced by MSMEs in adopting climate technologies, by creating a 
range of services covering:

=== PAGE 55 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 51 
 
 
 
Concessional lending directly to select MSMEs to create showcases of the real-world benefits of deploying climate 
interventions within the MSME landscape and disseminating success stories across the landscape.  
 
Creating new financial products that are designed specifically to meet the needs of the MSME sector and leveraging 
wider FI network to create an ecosystem of concessional lending towards MSMEs adopting climate technologies.  
 
Enable deployment of innovative facilities such as RESCOs, on-bill financing through DISCOMs, etc. designed to 
create large scale demand amongst MSMEs for climate technologies. 
All of which, when deployed together creates an environment which is designed to activate the neighbourhood effect to its 
fullest capacity within the MSME sector, making climate technologies a very attractive tool to benefit and drive revenue 
generation/profitability within the MSME. This ensures that going forward, beyond the life of the programme, the MSME sector 
remains dedicated towards the adoption of climate technologies in the long-term.  
Finally, the activities proposed under this programme, for both financiers as well as MSMEs are designed to be sector and/or 
region agnostic which ensures that it is replicable, at scale within the country. 
Sustainability and Replicability of the programme  
The activities suggested under the programme are designed considering their sustenance beyond programme period and is as 
described below:  
a. The investment in around ~10000 climate loans under the programme would help in mainstreaming these amongst lenders 
for segments otherwise perceived as unviable or highly risky.  Also, concessional loans is being used to trigger a dormant/slow 
moving market of climate technologies especially w.r.t MSMEs. According to several studies the following is required to stir the 
MSMEs to adopt climate technologies: 
• Concessional funding which is possible through innovative financing model  
• Capacity building/training/awareness generation for both the borrowers and lenders  
• Economies of scale where implementation of a technology/ies at a large scale would lead to spill over effect. For 
example: large scale adoption of any technology would also ensure a market for its services  
• Knowledge management and e-modules would address gaps in information asymmetry 
 
Hence, sustainability and replicability will not just be attained by provisioning loans but all the other related activities of this 
programme is aimed at achieving the same. 
 
b. Also, the proposed digital integrated climate credit rating tool as one of policy instruments will further strengthen the credibility 
of MSMEs proactive in their approach towards environment and social aspect thus bringing such activities as part of their 
business priorities. This will also help the PFIs to conduct loan appraisal/ financial appraisal of MSMEs by not just considering 
the credit worthiness aspects but also how the MSMEs are performing in various environmental and social aspects.  
c. The knowledge repository developed during the project implementation will help other stakeholders including FIs and Banks, 
MSMEs etc. for taking decisions for the adoption of such clean and climate technologies and their financing, The knowledge 
management and capacity building activities under the programme will help overcome existing “Risk Averse” nature of MSMEs 
wherein they tend to “follow rather than taking a lead”. The vendor development activity will help creating knowledge about the 
latest available technologies among MSMEs, at the same time help vendors in developing their local network which is quite 
essential for the penetration of technologies in MSMEs.  
d. Training of Banker/FIs will help in appraisal of technical proposals for the proposed areas of interventions will support in 
overcoming of the perceived risk. E-modules and uploading the same will ensure that the modules are readily available for further 
trainings. Further, the banking association such as Indian Bank’s Association (IBA) will also be encouraged to confer trainings 
for all the banks thus ensuring wide scale reach. 
f. The programme will continue financing for climate change mitigation and adaptation for MSME sector beyond project duration 
to support other financial institutions in the country. This will help sustainability and replicability of the programme through entering 
into financing ecosystem of the country. This will also support other Indian financial institutions to develop standard loan products/ 
instruments for MSME climate actions. SIDBI will seek additional resources from market to replenish the financing to fulfil the 
ultimate objective of mainstreaming the climate financing in MSME sector. The pilot projects developed as part of this programme 
will further be mainstreamed to enhance climate financing by banking sector for MSMEs.

=== PAGE 56 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 52 
 
 
 
 
C. FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + 
v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
215.60 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i)  Loans 
200 
13 years 
6 years 
As per termsheet  
(ii) Subordinated  
loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(iii) Equity 
Enter amount 
 
 
Enter % equity return 
(iv) Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable 
grants 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(vi) Grants 
15.6  
 
 
 
(vii) Results-
based payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-
financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
3577 
Options 
Name of 
institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
SIDBI 
Loans 
800 
million USD 
($)  
TBD 
TBD 
pari passu 
NBFCs/PFIs 
Loans 
2400 
million USD 
($)  
TBD 
TBD 
pari passu 
MSMEs 
Equity 
377 
million USD 
($)  
TBD 
TBD 
Options 
Click here to 
enter text. 
Options 
Enter 
amount 
Options  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
(c) Total 
financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
3792.6 
million USD ($)  
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 
words, 
approximately 
0.5 page) 
Please explain if any of the financing parties including the AE would benefit from any type of guarantee 
(e.g. sovereign guarantee, MIGA guarantee).  
Please also explain other contributions such as in-kind contributions including tax exemptions and 
contributions of assets.  
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme (refer to the co-financing 
policy).  
C.2. Financing by component  
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component and output as outlined in section B.3. above and disaggregate by 
source of financing. More than one co-financing institution can fund a single component or output. Provide the summarised cost 
estimates in the table below and the detailed budget plan as annex 4.  
This table should match the one presented in the term sheet and be consistent with information presented in other annexes 
including the detailed budget plan and implementation timetable.

=== PAGE 57 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 53 
 
 
 
 
In case of a multi-country/region programme, specify indicative requested GCF funding amount for each country in annex 17, if 
available. 
Proposed Financing Structure (tentative): 
 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
Options 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
Options 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Options 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name of 
 Institutions 
Component-I 
Concessional 
Term Loans 
Mitigation- 
Output 1.1:  
EE loan 
944 
50 
Loan 
200 
600  
  94 
Loan 
Loan  
Equity 
SIDBI 
NBFCs/PFIs  
MSMEs 
Mitigation- 
Output 1.2:  
RE Loan 
944 
50 
Loan 
200 
600  
  94 
Loan 
Loan  
Equity 
SIDBI 
NBFCs/PFIs  
MSMEs 
Mitigation- 
Output 1.3:  
EV loan 
378 
20 
Loan 
 80 
240  
  38 
Loan 
Loan  
Equity 
SIDBI 
NBFCs/PFIs  
MSMEs 
Adaptation- 
Output 1.4:  
Adaptation 
Loan  
1511 
80 
 Loan 
320 
960  
151 
Loan  
Equity 
SIDBI 
NBFCs/PFIs  
MSMEs 
Component-II 
Technical 
Assistance 
2.1. Capacity 
built, and 
knowledge 
management 
improved to 
support 
climate 
change 
adaptation 
and 
mitigation in 
4.74  
4.74

=== PAGE 58 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 54 
 
 
 
 
MSMEs and 
PFIs. 
Capacities of 
selected 
MSMEs and 
PFIs are 
enhanced to 
rapidly scale 
their 
business 
and climate 
impact 
2.2. Enabling 
environment 
for a low-
emission 
and climate-
resilient 
MSME 
sector 
4.21 
4.21 
 
 
 
 
2.3. 
Monitoring 
and 
Reporting 
2.71 
2.71 
Grant 
 
 
 
 
2.4. 
Operations 
Cost 
0.48 
0.48 
Grant 
 
 
 
Indicative total cost (USD) 
3792.6 
215.6 
3577

=== PAGE 59 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 55 
 
 
 
 
If the project/programme is expected to support capacity building and technology development/transfer, please provide a 
brief description of these activities and quantify the total requested GCF funding amount for these activities, to the extent 
possible 
The programme will support capacity building activities through Component 2 (Output 2.1 and Output 2.2) 
as detailed below:  
Output 2.1: Capacity built and knowledge management improved to support climate change mitigation and 
adaptation in MSMEs and PFIs. Capacities of selected MSMEs and PFIs are enhanced to rapidly scale their 
business and climate impact 
Output 2.2: Enabling environment for a low-emission and climate-resilient MSME sector 
125. The program will extend technical support to MSMEs and PFIs to address knowledge gaps on low carbon 
and climate resilient technologies. MSMEs will also be facilitated to develop bankable business proposals 
and access finance through the Fund of the project. 
  
126. Capacity building and strengthening of other financial institutions is a continuous process adopted by 
SIDBI under various programs such as PRSF wherein 15 banks/FIs/NBFCs are empanelled with SIDBI to 
support 
financing 
through 
performance 
contracting 
routes. 
While 
SIDBI 
conducts 
regular 
knowledge/capacity building programs for other banks/FIs to support them in enhancing their portfolios 
and to strengthen their capacities to appraise loans for MSMEs, focused climate specific capacity building 
for MSMEs is the need of the hour. Hence, large scale capacity building programs supporting the wider FI 
ecosystem in India to understand MSME climate financing landscape will be a critical part of the TA 
activities in this programme. Successful implementation of these activities is expected to play a key role 
towards the success of the larger programme. 
  
127. The best practices and learning of the program will be shared with larger audiences including other MSMEs 
through e-modules on a digital platform. The TA component will support in development of a repository of 
knowledge and learning established under the proposed program in digital form which will be maintained 
by SIDBI beyond project period and will be accessible by all stakeholders. 
 
128. The proposed program has been designed incorporating and building on learnings acquired by SIDBI over 
time (as showcased in preceding sections). Further, the program will build on the existing knowledge 
landscape developed by SIDBI under its ongoing schemes. 
 
129. The necessity of these activities has been determined through multiple stakeholder conversations with 
players across the climate financing ecosystems including MSMEs, PFIs, local communities etc. Basis 
their inputs, we have considered numerous TA related activities that have been included in our proposal 
which are designed to address climate concerns in the long term.

=== PAGE 60 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 56 
D 
 
D. EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Describe the potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result areas. As 
applicable, describe the envisaged project/programme benefits for mitigation and/or adaptation. Provide the intended outcomes for 
mitigation by elaborating on how the project/programme contributes to low-emission sustainable development pathways. Provide 
the intended outcomes for adaptation by elaborating on how the project/programme contributes to increased climate-resilient 
sustainable development. Calculations should be provided as an annex. This should be consistent with section E.3 reporting 
GCF’s core indicators.  
130. The programme will potentially leverage USD 3577 million from public and private sector sources, having a 
mobilization ratio of 1:16.59 towards a dedicated investment in MSME sector for carbon emission reduction and 
promoting MSMEs for accelerating adaptation actions. Of this, 40% will address the adaptation actions and the 
remaining 60% will address mitigation efforts. The monitoring protocol shall describe the approach to obtain, record, 
compile, analyse and document monitoring data, including assumptions, references, activity data, calculation factors, 
quality management procedures and uncertainty, in a transparent manner that enables the reproduction of the 
determination of emissions by the Fund. The monitoring protocol shall also consist of a detailed, complete, and 
transparent documentation of the monitoring methodology for a specific technology.  
Mitigation 
131. Mitigation impact will be achieved through investments at scale in the RE solar, energy efficiency, and low-emission 
transport sectors. In particular, MSME’s in these sectors suffer from several financial and non-financial barriers, 
such as limited access to finance due to high perceived risk, technology and capacity gaps, limited private sector 
involvement, and low awareness of impact potential. 
 
132. The total mitigation impact of the project will be 35.34 million tCO2eq of GHG emissions over equipment lifecycle 
through the adoption of low carbon climate technologies in ~10000 climate loans in MSMEs. A summary of climate 
baseline and additionality assumptions and targeted impact is provided in the table below, with assumptions and 
calculations further detailed in Annexure 22. 
 
GCF Result 
Area 
 
Project 
activity 
 
Methodologies  
 
Analysis of baseline & additionality  
 
Impact (tCO2) 
Lifetime 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation and 
access 
 
Promoting 
renewable 
energy 
generation in 
2352 climate 
loans in 
MSMEs. 
CDM 
Methodology 
AMS-ID  
Baseline: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel power 
energy generation in MSME sectors. 
 
Additionality: The programme will target small to 
medium size solar PV projects (average annual 
installation planned is 16MW, including for use in 
agriculture and manufacturing). 
26.99 million 
tCO2 eq 
(Over 
equipment 
lifetime) 
MRA 2 
Low-emission 
transport 
 
Promoting EV 
in 941 climate 
loans in 
MSMEs. 
 
CDM 
Methodology 
AMS-III C 
Baseline:  
Petrol-powered vehicles operating at current use 
and fuel efficiency levels. 
 
Additionality: 
The project will replace petrol consumption of 
baseline vehicles, resulting in net emission 
reduction.  
2.26 million 
tCO2 eq.  
(Over 
equipment 
lifetime) 
MRA 3 
Building, cities, 
industries, 
appliances 
 
Promoting 
energy efficient 
appliances in 
2352 climate 
loans in 
MSMEs. 
 
CDM 
Methodology 
AMS-II.C  
AMS- II.D 
AMS- III.B 
AMS- III A.N.  
 
 
Baseline: 
Existing factories continue to operate at current 
levels of energy efficiency and consumption. 
 
Additionality: 
Retrofitting various factories in manufacturing 
industry for increased energy efficiency. Increasing 
the efficiency of factory equipment cuts energy use 
and avoids emissions from the local grid supplying 
the factory with electricity.  
 
6.08 million 
tCO2 eq.  
(Over 
equipment 
lifetime)

=== PAGE 61 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 57 
D 
 
 
Adaptation  
133. Adaptation impact will be achieved through increased access to climate resilient energy supply, agriculture, 
livelihoods, water supply, and infrastructure. The programme will impact a total of 10.80 million beneficiaries. 
Additionally, the project will create ~420000 new climate jobs directly related to climate change Mitigation. The 
detailed calculation sheet is provided in the Annexure 22.  
 
Sector 
Hazard 
Climate risk/impact 
Adaptation interventions 
Adaptation impact 
Water-intensive MSME 
sectors. 
 
Major Subsectors 
include: 
• 
Textiles 
• 
Food processing 
• 
Paper production 
• 
Tanneries 
• 
Breweries and soft 
drinks production 
• 
Dairy and dairy 
production 
• 
Steel/ foundry mills 
• 
Canning 
• 
Roller and flour 
mills 
• 
Rubber and plastic 
production 
 
 
 
Reduced 
precipitation during 
the dry season 
and an increased 
trend toward short, 
intense rainfall 
events 
 
References: 
 
• 
IPCC’s AR6 
Report54 
 
• 
Projected 
changes in 
precipitation 
based on the 
IPCC’s CMIP6 
near-term 
data sets55. 
Leads to a decrease in 
ground water levels and 
an increase in the 
occurrence of drought 
events in vulnerable 
areas, including56.  
 
According to a recent 
report57, 39% of the 
portfolio of Indian banks 
is exposed to sectors that 
face high levels of 
operational water risk, 
including agriculture and 
allied activities (13.3%), 
power (6.8%), and basic 
metal and metal products 
(4.8%). 
The project will increase 
water resilience for 
production (manufacturing 
sector) and service delivery 
(service sector) through the 
promotion of water recycling 
technologies, water resilient 
production technologies and 
increased rainwater 
harvesting, while simulates 
promoting better 
management practices to 
monitor and reduce 
freshwater usage. Water-
efficient technologies and 
processes utilized und er the 
project will include soft flow 
machines, PLC in jet dyeing 
machines, zero liquid 
discharge, effluent treatment 
plants, and reverse osmosis 
plants58. These water 
scarcity reduction processes 
will be further supported 
through the implementation 
of efficient wastewater 
treatment measures, 
assisting in the reduction of 
surface water contamination 
and the availability of clean 
water for MSMEs and 
households. 
• 
Water saved 
especially in 
water stress 
and drought 
prone 
regions  
• 
More 
number of 
people in 
these 
regions will 
have access 
to safe 
drinking 
water  
• 
Impact on 
Food 
security  
• 
Improved 
cropping 
pattern by 
using 
weather 
information 
services  
• 
Increased 
resilience of 
vulnerable 
population to 
natural 
hazards  
 
MSMEs supporting 
agriculture and allied 
sectors. 
  
Subsectors include: 
• 
Crop farming 
• 
Agroforestry 
• 
Livestock 
• 
Agro- processing 
• 
Storage operations 
 
Increase in mean 
surface 
temperatures 
 
References: 
 
• 
IPCC SREX 
Report59 
 
• 
Projected 
changes in 
temperature 
Leads to increased 
instances of heat waves 
in vulnerable areas, 
including 61. 
 
Rising temperatures 
threatens crop yields 
through heat stress and 
exacerbates and on-farm 
food spoilage and waste, 
ultimately jeopardizing 
The project will invest in 
MSME enterprises that 
design, develop and 
propagate commercially 
available improved products, 
technologies and techniques 
related to climate resilient 
agriculture and food storage. 
Rollout of appropriate 
climate resilient 
technologies and products 
will be supported by 
 
54 https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGI_Full_Report.pdf  
55 Source: https://interactive-atlas.ipcc.ch/ 
56 Ground Water Yearbook, India 2017-18. http://cgwb.gov.in/Ground-Water/Groundwater%20Year%20Book%202017-18.pdf 
57 NITI Aayog, August 2019. https://www.niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2019-08/CWMI-2.0-latest.pdf  
58 Pg. no. 76: Report on Adaptation and Indian MSMEs by GiZ and SIDBI: https://www.adelphi.de/en/system/files/mediathek/bilder/adelphi-
giz-2012-msme-climate-risk-study.pdf  
59 IPCC, 2012: Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation. A Special Report of Working 
Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. 
Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, and 
New York, NY, USA, 582 pp. Available: https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/03/SREX_Full_Report-1.pdf 
61 IMD, India https://internal.imd.gov.in/section/nhac/dynamic/FAQ_heat_wave.pdf

=== PAGE 62 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 58 
D 
 
 
 
based on the 
IPCC’s CMIP6 
near-term 
data sets60. 
 
food security in rural and 
connected urban areas62. 
  
technical capacity building, 
training and awareness 
raising through the project. 
 
Appropriate intervention 
activities include: 
• 
Drought resistant crop 
varieties 
• 
Improved soil, nutrient 
and pest management 
practices 
• 
Improved feed and 
shelter management 
for livestock 
• 
Precision irrigation 
systems and solutions 
• 
Agroforestry products 
and services 
• 
Weather forecasting 
and early warning 
systems 
 
Reduced 
precipitation during 
the dry season 
and an increased 
trend toward short, 
intense rainfall 
events 
 
References: 
 
• 
IPCC’s AR6 
Report63 
 
• 
Projected 
changes in 
precipitation 
based on the 
IPCC’s CMIP6 
near-term 
data sets64. 
Decline in precipitation 
and rise in temperature 
both contribute to 
agricultural drought in the 
country. 17 states (out of 
the 27 states and UTs) 
reported having more 
than 50% area under 
rain-fed agriculture, 
highlighting inadequate 
coverage by irrigation 
systems in the country65. 
 
Two major crops, wheat 
(74% of the area under 
cultivation) and rice (65% 
of the area under 
cultivation) face 
significant levels of water 
scarcity and vulnerability 
to drought66. 
 
The project will invest in 
enterprises that propagate 
climate resilient agriculture 
products/ services/ 
technologies to save water 
and reduce water stress and 
reduce fertilizer 
consumption (thereby 
reducing water 
contamination).   
 
Appropriate intervention 
activities include: 
• 
Drought resistant crop 
varieties 
• 
Improved soil, nutrient 
and pest management 
practices 
• 
Improved feed and 
shelter management 
for livestock 
• 
Precision irrigation 
systems and solutions 
• 
Agroforestry products 
and services 
• 
Weather forecasting 
and early warning 
systems 
 
Furthermore, afforestation 
and agroforestry can assist 
in reducing risk and damage 
from climate change induced 
flood events. 
 
 
60 Source: https://interactive-atlas.ipcc.ch/ 
62 https://www.pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.1317275111  
63 https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGI_Full_Report.pdf  
64 Source: https://interactive-atlas.ipcc.ch/ 
65 NITI Aayog, August 2019. https://www.niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2019-08/CWMI-2.0-latest.pdf 
66 NITI Aayog, August 2019. https://www.niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2019-08/CWMI-2.0-latest.pdf

=== PAGE 63 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 59 
D 
 
Technical capacity building, 
training and awareness 
raising through the project 
will ensure the appropriate 
adoption and sustainable 
operation of these 
interventions. 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Paradigm shift potential is defined as ‘degree to which the proposed activity can catalyse impact beyond a one-off project or 
programme investment’. In this section, elaborate on the contribution to paradigm shift and how the proposed project/programme 
aims to contribute towards it based on the theory of change described in section B2(a). Also describe how and to what extent the 
project/programme will be able to promote or contribute to paradigm shift through the below.  
Potential for scaling up and replication  
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies  
Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate change adaptation 
strategies and plans  
 
134. The programme will focus on MSME sector which is credit starved particularly in the climate space. The sub-
projects typically will have low investment, and high emission reduction potential. The dedicated credit and 
technical support approach of the programme will result in crowding-in of private funds and unlock the potential 
of investment for climate change projects in MSMEs. The exclusive investment in climate technologies for 
adaptation and mitigation in MSMEs will accelerate industrial decarbonization trajectory of the country through 
(a) New innovations in climate change domain; and (b) Acceleration of the market for climate technologies. 
The capacity building and training of MSMEs / Industry Associations will generate awareness among the 
MSMEs on the need of climate technologies, as well as increase the focus of banks/ FIs on climate financing. 
The support from the programme will unleash climate innovations, and thereby facilitate climate low carbon 
industrialization. The support for business approach for adaptation actions by investing in MSMEs operating in 
the ecosystem of climate adaptation technologies will upscale adaptation actions and build ecosystem for 
adaptation private sector investment in the country. As detailed below, the project's paradigm shift potential is 
anchored in its comprehensive approach to integrating sustainable practices within the MSME sector through 
scalable, replicable, and knowledge-driven initiatives that are supported by robust regulatory frameworks and 
an enabling environment for private sector participation. 
 
Potential for Scaling Up and Replication 
135. The project has potential to scale up its objectives within India's MSME sector by addressing prevalent 
challenges such as energy inefficiency, high GHG emissions, and excessive water use across sub-sectors 
such as manufacturing and services. It will introduce adaptable technologies and practices that are widely 
applicable, while leveraging SIDBI's financial structures (such as concessional loans and technical support 
funds) as scalable and replicable models for broader adoption in similar emerging subsectors and economies. 
The project’s integration of advanced, resource-efficient technologies facilitated by SIDBI’s extensive network 
will lay the basis for widespread technology transfer, ensuring dissemination and adaptation across India’s 
industrial landscape. Furthermore, the project's alignment with national policies and institutional frameworks 
enhances its replicability, with potential for replication being bolstered by a strong emphasis on capacity 
building, data-driven approaches, and demonstration effects. Enhanced partnerships with technology providers 
and policymakers, alongside alignment with global sustainability goals and India’s climate actions, position the 
project to catalyze a broad paradigm shift towards sustainability, attracting widespread support and fostering 
scalable and effective interventions across sectors. Moreover, mobilizing the Indian Banking system towards 
climate financing will trigger the market and more MSMEs will have access to climate finance for adopting 
climate and clean interventions related to mitigation and adaptation. The adoption of large scale climate 
technologies will also boost the market of service providers therefore ensuring that end of sales service for 
these technologies is not a constraint.  
 
Potential for Knowledge Sharing and Learning 
136. The project will leverage SIDBI's network to enhance MSMEs' access to sustainable practices through 
knowledge hubs that adapt global innovations to local needs and collaborative platforms that engage multiple 
stakeholders. It will promote knowledge dissemination by documenting best practices and lessons learnt, which

=== PAGE 64 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 60 
D 
 
will provide scalable templates for energy efficiency, environmental sustainability and climate adaptation in the 
MSME sector. Additionally, the project will link with national and international networks to leverage the latest 
available and innovative technologies. The documentation and dissemination of learnings through various 
platforms and collaborations with international bodies will further the project’s reach and impact, creating a 
blueprint for knowledge sharing that can be emulated in other contexts The integration of capacity-building 
programs and technical support, particularly in energy-efficient technologies and resource management 
practices, will further foster a community of practice that extends beyond the immediate project lifespan. 
Additionally, a robust Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning framework to assess the effectiveness of 
interventions will facilitate real-time strategy adjustments. This comprehensive approach will aim to minimize 
the environmental impact of MSMEs while also bolstering their global competitiveness, aligning with the Green 
Climate Fund’s goals for sustainable, low-emission development. 
 
Contribution to the Creation of an Enabling Environment 
 
137. The project will contribute to creating an enabling environment for sustainable industrial practices, particularly 
in the MSME sector. By aligning with national priorities and frameworks such as India’s NDC targets, the project 
will solidify the institutional and policy groundwork necessary for broad-based adoption of climate technologies. 
Through concessional loans and targeted financial products, the project will build institutional capacity within 
SIDBI and local financial entities to manage climate financing effectively. Market transformation will be fostered 
by demonstrating and promoting the adoption of low-emission technologies, thus catalyzing a broader shift 
toward sustainable practices. This comprehensive approach includes capacity building for MSMEs, fostering 
collaborations among stakeholders, and utilizing robust data for informed decision-making, which supports the 
integration of sustainable development goals. These efforts collectively facilitate scalable and replicable models 
of resource efficiency and emissions reduction, positioning the project as a catalyst for widespread industrial 
and environmental reforms aligned with both national and international climate action objectives. 
 
Contribution to the Regulatory Framework and Policies 
 
National Climate Change Strategies and Priorities targeting MSMEs  
 
138. The program is in line with the regulatory and policy frameworks governing the financial, environment, energy 
conservation and promotion of MSME sectors. Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises Development Act 2006, an 
exclusive legislation for micro, small and medium enterprises states under its Section.9 on Measures for 
promotion and development that the Central Government may, from time to time, for the purposes of facilitating 
the promotion and development and enhancing the competitiveness of micro, small and medium enterprises, 
particularly of the micro and small enterprises, by way of development of skill in the employees, management 
and entrepreneurs, provisioning for technological upgradation, marketing assistance or infrastructure facilities 
and cluster development of such enterprises with a view to strengthening backward and forward linkages, 
specify, by notification, such programmes, guidelines or instructions, as it may deem fit. The Act under 
Section.10 on Credit Facility67 states that the policies and practices in respect of credit to the micro, small and 
medium enterprises shall be progressive, and such as may be specified in the guidelines or instructions issued 
by the Reserve Bank, from time to time, to ensure timely and smooth flow of credit to such enterprises, minimise 
the incidence of sickness among and enhance the competitiveness of such enterprises. 
 
139. Government of India has been implementing overarching framework of National Action Plan on Climate Change 
(NAPCC) with its eight missions and State specific Action Plans on Climate Change targeting climate change 
mitigation and adaptation efforts. Under its National Mission on Energy Efficiency, Government of India is 
implementing Perform, Achieve and Track (PAT) scheme to achieve energy efficiency in selected Designated 
Consumers targeting only major high energy-consuming industries. The Performance Linked Incentive Scheme 
is promoting co-investment model for raising blended capital to finance start-ups for agriculture & rural 
enterprise relevant for farm produce value chain. MSME sector is also one of the priority sectors in national 
financial inclusion68 Strategy of Government of India/ RBI which aims to ensure access to appropriate financial 
products and services needed by vulnerable groups such as weaker sections and low-income groups at an 
affordable cost by mainstream institutional players. The Zero Effect, Zero Defect, Make in India Campaign also 
focuses on to the Small and medium-sized enterprises. In line with ambitious climate targets for 2030 and net-
 
67 https://www.indiacode.nic.in/show-data?actid=AC_CEN_46_77_00002_200627_1517807324919&orderno=10  
68 https://www.ncfe.org.in/images/pdfs/reports/NSFE_20-25_ENG.pdf 79 https://www.industrytransition.org/

=== PAGE 65 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 61 
D 
 
zero pathways for 2070, India has also co-launched Leadership Group for Industry Transition (LeadIT)69 and 
Industry Deep Decarbonization Initiative70 in the last three years to facilitate climate finance and technology 
transfer for industry decarbonization and energy efficiency measures. However, these mainstream schemes 
and programs of the government in areas of energy efficiency and productivity of the industries with emission 
reduction as co-benefits often primarily target large industries. The proposed program will bridge the national 
priorities of enhancing the competitiveness of MSMEs and economy wide emission reduction strategies, by 
focusing on providing low-cost finance and support for adoption of low carbon technologies.   
 
140. Govt. of India has carried out various pilot projects in association with Bilateral / Multilateral agencies including 
the World Bank, UNDP, UNIDO, etc. for enhancement of awareness and capacity building of MSMEs along 
with identification of energy savings potential and implementation challenges. SIDBI is also part of many of 
these projects as a development financial institution working with MSMEs. These projects have been 
successful in demonstrating the potential for GHG emission reductions and resource optimization including 
water, etc. on pilot scale and highlighted the need of customized solutions including technology support 
available at concessional rates for their uptake in MSMEs. The ongoing GCF investments in India are not 
targeted for the needs of MSMEs but may have spillover technology transfer impacts.  
 
141. On adaptation side, the Government of India has adopted various sectoral approaches to address the climate 
vulnerabilities and enhance resilience of communities and the ecosystem. Five out of eight missions under 
NAPCC address sectoral adaptation actions in agriculture, water, forests, Himalayan region, and sustainable 
habitat. For example: The main objective of National Water Mission is the conservation of water, minimising 
wastage and ensuring equitable distribution both across and within states. The private sector including MSME 
is an important partner for achieving the Mission’s objectives, both because it is a major consumer of water 
and because it is an important source of innovation for water efficient processes and technologies. While water 
scarcity and rising water prices already challenge Indian society and business, climate change is likely to put 
additional pressure on water supply. Enhancing water efficiency and sustainably managing water withdrawal 
therefore are key components of a business adaptation strategy. The FMAP programme will target financing 
the MSMEs in water stressed regions to install water efficient technologies in their units so as to reduce their 
dependence on groundwater. Similarly, The National Mission on Strategic Knowledge for Climate Change 
(NMSKCC) seeks to address a number of gaps in existing research in climate change impacts on India. The 
programme will contribute to a better availability of regionalized data on climate impacts on MSMEs, adaptation 
interventions specific to MSMEs, key preconditions for MSMEs to proactively and successfully implement the 
adaptation interventions etc. The National Mission on Sustainable Habitat seeks to strengthen the ability of 
habitats to adapt to climate change by improving the resilience of infrastructure, strengthening disaster 
management and improving warning systems for extreme weather events. The programme aims to finance the 
MSMEs who would either manufacture/supply/service climate resilient infrastructures like amphibious houses, 
climate proofing/insulation products which can enhance the resilience of habitats and building against climate 
hazards. However, there is huge gap in demand and supply of finance to be invested in adaptation actions. 
The gap in adaptation finance also needs to be addressed by engaging private sector investment with 
innovative business models, enterprises, products and services to accelerate adaptation actions in the country 
to reach its required goals. 
 
142. The project will contribute to regulatory framework and policies by demonstrating sustainable practices within 
India's MSME sector. It will provide data to advocate for stringent environmental standards and enhance policy 
through insights gained from implementing advanced technologies focused on energy efficiency, climate house 
gas reduction, and water conservation. These efforts will support India’s commitments under international 
accords like the Paris Agreement and align with national actions plans on climate change, reinforcing the 
regulatory basis for sustainability. Additionally, the project will introduce innovative financing models that 
incentivize adoption of cleaner technologies and serve as examples for institutional frameworks for climate 
finance, ultimately fostering comprehensive integration of environmental considerations into regulatory and 
financial governance. This integration will not only promote a shift towards sustainable development but will 
also ensure enhanced compliance mechanisms and stakeholder involvement in policy development, making 
environmental policies effective and broadly accepted across the industry. Through these multifaceted 
contributions, the project sets a foundational precedent for future sustainability initiatives within the regulatory 
landscape. 
 
 
69 https://www.cleanenergyministerial.org/initiatives-campaigns/industrial-deep-decarbonisation-initiative/  
70 https://www.industrytransition.org/

=== PAGE 66 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 62 
D 
 
Additional national legislation and priorities that the programme supplements  
143. The Energy Conservation (EC) Act, 2001, accommodates productive utilization of energy and its preservation 
for matters associated therewith or incidental thereto. It was instituted by the Parliament in the Fifty-second 
Year of the Republic of India and was enacted on 29th September 2001 but came into practice from 1st march, 
2002.  
 
144. Environment Protection Act, 1986, and as amended thereof, relates to the protection and improvement of the 
human environment and the prevention of hazards to human beings, other living creatures, plants and property. 
The Act is an “umbrella” legislation designed to provide a framework for central government coordination of the 
activities of various central and state authorities established under previous laws. 
 
145. In addition to the above, this programme is also aligned to the resolve of the Government of India to achieve 
the following: 
 
• 
Reach 500GW non-fossil energy capacity by 2030. 
• 
50 per cent of its energy requirements from renewable energy by 2030. 
• 
Reduction of total projected carbon emissions by one billion tonnes from now to 2030. 
• 
Reduction of the carbon intensity of the economy by 45 per cent by 2030, over 2005 levels. 
• 
Achieving the target of net zero emissions by 2070. 
 
146. Further, in the very recent G20 Delhi declaration, the leaders unanimously accepted the recommendation of 
the Sustainable Finance Working Group (SFWG) to scale up climate financing through innovating finance 
models such as blended finance, to leverage private finance and multilateral climate funds. 
 
 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Describe the wider benefits and priorities of the project/programme in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals and provide 
the potential in terms of:  
• 
Environmental co-benefits  
• 
Social co-benefits including health co-benefit 
• 
Economic co-benefits 
• 
Gender-sensitive development benefit 
Sustainable Development 
Goal 
Programme support and expected impact 
No Poverty (SDG-1) 
There are studies to corroborate the fact that investments in climate energy (EE and RE) help in 
the growth of the economy as well as generate jobs 71. The employment generation per Million$ of 
investment in climate energy in India was evaluated to be at 116.1 direct jobs in Energy Efficiency 
and 215 direct jobs in Renewable Energy72. 
Gender Equality (SDG-5) 
It is estimated that the male and female ratio in the above estimated jobs and lives will be equally 
distributed @ 80:20 ratio 73  
Clean water and sanitation 
(SDG-6) 
Water savings through adoption of water efficient technologies in the operations of MSME units 
and water recycling & treatment technologies for ZLD, ETP, RO plant etc. 
Affordable & clean energy 
(SDG-7)  
The project will support financing for clean energy such as solar power initiative that could halve 
energy costs for MSMEs, thereby advancing India towards its net-zero target by 2070.   
Decent Work and economic 
Growth (SDG-8), Industry, 
innovation and infrastructure 
(SDG-9), Sustainable cities 
and communities (SDG-11) 
The proposed project will invest in technology and infrastructure to boost economic growth and 
sustainability in cities by lowering GHG emissions and fossil fuel use. This will clean cities and 
support long-term community sustainability. Additionally, it will help MSMEs in the service sector 
to meet various climate standards like USGBC LEED, BEE Star Rating, TERI GRIHA, IFC Edge, 
Energy Conservation Building Code, Net Zero Energy Buildings etc.          
Sustainable consumption & 
production (SDG 12), 
Climate action (SDG-13)  
The programme follows the concept of “produce more with less consumption”.  
In addition to economic benefits in terms of increased productivity and enhanced product quality, 
the programme activities are also expected to bring other environmental and social co-benefits 
 
71 Max Wei, Shana Patadia, and Daniel M. Kammen. Putting renewables and energy efficiency to work: How many jobs can the clean 
energy industry generate in the US? Energy Policy, 38:919–931, February 2010. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2009.10.044  
72 https://cse.azimpremjiuniversity.edu.in/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Annual_Report_PLFS_2018_19_HL.pdf  
73 Section 2.2.2.1: https://msme.gov.in/sites/default/files/MSME-ANNUAL-REPORT-ENGLISH%202020-21.pdf

=== PAGE 67 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 63 
D 
 
such as improved working conditions, reduce negative health impacts due to reduction in fugitive 
emissions, reduced workplace temperature, etc. Further, the Programme is expected to create 
additional jobs either directly in the MSMEs or allied operations such as manufacturing, 
maintenance and services, etc. thus affecting the livelihood of associated work force and their 
dependents.   
 
Co-benefits: 
• 
Job Creation / Employment opportunities through low-cost climate resilient financial assistance - There 
are studies to corroborate the fact that investments in climate energy (EE and RE) help in the growth of the 
economy as well as generate jobs 74. The employment generation per million$ of investment in climate energy in 
India was evaluated to be at 116.1 direct jobs in Energy Efficiency and 215 direct jobs in Renewable Energy75. 
(1) This Programme will cover ~10000 climate loans in MSMEs and will impact around 10.80 million lives indirectly.  
(2) Partnerships with technical experts / ESCOs to bring in much needed expertise through joint ventures and will 
also create new job avenues in service segment. 
(3) Further policy measures (a) Digital Integrated Climate Credit rating tool; (b) Assessment and recommendation 
for domestic carbon trading scheme for MSME sector, will create more jobs. 
• 
Environmental and climate benefits - Energy efficiency in MSMEs can play a major role in reducing local air 
pollution, particularly outdoor concentrations of pollutants such as sulphur dioxide, particulate matter, unburned 
hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides. In doing so, it can lead to a range of associated economic, environmental and 
health benefits. The Project will enable expected saving of more than 2.75 million MWh energy and ~ 1,458,641 
million litres of water saving through the adoption of improved technologies in MSMEs.  
• 
Better productivity & Quality – Advanced EE machines improves competitiveness, product quality, material 
efficiency and enhance demand in the market. Studies indicate that the value of the productivity and operational 
benefits derived can be up to 2.5 times the value of the energy savings (IEA, 2014b)76. 
• 
Improved bottom line ‘profitability’ - Cost-effective investments in energy efficiency generate energy savings 
that have a direct impact on the profitability of MSMEs and provide net positive earnings in the long run. Energy 
cost reductions can free up resources that can be directed at more productive activities, such as expansion or 
developing new product lines or services. 
• 
Reducing Credit Risk - Energy efficiency can also help mitigate risks for MSMEs. While risk is inherent in all 
business functions and activities, MSMEs are more vulnerable than large companies to changing conditions in 
credit markets, given their limited financial base. MSMEs often face more severe credit conditions than large 
enterprises. Banks may not be as motivated to engage with MSMEs, as the transaction costs of smaller loans are 
proportionately higher. Many banks are uneasy about the risks involved or fail to see quality or resilience in the 
small business segment. At the same time, most MSMEs do not have enough collateral to provide a strong 
alternative repayment source. MSMEs in many countries also pay more per unit of energy than larger companies 
and are hence more vulnerable to price increases. Despite a dip in energy prices across many countries, energy 
costs are increasingly restricting MSME profitability. MSMEs are also more sensitive to energy supply disruptions 
as they may not have back-up systems or on-site generation.  
• 
Future Entrepreneurs ‘Innovation’ - MSMEs are important for climate growth as drivers of eco-innovation and 
key players in emerging climate industries. New and young companies are particularly important for radical climate 
innovations, as they often exploit technological or commercial opportunities that have been neglected by more 
established enterprises or even challenge the business models of existing companies. 
• 
Women Empowerment- Various TA activities including capacity building and financial literacy of women 
workers/civil society representatives will be conducted so that they can become an independent entrepreneur. On 
the other hand, women entrepreneurs will be attracted for credit incentives in terms of Interest Subventions. These 
 
74 Max Wei, Shana Patadia, and Daniel M. Kammen. Putting renewables and energy efficiency to work: How many jobs can the clean 
energy industry generate in the US? Energy Policy, 38:919–931, February 2010. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2009.10.044  
75 https://cse.azimpremjiuniversity.edu.in/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Annual_Report_PLFS_2018_19_HL.pdf 
76  https://c2e2.unepdtu.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2016/03/sme-2015.pdf

=== PAGE 68 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 64 
D 
 
initiatives will help in increasing the existing women employment ratio in MSMEs. As per the GCF gender policy, 
the Project will implement Gender Assessment and Action Plan as per Annexure 8 submitted with the Full Proposal. 
 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups and elaborate how the project/programme 
addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary country and groups, overall income level, etc.). 
Describe how the project/programme addresses the following needs:  
• 
Vulnerability of the country and/or specific vulnerable groups, including gender aspects (for adaptation only) 
• 
Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
• 
Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payments gap that prevents government from addressing 
the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital market) 
• 
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity 
Country Needs 
India is entering a dynamic phase in energy development post-Covid19, according to the India 
Energy Outlook 2021 report. It highlights the imminent surge in appliance, air conditioning, and 
vehicle purchases. Over the next two decades, to meet electricity demand, India must expand 
its power system to the size of the European Union's. Key to economic growth will be 
affordable, clean, and reliable energy. This requires strong policies, technological 
advancements, and increased clean energy investments. Plans include quadrupling renewable 
electricity by 2030, doubling natural gas use, enhancing energy efficiency and infrastructure, 
boosting coal production, and reducing oil import costs77. As the world's fourth-largest climate 
house gas emitter78, India's vulnerability to climate change was emphasized in the 2015 Paris 
pledge, given its large population, agricultural reliance, extensive coastal areas, and fragile 
Himalayan region79. A World Bank study80 suggests that unchecked emission growth could 
impact 600 million people. Urban migration and population increases could significantly raise 
overall emissions, necessitating large investments to mitigate climate change effects like 
altered rainfall, frequent droughts, groundwater depletion, and rising sea levels, which threaten 
agriculture and food security. District-level vulnerability reports81 by the Council on Energy, 
Environment, and Water (CEEW) show that over 80% of India's population resides in districts 
highly susceptible to extreme hydro-meteorological disasters. Southern India is notably 
vulnerable, followed by eastern, western, northern, north-eastern, and central zones. Several 
states face significant risks from floods, droughts, and cyclones.  India has committed to 
reducing emissions intensity by 45% by 2030 from 2005 levels under the Paris Agreement. 
This could lead to 90% emissions increase from 2014 levels by 2030, yet India’s efforts are 
aligned with the global 2°C warming limit, marking it as one of the few countries on track to 
meet its climate targets. Meeting these targets will require an estimated $2.5 trillion 82 , 
spotlighting the investment gap with current climate finance flows significantly below the 
needed $170 billion annually. This underscores the importance of innovative financing and 
technologies in advancing India’s climate goals. 
 
77 https://indiaclimatedialogue.net/2021/02/10/indias-energy-transition-to-play-key-role-in-global-climate-action/  
78 https://www.carbonbrief.org/the-carbon-brief-profile-india  
79 https://dst.gov.in/sites/default/files/Full%20Report%20%281%29.pdf  
80 https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2018/06/28/climate-change-depress-living-standards-india-says-new-world-bank-report  
81 https://www.ceew.in/publications/mapping-climate-change-vulnerability-index-of-india-a-district-level-assessment  
82 https://www.climatepolicyinitiative.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/Landscape-of-Green-Finance-in-India.pdf

=== PAGE 69 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 65 
D 
 
Needs of MSMEs 
Meeting the India’s aspirations related to climate change mitigation and adaptation through it’s 
INDC and NAPCC requires prolonged approach and resource including easy and affordable 
finance to support its efforts. These efforts have been supported by various National and 
International agencies e.g., GEF, CTF, GiZ, ADB, The World Bank, JICA, KfW, AFD etc. by 
means of technical and financial assistance. The focus of these assistance has been diversified 
and not specific to MSMEs only. Further, many of these have focused on Climate Mitigation 
only and do not include Adaptation measures. Further, the cost of funds from these agencies 
is on the higher side presently, making such projects unviable. 
 
Specific needs of MSMEs in terms of Climate Change Mitigation: 
• 
Reduction of Climate house Gas Emissions: MSMEs are significant contributors to 
carbon emissions, particularly the energy-intensive subsectors. There is a critical need to 
adopt low-carbon technologies and improve energy efficiency. 
• 
Technology Upgrade: Many MSMEs use outdated technologies that are less efficient and 
more polluting. Upgrading these technologies is essential for reducing energy consumption 
and associated emissions. 
• 
Access to Climate Financing: MSMEs often face barriers in accessing finance for climate 
upgrades. There is a need for financial products tailored to the unique challenges and risks 
of the MSME sector. 
• 
Capacity Building and Awareness: MSMEs require training and awareness programs on 
the benefits of energy efficiency and information on available technologies and financing 
options. 
• 
Policy Support: Supportive policies and incentives are needed to drive the adoption of 
climate technologies and practices in the MSME sector. 
 
Climate Change Adaptation Needs: 
• 
Risk Assessment and Management: MSMEs need tools and support to assess, manage 
and forecast climate risks, particularly those related to natural hazards like water scarcity, 
floods, and extreme weather events. 
• 
Infrastructure Resilience: Investments are necessary to make infrastructure more 
resilient against climate impacts, which includes upgrading facilities and adopting resilient 
construction practices. 
• 
Diversification of Water Sources: Given the dependency on monsoon rains, there is a 
need for MSMEs to diversify their water sources and increase their storage capacities to 
buffer against droughts and irregular rainfall. 
• 
Enhanced Information Access: MSMEs need better access to climate forecasts and 
market information to make informed decisions regarding crop planting, water use, and 
other critical business operations. 
• 
Community and Ecosystem Resilience: Programs that enhance the overall resilience of 
the communities and ecosystems in which MSMEs operate are crucial. This includes 
protecting local water sources and ecosystems that support agriculture and other MSME 
activities. 
Further MSMEs can contribute towards the manufacturing/servicing of adaptation 
technologies, especially those which are appropriate and locally suited to the climatic 
vulnerable regions of Himalayas, coastal and eastern belt in the sectors of agriculture, water 
resources, disaster risks, agroforestry and services. The tentative list of technologies are 
outlined below: 
• 
Weather forecasting and early warning systems to identify the climate related natural 
hazards in advance and to prevent loss in lives and livelihood  
• 
Software application- Consumer software applications and enterprise software 
applications on mobile devices concerning climate related services.

=== PAGE 70 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 66 
D 
 
• 
Flood and other disaster response services, 
• 
Climate-smart precision irrigation systems and solutions- MSME units to be supported 
for developing and commercial scale deployment of irrigation solutions that reduce 
water usage and enhance the resilience of crops to climate risks. 
• 
Manufacturing of raw materials  
• 
Manufacturing of Climate innovation related products 
• 
Water Efficient technologies to reduce overuse of water in drought prone areas  
• 
Supplying alternative raw materials for those that are at risk from climate change 
• 
Glacier-covering tarpaulins to prevent melting of glaciers  
Technologies to cater to the impact of climate induced migration like establishing temporary 
camps, manufacturing of tents, solar boats etc 
 
Project 
Developers, 
Equipment 
Manufacturer, 
Service 
Providers 
across the 
value chain 
• 
GCF fund of USD 215.6 million as loan and TA grant will potentially leverage USD 3577 
million from SIDBI and private sector sources, hence making a total programme outlay of 
USD 3792.6 million which will be utilized for climate investments in Industry, technology, 
manpower, machines, innovation, infrastructure, services, etc. adding to economic growth 
and will lead to a development of the value chain in the MSME sector in the country.  
• 
This programme will also lead to around 420000 employment generation. 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Please describe how the beneficiary country takes ownership of and implements the funded project/programme. Describe the 
following:  
• 
Existing national climate strategy 
• 
Existing GCF country programme 
• 
Relevance to and alignment with existing policies such as Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), Nationally Appropriate 
Mitigation Actions (NAMAs), and National Adaptation Plans (NAPs) 
• 
NDCs, NAMAs, and NAPs 
• 
Capacity of Accredited Entities or Executing Entities to deliver 
• 
Role of National Designated Authority 
Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders, including indigenous peoples, women and other 
vulnerable groups  
 
147. The Government of India has been implementing overarching framework of National Action Plan on Climate Change 
(NAPCC) with its eight missions and State specific Action Plans on Climate Change targeting climate change 
mitigation and adaptation efforts. Under its National Mission on Energy Efficiency, the Government of India is 
implementing Perform, Achieve and Track (PAT) scheme to achieve energy efficiency in selected Designated 
Consumers targeting only major high energy consuming industries. The Performance Linked Incentive Scheme is 
promoting co-investment model for raising blended capital to finance start-ups for agriculture & rural enterprise 
relevant for farm produce value chain. MSME sector is also one of the priority sectors in national financial inclusion 
Strategy of Government of India/ RBI which aims to ensure access to appropriate financial products and services 
needed by vulnerable groups such as weaker sections and low-income groups at an affordable cost by mainstream 
institutional players. The Zero Effect Zero Defect, Make-in-India Campaign also focuses on to the Small and 
medium-sized enterprises. India’s climate actions, economic development and financial inclusion strategies are 
aligned with the proposed project’s focus on MSME low carbon development pathways and accelerating climate 
adaptation actions. 
 
148. In line with ambitious climate targets for 2030 and net-zero pathways for 2070, India has also co-launched 
Leadership Group for Industry Transition (LeadIT) and Industry Deep Decarbonization Initiative in the last three 
years to facilitate climate finance and technology transfer for industry decarbonization and energy efficiency 
measures. However, these mainstream schemes and programs of the government in areas of energy efficiency 
and productivity of the industries with emission reduction as co-benefits and often primarily targeting large 
industries. The proposed program will bridge the national priorities of enhancing the competitiveness of MSMEs 
and economy wide emission reduction strategies, by focusing on providing low-cost finance and support for adoption 
of low carbon technologies.

=== PAGE 71 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 67 
D 
 
149. The proposed program is a great priority of the NDA and is aligned with several priorities included in India’s NDC83, 
including: i) to put forward and further propagate a healthy and sustainable way of living based on traditions and 
values of conservation and moderation, including through a mass movement for ‘LiFE’– ‘Lifestyle for Environment’ 
as a key to combating climate change; ii) to adopt a climate friendly and a cleaner path than the one followed 
hitherto by others at corresponding level of economic development; iii) to reduce Emissions Intensity of its GDP by 
45 percent by 2030, from 2005 level; iv) to achieve about 50% cumulative electric power installed capacity from 
non-fossil fuel-based energy resources by 2030, with the help of transfer of technology and low-cost international 
finance including from Green Climate Fund (GCF); v) to create an additional carbon sink of 2.5 to 3 billion tonnes 
of CO2 equivalent through additional forest and tree cover by 2030; vi) to better adapt to climate change by 
enhancing investments in development programmes in sectors vulnerable to climate change, particularly 
agriculture, water resources, Himalayan region, coastal regions, health and disaster management; vii) to mobilize 
domestic and new & additional funds from developed countries to implement the above mitigation and adaptation 
actions in view of the resource required and the resource gap; and viii) to build capacities, create domestic 
framework and international architecture for quick diffusion of cutting-edge climate technology in India and for joint 
collaborative R&D for such future technologies. 
 
150. India’s NDC is ambitious, and it is a significant contribution towards achieving the goals of the Paris Agreement. 
Environmentally sustainable, low carbon initiatives are underpinning all key sectors of the Indian economy. This 
update to India’s existing NDC is a step forward towards our long-term goal of reaching net-zero by 2070. To align 
with the NDC aims, the project is focusing on financing clean energy generation sources like solar power capacity 
of around 1.62 MWh/Yr which will not only provide clean energy to MSMEs but also reduce their power bills. 
Currently power generation cost on solar rooftop plants is around INR 3-4 per unit (kWh) which is almost 40-50% 
less than the average cost of conventional power.  
 
151. SIDBI, being the government’s DFI, is consulted on all matters related to the development and financing of MSMEs. 
Therefore, it is uniquely positioned to implement effective measures for the development of MSMEs. The 
organization is also consulted by MoEFCC which is the NDA for GCF on specific matters related to climate financing 
of MSMEs, hence it has a strong say in policy consultation of Government of India. 
 
152. Several stakeholder consultations have taken place in the development of this program to ensure strong country 
ownership. These consultations have resulted in the following points to be considered: 
• 
Accelerating the MSMEs to adopt climate technologies require incentivization and innovative financing models 
that would lead to provisioning loans to MSMEs at concessional rates.  
• 
A consultation conducted with NBFCs has shown an increasing interest among NBFCs in lending to MSMEs for 
adopting climate interventions.  
• 
Continued handholding in the form of technical assistance is required to address the gap of information symmetry 
among MSMEs with regards to climate technologies. 
 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s objectives, including addressing 
existing bottlenecks and/or barriers, and providing the minimum concessionality to ensure the project is viable without crowding out 
private and other public investments. Refer to section B.5 on the justification of GCF funding requested as necessary.  
 
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed project/programme, taking into account the total financing and 
mitigation/ adaptation outcome the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain how this compares to an appropriate 
benchmark. 
 
Please specify the expected economic rate of return based on a comparison of the scenarios with and without the 
project/programme.  
 
Please specify the expected financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support to illustrate the need for GCF funding to 
illustrate overall cost effectiveness. 
 
Please explain how best available technologies and practices have been considered and applied. If applicable, specify the 
innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best practices. 
 
83 Microsoft Word - V5 NDC submission to UNFCCC

=== PAGE 72 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 68 
D 
 
 
153. Funding climate technologies in MSMEs is currently perceived as a risky business. While the MSMEs can borrow 
from other private PFIs, the concessionality provided under this programme will drive the adoption of climate 
technologies in MSMEs. In addition, funding of climate technologies in remote/rural areas in the country is 
particularly challenging. To address this, the programme’s key feature will be reaching MSMEs in rural areas 
through indirect lending through PFIs who have wider presence. Thus, the programme will not crowd out private 
sector investment as it is targeting MSMEs that do not have access to alternative funding. 
 
154. The entire programme is structured by taking learnings from SIDBI’s previous programs related to Renewable 
Energy and Cleaner Production.  
1. The climate finance portfolio of SIDBI grew 16 times in FY 2023 which is expected to lead to energy savings of 
330 GWh per annum, and GHG emission reduction of 0.23 million tCO2 eq per annum in Indian MSMEs. 
2. In FY 2023-2024, financing of MSMEs for RECP has led to Electricity Savings of > 1.3 billion units annually with 
equivalent GHG Emission Reduction of 1.07 million tCO2 eq./Yr. 
3. The list of 900+ mitigation technologies financed by SIDBI through its various programs is attached as annexure. 
Thus, the best available technologies and practices have been considered and applied by using SIDBI’s past 
successes as models for this programme. 
 
Funding multiplier effect and Estimated cost per tCO2e 
155. GCF contribution by way of loan and TA Grant aggregating to USD 215.6 million (USD 200 million as loan, and 
USD 15.6 million as TA Grant) shall have a multiplier effect and leveraging a total investment of USD 3577 million 
in 5 years (SIDBI – USD 800 million; NBFC/PFIs – USD 2400 million; MSME – USD 377 million) for climate 
mitigation and adaptation measures, thereby improving the efficiency and effectiveness of each dollar invested by 
GCF. 
 
Co-financing Ratio of GCF loan to SIDBI’s loan 1:4 
 
Estimated cost per tCO2eq.  
USD 120 million (GCF contribution) / 35.34 million tCO2 eq. = 3.39 USD / tCO2 eq. 
 
Water Savings 
156. Through the programme, there will be substantial water savings through Adaptation measures by MSMEs, 
amounting to ~ 1,458,641 million litres of water (lifetime). 
 
GCF mobilization mechanism 
 
Mobilization Ratio of 1:16.59 
157. Based on current estimations, the GCF fund of USD 215.6 million will help SIDBI to channelize a total investment 
of USD 3577 million for Mitigation and Adaptation measures resulting a mobilization rate of 1:16.59. Co-Financing 
of USD 800 million from SIDBI, USD 2400 million as loan from NBFCs/PFIs and another USD 377 million will be 
mobilized as investments by MSMEs (around 10% will be invested by MSMEs before disbursements of these loans).  
 
158. SIDBI will lend around 20% of the loans directly and another 80% of the loans will be financed indirectly through 
PFIs from the USD 1000 million FMAP facility.  SIDBI will provide technical handholding support to the selected 
Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs)to design and implement climate lending products within their asset 
portfolio, in line with the climate financial instruments of SIDBI. SIDBI will select the PFIs based on their asset 
portfolio and experience. A detailed selection criteria of PFIs is provided in the term sheet and operations manual. 
Further list of PFI, SFBs and NBFCs with whom SIDBI is working is attached as Additional supporting documents 
2.

=== PAGE 73 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 69 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E. LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework to which the project/programme 
contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus 
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross-cutting proposals, select both. 
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
This section of the logical framework is meant to help a project/programme monitor and assess how it contributes to the paradigm shift described in section D.2 above by applying three 
assessment dimensions - scale, replicability, and sustainability.  
 
Accordingly, for each assessment dimension (see the definition per assessment in the accompanying guidance note), describe the current state (baseline) and the potential scenario 
(target) and rate the current state (baseline) by using the three-point-scale rating (low, medium, and high) provided in the guidance note. Also describe how the project/programme will 
contribute to that shift/ transformation under respective assessment dimensions (scale, replicability and sustainability). In doing so, please refer to section B.2(a) (theory of change).   
 
The programme will exclusively focus on MSMEs which have poor credit access, low investment, and high emission reduction potential. The dedicated credit and 
technical support approach of the programme will result in crowding-in of private funds and unlock the potential of investment for climate change projects in MSMEs. 
The exclusive investment in climate friendly Clean Technologies in MSMEs will accelerate industrial decarbonization trajectory of the country through (a) New innovations 
in climate change domain; and (b) Acceleration of the market for climate technologies. The capacity building and training of MSMEs / Industry Associations will increase 
climate risk resilience, as well as increase the focus of banks/ FIs on green financing. The support from the programme to new and young companies and entrepreneurs 
who often exploit technological or commercial opportunities that have been neglected by more established enterprises or even challenge the business models of existing 
companies will unleash green innovations, and thereby facilitate green low carbon industrialization. The support for business approach for adaptation actions by investing 
in MSMEs operating in the ecosystem of climate adaptation technologies will upscale adaptation actions and build ecosystem for adaptation private sector investment 
in the country.

=== PAGE 74 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 70 
 
 
 
 
 
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description) 
Description 
Rating 
 
 
Scale 
According to one study, the 
MSME sector consumes about 
25% of the total energy 
consumed by the industrial 
sector in India, and out of the 
total energy consumed in 
MSME, 15% is electricity 
consumption and 85% is 
thermal energy consumption 
(FMC and GIZ 2018). According 
to the report, the projected 
energy consumption shows a 
steep increase (by more than 
100%) from CO2 equivalent of 
30 million tonnes in 2016-17 to 
72.17 million tonnes in 2029-30 
(FMC and GIZ 2018). To 
overcome this MSMEs in India 
will require to use energy 
efficient technology and reduce 
their dependency on 
conventional energy and go for 
renewable energy generation.  
This will also lead to both 
mitigation and adaptation 
against climate effects.  
 
Low 
On demand side management, MSME’s 
through energy conservation and energy 
efficiency measures can reduce energy 
intake and hence reduce the carbon 
footprint of their operations. On the 
energy supply side, one of the measures 
is that MSMEs will deploy solar rooftops 
and become a source of clean thus 
contributing to overall mitigation and net-
zero efforts of India. 
 
Through this project reduction of ~35 
million tCO2e is envisaged. 
 
Climate funds through PFIs/NBFCs will 
ensure adaptability and blending of 
private resources to the MSME sectors 
will scale up commercial efficiencies and 
transformational impact.   
Replicability 
As per study of International 
Energy Agency, it is indicated 
that technologies are readily 
available today to achieve most 
of the carbon emissions through 
2030.  
It has been recorded that only 
16 percent of MSMEs are being 
Low 
Demonstration effects from the returns 
reaped by early-stage risk capital 
invested in energy efficient technologies 
would help attract more and varied 
capital towards green financing.  
With the launch of FMAP program private 
sector’s appetite for investments in 
The investment by GCF into FMAP will 
unlock a healthy cycle of capital 
mobilisation and scaling-up of impact.  
The knowledge repository developed 
during the project implementation will 
help other stakeholders including FIs and 
Banks, MSMEs etc. for taking decisions 
for replicating the adoption of such clean

=== PAGE 75 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 71 
 
 
 
 
 
financed by the formal banking 
system in India.   
renewable energy generation and use of 
energy efficient technology will increase. 
Paradigm shift can be achieved in terms 
of perception change of private investors. 
Eventually the financing structure can be 
replicated in other sectors – wind energy 
generation, energy efficiency, etc. - 
and/or in other countries facing similar 
climate change challenges. 
and green technologies and their 
financing,   
Successful outcomes demonstrated by 
FMAP investments will draw in additional 
capital from private sector investors into 
MSMEs.  
 
The project will have a high demonstration 
effect. Technical and financial success 
factors will be identified with the project 
team and stakeholders so that the 
project’s financing structure can be scaled 
and/or replicated across other sectors and 
regions. 
Sustainability 
Strong policy support for 
sustainability initiatives and 
transition to a low carbon 
economy, with NDC 
commitments and multiple 
national priority initiatives 
across EV, water, renewable 
energy, among others. 
MSME sector has emerged as 
a highly vibrant and dynamic 
sector of the Indian economy, 
with the share of 30% of GDP 
and 49.8% of total export in 
2019-20. The sector accounts 
for 45% of total industrial 
production, 40% of total exports 
with over 6000 products ranging 
from traditional to high-tech 
items are being manufactured 
by the MSME Sector in addition 
to provide wide range of service  
Low 
It contributes significantly to the 
economic and social development of the 
country by fostering entrepreneurship 
and generating large employment 
opportunities at comparatively lower 
capital cost, next only to agriculture. 
Paradigm shift can be achieved by 
eliminating a range of barriers to low 
carbon and resilient development by 
ensuring that projects are able to 
progress smoothly and expeditiously 
from a concept stage to a sustainable 
investment beyond the end of the GCF 
implementation period. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The fund set up under the programme 
will continue as a dedicated fund for 
climate change mitigation and adaptation 
for MSME sector beyond project duration 
to support other financial institutions in 
the country. This will help sustainability 
and replicability of the programme 
through entering into financing 
ecosystem of the country. This will also 
support other Indian financial institutions 
to develop standard loan products/ 
instruments for MSME climate actions. 
SIDBI will seek additional resources from 
market to replenish the Fund to fulfil the 
ultimate objective of mainstreaming the 
climate financing in MSME sector.  
By demonstrating a replicable and 
adaptable approach to attract private 
sector financing to climate projects, local 
project developers and international 
equity funds may adopt a similar 
approach building on the FMAP 
experience.

=== PAGE 76 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 72 
 
 
 
 
 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and or supplementary) indicators may be selected as 
applicable for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable to measure any given project/programme 
outcomes, project/programme-specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators).  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification (MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final84 
All mitigation result 
areas (Core 1 
indicator) 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Data gathered 
through MIS from 
MSMEs, 
Independent ex-post 
verification at mid 
and end of term 
0 
GHG 
mitigation at 
mid-term  
~7.49 million 
tCO2eq 
(Reduction 
from Solar PV, 
EV and Energy 
Efficiency 
measures 
GHG 
mitigation at 
the end of 
project 
implementation  
~20.93 million 
tCO2eq 
(Reduction 
from Solar PV, 
EV and Energy 
Efficiency 
measures) 
 
Lifetime target 
of GHG 
mitigation  
~35.34 million 
tCO2eq 
(Reduction 
from Solar PV, 
EV and Energy 
Efficiency 
measures) 
For Energy Efficient 
measures 
Emission Factor: 0.608 
tCO2/MWh and Lifespan: 
15 years  
 
For Solar PV  
Emission Factor: 0.81 
tCO2/MWh  
Lifespan: 25 years  
 
For EV-Emission factor for 
baseline vehicle category (g 
CO2/ km) 
2W- 17.37 g CO2/ km 
3W- 40.53 g CO2/ km 
4W- 46.31 g CO2/ km 
Bus Commercial- 548 g 
CO2/ km  
Lifespan for all type of 
vehicle is 15 years 
 
84 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the target value at the end 
of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.

=== PAGE 77 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 73 
 
 
 
 
 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Data gathered 
through MIS from 
MSMEs, 
Independent ex-post 
verification at mid 
and end of term 
0 
Mid-term GHG 
mitigation 
target ~4.94 
million tCO2eq 
(Reduction 
from Solar PV) 
End term GHG 
mitigation 
target ~13.83 
million tCO2eq 
(Reduction 
from Solar PV) 
 
Lifetime target 
for GHG 
mitigation ~ 
26.99 million 
tCO2eq 
(Reduction 
from Solar PV, 
EV and Energy 
Efficiency 
measures) 
For Solar PV  
Emission Factor: 0.81 
tCO2/MWh  
Lifespan: 25 years  
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access 
 
Supplementary 1.3: Installed 
renewable energy capacity 
Data gathered 
through MIS from 
MSMEs, 
Independent ex-post 
verification at mid 
and end of term 
0 
1231 MWp 
Final term 
target 1231 
MW 
 
Lifetime target 
1231 MWp 
The project is envisaged to 
install create 1231 MW of 
solar energy capacity 
distributed among the 11 
sectors by the end of the 6th 
year of the program 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access 
 
Supplementary 1.4: Renewable 
energy generated 
Data gathered 
through MIS from 
MSMEs, 
Independent ex-post 
verification at mid 
and end of term 
0 
Mid-term target 
~6.01 million 
MWh 
End term 
target ~16.83 
million MWh 
 
Lifetime target 
~32.83 million 
MWh 
The project is envisaged to 
generate ~1.65 million MWh 
energy per pear. Lifetime of 
solar plant has been taken 
as 25 years. 
MRA2 Low-emission 
transport 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Telematic data 
gathered through 
MIS from MSMEs, 
Independent ex-post 
verification at mid 
and end of term 
0 
Mid-term target 
~0.64 million 
tCO2eq 
(Reduction 
from EV) 
End term 
target ~1.90 
million tCO2eq 
(Reduction 
from EV) 
 
Lifetime target 
~2.26 million 
tCO2eq 
For EV-Emission factor for 
baseline vehicle category (g 
CO2/ km) 
2W- 17.37 g CO2/ km 
3W- 40.53 g CO2/ km 
4W- 46.31 g CO2/ km 
Bus Commercial- 548 g 
CO2/ km

=== PAGE 78 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 74 
 
 
 
 
 
(Reduction 
from EV) 
Lifespan for all type of 
vehicle is 15 years  
MRA2 Low-emission 
transport 
Supplementary 1.5 Improved 
low-emission vehicle fuel 
economy 
Telematic data 
gathered through 
MIS from MSMEs, 
Independent ex-post 
verification at mid 
and end of term 
0 
Mid-term target 
25,267 million 
megajoule 
energy saving 
End term 
target 74,399 
million 
megajoule 
energy saving 
 
Lifetime target 
88,436 million 
megajoule 
energy saving 
The energy saving numbers 
depends on the actual 
number of vehicle being 
deployed. 
MRA3 Buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances 
 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Data gathered 
through MIS from 
MSMEs,  
Independent ex-post 
verification at mid 
and end of term 
0 
Mid-term target 
~1.90 million 
tCO2eq 
(Reduction 
from EE 
measures) 
End term 
target ~5.18 
million tCO2eq 
(Reduction 
from EE 
measures) 
 
Lifetime target 
~6.08 million 
tCO2eq 
(Reduction 
from EE 
measures) 
For Energy Efficient 
measures 
Emission Factor: 0.608 
tCO2/MWh and Lifespan: 
15 years  
MRA3 Buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances 
 
Supplementary 1.1: Annual 
energy savings 
Data gathered 
through MIS from 
MSMEs,  
Independent ex-post 
verification at mid 
and end of term 
0 
Mid-term target 
521,989 MWh 
annual energy 
saving  
 
Final term 
target 656,334 
MWh annual 
energy saving  
 
Lifetime target 
667,120 MWh 
annual energy 
saving  
Total 667,120 MWh annual 
energy saving from EE 
interventions is envisaged.  
 
Lifetime of 15 years have 
been considered.  
MRA3 Buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances 
Core 3: Value of physical assets 
made more resilient to the 
effects of climate change and/or 
Data gathered 
through MIS from 
MSMEs,  
Independent ex-post 
0 
Mid-term target 
USD million 
850 provided 
as loan to 
Final target 
USD million 
850 provided 
as loan to 
The project envisaged to 
provide USD million 850 to 
as loan to MSMEs create 
climate resilient

=== PAGE 79 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more able to reduce GHG 
emissions 
verification at mid 
and end of term 
MSMEs for 
climate 
resilient 
machineries/ap
pliances  
MSMEs for 
climate 
resilient 
machineries/ap
pliances 
 
Life time target 
USD Million 
850 provided 
as loan to 
MSMEs for 
climate 
resilient 
machineries/ap
pliances 
assets/machineries/applian
ces to reduce GHG 
emissions 
All adaptation result 
areas (Core 2) 
Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached 
Data gathered 
through MIS from 
MSMEs,  
Independent ex-post 
verification at mid 
and end of term 
0 
Mid term target 
(Indirect):  
Total: 
3,241,004 
M: 2,592,804 
F: 648,200 
Final term 
target 
(Indirect):  
Total: 
10,803,348    
M: 8,642,679 
F: 2,160,669 
 
Life time target 
(Indirect):  
Total: 
10,803,348    
M: 8,642,679 
F: 2,160,669 
Indirect: 10,803,348   
The assumption is different 
for different types of 
technology and is based on 
the impact that the 
technology creates to 
increase the resilience of 
the communities. 
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities 
 
Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached 
Data gathered 
through MIS from 
MSMEs,  
Independent ex-post 
verification at mid 
and end of term 
0 
Mid term target 
(Indirect):  
Total: 
3,241,004 
M: 2,592,804 
F: 648,200 
Final term 
target 
(Indirect):  
Total: 
10,803,348    
M: 8,642,679 
F: 2,160,669 
 
The program is envisaged 
to provide support to 
indirect beneficiaries only. 
The assumption is different 
for different types of 
technology and is based on 
the impact that the 
technology creates to

=== PAGE 80 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 76 
 
 
 
 
 
Lifetime target 
(Indirect):  
Total: 
10,803,348    
M: 8,642,679 
F: 2,160,669 
increase the resilience of 
the communities. 
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities 
 
Supplementary 2.5: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) 
adopting innovations that 
stregthen climate change 
resilience 
Data gathered 
through MIS from 
MSMEs,  
Independent ex-post 
verification at mid 
and end of term 
0 
Mid term target 
(Indirect):  
Total: 6,495 
M: 5,196 
F: 1,299 
Final term 
target 
(Indirect):  
Total: 21,653 
M: 17,323 
F: 4,330 
 
Lifetime 
(Indirect):  
Total: 21,653 
M: 17,323 
F: 4,330 
A total of 21,653 
beneficiaries will be 
impacted through creation 
of 231 innovative 
technologies during its 
project period. These 
innovative products will be 
context specific and locally 
suited and would be used 
for adaptation 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached 
Data gathered 
through MIS from 
MSMEs,  
Independent ex-post 
verification at mid 
and end of term 
0 
Mid term target 
(Indirect):  
Total:  
2,992,893 
M: 2,394,315 
F: 598,578 
Final term 
target 
(Indirect):  
Total: 
9,976,310 
M: 7,981,048 
F: 1,995,262 
 
Life time target 
(Indirect):  
Total: 
9,976,310 
M: 7,981,048 
F: 1,995,262 
The assumption is different 
for different types of 
technology and is based on 
the impact that the 
technology creates to 
increase the resilience of 
the communities. 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
 
Supplementary 2.2: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) with 
improved food security 
Data gathered 
through MIS from 
MSMEs,  
Independent ex-post 
verification at mid 
and end of term 
0 
Mid term target 
(Indirect):  
Total:  
170,090 
M: 136,072 
F: 34,018 
Final term 
target 
(Indirect):  
Total: 566,967 
M: 453,574 
F: 113,393 
Introduction of pack houses 
will insure less post harvest 
food loss and will increase 
food security amongst the 
communities.

=== PAGE 81 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 77 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Life time target 
(Indirect):  
Total: 566,967 
M: 453,574 
F: 113,393 
 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
 
Supplementary 2.3: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) with 
more climate-resilient water 
security 
Data gathered 
through MIS from 
MSMEs,  
Independent ex-post 
verification at mid 
and end of term 
0 
Mid term target 
(Indirect):  
Total:  
2,822,803 
M: 2,258,242F: 
564,561 
Final term 
target 
(Indirect):  
9,409,343 
M:7,527,475 
F: 1,881,868  
 
Lifetime target 
(Indirect):  
9,409,343 
M:7,527,475 
F: 1,881,868 
Introduction 
of 
water 
efficient 
technologies 
in 
water stress regions will 
insure less extraction of 
fresh water hence making 
the communities resilient. 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
 
Supplementary 2.4: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) 
covered by new or improved 
early warning systems 
Data gathered 
through MIS from 
MSMEs,  
Independent ex-post 
verification at mid 
and end of term 
0 
Mid term target 
(Indirect):  
Total:  
240,487 
M: 192,390 
F: 48,097  
Final term 
target 
(Indirect):  
Total:  
801,623 
M: 641,299 
F: 160,324  
 
Life time target 
(Indirect):  
Total:  
801,623 
M: 641,299 
F: 160,324 
The 
assumption 
is 
that 
these 
technologies 
will 
increase the resilience of the 
MSMEs 
and 
related 
beneficiaries 
towards 
predicting 
climatic 
uncertainties

=== PAGE 82 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 78 
 
 
 
 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome against the 
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis-à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the 
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section. 
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for current 
state (baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
Core Indicator 5: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission climate-
resilient development 
pathways in a country-
driven manner 
According to a report, 
total energy consumed 
in MSME, 15% is 
electricity consumption 
and 85% is thermal 
energy consumption. 
The projected energy 
consumption shows a 
steep increase (by more 
than 100%) from CO2 
equivalent of 30 million 
tonnes in 2016-17 to 
72.17 million tonnes in 
2029-30 (FMC and GIZ 
2018). To overcome this 
MSMEs in India will 
require to use energy 
efficient technology and 
reduce their dependency 
on conventional energy 
and go for renewable 
energy generation.  
This will also lead to 
both mitigation and 
adaptation against 
climate effects.  
 
low 
>500 MSMEs, specially 
manufacturing as well as 
solution / service 
provider addressing 
adoption of clean 
technologies towards 
emission reduction and 
providing solutions to 
enhance climate 
resilience of 
communities.  
FMAP will set up a 
dedicated Mitigation and 
Adaptation Fund 
targeting the reduction 
of carbon emissions and 
enhancing the resilience 
to the impacts of climate 
change, in line with the 
requirements of MSMEs 
based on its past 
experience of working 
with MSMEs.  
A total reduction of ~34 
million tco2 is envisaged 
to be attained through 
this project  
National level (one 
country) 
Core Indicator 6: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to technology 
Energy efficient 
technologies exist for 
certain use cases in 
industry and 
low 
Market for energy 
efficient technologies 
and sustainable 
transport through EV. 
SIDBI will identify the 
MSMEs which bring 
innovative technologies 
and business models to 
National level (one 
country)

=== PAGE 83 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 79 
 
 
 
 
 
deployment, 
dissemination, 
development or transfer 
and innovation 
transportation, novel 
technologies are needed 
for use cases such as 
replacement of energy 
efficient machinery 
process in line in 
industries. 
This will involve not only 
increased adoption of 
existing technologies, 
but continuous 
innovation (and 
investments) in research 
and development across 
the sector. 
market, supporting them 
in business building and 
scale-up by leveraging 
its deep networks across 
innovation, industry and 
policy ecosystems. 
 
Core indicator 7: Degree 
to which GCF 
Investments contribute 
to market 
development/transforma
tion at the sectoral, 
local, or national level 
India has immense 
potential to leapfrog its 
development towards 
energy efficient and low-
carbon pathways. 
low 
Strong financial markets 
offering a range of 
products to support 
investment of capital 
across the sector, which 
increases the 
penetration of low-
carbon and climate 
resilient technologies. 
This should in turn, put 
downward pressure on 
the cost curve and make 
these technologies even 
more attractive 
compared to traditional 
alternatives. 
FMAP will provide 
financing to MSMEs 
adopting energy efficient 
solutions which will 
support scaling up of 
low-carbon and climate 
friendly technologies 
which have the potential 
to be replicated to 
further scale-up the 
market impact.  
National level (one 
country) 
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards 
SIDBI will perform the 
duty of Accredited Entity 
as well as the Executing 
Entity for the proposed 
project. SIDBI is the 
principal development 
financial institution set 
up by Government of 
India under an Act of 
Parliament in 1990 with 
the mandate of 
promotion, financing, 
and development, of 
MSMEs and co-
ordination with other 
low 
Knowledge of financing 
products and best 
practices within each 
subsector are 
developed. Increased 
capacity among financial 
institutions to provide 
customized financing 
solutions to companies/ 
customers in the space 
at attractive terms. 
Financiers provide 
knowledge and 
learnings to support 
measure outcomes and 
FMAP will provide 
support for EE, EV and 
green technologies to 
the MSMEs that have 
the potential to be 
replicated. SIDBI will 
have monitoring and 
evaluation systems in 
place to measure the 
outcomes and impacts 
of these interventions 
and also identify lessons 
learned, it will also 
participate in forums of 
knowledge sharing to 
National level (one 
country)

=== PAGE 84 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 80 
 
 
 
 
 
entities engaged in 
similar activities  
 
impacts of their 
interventions. 
influence market 
behaviour, regulations 
and policy in the space. 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) 
This section should list out project/programme-specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1-E.4). List down tailored indicators 
to monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (outcomes/outputs).  AEs have the freedom to decide against which outcomes they would like to set 
project/programme specific indicators. If any co-benefits are identified in sections B.2(a)(b), and D.3, AEs are encouraged to add and monitor co-benefit indicators under the 
“Project/programme co-benefit indicators” section in table below. Add rows as needed. 
Please number each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numbering for outputs under this section should 
correspond to the output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan). 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
 
Project/programme 
specific Indicator 
 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
Outcome 1: Adoption 
of low-emission climate-
resilient technologies 
across MSME sectors 
No. of loan disbursed/ 
sanctioned to MSMEs 
and they have 
adopted the proposed 
technologies 
MIS/MPR and M&V 
through visits by 
RMs/M&E 
0 
2963 MSMEs 
9876 MSMEs 
Energy efficient 
technologies exist for 
certain use cases in 
industry and 
transportation, novel 
technologies are needed 
for use cases such as 
replacement of energy 
efficient machinery 
process in line in 
industries. 
Outcome 2:  
Strengthened finance 
and market 
environment for 
upscaling 
commercialised 
adaptation and 
No. of loan disbursed/ 
sanctioned to MSMEs 
and they have 
adopted the proposed 
technologies 
MIS/MPR and M&V 
through visits by 
RMs/M&E 
0 
2963 MSMEs 
9876 MSMEs 
Energy efficient 
technologies exist for 
certain use cases in 
industry and 
transportation, novel 
technologies are needed 
for use cases such as 
replacement of energy 
Number of electric 
vehicles financed 
MIS/MPR and M&V 
through visits by 
RMs/M&E 
0 
41974 
139915

=== PAGE 85 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 81 
 
 
 
 
 
mitigation technologies 
through MSMEs  
Number of solar 
projects financed 
MIS/MPR and M&V 
through visits by 
RMs/M&E 
0 
370 
1231 
efficient machinery 
process in line in 
industries. 
Volume of (USD 
millions) financing 
approved and 
disbursed to MSMEs, 
disaggregated by 
targeted sectors 
MIS/MPR and M&V 
through visits by 
RMs/M&E 
0 
EE- USD 255 
million 
PV- USD 255 
Million 
EV- USD 102 
million 
EE- USD  850 
million 
PV- USD 850  
million 
EV- USD 340 
million 
No. of FIs selected 
and participating in 
the program 
MIS/MPR and M&V 
through visits by 
RMs/M&E 
0 
8 
25 
The program will target 
empanelling 25 numbers 
of PFIs. 
No. of loans 
disbursed by FIs, 
disaggregated by 
sectors 
MIS/MPR and M&V 
through visits by 
RMs/M&E 
0 
EE- 706 
PV- 706 
EV- 282 
EE- 2352 
PV- 2352 
EV- 941 
80% of the program 
financing will be through 
PFIs 
Output 1.1:  MSME 
mitigation technologies 
financed and 
implemented. Increased 
access to mitigation 
finance for MSMEs 
No. of loan 
disbursed/ 
sanctioned to 
MSMEs  
MIS/MPR 
 
0 
1693 MSMEs 
5645 MSMEs 
Project envisaged to 
support a total of 5,645 
mitigation projects in the 
following mitigation areas: 
EE- 2352 
EV- 941 
Solar PV- 2352 
Output 1.2: MSME 
adaptation technologies 
financed and 
implemented. Increased 
access to adaptation 
finance for MSMEs 
No. of MSMEs 
adopted the 
proposed 
technologies 
MIS/MPR and M&V 
through visits by 
RMs/M&E 
0 
1269 MSMEs 
4232 MSMEs 
The project is envisaged 
to support 4232 
adaptation projects in the 
area such as Water, 
wastewater, cold supply 
chain, Food Processing 
including sea food, 
fisheries, beverages, 
juice, Solar Boats, 
Others) 
Outcome 3: Improved 
resilience of the most 
vulnerable populations, 
reduced GHG 
No. of MSMEs 
adopted the proposed 
technologies 
MIS/MPR and M&V 
through visits by 
RMs/M&E  
0 
2962 MSMEs 
9876 MSMEs 
Energy efficient 
technologies exist for 
certain use cases in 
industry and

=== PAGE 86 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 82 
 
 
 
 
 
emissions in the MSME 
sector of India  
transportation, novel 
technologies are needed 
for use cases such as 
replacement of energy 
efficient machinery 
process in line in 
industries. 
Output 2.1: Capacity 
built, and knowledge 
management improved 
to support climate 
change adaptation and 
mitigation in MSMEs 
and PFIs. Capacities of 
selected MSMEs and 
PFIs are enhanced to 
rapidly scale their 
business and climate 
impact. 
  
No. of trainings 
organized 
MIS/MPR, training 
reports 
0 
48 Trainings 
160 Trainings 
SIDBI will build capacities 
of the MSMEs/PFIs. 
Further, various training 
on climate change 
mitigation and adaptation 
will be carried out for the 
prospective borrower 
from the PFI side.  
No. of policy 
frameworks to 
support green 
financing  developed 
 
Integrated Digital Green 
Credit Rating Tool 
(DGCRT) 
0 
1 
1 
An established firm will 
be hired to develop an 
Integrated Digital Green 
Credit Rating Tool 
(DGCRT) consisting of 
Green parameters 
(Energy and 
Environment). The tool 
will be implemented for 
five years with a cost 
estimate of USD 
120000/year. 
Output 2.2: Enabling 
environment for a low-
emission and climate-
resilient MSME sector 
No. of units adopted 
the proposed energy 
efficient technologies 
MIS/MPR 
0 
705 loans 
1647 loans 
Strengthening 
environmental regulations 
and standards can drive 
demand for greener 
products and services 
from MSMEs while 
improving overall 
environmental 
performance. Gradually 
tightening emissions 
standards, mandating 
energy audits, and 
No. of units adopted 
Electric vehicle  
MIS/MPR 
0 
282 loans 
659 loans 
No. of units adopted 
Solar power (PV) 
generation option  
MIS/MPR 
0 
705 loans 
1647 loans

=== PAGE 87 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 83 
 
 
 
 
 
introducing eco-labelling 
schemes are some ways 
to shift MSME behaviour 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators 
Co-benefit 1:  Improved 
water supplies 
No of beneficiary 
having access to 
water efficient 
technologies  
MIS/MPR and M&V 
through visits by 
RMs/M&E 
0 
2,822,802 
9,409,343 
Deploying water efficient 
technologies in MSMEs 
located in water stress 
regions will save water 
and increase number of 
people residing in the 
periphery of the unit will 
have access to improved 
water supply.  
Co-benefit 2:  
Enhanced job creation 
assistance  
 
No. of direct jobs 
created 
MIS/MPR and M&V 
through visits by 
RMs/M&E 
0 
126,405 Jobs 
421,350 Jobs 
The employment 
generation per million $ of 
investment in green 
energy in India was 
evaluated to be at 116.1 
direct jobs in Energy 
Efficiency and 215 direct 
jobs in Renewable 
Energy. 
Co-benefit 3: Greater 
gender equality in 
MSMEs 
No. of women owned 
MSMEs 
MIS/MPR and M&V 
through visits by 
RMs/M&E 
0 
150 units 
500 units 
The program will benefit 
overall 5% of MSMEs to 
be financed under this 
program. 
Co-benefit 4:  Improved 
productivity and 
profitability 
Assessment of 
productivity and 
operational benefits  
MIS/MPR and M&V 
through visits by 
RMs/M&E 
0 
USD  
26.17 Million 
USD  
87.24 Million 
Studies indicate that the 
value of the productivity 
and operational benefits 
derived can be up to 2.5 
times the value of the 
energy savings (IEA, 
2014b) 
Co-benefit 5:  Reduced 
resource use and 
pollution  
Water saving  
MIS/MPR and M&V 
through visits by 
RMs/M&E 
0 
0.43 million 
litre 
1.45 million 
litre 
Deploying water efficient 
technologies in MSMEs 
located in water stress 
regions will save water 
and increase number of

=== PAGE 88 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 84 
 
 
 
 
 
people residing in the 
periphery of the unit will 
have access to improved 
water supply.  
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5 implementation timetable. Add rows as 
needed. 
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of activities to the related outputs provided above in section E.5. Similarly, please number sub-activities as 
shown below to associate to the related activity. 
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
Activity 1.1.1: Establish a loan 
instrument to provide concessional 
loans for MSME mitigation needs.  
FMAP aims to provide support to 
MSMEs through concessional loan for 
mitigation needs  
Sub-activity 1.1.1.1: Carry out detailed 
technical assessment of potential 
MSME units 
Detailed technical assessment  and 
credit risk rating evaluation of around 
5957 potential MSME units 
Sub-activity 1.1.1.2: Carry out credit 
risk rating evaluation of potential 
MSME units 
Detailed technical assessment  and 
credit risk rating evaluation of around 
5957 potential MSME units  
Sub-activity 1.1.1.3: Selection of 
MSMEs according to Eligibility Criteria 
as well as technical and risk 
assessment results 
Due diligence at GCFV using existing 
credit rating tool and creation of one 
due diligence checklist, which will be 
applicable in all the cases  
Sub-activity 1.1.1.4: Incentivize the 
units to create green MSME 
ambassadors and a group of 
champion units 
05 number of green MSME 
ambassadors and group of champion 
units created per year 
Sub-activity 1.1.1.5: Online loan 
application and speedy appraisal 
process setup 
Creation of one online loan application 
and speedy appraisal process 
Sub-activity 1.1.1.6: End to end 
technical and handholding support to 
MSMEs, PFIs, NBFCs, and other 
stakeholders 
End to end technical and handholding 
support to 263 MSMEs, PFIs, NBFCs, 
and other stakeholders 
Sub-activity 1.1.1.7: Facilitate 
networking of technology providers 
Facilitate around 20 networking of 
technology providers 
 
Activity 1.2.1: Establish a loan 
instrument to provide concessional 
loans for MSME adaptation needs. 
FMAP aims to provide support to 
MSMEs through concessional loan for 
adaptation needs 
Sub-activity 1.2.1.1: Carry out detailed 
technical assessment of proposal of 
potential MSMEs 
Detailed technical assessment and  
credit risk rating evaluation of around 
3971 potential MSME units

=== PAGE 89 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 85 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub-activity 1.2.1.2: Carry out credit 
risk rating evaluation of potential 
MSMEs 
Detailed technical assessment and  
credit risk rating evaluation of around 
3971 potential MSME units 
 
Sub-activity 1.2.1.3: Selection of 
MSMEs according to Eligibility Criteria 
as well as technical and risk 
assessment results 
Due diligence at GCFV using existing 
credit rating tool and creation of one 
due diligence checklist, which will be 
applicable in all the cases  
Sub-activity 1.2.1.4: Incentivize the 
units to create green MSME 
ambassadors and a group of 
champion units 
05 numbers green MSME 
ambassadors and group of champion 
units created per year 
Sub-activity 1.2.1.5: Online loan 
application and speedy appraisal 
process setup 
Creation of one online loan application 
and speedy appraisal process 
Sub-activity 1.2.1.6: End to end 
technical and handholding support to 
MSMEs, PFIs, NBFCs, and other 
stakeholders, facilitate networking of 
technology providers. 
End to end technical and handholding 
support to 262 MSMEs, PFIs, NBFCs, 
and other stakeholders 
Activity 2.1.1: Undertake baseline 
studies for 500 MSMEs 
Conduct baseline and feasibility study 
2.1.1.1 Undertake Technology Need 
Assessments for 500 MSMEs 
 Baseline and feasibility studies will be 
conducted in 500 number of MSMEs  
Activity 2.1.2: Undertake awareness 
raising and trainings on climate 
change adaptation and mitigation for 
MSMEs and Financial Institutions 
Conduct awareness raising trainings 
and trainings on climate change 
adaptation and mitigation for MSMEs 
and Financial Institutions 
2.1.2.1 Undertake awareness raising 
and trainings on climate change 
adaptation and mitigation for MSMEs 
and Financial Institutions  
32 No. of trainings will be conducted-
(one training per quarter per cluster in 
initial five years of the project) 
Activity 2.1.3: Implement knowledge 
management and sharing on climate 
change adaptation and mitigation for 
MSMEs 
Case studies and documentation of 
best practices 
2.1.1.3 Implement knowledge 
management and sharing on climate 
change adaptation and mitigation for 
MSMEs 
Case study and research study 
reports- five case and research study 
per sectors i.e. EE, EV,RE generation 
and adaptation. A total of 20 no. of 
case research/case studies will be 
conducted  
Activity 2.2.1: Develop and 
implement MSME sectoral 
adaptation and mitigation 
benchmarking tools 
The program will contribute to the 
upgrading and further development of 
the online assessment / benchmarking 
tools for MSMEs. 
2.2.1.1 Develop and implement 
MSME sectoral adaptation and 
mitigation benchmarking tools 
Tool- - One tool prepared at the start 
of the program

=== PAGE 90 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 2.2.2:  Digital Green Credit 
Rating Tool (DGCRT) includes 
integration of Green parameters 
(Energy and Environment) with 
Credit rating tool 
 
This activity will support the digitization 
of an integrated credit rating tool which 
includes integration of green 
parameters (Energy and Environment) 
into credit rating tool. 
2.2.2.1 Contribute to Policy Initiatives 
to support Green Financing of MSMEs 
2.2.2.1 One comprehensive credit 
rating tool  will be developed  
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Monitoring and verification (M&V) for verification of project indicators will be undertaken once in two years, starting from the 3rd year onwards, on a sample basis. 
Indicators tracked under M&V activities will include implementations of sub-projects, energy savings, environmental benefits e. g. CO2 emission reductions, and 
other co-benefits at programme level.  
 
As an Accredited Entity, SIDBI will be responsible to Oversee, Supervise, Manage and Monitor the overall implementation of the programme and periodically submit 
progress reports to the GCF as agreed in the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) and the Accreditation Management Agreement (AMA).  Executing Entity headed 
by the Project Director consists of experts shall be responsible for the execution of day-to-day activities of the programme for direct loans as well as for the loan 
sectioned through PFIs and report to the AE about the progress of the FMAP. Experts placed at Executing Entity (EE) will be responsible for M&V of sub projects 
sanctioned directly and through PFIs. EE will ensure in house M&V as well as M&E through independent agencies. 
 
Additionally, a Management Information System (MIS) will be developed to assist in project tracking, including dashboards for loan cases and online regular 
monitoring of proposals and related outcomes indicators. AE will collate the data and will further report to NDA and GCF.  
 
Moreover, an Impact Evaluation at the end of the project will be Undertaken. Lastly, as part of the project monitoring process, internal financial audits will be 
conducted annually. Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRV) of Climate Impacts- Mitigation and Adaptation will be achieved through the use of energy 
efficient technologies by MSMEs.

=== PAGE 91 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 87 
 
 
 
 
F. RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
Please describe financial, technical, operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing (ML/TF), sanctions, 
prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the 
proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.  
 
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability 
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact 
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as well as 
fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
The technical risk may be owing to lack of understanding among the end beneficiaries regarding a particular 
Resource Efficient and Cleaner Production (RECP) technology which may hinder its adoption and may affect market 
demand for these technologies. The operational risk may be related to after end of sale services wherein servicing of 
these equipment/technologies may be hindered by lack of service providers in the market. In addition, MSMEs may 
be unable to invest 10%, resulting in weak commercial appetite from MSMEs in the FMAP facility. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk 
occurring? If so, to what level?  
• Technical Assistance component includes various activities such as awareness creation, capacity building of various 
stakeholders to motivate industries and enabling them to make an informed decision.  
• Further, the programme envisages providing end to end handholding support to participating units. The approach 
has been very fruitful during the implementation of similar programmes in the past by SIDBI. 
• The proposed activities will also support “development of mentors” (Cluster champions or stalwarts) and will also 
perform various cluster development activities under “Project GRiT (Climate  inclusiviTy)” managed by SIDBI. 
The operational risks related to end of sale services will be mitigated by the market itself. It is understood that end of 
sale services is difficult to achieve for limited number of technologies, however, due to large scale technologies 
funded under this programme, there is bound to be spillover effect in the market which would incentivise service 
providers to scale up their operations in the market. 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Credit 
High 
Medium 
Description 
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
The risk perceived under this category relates to the MSMEs those may become non performing over the period of 
time due to various factors including market crunch, loss of revenue, or any other situation beyond their control. 
Credit risk is the possibility of a loss happening due to a borrower's failure to repay a loan or to satisfy contractual 
obligations which may result in the MSMEs becoming non performing over the period of time due to various factors 
including market crunch, loss of revenue, or any other situation beyond their control. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk 
occurring? If so, to what level?

=== PAGE 92 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 88 
 
 
 
 
In line with the RBI guidelines, SIDBI has developed a detailed assessment process for risk measurement following 
which investment decisions are taken. Some of the Risk Mitigation Measures are –  
• 
First charge over all assets created under the programme.  
• 
Personal guarantee of promoter(s) 
• 
Corporate Guarantee of group companies, if available and feasible 
• 
Any other security as offered by the borrower / other unencumbered assets of the Borrower, to meet asset 
coverage norms.  
• 
PRSF / CGTMSE / NCGTC cover may be obtained, wherever felt necessary. 
• 
Further, as per SIDBI’s annual report for FY22-23, the Gross NPA and Net NPA of the Bank stood at nominal 
0.01% and 0.00% during the year. There was no NPA reported in the climate lending portfolio of SIDBI. The 
low rate of NPA is owing to various risk management policies of the organization, rating tools, usage of block 
chain for security information services, focused monitoring of potential units that might defer etc.   
• 
SIDBI commits USD 800 million, through co-financing commitment letter and documented in the term sheet. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Forex 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
Dollar value may change with respect to time. Foreign exchange risk is the possibility for an entity to be affected by a 
variation in the exchange rate between its local currency and the currency used in a transaction with a foreign 
country.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk 
occurring? If so, to what level?  
The funds requested from GCF will be in USD while SIDBI will lend in INR. SIDBI will be managing the currency risks 
through appropriate hedging mechanisms and may charge risk premium to the end borrowers. The indicative annual 
hedging cost is taken as 2.85 percent per annum and is indicated in assumptions given in Annexure 3- Financial 
model.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
ML/FT 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
Banks and other financial institutions may be used as a channel for Money Laundering (ML)/ Terrorist Financing (TF) 
hence there is an associated risk related to ML/FT 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability 
of risk occurring? If so, to what level?  
SIDBI has a well formulated policy to prevent ML/FT with well laid out procedure to conduct risk assessment which is 
attached as Annexure. Yes, the mitigation measure can well reduce the possibility of a risk originating from ML/FT. a) 
SIDBI shall carry out ‘Money Laundering (ML) and Terrorist Financing (TF) Risk Assessment’ exercise periodically to 
identify, assess and take effective measures to mitigate its money laundering and terrorist financing risk for clients, 
countries or geographic areas, products, services, transactions or delivery channels, etc. The assessment process 
should consider all the relevant risk factors before determining the level of overall risk and the appropriate level and 
type of mitigation to be applied. While preparing the internal risk assessment, SIDBI shall take cognizance of the 
overall sector-specific vulnerabilities, if any, that the regulator/supervisor may share with SIDBI from time to time. (b) 
The risk assessment by SIDBI shall be properly documented and be proportionate to the nature, size, geographical 
presence, complexity of activities/structure, etc. of SIDBI. Further, the periodicity of risk assessment exercise shall be

=== PAGE 93 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 89 
 
 
 
 
determined by the Board or any other Committee of the Boards of SIDBI to which power in this regard has been 
delegated, in alignment with the outcome of the risk assessment exercise. However, it should be reviewed at least 
annually. (c) The outcome of the exercise shall be put up to the Board or Audit Committee of the Board and should be 
available to competent authorities and self-regulating bodies. (d) SIDBI shall apply a Risk Based Approach (RBA) for 
mitigation and management of the identified risk and would have Board approved policies, controls and procedures in 
this regard. Bank shall implement a Customer Due Diligence exercise, having regard to the ML/FT risks identified and 
the size of business. Further, SIDBI shall monitor the implementation of the controls and enhance them if necessary. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
 
Security risk may be related to law and order in any jurisdiction, it may also be due to international territorial disputes. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk 
occurring? If so, to what level?  
In this programme, though we will be focusing on Himalayan region for our adaptation interventions, not all areas 
within Himalayan region have security risk. Also, the industrial units to be financed are located in regions with low or 
minimal security risks with the law and order enforcement being managed by the state and central government. So, 
mitigations related to security risks (if any) are managed by the respective states and central government. The 
programme will not target areas which are affected by international territorial disputes/issues.

=== PAGE 94 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 90 
 
 
 
 
F G. POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
Provide the environmental and social risk category assigned to the proposal as a result of screening and the rationale 
for assigning such category. Present also the environmental and social assessment and management instruments 
developed for the proposal (for example, Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), Environment and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF), Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), Environmental and Social 
Management System (ESMS), environmental and social audits, etc.). Provide a summary of the main outcomes of these 
instruments. Present the key environmental and social risks and impacts and the measures on how the 
project/programme will avoid, minimize and mitigate negative impacts at each stage (e.g. preparation, implementation 
and operation), in accordance with GCF’s Environmental and Social Safeguard (ESS) standards. If the proposed project 
or programme involves investments through financial intermediations, describe the due diligence and management 
plans by the Executing Entities (EEs) and the oversight and supervision arrangements. Describe the capacity of the EEs 
to implement the ESMP and ESMF and arrangements for compliance monitoring, supervision and reporting. Include a 
description of the project/programme-level grievance redress mechanism, a summary of the extent of multi-stakeholder 
consultations undertaken for the project/programme, the plan of the Accredited Entity (AE) and EEs to continue to 
engage the stakeholders throughout project implementation, and the manner and timing of disclosure of the applicable 
safeguards reports following the requirements of the GCF Information Disclosure Policy and Environmental and Social 
Policy. 
 
Describe any potential impacts on indigenous peoples and the measures to address these impacts including the 
development of an Indigenous Peoples Plan and the process for meaningful consultation leading to free, prior and 
informed consent, pursuant to the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy.  
 
Attach the appropriate assessment and management instruments or other applicable studies, depending on the 
environmental and social risk category as annex 6.  
 
Environmental and social risk categorization:  
The Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) is prepared referring to policies, act, rules of the government 
of India and Green Climate Fund (GCF) of Project/Program Financing.  
The existing national policies and legislations, international frameworks on environment, social and energy efficiency 
issues along with the ESMP of Accredited Entity (SIDBI) and GCF’s environmental and Social Safeguard Policies were 
reviewed for the ESS categorization of the proposal. Further, the ESMS has been aligned with IFC’s Performance 
Standards. The potential adverse environmental and/or social risks and impacts related to the Programme activities are 
individually or cumulatively generally site-specific, largely reversible, and readily addressed through adequate policy 
implementation and workplace standards. Further, the initial screening based on Exclusion List will ensure that Category 
A/I1 projects are screened out and will not be financed under this programme. The activities and sub-activities under this 
programme therefore would be classified as a Category ‘B’ under the GCF Risk Categories. However, the program will 
be categorized as Medium level of intermediation, or I2 according to GCF guidelines as financial intermediation will be 
involved in the investment process 
 
Compliance with National Legislation:  
As a responsible financier, SIDBI has adopted various institutional mechanisms to ensure its compliance with the relevant 
environmental and social laws/norms. Under this, SIDBI has: 
• 
Adopted an Environmental and Social Management Policy (ESMP) which ensures that it’s initiatives are aimed at 
reducing environmental and social risks. The ESMP outlines SIDBI’s engagement with PFIs in the case of indirect 
financing.  
• 
Adopted the Sexual Harassment of Women (Prevention, Prohibition & Redressal) at Workplace as per the Sexual 
Harassment of Women (Prevention, Prohibition & Redressal) at Workplace Act, 2013 
• 
Adopted a Customer Grievance Redressal Policy to ensure prompt and efficient service to its customers. 
 
These detailed policies are placed in Annexure 1, Attachment 2 & 3 respectively at the end of Annexure 6.  
 
In compliance with GCF’s ESMS framework, the ESMS framework for this programme aims to achieve the following 
outcomes/meet performance standards: 
1. List of projects supported/Screening: Based on the risk categorization, SIDBI’s ESMP identifies the 
type/nature of projects to be supported.

=== PAGE 95 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 91 
 
 
 
 
2. Identify and assess environmental & social risks: Projects are assessed for their potential environmental and 
social impacts. This includes both negative impacts that need to be mitigated and potential benefits that can be 
enhanced.  
 
3. Manage & Monitor Risk, Reporting & Compliance: Based on the assessments, management plans are 
developed to address the risks through various measures including mitigation strategies, monitoring plans, and 
stakeholder engagement activities. Further, it ensures compliance with national regulations and international 
standards, and reporting on environmental and social performance. 
 
4. Grievance Redressal: This also includes a Grievance Redressal Mechanism to ensure all grievances are 
addressed in line with applicable policies and standards. 
 
5. Public Disclosure and Consultation: SIDBI’s through its website, will publicly disclose relevant reports in 
compliance with its Information Disclosure policy. The results of the preliminary environmental and social 
screening, and draft environmental and social assessment, shall be made available for public consultations. 
 
6. Zero Tolerance of SEAH:  SIDBI has ZERO TOLERANCE towards any sexually harassment in any form. SIDBI 
has adopted the Sexual Harassment of Women (Prevention, Prohibition & Redressal) at Workplace as per the 
Sexual Harassment of Women (Prevention, Prohibition & Redressal) at Workplace Act, 2013. 
 
7. Indigenous People: The COP decision adopting the Paris Agreement recognized the need to strengthen 
practices and efforts of local communities and Indigenous Peoples related to addressing and responding to 
climate change and operationalized the local communities and Indigenous Peoples platform to help do this. 
However, given that MSMEs are restricted to areas of industrial clusters/special economic zones, SIDBI’s project 
is not anticipated to have impacts on indigenous people, their lands, culture, livelihood or way of life. 
 
Details on each of the above elements of the ESMS framework are shared below: 
 
Project Screening 
SIDBI itself, or the PFIs that are engaged, will screen the projects to ensure that the proposed projects are not in the 
Negative list/ Exclusion list prepared by SIDBI as per their ESMP (Appendix I of Annexure 1 of the ESMS (annexure 
6)). The negative list includes projects/ programmes involving harmful or exploitative form of child labour, production or 
trade in weapons or munitions, production or trade in alcoholic beverages and tobacco, etc. The screening based on 
Exclusion List will ensure that Category A/I1 projects are screened out and will not be financed under this programme.  
 
Identification & assessment of E&S risks 
Further to the initial screening of the projects, SIDBI or the PFIs are required to screen the potential risks and 
environmental and social compliance of the project through document verification, field visits, and environmental and 
social checklist (Refer Appendix II of Annexure 1 of the ESMS (Annexure 6)). Further, each project is evaluated for its 
E&S risk using a proprietary ESG rating tool. This allows SIDBI to characterize the risk being considered while financing 
and accordingly plan for the mitigation.  
 
 
Manage & Monitor Risk, Reporting & Compliance 
SIDBI’s ESMP (Refer Section 9.2, 9.3, 9.4 of Annexure 1 of the ESMS (Annexure 6)) states that it is the responsibility 
of the PFIs/Host entity to address all environmental and social risks identified during the screening of environmental and 
social risks. The implementing entities’ programme reports shall include a section on status of implementation of any 
environmental and social management plan, including those measures required to avoid, minimize, or mitigate the risks.  
The reports shall also include, if necessary, a description of any corrective actions that are deemed necessary. 
Accordingly, the mid- term and terminal evaluation reports shall also include an evaluation of Programme performance 
with respect to environmental and social risks. 
The formats and periodicity of submitting such reports for effective monitoring is decided during the commencement of 
the Programme. 
 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
SIDBI has a comprehensive 3-tier Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM) (Refer Attachment 3 of ESMS Annexure 
6). It has put in place a web- enabled registration form for complaints/ grievances, whereby the project affected 
stakeholders can log their grievances.

=== PAGE 96 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 92 
 
 
 
 
SIDBI further mandates that the implementing agencies/ PFIs shall also have in place an effective GRM that provides for 
stakeholders affected by the projects supported by SIDBI. Such a mechanism shall be accessible, transparent, fair, and 
effective for receiving and addressing complaints about potential or actual environmental or social harm caused by any 
such project. 
 
Public Disclosure & Consultation 
SIDBI mandates that the PFIs identify stakeholders as early as possible in planning any programme. The results of the 
preliminary environmental and social screening, and draft environmental and social assessment, shall be made available 
for public consultations. 
Further, the scope and frequency of stakeholder engagement depends on the nature and scale of the programme and its 
potential environmental and social risks.  
Additionally, SIDBI’s existing ESMP states that SIDBI, through its website, will publicly disclose relevant reports in 
compliance with its Information Disclosure policy. 
 
Further, the Annexure on Stakeholder Engagement (Annexure 7 of Funding Proposal) has details on the plan to consult 
stakeholders at a regular frequency. It also has key findings from extensive stakeholder consultations conducted by SIDBI.  
 
Zero tolerance of SEAH 
SIDBI has adopted the Sexual Harassment of Women (Prevention, Prohibition & Redressal) at Workplace as per the 
Sexual Harassment of Women (Prevention, Prohibition & Redressal) at Workplace Act, 2013. The Act aspires to ensure 
women’s right to workplace equality, free from sexual harassment through compliance with the mentioned three elements 
viz. “Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal.” 
SIDBI has ZERO TOLERANCE towards any sexually harassment in any form.  
To give effect to the principle of zero-tolerance, FMAP recognizes the importance of its financed activities to prevent and 
respond effectively to SEAH in a survivor-centered and gender-responsive way.  
SIDBI will further ensure that the implementing agencies/ financial institutions shall also have in place an effective SEAH 
guidelines, norms acts in place as per requirement. 
 
Indigenous People 
Given that MSMEs are restricted to areas of industrial clusters/special economic zones, SIDBI's project is not anticipated 
to have adverse impacts on indigenous people, their lands, culture, livelihood or way of life.  
 
However, SIDBI through its PFIs will ensure sub-projects through FMAP, include measures to (a) avoid potentially adverse 
effects on the Indigenous Peoples’ communities, or (b) when avoidance is not feasible, minimize, mitigate, or compensate 
for such effects. The sub-projects are also designed to ensure that the Indigenous Peoples receive social and economic 
benefits that are culturally appropriate and gender and inter-generationally inclusive. 
 
An Indigenous People Framework (IPPF) has been developed (Refer Attachment 6 of the Annexure on ESMS) to 
mitigate any potential risk arising out of the activities of the programme that may have adverse impacts on indigenous 
people. Further, an Indigenous People Plan (IPP) will be developed for all projects affecting indigenous communities and 
Indigenous Peoples where impacts are identified, whether they are direct or indirect, negative or positive, if applicable 
with necessary disclosure for IPPs. 
 
Resettlement Action Plan: 
In case of greenfield projects where there is any likelihood of compulsory land acquisition and involuntary resettlement, a 
resettlement action plan has been developed which is aimed at the following: 
 
(a). To identify the risks at the sub-project level which may lead to compulsory land acquisition, involuntary resettlement 
affecting physical and/or economic displacement of people (loss of  structures, livelihoods and access to common 
resources 
(b). To mitigate the identified risks associated with compulsory land acquisition and involuntary resettlement and to 
check the adequacy and implementation of the mitigation measures 
(c). To develop a monitoring framework to check the adequacy and implementation of mitigate measures.

=== PAGE 97 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 93 
 
 
 
 
Flow Chart depicting E&S Risk Management Process: 
 
 
The ESMS also ensures compliance with India’s legislative & regulatory landscape across relevant themes such as: 
• 
Environment Protection 
• 
Land Acquisition & Resettlement 
• 
Labour & Working Conditions 
• 
Social Safeguards on engagement & inclusion, cultural heritage and safety 
A comprehensive ESMS is attached in Annexure 6.  
 
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Provide a summary of the gender assessment and project/programme-level gender action plan that is aligned with the 
objectives of GCF’s Gender Policy. Confirm a gender assessment and action plan exists describing the process used to 
develop both documents. Provide information on the key findings (who is vulnerable and why) and key 
recommendations (how to address the vulnerability identified) of the gender assessment. Indicate if stakeholder 
consultations have taken place and describe the key inputs integrated into the action plan, including: how addressing 
the vulnerability will ensure equal participation and benefits from funds investment; key gender-related results to be 
expected from the project/programme with targets; implementation arrangements that the AE has put in place to ensure 
activities are implemented and expected outcomes will be achieved, monitored and evaluated. 
 
Provide the full gender assessment and project-level gender action plan as annex 8.  
 
 
Approach 
In preparing the Gender Assessment & Action Plan for the Programme, following approaches have been leveraged: 
1. Baseline assessment of participation of women in the MSME sector in India as entrepreneurs 
a. The literature reviewed from secondary sources to understand the baseline situation and the broad scope 
for EE applications in the sector considering gender dimensions. In this regard, relevant reports, about 
national policies and guidelines (environmental, social, gender equality), historical studies and research 
on Energy Efficiency (EE), international best practices, potential EE interventions etc. considering gender 
equity were analysed.

=== PAGE 98 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 94 
 
 
 
 
b. This assessment has been done based on SIDBI’s existing initiatives to promote women 
entrepreneurship and based on research studies supported by SIDBI. 
 
2. Assessment of challenges faced by women entrepreneurs in the MSME sector 
a. Stakeholder consultation i.e. “Strengthening Green Financing and Mainstreaming Gender” organised 
under the banner ‘Green Indian Financial System (GIFS)85’ – Greening of Finance by Women (Grow)86 
Initiatives, founded by SIDBI, Shakti Sustainable Energy Foundation (SSEF) and French Development 
Agency (AFD) has identified the key challenges faced by women entrepreneurs in the MSME sector 
 
3. Review of SIDBI’s existing capabilities to promote women entrepreneurship/gender equality 
a. This assessment has been done based on a review of SIDBI’s existing initiatives to promote women 
entrepreneurship and participation of women in the MSME sector.  
b. Further, SIDBI’s gender policies have been reviewed in line with GCF’s gender policies 
 
Key Findings & Assessment 
• 
Gender Parity in Workforce: Only ~24% of the workforce in MSMEs is women. This is lower than the national 
labour force participation rates for females (~28.7% in 2023). This suggests that MSMEs have a scope to improve 
their gender parity in the workforce. 
• 
Gender Parity in Ownership: As per the statistical data provided on the Udyam Registration Portal (“URP”) 
under the Ministry of MSME87, women owned MSMEs constitute 20.37 per cent of the total number of registered 
MSMEs 
 
• 
Following are some of the key challenges faced by women entrepreneurs in India.  
 
• 
Not Sustainable: ~73% women-led enterprises have faced a reduction in revenues post COVID-19. Most 
female entrepreneurs are concentrated in sectors and industries highly affected by the pandemic and 
digitization like micro and small businesses in non-professional services, such as tailor shop owners, 
dressmakers, shopkeepers and street vendors, arts and handicrafts vendors, and beauty-parlor owners, 
among others. This points to the fact that women led businesses are not financially 
sustainable/resilient enough to recover from external shocks.  
• 
Not Autonomous: In ~20% cases, the business-related decisions are taken by the respective spouses and 
not the women entrepreneur running the business. Often, women do not truly own or control many women-
led enterprises. They depend considerably on men for key business decisions, procurement of raw 
materials, pricing information, and market access. 
• 
Not Formal: ~95.6% of the women entrepreneurs in India are informal and not registered with relevant 
national/state institutions. A high level of informality harms the growth and resilience of their enterprises and 
their entrepreneurial rights. The level of effort involved in running such enterprises go unaccounted for and 
expose women to occupational health hazards. Further, informality leads to challenges in accessing 
finance, market, etc.   
• 
Not sufficient employment generating: ~95% of women proprietors run with less than six workers, most 
being own-account or single person enterprises. Only ~1.9% proprietors run with six to 10 employees. This 
points to the fact that women entrepreneurs often lack skills in scaling businesses i.e. in areas such 
as business management, market access, access to finance, etc. 
• 
Lack of awareness and skills on green jobs and technologies:  Women in Indian MSMEs have been 
confined to low-paying, low-skilled jobs. The ongoing transitions present them with an opportunity to realign 
their skill sets and adjust to the evolving nature of work. Digital & Green Technologies proficiency is one of 
the most important skills that women need to acquire to keep pace with the ongoing transitions. This will 
enable them to enter traditionally male-dominated sectors that rely heavily on digital technologies, such as 
healthcare services, automobiles, and more advanced roles within the textiles sector with green technologies.  
 
 
85 https://www.gifsinitiative.in/ 
86 https://grownetwork.in/ 
87 https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2002574

=== PAGE 99 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 95 
 
 
 
 
SIDBI has undertaken several structural reforms/adopted policies to promote women's welfare and 
entrepreneurship as detailed in Annexure 8. 
 
Alignment of the Project with GCF Gender Assessment Guideline  
• 
SIDBI as an AE shall take the necessary measures to ensure that proposed projects, as well as proposed activities 
under the FMAP, submitted to GCF for financing are aligned with national policies and priorities on gender.  
• 
The project activities shall be framed around principals of GCF and will ensure the following issues in the gender 
action plan:    
 
  
Gender Action Plan 
 
Based on the programme design, the broad aim is to ensure adequate representation for women as stakeholder and 
beneficiary under component (1) supporting affordable financing of mitigation and adaptation activities; targeted technical 
support under component (2), for capacity development, awareness generation, etc., as well as in M&E frameworks; and 
leveraging financing mechanisms for greater and more equitable outreach and coverage in the MSME sector going ahead. 
A stated endeavor of the programme is to secure 80:20 coverage (i.e. 20% financing towards women), broadly in line with 
the selected baselines for women’s ownership and labour force participation. In the longer term, the aim is to contribute 
to a paradigm shift in terms of women’s capacity and participation in ownership/ leadership/ management and technical 
roles/workforce participation in, as well as other benefits from climate mitigation and adaption activities taken up in the 
MSME sector in India. This will ensure that the current challenges on women in MSMEs, especially in the area of climate, 
will be addressed and thus the landscape of women-led MSMEs in India will be significantly transformed.  
Following are the outcomes that the program aims to achieve: 
• 
Number of women led MSMEs: Increase the number of women owned MSMEs through necessary interventions 
and ensure enhanced participation of women workforce in MSMEs. 
• 
Business Sustainability through improve access of finance: Make women led enterprises/MSMEs more 
sustainable & resilient to external shocks, especially climate shocks by providing access to affordable finance for 
mitigation and adaption technologies. Services and technologies provided by the project/program shall be 
available and accessible to both women and men.

=== PAGE 100 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 96 
 
 
 
 
• 
Autonomy: Increased skilling for women entrepreneurs to ensure their businesses are more climate resilient by 
offering handholding support on the adoption of better technology. Encourage women entrepreneurship in energy 
efficiency, renewable, electric vehicles and other identified sectors 
• 
Formalization: Increased formalization of women-led MSMEs, leading to enhanced access to credit.  
• 
Employability & Employment Generation: Ensuring the opportunities of creating more employment from 
Women own MSMEs by capacity building on climate finance and awareness on energy efficient technology. The 
measures will also be taken to equip the women workforce for green jobs helping in just transition. 
• 
Encouraging gender-focused practices among MSMEs: The project would encourage those MSMEs with 
women-centric workplace or are willing to create the one. These will include having a gender action plan, separate 
rest spaces, better lighting etc. 
 
A detailed gender action plan outlining the baseline assessment, investment amounts, M&E processes, etc. has been 
outlined in Annexure 8.  
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Describe the project/programme’s financial management including the financial monitoring systems, financial 
accounting, auditing, and disbursement structure and methods. Refer to section B.4 on implementation arrangements 
as necessary.  
Articulate any procurement issues that may require attention, e.g. procurement implementation arrangements and the 
role of the AE under the respective proposal, articulation of procurement risk assessment undertaken and how that 
will be managed by the AE or the implementing agency. Provide a detailed procurement plan as annexure 10. 
  
159. In line with the Govt. of India Procurement guidelines, SIDBI has an established Procurement Manual which is 
approved by the Board (enclosed). The manual provides guidance on the following (including but not limited to): 
i. categorization of procurement as Goods, Works and Services. 
ii. procurement methods/approach for Goods, Works and Services  
iii. thresholds/ limits under various methods of procurement 
iv. Mandatory procurement through Govt e-marketplace (GeM) which is an electronic platform by GoI for transparency 
and to reduce manual intervention. 
v. Purchase preference policies of Govt of India like MSE, Make in India (MII), Khadi and Village Industries 
Commission (KVIC) etc. 
Procurement activities under the Project would be undertaken in line with the Bank’s procurement manual. Detailed 
draft of procurement plan is enclosed at Annexure 10. 
The procurement plan majorly consists of procurements of services and goods with small values and thus of lower risk. 
The same would be carried out in line with the thresholds defined in the procurement manual which have been 
categorized duly addressing the potential risk and to maintain transparency in the process. Further SIDBI has an 
established mechanism for financial and administrative review and approval powers delegated to the Competent 
Authorities. The same would be followed for seeking approvals prior to initiating the procurements under the project. 
Since the procurements envisaged are of smaller values and SIDBI’s established review mechanism which gives due 
attention to economy, efficiency and transparency, no major procurement challenge/risk is envisaged. Further, 
assessed Procurement Risks and corresponding Mitigation Measures are tabulated below: 
 
Risk Factor  
Risk Category Mitigation Measure 
• 
Limited 
capacity 
and 
inefficiencies resulting in delays 
in procurement processes 
Lower 
• 
Use 
of 
skilled 
procurement 
staff 
for 
handling 
procurement 
• 
Monitoring through Regular Review meetings  
• 
Adequate delegation for procurement related reviews, 
decision making/approvals. 
• 
Use of e-platforms (viz; GeM, CPPP, etc.) 
• 
Regular trainings, workshops  
• 
Disclosure of procurement-related information  
• 
Appropriate handling and addressal of complaints 
 
Although the procurement plan enlists the procurements envisaged to be undertaken during the initial 60 months for 
Consultancy and Non-Consulting Services and whole duration of the of project/program implementation in case of 
Goods, the same would be an ever-evolving. Changes/modifications, if any, to the approved procurement plan (if 
needed) during the currency of the of project/program implementation would be conveyed to GCF.

=== PAGE 101 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 97 
 
 
 
 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure for 
all information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and programme 
funding proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the 
redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in confidence is one of 
the exceptions, but this exception should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the document contains specific, 
segregable portions that can be disclosed without prejudice or harm.  
 
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information. 
 
☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may not 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited entity 
is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
• 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with an 
explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
• 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 102 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 98 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
ANNEX 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
ANNEX 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
ANNEX 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
ANNEX 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
ANNEX 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
ANNEX 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☒ Others (Please Specify – E.G.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, Etc.) 
☒ 
ANNEX 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
ANNEX 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
ANNEX 9 
Legal Due Diligence (Regulation, Taxation and Insurance) 
 
☒ 
ANNEX 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
ANNEX 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
ANNEX 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
ANNEX 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
ANNEX 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☐ 
ANNEX 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☐ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☐ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment

=== PAGE 103 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.12.0 | PAGE 99 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
88 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects.  
 
 
☒ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22  
Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting-projects)88

=== PAGE 104 ===
No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 105 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Financing Mitigation and Adaptation Projects (FMAP) in 
Indian MSMEs 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or private) 
Private 
Accredited entity 
Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category I-2 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
Republic of India  
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, June 14, 2024 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Hindi 
Explanation on language 
Hindi is the official language of India.  
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://www.sidbi.in/assets/front/pdf/ESMS-FMAP-E.pdf 
  
Hindi:  
https://www.sidbi.in/assets/front/pdf/ESMS-FMAP-H.pdf 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I-
2 project is contained in the 'Environment and Social 
Management System (ESMS)'.

=== PAGE 106 ===
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) and 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)/ Friday, June 14, 2024 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Hindi 
Explanation on language 
Hindi is the official language of India. 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://www.sidbi.in/assets/front/pdf/ESMS-FMAP-E.pdf 
Hindi: 
https://www.sidbi.in/assets/front/pdf/ESMS-FMAP-H.pdf 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
An IPPF consistent with the requirements for a Category I-2 
project is contained in the Attachment 6 of Annexure 6 
ESMS.  
In addition, RAP consistent with the requirements for a 
Category I-2 project is contained in the Attachment 8 of 
Annexure 6 ESMS 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Friday, June 14, 2024 
Place 
Hard copies will be made available in SIDBI Delhi Office  
Address: ATMA RAM HOUSE, 1 Tolstoy Marg, New Delhi- 
110001 
Hard copies will also be made available in SIDBI Branch 
Offices 
as 
per 
the 
list 
indicated 
here: 
https://www.sidbi.in/branch-office  
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
TBD 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting 
Monday, July 15, 2024 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.16/Rev.01 
Page 107 
 
 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP241 
Proposal name: 
Financing Mitigation and Adaptation Projects (FMAP) in Indian 
MSMEs 
Accredited entity: 
Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) 
Country/(ies): 
India 
Project/programme size: 
Large 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Overview 
1. 
The Financing Mitigation and Adaptation Project (FMAP) aims to accelerate the adop-
tion of low-emission and climate-resilient practices among micro, small and medium-sized en-
terprises (MSMEs) in India while promoting the greening of the country’s financial sector. Led 
by Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) as the accredited entity (AE) and execut-
ing entity (EE), the programme focuses on financing resource-constrained sectors. A key benefit 
of FMAP is its emphasis on financing adaptation projects, which have so far seen limited uptake 
by both public and private financial institutions. In addition, the programme seeks to boost the 
effectiveness of primary financial institutions (PFIs), including small finance banks (SFBs), mi-
crofinance institutions (MFIs) and non-banking financial companies (NBFCs), by enabling them 
to build a track record that supports scaling up climate finance in India. 
2. 
FMAP consists of two components. The first is a USD 1 billion lending facility managed 
by SIDBI, capitalized by an USD 800 million contribution from SIDBI and an additional USD 200 
million from the GCF. These funds will support direct lending (20 per cent) to MSMEs for cli-
mate-aligned initiatives and indirect financing (80 per cent) of MSMEs through PFI partners. 
The indirect financing will be channelled to MSMEs via PFIs, which are required to co-finance 
three times the amount received, mobilizing an additional USD 2.4 billion. This three times com-
mitment is measured on a portfolio basis rather than at the level of the individual loans. Fur-
thermore, participating MSMEs are expected to contribute equity ranging from 10 to 25 per cent 
of the total loan for eligible projects. The concessionality provided by the GCF funds enables 
FMAP to adopt a flexible approach (e.g. in terms of grace periods and tenors) in structuring sub-
loans and to offer concessional capital costs to incentivize uptake among MSMEs. 
3. 
The second component is a USD 16 million grant facility to be implemented by SIDBI. 
These grants will support MSMEs and PFIs in greening their operations by identifying the tech-
nical needs of MSMEs, promoting knowledge-sharing, building capacity among stakeholders and 
contributing to policy initiatives. SIDBI will prioritize conducting technology needs assessments 
to identify key solutions for MSMEs and capacity-building for PFIs, and will implement due dili-
gence on their loan books through a dedicated project management unit. Leveraging its experi-
ence in knowledge-sharing and capacity-building, SIDBI will lead training sessions and work-
shops to raise awareness and address barriers. The grant component is sized at approximately 
1.6 per cent of the loan facility component. 
4. 
The objective of FMAP is to address market gaps in access to finance for resource-con-
strained sectors, particularly in adaptation, by providing concessional lending and technical as-
sistance. By working through PFIs in addition to direct lending, the programme seeks to support

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.16/Rev.01 
Page 108 
 
 
 
 
the greening of the Indian financial sector. In addition, FMAP aims to induce positive market sig-
nals on the commercial viability of climate projects and attract local financial institutions and 
private sector finance. 
1.2 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high 
5. 
India is a major emitter of greenhouse gases (GHGs). Given its rapid economic develop-
ment and substantial population growth, it is imperative for India to pursue a development path 
that leads to a low-carbon, more resilient future. According to the third national communication 
and initial adaptation communication submitted by India under the Convention in December 
2023, India’s net national GHG emissions in 2019 amounted to 2.6 billion tonnes of carbon diox-
ide equivalent (t CO2 eq), reflecting a 4.56 per cent increase from the 2016 level and a 115 per 
cent increase since 1994. CO2 remains the main GHG, accounting for 79 per cent of total emis-
sions in 2019, primarily due to increased fossil fuel combustion, and rising aluminium and ce-
ment production. 
6. 
The FMAP funding proposal explains that India’s energy-intensive MSME subsectors are 
substantial contributors of GHG emissions. However, MSMEs face several barriers to becoming 
more climate-aligned, include their use of conventional processes and technologies, coupled 
with unskilled or semi-skilled workers, leading to higher resource consumption and associated 
waste generation and emissions. There are over 63 million MSMEs in India, employing about 
110 million people and accounting for about 45 per cent to the country’s manufacturing output. 
MSMEs consume about 25 per cent of the total energy used by the industrial sector in India, rep-
resenting a significant opportunity to reduce resource consumption, including electricity, fossil 
fuels and water, in a cost-effective manner. FMAP aims to support this transition by improving 
access to finance and facilitating MSME access to greener technologies. 
7. 
Considering the above, the independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) takes a posi-
tive view of FMAP’s main goal of sensitizing MSMEs towards adopting green and cleaner pro-
duction technologies, and developing and deploying adaptation technologies. The iTAP also con-
curs with the programme’s aim to encourage banks and financial institutions to develop dedi-
cated green instruments and lend with increased confidence to meet MSMEs’ demand for adopt-
ing and developing the necessary green technologies. Transitioning MSMEs in India to lower-
carbon, more resilient pathways could be a crucial contributor to helping India meet its climate 
goals. 
8. 
FMAP will provide loans to MSMEs targeting the renewable energy, energy efficiency 
and low-emission transport sectors. In addition, it will support adaptation by helping MSMEs in 
the water-intensive and agriculture sectors to implement climate solutions in their businesses, 
thereby increasing resilience and adaptive capacity against climate change. Adaptation invest-
ments will be directed to highly vulnerable regions such as coastal areas, the Himalayas and the 
eastern belt of India. According to the funding proposal, FMAP is expected to avoid 43.86 million 
t CO2 eq and benefit 10.3 million people. The iTAP notes that estimating GHG reductions over 
such a large programme and long tenor (13 years) is challenging due to uncertainties in the 
composition of underlying loans. It is therefore difficult to put very much stock on specific pro-
jections in the context of FMAP; however, the iTAP acknowledges that the targeted loan areas 
(e.g. energy efficiency, low-emission transport, renewables) coupled with climate-aligned 
screening mechanisms mean that there is the potential for significant impact. Importantly, the 
sheer scale of India and the role of MSMEs in the economy support an argument that the overall 
impact will be positive from a climate standpoint. 
9. 
Moreover, FMAP is expected to mobilize USD 3.5 billion from public and private sector 
sources, with co-financing at a ratio of 1:18 towards dedicated investments in MSMEs for GHG 
emission reductions and accelerating MSME adaptation actions. Of this, the funding proposal es-
timates that 40 per cent of the funding will address adaptation actions, and the remaining 60

=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.16/Rev.01 
Page 109 
 
 
 
 
per cent will focus on mitigation efforts. The iTAP agrees that the potential mobilization impact 
could be significant, and the potential to redirect the lending of PFIs in India towards climate-
aligned interventions is a valuable aspect of this funding proposal.  
10. 
The iTAP also concurs that the well-sized and tailored use of grants alongside commer-
cial lending can help to develop a pipeline for the lending facility and, in turn, increase confi-
dence that MSMEs will take up loans and effect operational changes that have beneficial climate 
outcomes. Moreover, the grant component has the potential to accelerate the greening of the lo-
cal financial sector as envisaged in the funding proposal, which is critical to the programme’s 
success.  
11. 
The iTAP considers that the programme is well-positioned to mitigate barriers to ac-
cessing finance, by directly supporting MSMEs through green lending at concessional rates 
while incentivizing local financial institutions through wholesale lending. Direct lending will tar-
get medium-sized enterprises, while indirect lending will support micro and small enterprises, 
ensuring complementarity between both channels. For indirect lending, SIDBI will work with 
eligible local financial institutions, MFIs, NBFCs and SFBs. This approach could allow SIDBI to 
reach a broader range of MSMEs through these institutions’ networks and help them increase 
their capacity to extend green loans for implementing or developing climate solutions. This in-
clusive structure addresses the immediate need for finance availability. 
12. 
FMAP intends not only to increase the availability of finance for climate-related loans to 
MSME but also to use concessionality to accelerate the transition to climate-friendly technolo-
gies. The AE has made a credible case for the levels of concessionality needed to shift PFIs to-
wards climate-aligned sectors and, more importantly, to encourage MSMEs to adopt technology 
changes that enhance their resilience to climate impacts and reduce GHG emissions. However, 
the iTAP notes a concern over how levels of concessionality will be determined over time. The 
iTAP recommends that SIDBI regularly evaluate and adjust concessionality on a sector-by-sec-
tor basis to avoid over-subsidization, which could generate windfall gains for some PFIs while 
crowding out other players.  
13. 
In addition, the iTAP has some qualms concerning the risk that a substantial portion of 
FMAP funding could end up refinancing existing PFI portfolio loans instead of financing new and 
additional MSME efforts to adopt climate-friendly technology. There is very little climate-di-
rected utility in using GCF concessionality to refinance mitigation efforts that have already been 
funded commercially. SIDBI has indicated that it may wish to fund some portfolio refinance in 
the early stages of the programme as a way to attract PFI partners and facilitate their co-financ-
ing capacity. The iTAP is willing to accept this argument but strongly recommends that the Sec-
retariat and SIDBI develop safeguards to ensure that the bulk of concessional funding is truly for 
additional projects. The iTAP encourages SIDBI to develop a plan for FMAP that minimizes port-
folio refinancing over time on a trajectory to zero over the programme’s tenure. 
14. 
Notwithstanding the above concerns, the iTAP regards FMAP’s impact potential as me-
dium-high. The significant potential for mobilization of substantial local finance into a high cli-
mate impact sector has strongly influenced this assessment.  
 
1.3 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
  
                    Scale: High 
15. 
The funding proposal convincingly demonstrates that MSMEs in India are crucial to the 
local economy and that any significant shift in India’s climate trajectory must address their GHG 
emissions and vulnerability to climate impacts. The proposal also effectively argues that a key 
barrier to climate action is the lack of access to affordable finance. FMAP will provide conces-
sional loans to MSMEs with limited credit access, enabling them to adopt and develop climate 
solutions. By enhancing the capacity of MSMEs and financial institutions for green financing

=== PAGE 110 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.16/Rev.01 
Page 110 
 
 
 
 
practices, FMAP seeks to build institutional capacity within SIDBI and local financial entities to 
manage climate financing effectively. Market transformation will be driven by demonstrating 
and promoting low-emission technologies, thereby catalysing a broader shift towards sustaina-
ble practices. 
16. 
The iTAP views favourably the effort to pull the existing financial system into climate 
lending, noting that the most effective approach is to adapt current systems to align better with 
climate goals. FMAP recognizes that MSMEs in India already engage in financial practices, albeit 
inadequately scaled, which can be steered towards a greener future through a mix of co-finance, 
concessionality and technical support. This is a pragmatic approach and avoids the pitfall of 
one-off innovations that often plague climate finance thinking. The iTAP also notes that the GCF 
paradigm shift potential is defined as the “degree to which the proposed activity can catalyse 
impact beyond a one-off project or programme investment”. By creating conditions that incen-
tivize Indian PFIs to finance climate technologies for MSMEs, it is expected that PFIs will de-
velop a comfort level in these sectors. This should spur additional private capital flows from the 
Indian financial system into the sector, scaling up climate finance and accelerating the country’s 
decarbonization efforts. Potential for replication and overall market uptake is a key factor in 
achieving a paradigm shift. 
17. 
SIDBI has demonstrated its past success in providing local financial institutions with 
technical support and concessional loans. This track record gives the iTAP some confidence in 
the AE’s ability to scale and replicate models for addressing energy inefficiency and high GHG 
emissions across various MSME sectors. FMAP’s capacity-building initiatives are expected to in-
crease awareness of available climate solutions among MSMEs and help participating PFIs to en-
hance their ability to extend climate financing. The programme will promote knowledge dissem-
ination by documenting best practices and lessons learned, providing scalable templates for en-
ergy efficiency, environmental sustainability and climate adaptation in the MSME sector. 
18. 
The iTAP also notes favourably that FMAP will focus on MSMEs with poor credit access, 
low investment potential and high emission reduction potential. Investing exclusively in cli-
mate-friendly technologies for MSMEs will have the added benefit of accelerating the growth of 
the product and service providers essential to India’s decarbonization trajectory. The paradigm 
shift benefits extend beyond direct interventions at the MSME level or getting PFIs comfortable 
with climate lending; they also support the expansion of the ecosystem of climate-friendly solu-
tions in India. The scale of lending and concessional support has the potential to drive demand 
for low-carbon technologies and services (and climate adaptive interventions), which in turn 
could spur greater supply and investment into providers of these products and services. 
19. 
Overall, the iTAP rates the potential for FMAP to effect paradigm shift as high.  
1.4 
Sustainable development potential                         Scale: Medium to high 
20. 
The FMAP funding proposal estimates that the programme will directly reduce GHG 
emissions and benefit 10.3 million people through approximately 10,000 green loans to MSMEs 
over its 13-year lifespan. These loans will facilitate the adoption of climate technologies, which 
are expected to help MSMEs save over 100,000 GWh of energy and 1,241 million cubic metres of 
water over the life time of the technologies and equipment. In addition to the anticipated cli-
mate benefits, the proposal projects ancillary environmental benefits, such as cleaner air 
through reduced air pollution. For instance, energy efficiency improvements implemented by 
MSMEs can significantly reduce local air pollution, particularly outdoor concentrations of pollu-
tants such as sulphur dioxide, particulate matter, unburned hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides. 
21. 
The funding proposal credibly demonstrates FMAP’s potential to contribute to India’s 
sustainable development beyond mitigation and adaptation impacts, as follows: 
22. 
Economic co-benefits:

=== PAGE 111 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.16/Rev.01 
Page 111 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
The proposed climate financing is expected to stimulate economic activity and create 
over 400,000 jobs. Low investment costs for implementing green technologies are antic-
ipated to directly enhance the profitability of MSMEs through increased productivity 
and product quality;  
(b) 
The programme will also target innovative entrepreneurs to drive MSME growth, posi-
tively impacting India’s gross domestic product, given the sector’s economic signifi-
cance; and 
(c) 
Cost-effective investments in energy efficiency will generate energy savings that directly 
improve the profitability of MSMEs and provide net positive earnings in the long run. 
Reduced energy costs can free up resources for more productive activities, such as ex-
pansion or developing new product lines or services; and 
23. 
Social and gender co-benefits:  
(a) 
The adoption of climate technologies and best practices will support increased access to 
affordable clean energy and water-efficient technologies, improving the health and well-
being of the Indian population; and  
(b) 
The programme will empower women and ensure their adequate representation as 
stakeholders and beneficiaries. The funding proposal specifies that 20 per cent of the to-
tal annual FMAP lending will be allocated to women. 
24. 
Overall, the iTAP rates the sustainable development potential of FMAP as medium-high.  
1.5 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high 
25. 
India is experiencing rapid economic growth and entering a crucial phase of energy de-
velopment, which will shape its emissions profile for many years to come. This pivotal moment 
affects both the supply and demand sides of energy. Economic growth is driving increased de-
mand for air conditioning, vehicle purchases and other symbols of rising affluence. Over the 
next two decades, to meet electricity demand, India must expand its power system to a scale 
comparable with that of the European Union. 
26. 
It is essential that this economic growth is fuelled by clean, reliable energy. To achieve 
this, climate-aligned technologies need to be adopted across the economy, particularly by 
MSMEs. MSMEs are significant contributors to GHG emissions (over 110 million t CO2 eq in 
2018), especially in energy-intensive subsectors. Achieving a low-carbon future for India will 
necessitate rapid adoption of low-carbon technologies and improved energy efficiency by 
MSMEs. However, MSMEs often face barriers in accessing finance for green upgrades. There is a 
pressing need for financial products tailored to the unique challenges and risks of the MSME 
sector. 
27. 
Under the Paris Agreement India has committed to reducing emissions intensity by 45 
per cent by 2030 compared with the 2005 level. Meeting these targets will require an estimated 
USD 2.5 trillion, highlighting the significant investment gap, with current green finance flows 
well below the USD 170 billion needed annually. This underscores the critical importance of in-
novative financing and technologies in advancing India’s climate goals. 
28. 
India is also highly vulnerable to climate change, as emphasized in its nationally deter-
mined contribution (NDC), due to its large population, agricultural dependence, extensive 
coastal areas and fragile Himalayan region. India ranks seventh on the Climate Risk Index and 
thirty-first on the INFORM Risk Index, both of which measure climate change vulnerability. The 
funding proposal demonstrates that the MSME sector is particularly vulnerable to extreme 
weather events such as floods, droughts and cyclones, especially MSMEs dependent on agricul-
ture and located in vulnerable regions. This sector faces a number of barriers, such as limited

=== PAGE 112 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.16/Rev.01 
Page 112 
 
 
 
 
access to technology, limited capacity to adopt new technologies and lack of affordable financing 
options. 
29. 
In India, MSMEs need tools and support to assess, manage and forecast climate risks, 
particularly those related to natural hazards (e.g. water scarcity, floods and extreme weather 
events). Investments are needed to make infrastructure more resilient to climate impacts, in-
cluding upgrading facilities and adopting resilient construction practices. 
30. 
The funding proposal describes how FMAP aims to alleviate financing barriers for 
MSMEs’ mitigation and adaptation interventions by providing long-term concessional lending. 
In addition, technical assistance will be provided to MSMEs to increase awareness of available 
climate solutions, addressing market gaps and delivering climate impact projects that are un-
likely to be implemented without FMAP. 
31. 
The iTAP rates the needs of the recipient as medium-high.  
1.6 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high 
32. 
The FMAP aligns with the implementation of India’s NDC and is consistent with national 
adaptation plans and the national climate strategy. The focus on sectors such as renewable en-
ergy, energy efficiency, transportation, water and agriculture align with high-priority areas 
identified in India’s NDC. The iTAP considers the proposed programme’s emphasis on MSME 
low-carbon development pathways and accelerating climate adaptation efforts to be in harmony 
with India’s climate actions, economic development and financial inclusion strategies. 
33. 
India has issued a non-objection letter for FMAP. In addition, the AE (SIDBI) is an agency 
of the Government of India, with over 30 years of experience working with Indian MSMEs and 
local financial institutions. These factors collectively indicate strong government engagement 
and national ownership. 
34. 
The iTAP finds it commendable that SIDBI will contribute a substantial portion (80 per 
cent) of the finance in the lending facility from its own balance sheet, demonstrating confidence 
in the programme’s potential to achieve its desired outcomes. However, it is disappointing that 
SIDBI’s financial commitment is limited to the loan facility and does not extend to the grant 
component for capacity-building. While SIDBI intends to contribute in-kind assistance (person-
nel) to some capacity-building efforts, the lack of any SIDBI budget at stake in the grant compo-
nent increases the risk of quality control issues over time. When grant facilities rely solely on 
external funding there is a higher risk that managers prioritize fund deployment over ensuring 
the funds achieve the best impact outcomes. 
35. 
The iTAP also notes positively that FMAP builds on SIDBI’s past experiences with direct 
lending to MSMEs and collaboration with PFIs to promote MSMEs’ adoption of green technolo-
gies. This includes providing concessional loans, partnering with NBFCs and offering technical 
assistance to bridge the information gap. We observe approvingly that SIDBI has incorporated 
several lessons learned from these past efforts into FMAP, particularly the requirement for PFIs 
to co-lend alongside FMAP. The iTAP also appreciates that the FMAP development process in-
cluded stakeholder consultations with both potential borrowers and the banking community in 
India. 
36. 
The iTAP considers FMAP to be aligned with host country priorities and assesses in-
volvement on the part of India to be significant. Overall, country ownership of the funding pro-
posal is rated as medium-high.  
1.7 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high

=== PAGE 113 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.16/Rev.01 
Page 113 
 
 
 
 
37. 
iTAP concurs that fFocusing on transitioning MSMEs to a low-carbon and more resilient 
pathway is an effective strategy, given the overall size of the Indian economy, the central role of 
MSMEs and the rapid changes occurring in India. The proposal’s aim to deliver high-impact miti-
gation and adaptation projects by enhancing the capacity of local financial institutions to pro-
vide climate loans to MSMEs is viewed by iTAP as positive, and greening the existing financial 
systems is an efficient and effective approach. Moreover, FMAP plans to fund green technologies 
in remote/rural areas of India, which can be particularly challenging. To address this, the pro-
gramme’s key feature will be reaching MSMEs in rural areas through indirect lending via local 
financial institutions with a wider presence. This inclusive structure is crucial for developing the 
capacity and sustainability of climate financing in India. 
38. 
Challenges may arise in ensuring that underlying loans deliver the expected climate im-
pacts. This will require the AE to maintain strict screening criteria for its direct loans and effec-
tive oversight of its PFI partners. The iTAP assessed the criteria and processes described in the 
funding proposal and notes that they meet a minimal standard of acceptability but could be im-
proved. In particular, standards are only as effective as their implementation. In this case, SIDBI 
serving as both AE and EE dilutes one of the usual checks on misapplication that the GCF relies 
on, namely the AE acting as the GCF’s fiduciary eyes and ears. The iTAP encourages the Secretar-
iat to consider requesting additional safeguards to ensure that GCF funds and concessionality 
are used effectively, minimizing the risk of merely supporting PFI balance sheets or financing 
interventions without a strong climate rationale. 
39. 
The USD 200 million senior loan provided by GCF will be blended with SIDBI’s USD 800 
million and further leveraged by 16 times through participating local financial institutions, sup-
plemented by USD 377 million in equity at the MSME level, and this is viewed as positive by the 
iTAP. Specifically, the funding proposal states that GCF funding will help SIDBI channel a total 
investment of approximately USD 3.5 billion for mitigation and adaptation measures, resulting 
in a mobilization rate of 1:20.71. This represents significant co-finance by multiple partners, in-
cluding the MSMEs themselves. This structure aligns the interests of all parties with those of the 
GCF. By requiring financial inputs from all relevant parties, FMAP has the potential to scale up 
green financing for MSMEs, delivering climate impact projects. In addition, partnering with local 
financial institutions will leverage existing banking relationships to improve scaling and speed 
of deployment. 
40. 
Funding green technologies in MSMEs is currently perceived as risky. While MSMEs can 
borrow from other private financial institutions, the concessionality provided under this pro-
gramme will drive the adoption of green technologies in MSMEs. The GCF funds will enable 
FMAP to offer concessionality as needed, depending on the relevant MSME sector and technol-
ogy. This flexible approach allows lenders to provide financing that is fit for purpose. However, 
there is a risk that over the long tenor of FMAP, the provided concessionality may not keep up 
with market needs. The iTAP encourages the Secretariat and the AE to explore ways to ensure 
that GCF concessionality does not end up over-subsidizing sectors as technologies become more 
accepted and additional financing entrants join the market. As the AE and EE are the same en-
tity, the iTAP suggests having an external process to periodically evaluate the levels of conces-
sionality and the additionality of FMAP funding. This would help mitigate the risk of crowding 
out other funders, or of PFIs capturing windfall profits without corresponding climate benefits. 
41. 
The iTAP agrees on the effectiveness of combining a grant component with the lending 
programme to provide technical assistance and capacity-building for both MSMEs and partici-
pating financial institutions, and the grant programme is well-sized and focused on providing 
technology assessments for MSMEs. These assessments can increase awareness of climate tech-
nologies and dispel outdated perceptions about the costs and effectiveness of many clean tech-
nologies. Capacity support for participating financial institutions, particularly underserved 
NBFCs, MFIs and SFBs, is also crucial in increasing their ability to extend climate finance.

=== PAGE 114 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.16/Rev.01 
Page 114 
 
 
 
 
42. 
Overall, the iTAP rates the efficiency and effectiveness of this programme as medium-
high.  
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
43. 
The iTAP considers that the FMAP programme aligns closely with the GCF private sector 
strategy and overall mission of supporting developing countries to pursue growth pathways 
that are aligned with a low-carbon and resilient future for the planet.  
44. 
If executed well, FMAP will facilitate access to capital for vulnerable MSMEs and create 
incentives for these businesses to adopt climate-aligned technologies and processes. Im-
portantly, FMAP will also aim to green the existing financial system by building capacity and es-
tablishing a track record for PFIs in financing mitigation and adaptation investments among the 
most vulnerable economic segments. In doing so, FMAP should mobilize large-scale funds from 
these local financial institutions by de-risking private sector investments and supporting the 
greening of the financial system. 
45. 
The iTAP considers that the concessional loans and technical assistance provided 
through FMAP can play a pivotal role in reducing the costs and risks – both real and perceived – 
associated with investments in climate change mitigation and adaptation. SIDBI has long been a 
market maker for MSMEs in India and has comprehensive access to the MSME landscape, in-
cluding those not significantly serviced by traditional lenders. The iTAP notes that SIDBI is well-
positioned to be catalytic across MSME segments for both mitigation and adaptation activities. 
46. 
Significantly, the commitment of GCF funding will be complemented by substantial fi-
nancial support from SIDBI, signalling that this programme is well-suited for the Indian context. 
The programme also incorporates co-finance obligations from PFIs and the MSMEs themselves 
to ensure proper buy-in from all key actors. At the heart of FMAP is the recognition that ad-
dressing the climate finance challenge in larger and middle-income countries is best achieved by 
catalysing a green shift in local financial markets, rather than relying on cross-border funding. 
Local finance can operate more efficiently due to a better understanding of localized implemen-
tation risks, legal frameworks and market challenges, and doing all this in the right currency. In 
any investment analysis, the journey from perceived risk to real risk understanding is much 
shorter for local financial actors.  
47. 
However, the iTAP has noted some areas of concern, primarily related to the operation-
alization of FMAP over time. The FMAP concept is strong, but it relies heavily on SIDBI’s capac-
ity to underwrite loans and oversee participating PFIs’ underlying loans to achieve the target 
mitigation and adaptation impacts. Areas of FMAP that can be strengthened are noted through-
out this assessment. FMAP may face challenges associated with pipeline risks and MSMEs’ will-
ingness to adopt climate-resilient technologies and solutions. In such circumstances, there could 
be a temptation to loosen climate screening standards or oversight of PFI portfolios. It is im-
portant to consider additional safeguards in the operational plan to mitigate this risk and up-
hold the climate imperative of FMAP. 
48. 
Considering the foregoing considerations, the iTAP recommends that the Board approve 
this funding proposal.

=== PAGE 115 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.16/Rev.01 
Page 115 
 
 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP241) 
Proposal name: 
Financing Mitigation and Adaptation Projects (FMAP) in Indian 
MSMEs 
Accredited entity: 
Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) 
Country/(ies): 
India 
Project/Programme size: 
Large  
 
AE duly notes the comments of iTAP and appreciates the efforts of the team in reviewing the 
Funding Proposal package in detail. The comprehensive feedback would help the AE in further 
strengthening the proposal and programme. It may be noted by the iTAP that the Funding 
Proposal has undergone significant revisions as suggested by the secretariat and most of the 
concerns/feedback/recommendation given by the iTAP members has already been factored in 
the FP package. However, AE acknowledges the valuable feedback and would like to give below 
clause wise explanation on the comments by iTAP. 
Impact potential 
iTAPs feedback (Point 8)-: FMAP will provide loans to MSMEs targeting the renewable 
energy, energy efficiency and low-emission transport sectors. In addition, it will support 
adaptation by helping MSMEs in the water-intensive and agriculture sectors to implement 
climate solutions in their businesses, thereby increasing resilience and adaptive capacity 
against climate change. Adaptation investments will be directed to highly vulnerable regions 
such as coastal areas, the Himalayas and the eastern belt of India. According to the funding 
proposal, FMAP is expected to avoid 43.86 million t CO2 eq and benefit 10.3 million people. 
The iTAP notes that estimating GHG reductions over such a large programme and long tenor 
(13 years) is challenging due to uncertainties in the composition of underlying loans. It is 
therefore difficult to put very much stock on specific projections in the context of FMAP; 
however, the iTAP acknowledges that the targeted loan areas (e.g. energy efficiency, low-
emission transport, renewables) coupled with climate-aligned screening mechanisms mean 
that there is the potential for significant impact. Importantly, the sheer scale of India and the 
role of MSMEs in the economy support an argument that the overall impact will be positive 
from a climate standpoint. 
 
SIDBI Response: 
While estimating the GHG emissions, AE has considered the following:  
(i) 
AE has used the approved methodologies (CDM and SEC) for calculation 
for energy savings and GHG emissions of different sub-sectors. 
(ii) 
AE has experience of working in the area of Energy Efficiency in MSME 
since 2005-06. A technology list comprises of 891 clean, green, energy 
efficient technologies have been developed with the support of technical 
expert agencies, Bureau of Energy Efficiency etc., AE has used the data 
from the projects assisted in the past, by AE for the baseline calculations.

=== PAGE 116 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.16/Rev.01 
Page 116 
 
 
 
However, considering the various limitations as well as vast heterogeneity of the MSME 
sector, AE agrees with the observations of the iTAP that although realistic estimations of GHG 
emissions is difficult for such a long tenor but the programme has a huge potential for 
significant impact on the most vulnerable segment i.e MSMEs.   
 
iTAPs feedback (Point 12)- FMAP intends not only to increase the availability of finance for 
climate-related loans to MSME but also to use concessionality to accelerate the transition to 
climate-friendly technologies. The AE has made a credible case for the levels of 
concessionality needed to shift PFIs towards climate-aligned sectors and, more importantly, 
to encourage MSMEs to adopt technology changes that enhance their resilience to climate 
impacts and reduce GHG emissions. However, the iTAP notes a concern over how levels of 
concessionality will be determined over time. The iTAP recommends that SIDBI regularly 
evaluate and adjust concessionality on a sector-by-sector basis to avoid over-subsidization, 
which could generate windfall gains for some PFIs while crowding out other players.  
 
SIDBI Response-  
The concerns regarding determination of levels of concessionality and passing of the same 
over a period is duly noted and the explanation is as follows:  
(a). The concessionality provided by GCF on blended basis shall be passed on to the 
borrowers (MSMEs as well as PFIs) by AE by way of reducing the spread by atleast an amount 
equal to the concessionality worked out on blended basis towards each tranche of drawal 
from GCF. Further, AE shall suitably bind the PFIs to pass on the concessionality on a blended 
basis to their end borrowers. 
(b). AE duly notes the suggestions of iTAP regarding the necessity to evaluate and adjust 
concessionality to avoid over-subsidization. In this regard, AE submits that all the sub-loans 
will undergo credit rating and the effective interest rate for the end borrower would be the 
interest rate based on the credit rating of the borrower. The credit rating parameters include 
various factors on obligor and facility, as well as sectoral outlook. 
(c). The programme has also inbuilt suitable checks and balances which includes M&E on 
sample basis of sub-loans, periodical reporting of the climate benefits, pricing and passing on 
the concessionality to the ultimate borrowers etc., to avoid over-subsidisation or PFIs getting 
windfall profits without any climate benefits. The programme proposes to work not with one 
two PFIs but with around 20 to 25 PFIs and it is expected that over the period gradually there 
will be sufficient competition among these PFIs for climate financing. This would obviate the 
risk of windfall profits to the PFIs and shall ensure further benefits to the ultimate borrowers 
i.e. MSMEs.  
 
iTAPs feedback (Point 13)- In addition, the iTAP has some qualms concerning the risk that a 
substantial portion of FMAP funding could end up refinancing existing PFI portfolio loans 
instead of financing new and additional MSME efforts to adopt climate-friendly technology. 
There is very little climate-directed utility in using GCF concessionality to refinance 
mitigation efforts that have already been funded commercially. SIDBI has indicated that it 
may wish to fund some portfolio refinance in the early stages of the programme as a way to 
attract PFI partners and facilitate their co-financing capacity. The iTAP is willing to accept this 
argument but strongly recommends that the Secretariat and SIDBI develop safeguards to 
ensure that the bulk of concessional funding is truly for additional projects. The iTAP

=== PAGE 117 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.16/Rev.01 
Page 117 
 
 
 
encourages SIDBI to develop a plan for FMAP that minimizes portfolio refinancing over time 
on a trajectory to zero over the programme’s tenure. 
 
SIDBI Response- AE wish to state that iTAP concerns are addressed in the revised Funding 
Proposal and the Term Sheet. Further, AE would like to supplement with the following w.r.t 
refinancing of existing portfolio: 
(A) The programme will not cover any sub-loans prior to the date of effectiveness 
of FAA.  
(B) The Programme will offer onlending/ refinance support against eligible assets 
created by the empanelled PFIs and originated no longer than six months 
prior to approval from the Executing Entity for financing in accordance with 
FAA. The concerned PFI would be required to submit (for Refinance) all the 
details, copy of documentation, etc. to satisfy AE that the conditions stipulated 
in the term sheet at the time of sanction have been fully complied with.  
The above will ensure that only new/additional projects (which were not already support by 
PFIs before launch of the programme) are covered under the programme. 
 
Paradigm shift potential 
AE acknowledges the positive feedback from iTAP on the paradigm shift potential of the 
FMAP proposal.  
 
Sustainable development potential 
AE acknowledges the positive feedback from iTAP on the sustainable development potential 
of the FMAP proposal. 
 
Needs of the recipient 
AE duly notes and appreciates that iTAP recognises the objectives of the FMAP programme in 
alleviating the financing barriers of MSMEs in adopting mitigation and adaptation 
interventions.  
 
Country ownership 
iTAP feedback (Point 34)- The iTAP finds it commendable that SIDBI will contribute a 
substantial portion (80 per cent) of the finance in the lending facility from its own balance 
sheet, demonstrating confidence in the programme’s potential to achieve its desired 
outcomes. However, it is disappointing that SIDBI’s financial commitment is limited to 
the loan facility and does not extend to the grant component for capacity-building. 
While SIDBI intends to contribute in-kind assistance (personnel) to some capacity-
building efforts, the lack of any SIDBI budget at stake in the grant component increases 
the risk of quality control issues over time. When grant facilities rely solely on external

=== PAGE 118 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.16/Rev.01 
Page 118 
 
 
 
funding there is a higher risk that managers prioritize fund deployment over ensuring 
the funds achieve the best impact outcomes. 
 
SIDBI Response- It is worth noting that iTAP acknowledges that the FMAP aligns with the 
implementation of India’s NDC and is consistent with national adaptation plans and the 
national climate strategy. AE appreciates the positive feedback received in this section.  
In this regard, AE wish to submit the following: 
(i) 
AE is ensuring 16X leverage of the funds contributed by the GCF. 
(ii) 
AE is taking the credit risk on NBFCs, SFBs, MFIs as well as the MSMEs. 
GCF is taking credit risk on SIDBI which is a AAA rated quasi sovereign 
entity.  
(iii) 
It may be noted that the TA supported by GCF has been estimated on a highly 
conservative basis and it is not even 2% of the total cost i.e. USD 400 Mn (around 
10% of total climate financing expected, USD 4 Bn) which will be incurred by the 
EE (SIDBI) as well as the PFIs towards manpower and administrative costs 
towards deployment of the climate loans. 
 
As regards comment on prioritising fund deployment of the donor, AE may like to mention 
again that AE has managed several technical assistance(s) which were part of a project 
involving LOC for being channelised and TA for capacity building. There has been only 
counterpart contribution in-kind (from SIDBI) and still AE has achieved the intended 
outcome set by the donor(s). 
 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
iTAP feedback (Point 38)-  Challenges may arise in ensuring that underlying loans deliver 
the expected climate impacts. This will require the AE to maintain strict screening criteria for 
its direct loans and effective oversight of its PFI partners. The iTAP assessed the criteria and 
processes described in the funding proposal and notes that they meet a minimal standard of 
acceptability but could be improved. In particular, standards are only as effective as their 
implementation. In this case, SIDBI serving as both AE and EE dilutes one of the usual checks 
on misapplication that the GCF relies on, namely the AE acting as the GCF’s fiduciary eyes and 
ears. The iTAP encourages the Secretariat to consider requesting additional safeguards to 
ensure that GCF funds and concessionality are used effectively, minimizing the risk of merely 
supporting PFI balance sheets or financing interventions without a strong climate rationale. 
 
SIDBI Response- SIDBI duly acknowledges iTAP’s comment in maintaining strict screening 
criteria. In this regard, we would like to highlight the Funding Proposal has been revised to 
accommodate the following: 
1. A comprehensive eligibility criteria and investment process for the mitigation 
and adaptation technologies that would be financed has been laid down and 
the compliance of the same shall be ensured through a robust MRV 
mechanism for both direct as well as indirect lending.  
 
2. The revised Funding Proposal also has details of the loan approval process in 
which at the very initial stage, due diligence related to technical viability, 
climate impact, ESS due diligence would be checked by dedicated professional

=== PAGE 119 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.16/Rev.01 
Page 119 
 
 
 
at the branch level and at the PMU level. For the PFIs, the required check to 
factor in climate criteria is placed at the very first stage of the loan approval 
which details out the condition for empanelment which necessitates that the 
PFIs which have interest in climate financing and are willing to adopt new 
systems processes would be empanelled.  
 
SIDBI’s total balance sheet size is around USD 57 billion (FY 2024). Out of the above around 
90% approximately USD 53.4 billion is towards providing on-lending/ Refinance support to 
50 Banks, 78 NBFCs, 41 SFB/MFIs. This depicts SIDBI’s strong relationship/ operating 
capabilities with Financial Institutions. Further, with regard to climate financing, SIDBI has 
been actively pursuing energy efficiency financing in MSMEs since 2005 -06 and have 
channelised around USD 2 billion to over 16,000+ MSMEs.  The present outstanding of direct 
green loans is USD 850 million as on March 31, 2024. Hence, AE has strong capacity to 
underwrite loans as well as to encourage MSMEs and the PFIs to participate in the 
programme. 
 
AE again reassure the achievements of envisaged impact of the programme through our 
development and credit plus engagement. This is validated by AE’s continued top ranking on 
multilateral supported programmes. It may be mentioned that in many such multilaterals 
programmes, SIDBI has been playing both the roles i.e AE as well as EE. 
 
iTAP feedback (Point 40)-  Funding green technologies in MSMEs is currently perceived as 
risky. While MSMEs can borrow from other private financial institutions, the concessionality 
provided under this programme will drive the adoption of green technologies in MSMEs. The 
GCF funds will enable FMAP to offer concessionality as needed, depending on the relevant 
MSME sector and technology. This flexible approach allows lenders to provide financing that 
is fit for purpose. However, there is a risk that over the long tenor of FMAP, the provided 
concessionality may not keep up with market needs. The iTAP encourages the Secretariat and 
the AE to explore ways to ensure that GCF concessionality does not end up over-subsidizing 
sectors as technologies become more accepted and additional financing entrants join the 
market. As the AE and EE are the same entity, the iTAP suggests having an external process to 
periodically evaluate the levels of concessionality and the additionality of FMAP funding. This 
would help mitigate the risk of crowding out other funders, or of PFIs capturing windfall 
profits without corresponding climate benefits. 
 
SIDBI Response- The programme has been designed on the blended finance concept to offer 
concessional loans to MSMEs either directly or indirectly through PFIs (NBFCs/SFBs/MFIs). 
The programme envisages a leveraging of more than 16x of the GCF support by way of 
concessional loan. The programme shall create an ecosystem for financing climate 
technologies in order to ensure that results are achieved at a scale. Through this, the 
programme intends to encourage the PFIs to create an ecosystem of climate financing which 
would allow them to lend to the MSMEs with an increased understanding of the associated 
risks and underwriting capabilities required. SIDBI’s direct lending to the MSMEs sets an 
example for the PFIs to follow to successfully lend to the MSMEs for adopting low emission 
climate resilient technologies.

=== PAGE 120 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.16/Rev.01 
Page 120 
 
 
 
This will be achieved by : 
(i). Offering concessional finance to MSMEs directly encouraging them to adopt relevant 
climate resilient technologies and interventions. However, at the same time minimum energy 
savings of 10% will be ensured on a sub-loans basis and 20% at the programme level.  
(ii). Offering concessional lines of capital and blended financial products to FIs which will 
help in reducing their risk of lending towards MSMEs thus encouraging them to offer 
additional financing. 
 
The programme has also inbuilt suitable checks and balances which includes M&E on sample 
basis of sub-loans, periodical reporting of the climate benefits and passing on the 
concessionality to the ultimate borrowers etc., to avoid over-subsidisation or PFIs getting 
windfall profits without any climate benefits. The programme proposes to work not with one 
two PFIs but with around 20 to 25 PFIs and it is expected that over the period gradually there 
will be sufficient competition among these PFIs for climate financing. This would obviate the 
risk of windfall profits to the PFIs and shall ensure further benefits to the ultimate borrowers 
i.e. MSMEs.  
 
As regard independent evaluation, it may be mentioned that the programme has suitable 
provisions for interim and final evaluations through independent third-party agencies. 
 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
iTAPs feedback (Point 47)- However, the iTAP has noted some areas of concern, primarily 
related to the operationalization of FMAP over time. The FMAP concept is strong, but it relies 
heavily on SIDBI’s capacity to underwrite loans and oversee participating PFIs’ underlying 
loans to achieve the target mitigation and adaptation impacts. Areas of FMAP that can be 
strengthened are noted throughout this assessment. FMAP may face challenges associated 
with pipeline risks and MSMEs’ willingness to adopt climate-resilient technologies and 
solutions. In such circumstances, there could be a temptation to loosen climate screening 
standards or oversight of PFI portfolios. It is important to consider additional safeguards in 
the operational plan to mitigate this risk and uphold the climate imperative of FMAP. 
 
SIDBI response- SIDBI submits the following: 
1. SIDBI’s total balance sheet size is around USD 57 billion (FY 2024). Out of the above 
around 90% approximately USD 53.4 billion is towards providing on-lending/ 
Refinance support to 50 Banks, 78 NBFCs, 41 SFB/MFIs. This depicts SIDBI’s strong 
relationship/ operating capabilities with Financial Institutions. Further, with regard 
to climate financing, SIDBI has been actively pursuing energy efficiency financing in 
MSMEs since 2005 -06 and have channelised around USD 2 billion to over 16,000+ 
MSMEs.  The present outstanding of direct green loans is USD 850 million as on March 
31, 2024. Hence, AE has strong capacity to underwrite loans as well as to encourage 
MSMEs and the PFIs to participate in the programme. 
 
2. It may be mentioned that there are more than 63 million MSMEs in India and the 
programme is targeting only around 10,000 MSMEs. Notwithstanding the above, we

=== PAGE 121 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.16/Rev.01 
Page 121 
 
 
 
fully concur with the views of the iTAP regarding willingness of MSMEs to adopt 
climate -resilient technologies and solutions.  Accordingly, the programme envisages 
to provide suitable technical handholding, capacity building, awareness as well as 
other TA activities to encourage MSMEs to participate in the programme. The 
concessionality will also play a major role in encouraging MSMEs to adopt climate- 
resilient technologies.

=== PAGE 122 ===
0 
GENDER ASSESSMENT AND ACTION PLAN 
‘Financing Mitigation & Adaptation Projects (FMAP) in 
Indian MSMEs’ 
Gender documentation for FP241

=== PAGE 123 ===
CONTENTS 
1. 
GENDER ANALYSIS & ASSESSMENT STUDY ......................................................... 1 
1.1 
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. 1 
1.1.1 RATIONALE OF THE ASSESSMENT .............................................................. 1 
1.1.2 METHODOLOGY NOTES ................................................................................ 2 
1.2 
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT: GENDER IN INDIA ..................................... 3 
1.3 DATA REFERENCES & TRENDS ......................................................................... 7 
1.4 CHALLENGES RELATED TO WOMEN ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN MSME 
SECTOR IN INDIA ............................................................................................ 8 
1.5 
GENDER 
LENS 
ON 
MSMES 
AND 
CLIMATE 
(MITIGATION 
AND 
ADAPTATION) .................................................................................................. 9 
1.6 
INITIATIVES TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT TO PROMOTE & SUPPORT 
WOMEN ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN MSME SECTOR IN INDIA ................... 12 
2. 
SIDBI’S 
EXISTING 
INITIATIVES/MECHANISMS 
TO 
SUPPORT 
WOMEN 
ENTREPRENEURS IN MSME SECTOR .................................................................. 15 
3. 
GENDER ACTION PLAN ........................................................................................... 20 
3.1 
ESTABLISHING THE CONTEXT/ BASELINE TO THE ACTION PLAN ......... 20 
3.2 
MAPPING OF PROPOSED GENDER-SENSITIVE PROGRAMME MEASURES 
AGAINST PROGRAMME CYCLE AND PROJECT ACTIVITIES ................... 20 
3.3 
M&E, KNOWLEDGE, EVIDENCE AND LEARNING ...................................... 22 
3.4 OUTCOMES FROM PROGRAM ......................................................................... 23 
3.6 GENDER ACTION PLAN: TEMPLATE (PROJECT/PROGRAM LEVEL)- 
INDICATIVE FIGURES ................................................................................... 25 
APPENDIX I: CHECKLIST .................................................................................................... 28 
APPENDIX- II: GENDER POLICY ........................................................................................ 29 
APPENDIX -III STRENGTHENING GREEN FINANCE AND MAINSTREAMING GENDER 33 
GIFS-GROW ANNUAL EVENT ................................................................................. 34 
OBJECTIVES OF THE ANNUAL EVENT ............................................................... 34 
SESSION 1: VOICES ON GROW BY WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS ....................... 35

=== PAGE 124 ===
ii 
 
SESSION 2: POLICY PERSPECTIVE ON CLIMATE FINANCE LANDSCAPE INDIA: 
DEVELOPMENTS IN THE BANKING SECTOR, AND REGULATION FOR THE 
SAME .............................................................................................................. 38 
SESSION 3: SHARING OF GIFS ACHIEVEMENTS ................................................. 41 
SESSION 4: INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION PERSPECTIVES: WHAT ARE THEIR 
GREEN ASPIRATIONS? ................................................................................ 44 
SESSION 5: LESSONS LEARNED FROM G20 PRESIDENCY FOR THE INDIAN 
FINANCIAL SECTOR & COP28 MESSAGES & TAKEAWAYS IN INDIA 
CONTEXT ....................................................................................................... 46 
SESSION 6: THE NEXUS OF WOMEN AND GREEN FINANCE ACROSS 
STAKEHOLDERS ........................................................................................... 49 
ANNEXURE – AGENDA ............................................................................................ 52

=== PAGE 125 ===
1 
 
1. 
GENDER ANALYSIS & ASSESSMENT STUDY 
1.1 
INTRODUCTION 
 
In the past few years, India has been increasingly faced with the challenge of mitigating 
the detriments of and adapting to the adverse impact of climate change and balancing 
the same with the need of economic growth. While the ever-increasing demand of 
energy resources, energy systems and infrastructure, concomitant with the needs of 
a vast and rapidly developing country, climate related vulnerabilities are now in 
desperate need of mitigation and adaptation actions.  
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (“MSMEs”), forming a vital part of the Indian 
economy and playing a critical role in the sector of employment generation in the 
country, today face considerable operational challenges, energy costs being one of 
the key causes. Challenges such as insufficient infrastructure, limited access to credit 
and investments, as well as limited financial, technical knowledge and capacities 
further render MSMEs vulnerable to adverse impacts of climate change. 
It is in this context that SIDBI, India proposes to address such deficiencies, through a 
programme named ‘Financing Mitigation & Adaptation Projects (FMAP) in 
MSMEs’, that is aimed at facilitating MSMEs to become more climate resilient, 
sustainable and competitive in the long run.” (“Programme”) This programme will be 
upscale ongoing projects, through affordable and accessible finance and technical 
support for projects pertaining to climate change mitigation and adaptation 
projects.  
Among other aspects, the design of the programme takes into consideration, the 
existing gender issues, and concerns, in conformity with international norms and 
national priorities.  
 
1.1.1 RATIONALE OF THE ASSESSMENT 
 
The Gender Assessment will help to understand relationship between men and 
women, their access to resources, their activities, and the constraints they face relative 
to each other. 
 
The objective of the present document is to showcase findings basis a Gender 
Assessment Study and formulate a Gender Action Plan for the Programme, with 
respect to its’ targeted sectors. The projects in MSMEs under this Programme 
would 
be 
related 
to 
mitigation 
specific 
interventions 
such 
as 
Energy 
Efficiency/Technology upgradation, Electric Mobility, Renewable Energy (including 
Solar). Further, the interventions will also include adaptation specific interventions

=== PAGE 126 ===
2 
 
across a variety of themes including Climate Smart technologies, Water, Wastewater, 
Innovative Technologies etc. 
The scope of work under the Programme entails, conducting a gender assessment 
study, preparing a gender action plan, as well identifying the gender impact and 
benefits accruing from the said programme.  
 
1.1.2 METHODOLOGY NOTES 
The assessment and the action plan under the Programme is prepared in alignment 
with the Green Climate Fund (“GCF”) Gender Policy, in consonance with the 
instructions provided by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change(“UNFCCC”), the Sustainable Development Goals (“SDGs”) and other related 
international agreements and normative frameworks. The exercise of acknowledging 
disproportionate gender impact, aids in examining the inter-sectional constraints and 
issues prevalent in the national and sectoral context; and thereby aims to incorporate 
a course to enhance the ‘agency’ of women in the change process (in contributing to 
mitigation and adaptation activities, enhancing resilience and well-being, supporting 
livelihoods in volume and diversity, etc).1 
 
It is to be noted that GCF has placed gender perspectives as a “key element of its’ 
programming architecture” and deems it to Be an “essential decision-making element 
for the deployment of its resources” towards a thoroughly “gender-responsive” 
approach for its projects/ programmes. 
 
In preparing the Gender Action Plan for the Programme, following approaches have 
been leveraged: 
1. Baseline assessment of participation of women in the MSME sector in 
India as entrepreneurs 
a. The literature reviewed from secondary sources to understand the 
baseline situation and the broad scope for EE applications in the sector 
considering gender dimensions. In this regard, relevant reports, about 
national policies and guidelines (environmental, social, gender equality), 
historical studies and research on Energy Efficiency (EE), international 
best practices, potential EE interventions etc. considering gender equity 
were analysed. SIDBI’s Gender Policy attached at Appendix-II. 
b. This assessment has been done based on SIDBI’s existing initiatives to 
promote women entrepreneurship and based on research studies 
supported by SIDBI. 
c. SIDBI in collaboration with Dun and Bradstreet introduced a quarterly 
Sustainability Perception Index (SIDBI - D&B SPeX)2 - the green pulse 
 
1 UNWomen and Green Climate Fund, (2017), Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate Fund Projects, available at 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/guidelines-gcf-toolkit-mainstreaming-gender_0.pdf 
2 https://www.sidbi.in/spex

=== PAGE 127 ===
3 
 
indicator. SPeX is a pioneering effort to assess the sustainability 
perceptions of MSMEs across various industries and locations. The 
index is designed to provide a comprehensive overview of the 
sustainability landscape in the Indian MSME sector. 
 
2. Assessment of challenges faced by women entrepreneurs in the MSME 
sector 
a. Stakeholder consultation i.e. “Strengthening Green Financing and 
Mainstreaming Gender” organised under the banner ‘Green Indian 
Financial System (GIFS)3’ – Greening of Finance by Women (Grow)4 
Initiatives, founded by SIDBI, Shakti Sustainable Energy Foundation 
(SSEF) and French Development Agency (AFD). The proceedings of 
stakeholder consultation attached at Annexure-III. 
 
3. Review 
of 
SIDBI’s 
existing 
capabilities 
to 
promote 
women 
entrepreneurship/gender equality 
a. This assessment has been done based on a review of SIDBI’s existing 
initiatives to promote women entrepreneurship and participation of 
women in the MSME sector.  
b. Further, SIDBI’s gender policies have been reviewed in line with GCF’s 
gender policies 
 
The above assessments feed into the Gender Action Plan proposed for the 
Programme and the specific outcomes from the Gender Action Plan for the 
Programme.  
 
1.2 
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT: GENDER IN INDIA 
 
Gender and Employment in India – Data Trends 
There remains no doubt in the growing potential of women in terms of their economic 
participation. It is to be noted that the difference between the overall literacy rate for 
adult males and females aged 15 and above have significantly reduced, with the 
current participation of women estimated at 65.79 per cent of the total female 
population, against the male population comprising of 82.37 per cent.  
 
However, it is pertinent to note that there was a significant disproportionate gender 
impact because of the COVID - 19 pandemic, in sectors of labour, employment, 
financial inclusion and with reference to other socio-economic considerations. In the 
 
3 https://www.gifsinitiative.in/ 
4 https://grownetwork.in/

=== PAGE 128 ===
4 
 
global context, the WEF Gender Gap Report 20215(“WEF Report 2021") highlighted 
the following pointers: 
1. 5 per cent of all employed women lost their jobs, compared with 3.9 per cent of 
employed men (ILO projection)  
2. marked decline of women’s hiring into leadership roles across multiple industries6 
3. increase in care work for women. 
4. automation, digitalization as compounding factors in ‘labour market disruption’ – 
with implications for ‘gender parity in further of jobs’ and ‘occupational gender 
segregation  
 
The WEF Report 2021 further identifies the increased likeliness of gender gaps in 
sectors that require disruptive technical skills. Further, in fields where women are 
under-represented, they are likely to face discrimination and other institutional or social 
barriers in job transition, particularly in emerging areas of growth potential, with 
widening disparities in access to resources and capacities.  
In case of India, reports furnished by UN Women (2021)7 and Centre for Sustainable 
Employment, Azim Premji University (2021)8 point to certain alarming trends, that 
threaten the national and international investments in gender empowerment and long-
term gains in this regard. The latter recognizes the impact of the pandemic, rendering 
a large section of the workforce without access to employment or social protection. 
These reports also identify the increased informality and decline in earnings for 
majority of workers, with women and younger workers disproportionately affected, 
because of the pandemic. 
For women, it is observed that wage inequality and the burden of unpaid care has 
pushed more women out of employment falling into depths of poverty, with women 
losing jobs during COVID-19, and therein engaging more in unpaid care work, both in 
India and globally.  
 
This section attempts to provide an overview of gender related workforce allocation 
vis a vis the MSME sector in India. Given the scope of the present study, the focal 
point of this sections is to furnish national level data, in respect to the participation of 
women as workforce in the economy and the current scenario of women workforce 
and ownership vis a vis the MSME sector. 
 
 
 
5 Global Gender Gap Report, WEForum 2021, https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2021.pdf 
6 Ibid. It is noted that while this trend is countered in industries as Software and IT Services, Financial Services, Health and Healthcare, and 
Manufacturing; the gains are offset by high dislocation in Consumer sector, Non-profits, and Media and Communication – industries with 
higher participation of women – based on Linked in data.  
7https://www.unwomen.org/en/news/stories/2021/7/faq-women-and-covid-19-in-india 
8 Centre for Sustainable Employment (2021), State of Working India 2021, Azim Premji University, 
https://cse.azimpremjiuniversity.edu.in/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/SWI2021_August_WEB.pdf

=== PAGE 129 ===
5 
 
Female population (per cent of total)9 
 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
48.34% 
48.35% 
48.36% 
48.38% 
48.40% 
 
Labor force, female (per cent of total labor force)10 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
25.04
% 
25.09% 
24.98% 
25.39% 
25.98% 
28.70% 
 
Gender-Wise Distribution of Workers in Rural and Urban areas (in lakhs)11 
 
Sector 
Female 
Male 
Total 
Share (per 
cent) 
Rural 
137.50 
360.15 
497.78 
45 
Urban 
127.42 
484.54 
612.10 
55 
Total 
264.92 
844.68 
1109.89 
100 
Share per cent 
24 
76 
100 
 
 
More recently, a gender assessment of enterprise ownership has also been included 
in the Annual Report of 2022-23 by the Ministry of MSMEs, as has been furnished 
hereinbelow: 
Out of 1109.89 lakh employees in the MSME sector, males comprise of 844.68 lakh 
employees totalling to approximately 76 per cent of the total workforce in India, 
whereas the remaining 264.92 lakh workers i.e. 24 per cent of the total workforce in 
India comprises of females. The sectoral distribution of workers in male and female 
categories have been provided as follows: 
Participation of Women in MSME sector as entrepreneurs 
As per the statistical data provided on the Udyam Registration Portal (“URP”) under 
the Ministry of MSME12, women owned MSMEs constitute 20.37 per cent of the total 
number of MSMEs registered on the said portal since its inception in 1st July 2020.   
 
 
 
9 World Bank Data/ WDI, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL.FE.ZS?locations=IN 
10 Derived using data from International Labour Organization, ILOSTAT database. The data retrieved on June 15, 2021, 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.TLF.TOTL.FE.ZS?locations=IN&view=chart 
11 Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, GoI, Annual Report 2022-23. Untitled-1 (msme.gov.in) 
12https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2002574

=== PAGE 130 ===
6 
 
 
These women owned enterprises are spread across several states, with Eastern 
region of India having the highest share of women-owned MSMEs.  
 
Nature of women owned MSMEs in India 
• Based on type & scale of organization13: Most women-owned enterprises in 
India are a single-person micro enterprise. Only ~17% of women-owned 
enterprises have employed workers, of which ~95% operate with less than 6 
workers. As the size of the organization increases, the proportion of women-led 
enterprises decreases. There is a need to increase the share of women-owned 
MSME in the small and medium enterprise. 
 
 
Figure 1: Women owned MSME across different categories of MSME 
 
Social & Financial Impact of the women owned MSMEs:  
• These women-owned MSMEs’ encompasses 18.73 per cent of the total 
employment generated by the total Udyam registered MSMEs, further, 
generating 11.15 per cent of the total investment therein14.  
• The contribution of women owned MSMEs vis a vis the total turnover of URP 
registered MSMEs totals to 10.22 per cent.   
• As per the data provided on the Udyam Assist Platform (“UAP”) 15 , the 
contribution of women-owned Informal Micro enterprises (IMEs) to the total 
number IMEs since the inception of Udyam Assist portal on 11.01.2023 is 70.49 
per cent, and their contribution to employment stands at 70.84 per cent. 
 
Women participation in total workforce: 
 
13 MoMSME annual report 2021-22 
14 https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=2002574 
15The Udyam Assist Platform of Ministry of MSME. GoI facilitates online registration of Informal Micro 
Enterprises (“IME”) through Assist Process for generation of Udyam Registration Number and Udyam Assist 
Certificate. (https://udyamassist.gov.in/)

=== PAGE 131 ===
7 
 
 
• As per SIDBI’s SPeX conducted survey of 250+ MSMEs across India during 
October-December 202316 through a digital questionnaire containing questions 
aimed to elicit their perception, understanding and implementation of 
sustainability practices/measures. Out of total MSMEs surveyed only 38% of 
MSMEs cited the participation of higher women in total workforce.  
 
1.3 DATA REFERENCES & TRENDS 
 
The details of the total number of women owned MSMEs and their contribution to 
employment, investment and turnover as available on the URP and UAP is provided 
hereinbelow17: 
 
Category 
Total 
Employment 
Investment 
(INR In Crore) 
Turnover 
(INR In Crore) 
Women MSME 
 4,667,278 
28,407,069 
126845.12 
1714992.98 
MSMEs 
22,819,417 
151,668,034 
1,137,237 
16,784,358 
Percentage 
of 
Women owned 
MSMEs 
 20.5 per cent 18.73 per cent 
11.15 per cent 10.22 per cent 
 
 
Contribution of women-owned Informal Micro Enterprises (IMEs) to total IMEs 
registered on the UAP since Inception of the portal (11.01.2023 to 31.01.2024) is 
furnished hereinbelow: 
Category 
Total (nos.) 
Employment 
(no 
of 
persons) 
Women IME 
9,108,058 
11,023,945 
IMEs 
12,920,177 
15,561,967 
 per centage 
70.49 per cent 
70.84 per cent 
 
16 https://www.sidbi.in/head/uploads/spexthegreenpulse_documents/D&B%20SIDBI%20SPeX%20Oct-
Dec%202023.pdf 
17https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2002574

=== PAGE 132 ===
8 
 
1.4 CHALLENGES RELATED TO WOMEN ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN 
MSME SECTOR IN INDIA 
 
The MSME sector in India contributes to ~30% of India’s GDP and employs around 
110 million people. In India, about 89% of the women-owned enterprises operate all 
year round, 9%are seasonal, and the remaining 2% operate casually, which are 
neither perennial nor seasonal18. 
 
The stakeholder consultation highlights the efforts needed to support the greening of 
Indian financial systems and the role of MSMEs in initiatives scaling up of renewables, 
energy efficiency, electric vehicles and sustainable business. The event brings 
together stakeholders from different sectors to share learnings and drive sustainable 
practices. The consultation also focuses on promoting women's participation in the 
green and climate finance sector. Women entrepreneurs share their experiences and 
insights in sustainable business, highlighting the challenges they face and the potential 
solutions. The experts also deliberated on challenges faced by sustainable businesses 
in scaling their products, the need for government support, and the importance of user-
friendly technology and clear communication for making sustainable technologies 
commercially viable. 
 
Following are some of the key challenges faced by women entrepreneurs in India.  
 
• Not Sustainable: ~73% women-led enterprises have faced a reduction in 
revenues post COVID-19. Most female entrepreneurs are concentrated in 
sectors and industries highly affected by the pandemic and digitization like 
micro and small businesses in non-professional services, such as tailor shop 
owners, dressmakers, shopkeepers and street vendors, arts and handicrafts 
vendors, and beauty-parlor owners, among others. This points to the fact that 
women led businesses are not financially sustainable/resilient enough to 
recover from external shocks.  
• Not Autonomous: In ~20% cases, the business-related decisions are taken 
by the respective spouses and not the women entrepreneur running the 
business. Often, women do not truly own or control many women-led 
enterprises. They depend considerably on men for key business 
decisions, procurement of raw materials, pricing information, and market 
access. 
• Not Formal: ~95.6% of the women entrepreneurs in India are informal and not 
registered with relevant national/state institutions. A high level of informality 
harms the growth and resilience of their enterprises and their entrepreneurial 
rights. The level of effort involved in running such enterprises go unaccounted 
 
18 Niti Aayog – “Decoding support to women entrepreneurs in india” - 2023

=== PAGE 133 ===
9 
 
for and expose women to occupational health hazards. Further, informality 
leads to challenges in accessing finance, market, etc.   
• Not sufficient employment generating: ~95% of women proprietors run with 
less than six workers, most being own-account or single person enterprises. 
Only ~1.9% proprietors run with six to 10 employees. This points to the fact 
that women entrepreneurs often lack skills in scaling businesses i.e. in 
areas such as business management, market access, access to finance, 
etc. 
• Lack of awareness and skills on green jobs and technologies:  Women in 
Indian MSMEs have been confined to low-paying, low-skilled jobs. The ongoing 
transitions present them with an opportunity to realign their skill sets and adjust 
to the evolving nature of work. Digital & Green Technologies proficiency is one 
of the most important skills that women need to acquire to keep pace with the 
ongoing transitions. This will enable them to enter traditionally male-dominated 
sectors that rely heavily on digital technologies, such as healthcare services, 
automobiles, and more advanced roles within the textiles sector with green 
technologies.  
 
Currently, there is limited evidence on how climate change affects women in the 
MSME sector. The impact of these disruptions presents both a challenge and an 
opportunity for mainstreaming gender inclusion and empowerment through the 
proposed project.  
 
1.5 
GENDER LENS ON MSMES AND CLIMATE (MITIGATION AND 
ADAPTATION) 
 
The role of women entrepreneurs in driving inclusive economic growth cannot be ruled 
out. Women entrepreneurs not only generate income for themselves and their families 
but also reinvest in their communities, thereby creating a ripple effect of positive 
socioeconomic impact. By fostering entrepreneurship opportunities for women, we can 
reduce gender disparities in employment and help alleviate poverty. Targeted 
interventions to address the specific needs of women in different regions and sectors, 
especially in clean energy and climate-resilient agriculture, would be the best next 
step. 
 
Women entrepreneurs are not just agents of change; they are the architects of a 
sustainable future. To create a more inclusive, equitable, and sustainable future for 
generations to come, women-led endeavours must be supported. Further, an enabling 
environment should be created for women to flourish and share their learning’s and 
insights while tackling climate change.  
 
A recent report for “improving women’s productivity and incomes” through 
energy/ climate initiatives has also been conducted in 2021 by the Council on

=== PAGE 134 ===
10 
 
Energy, Environment and Water.19 Citing a direct link or contribution to SDGs 5, 7 and 
8, women’s engagement as producers, customers, and suppliers in this area is seen 
to have potential for expanding markets and achieving scale. 
 
Opportunities: 
 
In order to address women’s specific and systemic vulnerabilities, there is a need for 
collective efforts that support women in the sector.  
• There is a need for national and state level governments to ensure effective 
skill training in addition to training provided by the employer.  
• Drawing lessons from past experiences: Women are also more susceptible 
to economic fluctuations and other shocks that affect the MSME sector. For 
Instance, during the first lockdown in 2020, only 7 per cent of men lost their 
jobs, compared to 47 per cent of women who lost their jobs and did not return 
to work by the end of the year. In the informal sector, women fared even worse. 
Between March and April 2021, rural Indian women in informal jobs accounted 
for 80 per cent of job losses.” 
 “Indian women also spend more time doing unpaid care work at home 
than men. On an average, they spend 9.8 times more time than men on 
unpaid domestic chores and 4.5 hours a day caring for children, elders 
and the sick. During the pandemic, their share of unpaid care work grew 
by nearly 30 per cent.” Centre for Sustainable Employment, State of 
Working India (2021)  
 “More girls than boys were left out of school during the pandemic and 65 
per cent of parents surveyed were reluctant to continue the education of 
girls and resorting to child marriages to save costs. This can create an 
entire generation of young women without education and employment 
opportunities.” UN Women (2021) 
 
As women-led businesses continue to recover from the pandemic-induced 
shocks, there is an emerging need to adopt cleaner energy technologies, 
digitalization, and other transitions in the value chain. As these transitions 
necessitate newer and more specialized skills, they further compound the 
existing challenges that women in MSMEs currently face. 
 
• New skills and training for women in green jobs: Women are more inclined 
to embrace technologies and mechanisms that offer cost and energy savings, 
leading to increased cash flows. It is imperative to develop suitable business 
cases and models to promote the adoption of renewable technologies, such as 
solar energy and biogas. There is, therefore, a need to make such innovations 
 
19 Improving Women’s Productivity and Incomes Through Clean Energy in India Sasmita Patnaik, Shaily Jha, and Tanvi Jain, CEEW Report 
July 2021, https://www.ceew.in/sites/default/files/Improving-Womens-Incomes-and-Productivity-through-Clean-Energy-in-India.pdf

=== PAGE 135 ===
11 
 
accessible to female entrepreneurs through training and research provisions. It 
is crucial to educate women about the long-term implications of climate change 
for their businesses and highlight the potential opportunities arising from the 
adoption of clean energy and climate-resilient practices. Additionally, on-the-
job training programs should be designed to develop relevant skill sets among 
female workers. These programs should include modules on financial 
management, digital and information technology, leadership, and management. 
This approach will not only support female workers in making informed choices 
when selecting from various career paths but also contribute to their 
professional development and decision-making capabilities.  
• Establishing Institutional support: Women workers and entrepreneurs may 
find themselves in the minority as they strive to enter roles and sectors 
traditionally dominated by men. Ensuring that women are not left behind during 
the low-carbon transition and placing them at the forefront of climate adaptation 
and resilience require comprehensive support at all levels. Creating 
opportunities for women requires innovative strategies and policies that 
effectively address social, cultural, and economic biases. The formation of 
networks of female workers that provide mutual support and training for new 
and multiple roles is vital. Even as women enter sectors such as aviation, 
engineering, and construction, they require targeted support and skills for 
technical roles where they are currently underrepresented.  
• Gender-responsive financing for MSMEs: Access to credit is a primary 
barrier for women in MSMEs. Improving access to formal and affordable 
financial services can serve as a catalyst in supporting women during the 
transition to clean energy and climate change. The financial inclusion of women 
can lead to social and economic empowerment by improving access to a range 
of financial products, including savings, credit, insurance, and payment 
services, and by building financial awareness. Most women-owned MSMEs 
operate as unregistered enterprises and continue to face issues in accessing 
formal financing to meet their business requirements. The credit needs of 
women entrepreneurs remain largely unmet owing to social, economic, cultural, 
and legal factors. 
• Promote decent and dignified workplaces for women: Business 
sustainability involves striking a balance between social, economic, and 
environmental considerations. From a gender perspective, this implies 
providing conducive and safe working conditions, access to resources, training, 
and capacity building for female workers. To ensure comprehensive support for 
women across different life stages, including marriage and motherhood, there 
is a need for innovative and flexible mechanisms that facilitate and encourage 
an effective return to work. 
 
The current mechanisms for accessing climate funds offer ad hoc solutions. There is 
a need to move towards systems approaches that provide financial assistance and

=== PAGE 136 ===
12 
 
offer support to entrepreneurs in sectors undergoing multiple transitions, such as low-
carbon and technological transitions. It is crucial to consider systemic benefits and 
institutional mechanisms for a just transition. 
 
In this regard, encouraging women entrepreneurs in the “green” economy represents 
an opportunity to make women-led enterprises more resilient and sustainable, thus 
enabling a “just” transition through FMAP. 
 
1.6 
INITIATIVES TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT TO PROMOTE & SUPPORT 
WOMEN ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN MSME SECTOR IN INDIA 
 
There are several Gender focused legal regulations in India, that aim to address the 
vulnerabilities and cultural biases associated with gender, through the provision of 
certain measures that support a safe and equal professional platform for women. 
These regulations are presented below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The G20 New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration 2023 focuses on “Enhancing Economic 
and Social Empowerment,” “Bridging the Gender Digital Divide,” “Driving Gender 
Inclusive Climate Action,” “Securing Women’s Food Security, Nutrition, and Well-
Being, Creation of a Working Group on the Empowerment of Women. 
 
The Government of India had launched programmes like Beti Padhao, Beti Bachao 
campaign (launched in 2015) for improving the Gender Parity Index (GPI) 20  by 
promoting survival, protection and education of girl child. The schemes aim to address 
the issue of declining Child Sex Ratio through a mass campaign targeted at changing 
social mind set and creating awareness about the criticality of the issue. Furthermore, 
Mahila E-Haat has been launched by the Government in 2016 for promoting women 
entrepreneurs, with the objective to provide an e-marketing platform by leveraging 
technology 
for 
showcasing 
product 
made/manufactured/sold 
by 
women 
entrepreneurs/SHGs/NGOs. 
 
20 Gender Parity Index (GPI) in education is a valuable indicator which reflects the discrimination against girls in 
access to educational opportunities 
Equal Remuneration Act, 1973 
provides for payment of equal 
remuneration to men and women 
workers for the same work of similar 
nature without any discrimination. In 
order to ensure social security to the 
workers including women in the 
unorganised sector, the 
Government has enacted the 
Unorganised Workers’ Social 
Security Act 2008. 
The Maternity Benefit Act, 
1961 and The Maternity 
Benefit (Amendment) Act, 
2017 regulate employment of 
women in certain 
establishments for a certain 
period (26 weeks) before and 
after childbirth and provides for 
maternity and other benefits. 
The 
Sexual 
Harassment 
of 
Women at Workplace (Prevention, 
Prohibition and Redressal) Act 
(POSH), 2013 has been enacted, 
which covers all women, irrespective 
of their age or employment status 
and protect them against sexual 
harassment at all workplaces both in 
public and private sector, whether 
organised or unorganised.

=== PAGE 137 ===
13 
 
 
Further, The Ministry of MSME, Government of India has taken a number of steps 
to promote and support women-owned MSMEs21 
1. 
Special drives have been undertaken for registration of women owned MSMEs 
under the URP. 
2. 
In order to endorse women entrepreneurs, the Public Procurement Policy was 
amended in 2018 mandating Central Ministries/Departments/ Undertakings to 
procure at least 3 per cent of the annual procurement from women-owned 
MSMEs. 
3. 
To further support women entrepreneurs under the Credit Guarantee Scheme 
for MSMEs, the following two provisions have been introduced for w.e.f. 
01.12.2022.  
a. 10 per cent concession in annual Guarantee fees; and 
b. 10 per cent additional Guarantee coverage of up to 85 per cent, as against 
the 75per cent for other entrepreneurs. 
4. 
In order to encourage entrepreneurship among women, the Ministry of MSME 
has implemented the ‘Skill Upgradation & Mahila Coir Yojana’ under ‘Coir Vikas 
Yojana’, which is an exclusive training program aimed at the skill development 
of women artisans engaged in the Coir sector. 
5. 
The Ministry of MSME has also implemented Prime Minister’s Employment 
Generation Programme (“PMEGP”), which is a major credit-linked subsidy 
programme aimed at generating self-employment opportunities through 
establishment of micro enterprises in the non-farm sector.  
6. 
A higher subsidy is being provided to beneficiaries belonging to special 
categories such as Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe/OBC /minorities/women/ 
ex-serviceman/ physically handicapped/ NER/ Hill and Border areas, etc. 
7. 
For purposes of encouraging participation of women entrepreneurs in trade 
fairs under the Procurement & Marketing Support Scheme, a higher subsidy is 
provided for women owned MSMEs. 
8. 
“SAMARTH” initiative was launched to support women owned MSMEs with the 
objective of providing Skill Development and Market Development Assistance 
to women and to train more than 7,500 women candidates from rural and sub-
urban areas. Aspiring and existing women entrepreneurs have been 
provisioned with 20 per cent seats in free Skill Development Programs 
organized under Skill Development Schemes of the Ministry of MSME; 20 per 
cent of MSME Business Delegations for domestic & international exhibitions 
under the schemes for Marketing Assistance implemented by the Ministry of 
MSME; and 20 per cent discount on annual processing fee on National Small 
Industries Corporation’s Scheme. 
 
21https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=2002574

=== PAGE 138 ===
14 
 
9. 
MSME Sustainable Zero Defect Zero Effect (“ZED”) Certification Scheme is an 
initiative to provide a roadmap to global competitiveness for Indian MSMEs 
having economic and social impacts in terms of capacity building of MSMEs. 
The aim of the scheme is that the goods being manufactured by the MSME 
sector have zero recall from market at the same time has zero effect on 
environment. Under this scheme to support and empower women 
entrepreneurs, there is a provision of 100 per cent subsidy on cost of ZED 
Certification for Women owned MSMEs. 
10. 
Under the incubation component of MSME Innovative Scheme, a special 
MSME Idea Hackathon 3.0 has been organized for women entrepreneurs 
wherein 18,888 ideas have been received yet. 
The Ministry of MSME implements the following capacity building programmes for 
capacity building and skill enhancement for MSMEs, including women entrepreneurs 
in MSMEs:22 
1. Entrepreneurship Skill Development Programme ("ESDP”): The objective of ESDP 
is to promote new enterprises, to build capacity of existing MSMEs and to inculcate 
entrepreneurial culture in the country. About 40 per cent of the targeted 
beneficiaries of ESDPs are stated to belong from weaker sections of the society 
(SC/ST/Women/Physical Handicapped). As per the said programme, no 
participation fee will be charged from SC, ST, Physical Handicapped, Below 
Poverty Line (BPL) participants and women. 
2. Mahila Coir Yojana (“MCY”) aims at empowering women artisans in the coir sector, 
by providing these women with a stipendiary two-month training programme. 
These women artisans are encouraged to avail assistance under Prime Minister’s 
Employment Generation Programme (“PMEGP”). 
These initiatives are expected to spur the growth of women entrepreneurs in the 
MSME sector in India.  
 
 
 
22https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=2002574

=== PAGE 139 ===
15 
 
2. 
SIDBI’S EXISTING INITIATIVES/MECHANISMS TO SUPPORT 
WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS IN MSME SECTOR 
 
Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) plays a proactive role in the 
promotion and development of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) to 
address various financial and non-financial challenges faced by them. It aims at 
innovating for wider impact and to benefit MSMEs in both “setting up” and “stepping 
up”, thereby leading to economic growth of the country. SIDBI under its Mission 
Swavalamban aims at promoting the aspiring, livelihood, micro and small 
entrepreneurs. SIDBI promotes entrepreneurship culture and encourages women, 
youth and other aspirants to become “Job creators” from “Job seekers”, which restricts 
rural migration to urban areas and promotes sustainable livelihood opportunities with 
thrust on the bottom of the pyramid, unserved/underserved pockets/ segments of 
Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) through various novel initiatives. 
SIDBI has been undertaking several impactful interventions for promotion of 
entrepreneurship and development of enterprises at the grass root level. The 
Programmes for Development & Impact (PDI) Vertical of the Bank through its 
Swavalamban Resource Facility (SRF) with support from FCDO, UK, aims to promote 
inclusive and innovative entrepreneurship in low-income pockets of India, with a 
special focus on women entrepreneurs. 
Institutional Capacity of SIDBI 
SIDBI has been a pioneer in supporting women-led MSMEs in India. SIDBI has 
created and nurtured (for 25+ years) the micro-finance ecosystem in India. For 
example, SIDBI’s program to support microfinance institutions has created 150 micro-
finance institutions to support women’s self-help group (SHGs). This has reached 30-
40 lakh women – this segment has grown such that 9 institutions have evolved to small 
finance banks (e.g. Bandhan, Utkarsh).  
SIDBI continues to actively promote financial inclusion and entrepreneurship for 
women. SIDBI aims to support 20% of its financing towards women led MSMEs. 
Following are some of the key programmatic initiatives undertaken by SIDBI to 
further this cause23. 
• Jal Sparsh-Waste to Wealth: The uncontrolled growth of water hyacinths is a 
problem for a lot of water bodies in the country. It blocks waterways and limits boat 
traffic, recreation, flood control and wildlife use. It produces a dense canopy at the 
water surface, and the pest plant shades out native submerged plant species and 
can uproot native emergent species that are important to wildlife. Eco-roots 
Foundation floated a solution to make productive use of the uncontrolled growth of 
water hyacinth, by its extraction from the water bodies. The solution has also 
 
23 SIDBI Annual Report, FY 23

=== PAGE 140 ===
16 
 
helped the local women earn sustainable and meaningful livelihoods. Hence, the 
intervention has a positive effect on the environment as well as the livelihood. The 
rural women were provided with skills to sustainably extract the water hyacinth 
vines and the methods to process it to form useful products such as bags, mats, 
stands, and other decorative. The activity mainly engages poor women for the 
entire process. Eco-roots have also marketed the finished products through various 
online and offline avenues such as e-listing on commerce platforms, exhibitions, 
and fashion shows in school. The project is present in 5 states in India.  
 
• Women Entrepreneurship -Livelihood Initiatives on Green Energy and Rural 
Household Electrification (WE-LIGHT): Climate change is a massive issue to 
address, and women are most affected by climate change problems. Non-
electrification and limited access to power supply further adds to the problems. It 
is an integrated approach to address climate change and poverty reduction through 
a solar-focused energy access program by enabling rural communities to become 
self-sufficient and resilient. The knowledge and utility of solar is thus transferred to 
the community for sustainable access to electricity at an affordable cost for the 
rural population. This program aims to combine technology, market strengthening 
and skills to effectively deploy capital that delivers impacts for the environment, 
women, communities, and the rural poor. It brings together the most holistic 
program of training on the design and fabrication of solar lanterns, marketing, 
entrepreneurship, and leadership which allows rural women to have access to 
capital to scale the distribution of renewable energy products in the rural market in 
India. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Prayaas Initiative: IN FY 23, loans upto Rs. 5 Lakhs for livelihood activities were 
extended to ~80,000 micro enterprises, most of which are women led.  
• ARJANA: This plan includes various financial benefits such as reduced credit 
guarantee fees, no prepayment charges, additional advantages for ZED

=== PAGE 141 ===
17 
 
certification, discounts for timely repayment, lower processing fees, and lower 
promoter margins (only for women entrepreneurs).  
• Swavalamban Initiative: SIDBI’s Mission Swavalamban has collaborated with Usha 
International Limited to promote women entrepreneurship in underprivileged areas 
through the Swavalamban Silai (i.e. Tailoring Homepreneurs Programme. This has 
helped over 3000 marginalized women become Silai Homepreneurs in 23 states 
over 5 phases.  
• SWAS: SIDBI and ‘Mukti’ collaborated to launch the ‘Swavalamban Accelerator in 
Sunderbans’ (SWAS) program to train SHG women in establishing alternative 
livelihoods and rebuild the Sundarbans, which was affected by Super Cyclone 
Amphan. 1000 women were trained in food processing and handicrafts (500 each) 
and received start-up kits to begin their microenterprises after the training. 417 
beneficiaries established new microenterprises and 771 beneficiaries were 
provided with market linkage.  
• SAATHI: The Aga Khan Rural Support Programme India is working to create 200 
model villages in Western and Central India, with a focus on training tribal youth, 
especially women, in micro-enterprise development. Under this program, the goal 
is to establish 650 enterprises in these villages within three years. As of FY 2023, 
275 people have been trained and 200 have started their own enterprises.  
• WE-LEAD: The project being carried out by OSAFII in Eastern India, aims to 
support 12,000 women entrepreneurs, amongst SHGs/ JLGs members, by 
providing them with capacity building, skill training, and business development 
services. In FY 2023, 7,970 women were trained, 2,859 women were given credit, 
and 2,832 enterprises were established. The project is replicated in partnership 
with the Association of Microfinance Institutions, with the aim of promoting 10,000 
women entrepreneurs.  
• TOWER: Mahabhinishkraman Unnayan Sansthan is implementing the TOWER 
project to help 100 tribal women entrepreneurs in a district  in Eastern India develop 
their businesses using non-timber forest products. A modern machinery powered 
by solar energy has been established to produce high-quality Saal leaf plates and 
bowls which is managed and owned by the community. 
• Empowering Women and Enhancing their Business through E-Mobility 
(EWEE): The rural India is critical for the nation's development and the women are 
the backbone of it. The empowerment of women at the grassroots level is important 
to build the nation. One of the many ways to empower women is to improve the 
mobility options in rural parts to encourage them to start their businesses, job 
opportunities, etc. SIDBI launched E-WEE Programme to ease the mobility of 
women entrepreneurs by providing access to affordable finance through blended 
finance facility to purchase electric two-wheelers with the support of Non-banking 
financial companies. 
• SIDBI is also one of the signatory of Finance in Common (FiCS) gender coalition 
to the Paris Development Banks Statement on Gender Equality and Women’s 
Empowerment.

=== PAGE 142 ===
18 
 
Beyond these programmatic initiatives, SIDBI has undertaken several structural 
reforms/adopted policies to promote women's welfare and entrepreneurship.  
• Strength of women employee base & equal opportunity employer: As of FY23, 
SIDBI had 227 women employees (21.89% of the total strength). SIDBI is an 
equal opportunity provider and has implemented fair practices for enabling 
career progression. For example, in FY 23, SIDBI made 1607 nominations for 
various employee training programs. Of this, 322 nominations were women 
employees (~20% of overall nominations).  
• Gender Policy: As a GCF accredited National Implementation Entity (NIE), 
SIDBI has adopted a Gender Policy at an organizational level (attached below). 
This policy governs SIDBI’s organizational policies with respect to gender 
equality and inclusion. Further, the policy also governs SIDBI’s engagement 
with their PFIs with respect to gender equality and inclusion.  
• Further, SIDBI is mandated to comply with Sexual Harassment of Women at 
Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013 
• Further, gender-related considerations have been factored in the E&S checklist 
that every financing proposal has to adhered.  
Based on the above information, SIDBI is adequately placed to implement gender 
awareness activities. SIDBI has already implemented multiple schemes encouraging 
women entrepreneurship across different geographies in India. The previous 
experience of these schemes has enriched SIDBI staff to undertake these activities. 
At a program level, SIDBI has employed Gender experts to drive the implementation 
of the Gender Policy/Action plan and ensure effective monitoring & reporting. For 
FAMP, SIDBI will employ suitably qualified Gender experts.

=== PAGE 143 ===
19 
 
Alignment of the Project with GCF Gender Assessment Guideline 
• SIDBI as an AE shall take the necessary measures to ensure that proposed 
projects, as well as proposed activities under the FMAP, submitted to GCF for 
financing are aligned with national policies and priorities on gender. 
• The project activities shall be framed around principals of GCF and will ensure 
the following issues in the gender action plan:  
 
 
Services and technologies provided by the project/program 
shall be available and accessible to both women and men 
Improve access to finance and institutional support, along 
with an enabling environment
Equal access for the women and men from vulnerable communities to 
information and opportunities necessary to participate and benefit 
fully from the anticipated outcomes of the project
Encourage women entrepreneurship in energy efficiency, 
renewable, electric vehicles and other identified sectors 
Promote leadership capacity for female workers
Encourage more educated women to in higher management 
Ensure capacity development activities , trainings  etc., of 
disadvantaged groups

=== PAGE 144 ===
20 
 
3. GENDER ACTION PLAN 
3.1 
ESTABLISHING THE CONTEXT/ BASELINE TO THE ACTION PLAN 
 
The present proposal prioritizes the mainstreaming of gender concerns, with focus on 
leveraging the funding to improve gendered coverage of programme financing and 
benefits. A stated endeavour of the programme is to secure 80:20 coverage (i.e. 20% 
financing towards women), broadly in line with the selected baselines for women’s 
ownership and labour force participation. In the longer term, the aim is to contribute to 
a paradigm shift in terms of women’s capacity and participation in ownership/ 
leadership/ management and technical roles/workforce participation in, as well as 
other benefits from climate mitigation and adaption activities taken up in the MSME 
sector in India.  
As a critical support to MSME financing and development in the country, SIDBI is also 
called upon to provide momentum for creating an enabling environment, contributing 
to public/ stakeholder awareness, as well as identifying and setting operational and 
regulatory standards to this end.  
The overall direction of recommended actions to this end would be in terms of:  
a. Building on existing mechanisms and provisions supporting financial inclusion and 
incentives/ concessionalities for women entrepreneurs, with a view to enhancing 
their agency in climate mitigation and adaptation initiatives through this 
programme. 
b. Collaborating with existing industry associations and women entrepreneur/ other 
networks on targeted capacity-building programmes on women and energy 
efficiency, resource management. 
 
In addition, and particularly relevant for an institution such as SIDBI, given its niche 
status in the MSMEs sector are aspects of strengthening the enabling environment for 
gender mainstreaming. These pertain to issues such as:  
● operational learning to sustain gender mainstreaming efforts 
● technology for outreach 
● sector-wide awareness campaigns, capacity building and entrepreneurship 
development programmes 
● innovations as gender sensitive credit ratings, support with registration and 
paperwork, etc 
 
3.2 
MAPPING OF PROPOSED GENDER-SENSITIVE PROGRAMME 
MEASURES 
AGAINST 
PROGRAMME CYCLE 
AND 
PROJECT 
ACTIVITIES

=== PAGE 145 ===
21 
 
 
Based on the programme design, the broad aim is to ensure adequate representation 
for women as stakeholder and beneficiary under component (1) supporting affordable 
financing of mitigation and adaptation activities; targeted technical support under 
component (2), for capacity development, awareness generation, etc., as well as in 
M&E frameworks; and leveraging financing mechanisms for greater and more 
equitable outreach and coverage in the MSME sector going ahead. 
Specific, gender sensitive programme measures can then be given by the following 
categories: 
● Screening Parameters for Beneficiary M/SMEs 
● Actions by/ Performance Indicators for SIDBI 
● Incentives 
● SIDBI Niche/ Enablers 
In the case of screening parameters, the suggestion is to give weightage and 
priorities to  
(i) 
sectors/ geographies with higher representation of women (top 10 states 
with women entrepreneurs/women led MSMEs is given in Section 1.2 of 
this document), as well as to  
(ii) 
firms owned by women, and those with significant representation in the 
management and work force. These weightages would ideally translate 
into/ align with a points system on eligibility criteria, and link with a higher 
degree of concessionality in financing terms as well as other support 
services. A suggestion, going beyond the individual firm focus in the 
programme, is to include MSME clusters comprising women-led 
enterprises and/or with significant representation, as eligible beneficiaries 
under this programme. It is believed that this would be especially relevant 
to extend programme benefits and impacts given the current distributions 
in this regard, and to secure/ advance beyond given targets.   
While appraising the cases for MSMEs, certain commitments/undertakings would be 
required as a pre-requisite for providing financial assistance as under:-  
1) Availability of a gender policy or adherence to the gender policy of SIDBI. 
2) Existence of committee to perform Grievance redressal for the cases pertinent 
to gender based violence (GBV), Sexual Exploitation Abuse and Harassment 
(SEAH) as per the (POSH), Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace 
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013. 
Actions by SIDBI  
In the implementation of the programme in line with its core functions and operating 
context would essentially include bringing together its gender inclusive provisions,

=== PAGE 146 ===
22 
 
services and targeted outreach mechanisms in support of this programme. It is also 
recommended that a certain proportion of the entire planned corpus be earmarked for 
firms/ clusters with representation of women as owners/ management/ leaders 
accompanied by higher concessions (e.g. in eligibility criteria, application paperwork, 
better rates, etc.) and facilitative support. There is also a provision to (iii) improve 
gender sensitivity and responsiveness of SIDBI management and frontline staff, as a 
basis for continual learning and improving outreach in this regard. Actions under this 
category also translate directly into performance criteria and monitoring indicators for 
SIDBI.  
The nature of incentives, as already highlighted, include (i) reductions and 
concessionality in terms of fees and rates for women entrepreneurs, which may be 
extended to firms/ clusters/ sectors and geographies with higher female participation. 
Another important area of incentivisation will be through the (ii) targeting of capacity 
building programmes, which are a critical pathway to increase women’s ownership and 
participation not only in the MSME sector but also in climate initiatives and actions.  In 
this case, it is suggested that the overall participation of female entrepreneurs/ 
technical and other workers be ensured at a minimum of 30 per cent of overall annual 
participation in such programmes. There may also been more intensive programmes 
aimed at young women/ youth in this regard – a segment of high potential given the 
baseline and general trends, as well as from a forward-looking perspective. 
The SIDBI niche as an MSME enabler and as an institution that will set standards for 
the country in this area, is reiterated here. Monitoring and data analysis to inform 
operational processes as well as industry standards, research and knowledge 
capacities and outreach, as well as convening and consultative functions of the 
financial institutions are critical to taking this programme from business-as-usual to 
one with the potential to bring about a paradigm shift in women’s financial inclusion 
and employment, also nurturing potential for leadership in the area of climate 
response. This nature of shift may be seen as the aspirational co-benefit of the 
programme. It is noted here that with this niche, SIDBI is also well placed to build 
exchanges and consultations with other institutions and frameworks, there is 
convergence of work on some or all aspects of women’s entrepreneurship/ 
employment, MSMEs and development, and climate solutions/ services.  
 
3.3 
M&E, KNOWLEDGE, EVIDENCE AND LEARNING 
 
With focus on M&E, knowledge, evidence and learning, the programme proposes to 
build on SIDBI’s unique operational niche to enhance existing knowledge and 
capacities in at the intersection of gender, MSMEs and climate initiatives in India, 
building on data/ evidence from the implementation of this programme – through.

=== PAGE 147 ===
23 
 
● Mandating monitoring and reporting standards for collection of gender 
disaggregated data – employment, entrepreneurship, capacities, compensation 
etc. in the selected sectors and geographies. 
● Undertake and provide trend analysis, maintain a database to support ongoing 
collaborative learning with partner organisations, industry organisations and 
networks on priorities for women entrepreneurs and professionals in climate 
mitigation and adaptation initiatives in India. 
 
3.4 OUTCOMES FROM PROGRAM 
 
Reskilling women workers who are already employed in the MSME to adopt, adapt, 
and apply best practices and providing relevant skills to women entering the workforce 
is essential to ensure sustainability. Increasing women’s share in MSME sector is 
essential to harness equitable economic gains and facilitate social transformation at 
scale24. 
 
It is important to ensure that women in the MSME sector are supported in the context 
of climate change and low-carbon transition. The overarching goal is to equip them 
with the necessary capacities—the key skills required for green jobs, climate finance, 
and essential technologies—thereby disrupting the traditional occupational 
segregation of women in the sector and transitioning to a sustainable and just 
economy.  
 
Ensuring decent and dignified workplaces for women business sustainability involves 
striking a balance between social, economic, and environmental considerations. From 
a gender perspective, this implies providing conducive and safe working conditions, 
access to resources, training, and capacity building for female workers. 
 
The programme aims to significantly transform the landscape of women led MSMEs 
in India. The following are the outcomes that the program aims to achieve: 
 
• Number of women led MSMEs: Increase the number of women owned 
MSMEs through necessary interventions and ensure enhanced participation of 
women workforce in MSMEs. 
• Business Sustainability through improve access of finance: Make women 
led enterprises/MSMEs more sustainable & resilient to external shocks, 
especially climate shocks by providing access to affordable finance for 
mitigation and adaption technologies. Services and technologies provided by 
the project/program shall be available and accessible to both women and men. 
• Autonomy: Increased skilling for women entrepreneurs to ensure their 
businesses are more climate resilient by offering handholding support on the 
adoption of better technology. Encourage women entrepreneurship in energy 
efficiency, renewable, electric vehicles and other identified sectors. 
 
24 https://wri-india.org/publication/building-ecosystem-gender-responsive-and-climate-resilient-msmes-

=== PAGE 148 ===
24 
 
• Formalization: Increased formalization of women led MSMEs, leading to 
enhanced access to credit.  
• Employability & Employment Generation: Ensuring the opportunities of 
creating more employment from Women own MSMEs by capacity building on 
climate finance and awareness on energy efficient technology. The measures 
will also be taken to equip the women workforce for green jobs helping in just 
transition. 
• 
Encouraging gender-focused practices among MSMEs: The project would 
encourage those MSMEs with women-centric workplace or are willing to create 
the one. These will include having a gender action plan, separate rest spaces, 
better lighting etc.

=== PAGE 149 ===
25 
 
3.6 GENDER ACTION PLAN: TEMPLATE (PROJECT/PROGRAM LEVEL)- 
INDICATIVE FIGURES  
 
The resulting framework is created to achieve the intended objectives of promoting 
gender inclusion in MSMEs across different levels i.e., leadership, workforce, etc., and 
at the Participation Financial Institution level. The details are below in tabular form: 
1. Number of women led MSMEs 
2. Business sustainability through improved access 
3. Autonomy 
4. Formalization 
5. Employability and employment generation 
6. Encouraged gender-focused practices among MSMEs 
The programme gender activities (as mentioned in gender action plan) will support to 
bridge the gender gap by increasing the percentage of women MSMEs in the country 
from currently at 20%. 
The gender action plan is given below:

=== PAGE 150 ===
Indicator* 
Proposed 
activities 
Project 
Baseline i.e., 
the number 
of units 
financed 
under the 
project 
Targeted 
value 
Resp
onsi
bility 
Frequency 
of 
reporting 
Budget 
estimates 
Outcome mapping 
Women-owned 
MSMEs 
sensitized on 
mitigation and 
adaption 
technologies 
Capacity building 
program on 
different 
technologies 
applicable in 
various sectors 
Nil 
5% of the 
MSMEs 
supports 
under the 
program 
PFI/ 
SIDBI 
Annual 
basis 
USD 50,000 
Business 
sustainability through 
improved access 
Number of 
borrowers 
sensitized to 
improve facilities 
for women 
workforce  
Capacity building 
on the facilities 
required for 
women's 
workforce through 
blended learning 
methodologies 
(Online/ Offline)  
Nil 
2000 
PFI/ 
SIDBI 
Annual 
basis 
USD 50,000 
Encouraged gender-
focused 
practices 
among MSMEs 
 
Number of 
women 
beneficiaries of 
the programme 
Awareness on 
product features 
for women led 
MSMEs and 
concessionality 
on loans 
Nil 
15% of 
total 
beneficiari
es  
PFI/ 
SIDBI 
Annual 
basis 
USD 30,000 
Increase in number of 
women-led MSMEs 
 
Number of 
young women to 
Training Program 
on climate finance 
including 
Nil 
5000 
PFI/ 
SIDBI 
Annual 
basis 
USD 10,000 
& In- kind 
Employability 
and 
employment 
generation

=== PAGE 151 ===
27 
 
be trained in 
entrepreneurship 
technology for 
college, Industry 
Training Institute, 
etc. through 
digital and other 
activities of SIDBI  
 
Autonomy 
 
Number of 
women led 
MSMEs brought 
on digital 
lending platform  
Through digital 
lending activities 
Nil 
10000 
PFI/S
IDBI 
Annual 
Basis 
USD 10,000 
& In-kind 
Formalization 
Number of PFI 
staff trained on 
gender 
awareness  
Awareness 
program for PFIs 
on SEAH and 
POSH 
Nil 
300  
PFI/ 
SIDBI 
Annual 
basis 
USD 40,000 
Encouraged gender-
focused 
practices 
among MSMEs 
 
Number of Media 
Outreach 
products on 
Gender 
Publications and 
events on project 
progress 
Nil 
10  
SIDBI Annual 
basis 
USD 30,000 
Increased 
participation of 
women in MSME, job 
creation, 
formalization etc. 
 
*The Programme endeavor to support more women beneficiaries, the indicators in the action plan to be revisited/reviewed every two years (during the implementation of the Programme) 
from the effectiveness of the Programme.

=== PAGE 152 ===
APPENDIX I: CHECKLIST 
 
CHECKLIST 
• UNWomen and Green Climate Fund, (2017), Mainstreaming Gender in Green Climate 
Fund 
Projects, 
available 
at 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/guidelines-gcf-toolkit-
mainstreaming-gender_0.pdf 
• GCF (2019), Gender Analysis/Assessment and Gender and Social InclusionAction Plan 
Templates 
available at https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/form-09-gender-
assessment-and-action-plan-template_0.pdf 
• Examples of Gender Action Plans - https://www.greenclimate.fund/projects/gender 
• UNFCCC Gender and Climate Change Guidelines & Tools (annotated bibliography) 
available 
at 
https://unfccc.int/topics/gender/resources/guidelines-or-other-tools-for-
integrating-gender-considerations-into-climate-change-related-activities-under-the-
convention 
• UNIDO GENDER MAINSTREAMING CHECKLIST FOR PROJECTS available at 
https://www.unido.org/sites/default/files/2015-09/GM_Checklist_for_Projectspdf_0.pdf

=== PAGE 153 ===
29 
 
APPENDIX- II: GENDER POLICY

=== PAGE 154 ===
30

=== PAGE 155 ===
31

=== PAGE 156 ===
32

=== PAGE 157 ===
APPENDIX -III STRENGTHENING GREEN FINANCE AND MAINSTREAMING GENDER 
 
STRENGTHENING 
GREEN FINANCE AND 
MAINSTREAMING GENDER 
GIFS-GroW Annual Event 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS 
23 January 2024 | Mumbai 
 
 
 
 
An Initiative by

=== PAGE 158 ===
GIFS-GroW Annual Event – Conference Proceedings 
 
34 
 
GIFS-GROW ANNUAL EVENT  
The GIFS Initiative is the first Indo-European platform which supports the greening of the Indian financial 
system, through knowledge exchanges, trainings, and networking, targeting like-minded finance 
practitioners from banks, investment funds and financial institutions. The GIFS Initiative expects to 
widen and shape the discourse around greening the financial ecosystem and support its 
operationalization through the Indian institutions. It has been founded by Shakti Sustainable Energy 
Foundation (SSEF), Agence Française de Développement (AFD), and Small Industries Development Bank 
of India (SIDBI) in December 2021. In 2022 and 2023, more than 500 participants participated in the 
different events organized by the GIFS Initiative. GIFS gathered again the financial community to reflect 
on the recent developments on green finance from the financial market side and invited more 
stakeholders to discuss how the financial system and the Medium, Small and Micro Enterprises (MSMEs) 
can find a common ground to ensure a resilient and low-carbon transition in India. The conference also 
included the GroW summit. GroW is the professional network for women in green and climate finance, 
which was created as part of the GIFS Initiative. 
OBJECTIVES OF THE ANNUAL EVENT 
• 
Platform to share updates on the 2022 and 2023 activities (newly created regulations, schemes, tools, 
and working groups) which have contributed to the greening of the Indian financial system 
• 
GIFS visibility, capitalization and presentation of its next developments, which include (i) setting up the 
“Greening the Finance-to-Finance Green” (G2FG) Technical Assistance platform for MSMEs and 
financial institutions, and (ii) network for Greening of Finance by Women (GroW) 
• 
Networking of the financial and MSME communities 
• 
Present key updates, enable collaboration and advancing engagement of women in green and climate 
finance through GroW

=== PAGE 159 ===
GIFS-GroW Annual Event – Conference Proceedings 
 
35 
 
SESSION 1: VOICES ON GROW BY WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 
 
OPENING REMARKS 
• Ms. Kruthika Jerome 
Programme Manager, Climate Finance, Shakti Sustainable Energy Foundation 
PANELISTS 
• Ms. Chaitsi Ahuja 
Founder, Brown Living 
• Ms. Kalyani Shinde 
Founder, Godaam Innovations 
• Ms. Sahar Mansoor 
Co-Founder, Bare Necessities 
• Dr. Vanita Prasad 
Co-Founder and CTO, REVY Environmental Solutions

=== PAGE 160 ===
GIFS-GroW Annual Event – Conference Proceedings 
 
36 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The GIFS-GroW Annual Summit's opening session, 
themed "Voices on GroW by Women 
Entrepreneurs" featured visionary female climate 
entrepreneurs discussing sustainability. The 
session had Ms. Chaitsi Ahuja of Brown Living, 
who is operating an innovative plastic- and 
chemical-free online marketplace; Dr. Vanita 
Prasad of REVY Environmental Solutions that 
focuses on waste reduction and resource reuse; 
Ms. Kalyani Shinde, from Godaam Innovations, 
aiming to transform the sector of agricultural 
technologies (agri-tech) and add value to each 
step of the crop cycle; and Ms. Sahar Mansoor, 
of Bare Necessities, who is championing a 
people- and earth-centered approach to create 
zero-packaging footprint products. In the 
session, the attendees shared their respective 
journeys and obstacles faced while running 
environmentally friendly businesses. They 
discussed the achievements and challenges that 
define the landscape of eco-conscious 
companies in the present world. The session 
highlighted the unique difficulties faced by 
these pioneers in obtaining funding, creating 
brand recognition, and balancing ecological 
impact with financial sustainability. All of this 
occurred in the context of a worldwide trend 
towards sustainable practices. 
As the conversation unfolded, a common thread 
emerged on the pervasive funding gap for 
women-led green and climate enterprises. This 
disparity underscores the urgency of reshaping 
investment paradigms to nurture and propel 
women entrepreneurs striving to make 
meaningful contributions to environmental 
solutions. The session prompted a reassessment 
of investment strategies and a shared 
commitment to backing enterprises genuinely 
devoted to advancing global sustainability.  
Key Insights 
Funding Disparity in Sustainability  
Studies show that female founders receive a 
disproportionately low amount of total start-up 
funding, with only a slight increase observed 
over the years. However, if start-ups with both 
male and female co-founders are considered, 
there is a small uptick in the share of funding 
received, although it remains below 20%. These 
findings indicate the need to address the 
gender gap in funding and provide more 
support and resources to female entrepreneurs. 
Overcoming this challenge requires a 
fundamental shift in investment practices, 
recognizing the indispensable role women 
entrepreneurs play in driving innovative and 
sustainable solutions. 
Language Barrier between Innovators and 
Investors 
The need for a shared language between 
innovators and investors in the environmental 
sector was emphasized. Bridging this 
communication gap is vital for translating 
groundbreaking innovations into viable business 
models. Enhancing mutual understanding 
fosters an environment where environmentally 
impactful solutions align seamlessly with 
financial sustainability. 
Technological Solutions for Agri-Tech  
Potential of the agri-tech was showcased with 
innovative IoT-based solutions addressing 
significant post-harvest wastage. Traditional 
storage practices often lead to significant losses

=== PAGE 161 ===
GIFS-GroW Annual Event – Conference Proceedings 
 
37 
 
ranging from 40-50% in the agricultural sector. 
One transformative example is gas monitoring 
technology. Unlike the conventional method, 
where wastage is identified by smell, this IoT-
based electronic device detects it at a much 
earlier stage, improving early identification 
from 25% to an impressive 1-2%. This 
demonstrates the revolutionary power of 
technology in reshaping the agri-tech storage 
ecosystem. 
Educating Investors on Sustainability     
Women entrepreneurs face challenges in 
educating investors on the unique aspects of 
sustainability. Overcoming this hurdle is crucial 
for dispelling misconceptions and garnering 
support. To enhance this educational process, 
there's a growing need for targeted initiatives, 
workshops, and platforms that facilitate direct 
interactions between women entrepreneurs 
and investors. Establishing mentorship 
programs and industry-specific training sessions 
can bridge the knowledge gap and foster a 
better understanding of the nuances of 
sustainable ventures. By actively promoting 
such educational avenues, the ecosystem can 
create a more informed and supportive 
environment for women entrepreneurs 
pursuing sustainability-driven initiatives. 
Role of Platforms in Increasing Visibility 
Entrepreneurs expressed gratitude for 
platforms like GroW, recognizing them as 
essential for visibility, networking, and 
increased awareness. Such platforms play a 
pivotal role in advocating for increased funding 
for women-led initiatives, fostering an enabling 
environment, and collectively raising awareness 
about the impactful work of women 
entrepreneurs in a predominantly male-
dominated sector.

=== PAGE 162 ===
GIFS-GroW Annual Event – Conference Proceedings 
 
38 
 
SESSION 2: POLICY PERSPECTIVE ON CLIMATE FINANCE LANDSCAPE INDIA: DEVELOPMENTS IN THE 
BANKING SECTOR, AND REGULATION FOR THE SAME 
 
PANELISTS 
• 
Mr. Sivasubramanian Ramann 
Chief Managing Director (CMD), SIDBI 
• 
Mr. Sunil Nair 
Chief General Manager, Reserve Bank of India (RBI 
• 
Mr. V. Chandrasekar 
Senior Advisor, Indian Banks’ Association (IBA)

=== PAGE 163 ===
GIFS-GroW Annual Event – Conference Proceedings 
 
39 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The second session at the GIFS-GroW Annual 
Summit brought together esteemed speakers to 
address the pivotal role of policy perspectives in 
navigating India's evolving climate financing 
landscape. The overarching theme centered on 
the banking sector's initiatives on integrating 
climate and channeling funds for climate 
investments effectively. The session witnessed 
stellar speakers in Mr. Sivasubramanian 
Ramann, the Chief Managing Director (CMD) of 
SIDBI; Mr. Sunil Nair, the Chief General Manager 
of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI); and Mr. V. 
Chandrasekar, the Senior Advisor to the Indian 
Banks’ Association (IBA). They set the tone by 
acknowledging the commendable initiatives 
undertaken by women entrepreneurs in the 
sustainability space. They underscored the 
prevailing challenge that it is not the lack of 
funds but the misdirection of available finances. 
Despite India's substantial financial resources, 
the funds often fail to reach the areas 
demanding immediate attention for sustainable 
development. 
Key Insights 
Financial Challenges in Electric Vehicle (EV) 
Adoption 
The challenges hindering the economic viability 
of EVs in India was stressed on. Despite the 
monumental aspiration of achieving 30% of new 
sales of electric vehicles by 2030, only 5 million 
out of the 90 million targeted electric vehicles 
have been realized. The financial obstacle lies in 
the fact that EVs cost 1.5 times that of Internal 
Combustion Engine (ICE) vehicles, coupled with 
high-interest rates reaching 18-20%. This 
financial landscape poses hindrances to 
consumers and necessitates a reevaluation of 
financing models to make the adoption of EVs 
more economically viable. 
RBI's Green Deposits Framework 
The Reserve Bank of India's (RBI) response to 
the evolving landscape with the introduction of 
a green deposits framework in April 2023 was 
highlighted. The absence of a taxonomy in India 
prompted the need for a framework to ensure 
funds raised under green deposits are genuinely 
directed to green initiatives. The framework 
defined criteria for raising and deploying funds, 
emphasizing the need for a financing 
framework and third-party verification. It 
showcased how a clear regulatory framework 
encourages responsible lending practices, 
mitigating the risk of greenwashing. 
Incentivizing Green Deposits and Capital 
Incentives 
The debate on incentivizing green deposits and 
exploring differential interest rates for such 
deposits was a focal point. Complexities 
emerged concerning capital maintenance 
requirements for banks and the potential 
penalization or incentivization based on lending 
to green or non-green sectors. The ongoing 
discourse revolves around determining the ideal 
capital maintenance for climate-related 
activities. The Basel Committee is actively 
exploring possibilities to strike a balance 
between risk and incentivization in the realm of 
green financing. 
The central bank has not mandated or endorsed 
any differential interest rates to be 
implemented at this time. The Basel Committee 
is reportedly in the process of discussing the

=== PAGE 164 ===
GIFS-GroW Annual Event – Conference Proceedings 
 
40 
 
integration of climate factors into Pillar 1, 2 and 
3, but it may be too early to make any changes 
to the capital requirements or risk weights for 
green and climate projects. As more knowledge 
is gained about the risk levels associated with 
different green and climate projects, 
supervisory guidelines will continue to evolve. 
However, it was emphasized that banks should 
not avoid financing transition and climate 
projects, and they must build significant 
capacity to support these activities. 
IBA's Advocacy Role in Green Finance 
The Indian Banks' Association (IBA) was 
recognized for its pivotal role in advocating 
green finance. As an unregistered association, 
IBA champions issues on behalf of banks, 
collaborating with international agencies and 
conducting seminars to enhance awareness. 
The focus is on integrating climate 
considerations into the banking framework, 
emphasizing the importance of taxonomy, 
disclosure, and scenario analysis for attracting 
green investments. IBA's involvement in task 
forces related to the greening of steel and the 
National Green Hydrogen Mission showcased its 
commitment to steering the banking sector 
towards sustainable practices. 
 
Challenges in Greening MSMEs 
The challenges in introducing green 
technologies to the Micro, Small, and Medium 
Enterprises (MSMEs) sector were underscored. 
The informal and production-oriented nature of 
MSMEs requires continuous handholding, 
awareness-building, and simplifying 
government benefit processes. Efforts to 
streamline processes under the Ease of Doing 
Business initiative and introducing clusters to 
comprehensive schemes from various ministries 
were discussed. The session emphasized the 
importance of providing MSMEs with a holistic 
package of schemes to effectively transition 
towards sustainable practices. 
Facilitating Energy Efficiency in Clusters 
Discussions focused on facilitating a 
comprehensive understanding of the support 
available for MSMEs to adopt energy-efficient 
measures seamlessly. This aligns with the 
broader agenda of improving the ease of doing 
business and promoting sustainable practices in 
the MSME sector. An example of the 
establishment of the Facilitation Centre for 
Energy Efficiency was highlighted as a crucial 
initiative. This center aims to provide a 
consolidated platform for MSMEs, offering 
information on technologies, financing options, 
and government schemes.

=== PAGE 165 ===
GIFS-GroW Annual Event – Conference Proceedings 
 
41 
 
SESSION 3: SHARING OF GIFS ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
PANELISTS 
• Mr. Nitin Desai 
Board Member, Shakti Sustainable Energy Foundation 
• Mr. Sivasubramanian Ramann 
Chief Managing Director, SIDBI 
• Ms. Audrey Brulé 
Deputy Head, Financial Systems Division, AFD

=== PAGE 166 ===
GIFS-GroW Annual Event – Conference Proceedings 
 
42 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The third session of the GIFS-GroW Annual 
Summit provided a nuanced exploration of the 
evolving landscape where climate action, Micro, 
Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs), and 
gender inclusivity converge. The distinguished 
speakers, including Mr. Nitin Desai the Board 
Member of the Shakti Sustainable Energy 
Foundation; Mr. Sivasubramanian Ramann, the 
CMD of SIDBI; and Ms. Audrey Brulé, the 
Deputy Head of the Financial Systems Division 
from the AFD, collectively highlighted the 
pathways for sustainable finance, the pivotal 
role of MSMEs in climate resilience, and 
strategies to bridge gender gaps in the climate 
and financial sectors. This session encapsulated 
a robust dialogue on aligning financial 
mechanisms with environmental goals, 
propelling MSMEs beyond networking into 
tangible action, and the imperative of 
integrating gender-focused initiatives into the 
broader climate finance narrative. 
The session, over and above all tried to 
underscore the initiatives undertaken by the 
Green Indian Financial System. The proposition 
of the G2FG (Greening the Finance-to-Finance 
Green Technical Assistance) platform surfaced 
as a catalyzing force to foster collaboration 
between MSMEs and financial institutions, 
aiming to provide technical assistance and 
support. This initiative seeks to leverage 
collective efforts in greening financial practices 
and expanding avenues for sustainable finance, 
thereby creating an ecosystem conducive to 
innovation and resilience. To further its goal, 
GIFS is currently undertaking a feasibility study 
for setting up a technical assistance center that 
would help with carrying out systematic 
interventions to bridge green financing needs of 
MSMEs. 
Secondly, the Greening of Finance by Women 
(GroW) Network, a part of the GIFS initiative, 
aims to promote the participation of women in 
the green and climate finance. The network 
plays an important role in recognizing the 
expertise of women in the field and helps 
strengthen and take advantage of the gender 
aspect of the sector. The main objectives of the 
network include increasing the visibility of 
women professionals in green and climate 
finance, fostering collaboration among different 
stakeholders in the field, and providing targeted 
knowledge enhancement opportunities for 
women professionals in green and climate 
finance.
Key Insights 
MSMEs: Beyond Networking to Action 
There was a demand for MSMEs to move away 
from networking and instead focus on taking 
action. This involved combining technology, 
entrepreneurship, and finance. Drawing 
parallels with the success of the Silicon Valley, 
this insight emphasized the need for a holistic 
ecosystem supporting MSMEs in climate change 
mitigation, innovation, and sustainability. The 
narrative brought forth the urgency for 
actionable steps and collaboration to empower 
MSMEs to play a central role in sustainable 
finance. 
Role of Finance in Climate Resilience 
A compelling case study, spotlighting the impact 
of finance in transforming traditional coal-based 
furnaces to gas-based ones in Moradabad, a city 
in the state of Uttar Pradesh, was underscored.

=== PAGE 167 ===
GIFS-GroW Annual Event – Conference Proceedings 
 
43 
 
This not only underlined the transformative 
power of financial intervention in MSMEs but 
also shed light on the intricate challenges, 
including regulatory hurdles and the need for 
tailored solutions such as energy audits. These 
audits, happening in various clusters, emerged 
as strategic tools guiding MSMEs towards 
environmentally acceptable practices and 
aligning them with global environmental 
standards. 
Gender-Centric Climate Finance Strategies 
A comprehensive approach to integrate gender-
centric strategies into climate finance was 
articulated. This involved not only internal 
practices but also mainstreaming gender 
considerations across operations and 
developing dedicated financial tools. The 
emphasis on partnerships, peer-to-peer 
exchanges, and global networks underscored 
the interconnectedness of gender diversity and 
financial success in green landscapes. 
Challenges and Opportunities in Climate 
Financing 
Speakers acknowledged the intricate challenges 
faced by MSMEs, especially at the micro-level, 
and navigated through the ongoing debate on 
incentivizing green investments. The emphasis 
on addressing legal issues, building resilience, 
and adapting to environmental standards 
highlighted the multi-faceted nature of 
challenges and opportunities in the climate 
financing landscape.

=== PAGE 168 ===
GIFS-GroW Annual Event – Conference Proceedings 
 
44 
 
SESSION 4: INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION PERSPECTIVES: WHAT ARE THEIR GREEN ASPIRATIONS? 
 
PANELISTS 
• Mr. Rajiv Chawla 
Founder and Chairman, Integrated Association of SMEs 
• Anil Bhardwaj 
Secretary General, Federation of Indian Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (FISME) 
• Ms. Madhu Tyagi 
Director and National President, Confederation of Women Entrepreneurs (COWE) 
MODERATOR 
• Mr. R. K. Singh 
Chief General Manager (CGM), Green Climate Finance Vertical, SIDBI

=== PAGE 169 ===
GIFS-GroW Annual Event – Conference Proceedings 
 
45 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The Industry Association Perspective session at 
the GIFS-GroW Annual Summit convened a 
distinguished panel to delve into the green 
aspirations shaping the landscape of MSMEs. 
The panel featured Rajiv Chawla, Founder and 
Chairman of the Integrated Association of SMEs; 
Anil Bhardwaj, Secretary General of the 
Federation of Indian Micro, Small, and Medium 
Enterprises (FISME); and Ms. Madhu Tyagi, 
Director and National President of the 
Confederation of Women Entrepreneurs 
(COWE). It was moderated by Mr. R. K. Singh, 
the Chief General Manager (CGM) of the Green 
Climate Finance Vertical of SIDBI. The intrinsic 
role played by industrial associations in steering 
the MSME ecosystem towards sustainable 
practices was highlighted with key perspectives 
shared on fostering green initiatives. 
Key Insights 
On Collaborative Green Revolution 
The session emphasized the need for 
collaborative efforts and cited example of SIDBI, 
World Bank, Bureau of Energy Efficiency, and 
GIZ in initiating a green revolution in India. The 
concerted endeavors sought to incentivize 
financial institutions and NBFCs, integrating 
them into regulatory frameworks to ensure the 
widespread embrace of environmentally 
conscious practices among entrepreneurs. 
On Navigating Regulatory Measures 
The discussion shed light on the array of 
regulatory measures imposed by the 
Government of India, including bans on single-
use plastic, firecrackers, and specific fuel 
sources. Acknowledging the compliance burden 
on MSMEs, the need for supportive measures 
during this transition was underscored. These 
measures include institutional backing, 
specialized credit lines, and concessional 
policies. 
On Appeal for Transition Support 
With India's commitment to a net-zero future 
and an anticipated surge in compliance and 
regulatory measures, the session advocated for 
institutional backing. The necessity of a 
framework that supports entrepreneurs during 
the intricate phase of transitioning towards 
greener business practices was stressed. 
Symbolic Tree Plantation 
The session's unique approach of presenting 
certificates instead of physical plants held a 
symbolic gesture. Participants learned that 
SIDBI committed to planting 10 trees on behalf 
of each speaker and attendee. This initiative 
underscored the summit's overarching theme of 
environmental consciousness and sustainability.

=== PAGE 170 ===
GIFS-GroW Annual Event – Conference Proceedings 
 
46 
 
SESSION 5: LESSONS LEARNED FROM G20 PRESIDENCY FOR THE INDIAN FINANCIAL SECTOR & 
COP28 MESSAGES & TAKEAWAYS IN INDIA CONTEXT 
 
PANELISTS 
• Mr. Dhruba Purkayastha 
India Director, Climate Policy Initiative (CPI) 
• Mr. Vivek Adhia 
Head of Climate & Sustainability, Boston Consulting Group (BCG) 
• Ms. Neha Kumar 
Head, South Asia Programme, Climate Bonds Initiative 
• Mr. Shubhashis Dey 
Director, Climate Policy Program, Shakti Sustainable Energy Foundation 
• Mr. Mukund Govindarajan 
ECube Investment 
• Anil Bhardwaj 
Secretary General, Federation of Indian Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (FISME) 
• Ms. Madhu Tyagi 
Director and National President, Confederation of Women Entrepreneurs (COWE) 
MODERATOR 
• Mr. R. K. Singh 
Chief General Manager (CGM), Green Climate Finance Vertical, SIDBI

=== PAGE 171 ===
GIFS-GroW Annual Event – Conference Proceedings 
 
47 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The session on Lessons learned from G20 
Presidency for the Indian Financial sector & 
COP28 messages at the GIFS-GroW Annual 
Summit brought together seasoned experts to 
dissect global trends in green finance and chart 
out strategies for an effective transition. 
Moderated by Mr. R. K. Singh, the CGM of the 
Green Climate Finance Vertical at SIDBI, the 
panel included Mr. Dhruba Purkayastha, the 
India Director of the Climate Policy Initiative 
(CPI); Mr. Vivek Adhia, the Head of Climate & 
Sustainability at the Boston Consulting Group 
(BCG); Ms. Neha Kumar from the Head of South 
Asia Programme at the Climate Bonds Initiative; 
Mr. Shubhashis Dey, the Director of Climate 
Policy Program at the Shakti Sustainable Energy 
Foundation; and Mr. Mukund Govindarajan 
from ECube Investment. This dynamic 
discussion aimed at evaluating COP28 
outcomes, examined the complexities of global 
green finance and additionally, outlined critical 
challenges and opportunities, emphasizing the 
need for precision, collaboration, and 
innovative financial mechanisms in the pursuit 
of sustainable transitions.  
Key Insights 
Global Climate Finance Dynamics 
The global climate finance landscape, 
particularly focusing on COP28 outcomes was 
discussed. Despite effective communication 
strategies, the lack of quantitative targets in 
phasing out fossil fuels was criticized. The 
commitment to triple renewable energy was 
deemed insufficient, especially considering the 
negligible pipelines in several countries, 
emphasizing the need for strategic allocation of 
international resources for a global public good. 
Mathematics of Transition Finance 
The session delved into the fundamental 
mathematics of transition finance, where light 
was shed on the cost disparity of mitigating one 
unit of CO2 in OECD countries versus 
developing nations. The failure of COP28 to 
recognize this distinction raises questions about 
the equitable utilization of international 
resources. The discussion emphasized the 
significance of accurate mathematical models 
and international collaboration in achieving 
sustainable transitions. 
Challenges in Climate Communication 
Drawing parallels between COP28 and 
educational testing processes, the 
communication challenges in conveying 
transitional fuel nuances were discussed. The 
panel recognized the need for precise 
communication, avoiding the oversimplification 
of complex concepts. This insight resonates 
beyond climate conferences, accentuating the 
importance of effective communication in 
climate action initiatives and garnering global 
support. 
ESG Governance in MSMEs 
The importance of incorporating Environmental, 
Social, and Governance (ESG) principles in 
MSMEs was also addressed. Best practices 
observed in larger companies, such as 
governance-focused committees, circularity, 
internal carbon pricing, and research & 
development (R&D), were highlighted. The 
challenge of MSMEs lies in accessing technology 
and financing, where institutions such as SIDBI 
could play a pivotal role by showcasing

=== PAGE 172 ===
GIFS-GroW Annual Event – Conference Proceedings 
 
48 
 
exemplary MSMEs and providing additional 
support. 
Facilitating a Just Transition 
The necessity of a rapid, orderly, and just 
transition, acknowledging that decarbonization 
is critical was underlined. While large 
corporations have taken the lead, it was noted 
that the financial sector's delayed entry needs 
acceleration. The session underscored the 
importance of a synergistic approach at global 
summits, advocating for increased accessibility 
and affordability of capital between developing 
countries. 
Role of Private Capital and Blended Finance 
The evolving role of private capital in addressing 
climate aspects was acknowledged, indicating 
the need for innovative instruments. Blended 
finance emerged as a potential solution, but the 
emphasis shifted to converting projects into 
bankable propositions. Technical assistance was 
identified as crucial to enhancing bankability, 
ensuring the successful conversion of projects 
and attracting philanthropic funds for impactful 
market-making initiatives.

=== PAGE 173 ===
GIFS-GroW Annual Event – Conference Proceedings 
 
49 
 
SESSION 6: THE NEXUS OF WOMEN AND GREEN FINANCE ACROSS STAKEHOLDERS 
 
PANELISTS 
• Ms. Ekta Mehra 
Senior Sector Specialist, KfW 
• Ms. Smitha Hari 
President – India, auctusESG 
• Ms. Shruti Srivastava 
Investment Director at Avaana Capital 
MODERATOR 
• 
Ms. Neetu Chitkara 
Managing Director and Partner, BCG

=== PAGE 174 ===
GIFS-GroW Annual Event – Conference Proceedings 
 
50 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The sixth session of the GIFS-GroW Annual 
Summit brought together a distinguished all-
women panel to explore the interconnection of 
women and green finance across diverse 
stakeholders. The session heard insights from 
Ms. Ekta Mehra, Senior Sector Specialist at KfW; 
Ms. Smitha Hari, President at auctusESG; and 
Ms. Shruti Srivastava, Investment Director at 
Avaana Capital. It was moderated by Ms. Neetu 
Chitkara, Managing Director and Partner at 
BCG. The session engaged in a comprehensive 
discussion, aiming to uncover challenges and 
opportunities in empowering women 
entrepreneurs within the climate and 
sustainability sphere. There was a particular 
focus on the role of women in green finance, 
examining how financial support could be 
channeled towards initiatives contributing to 
climate goals. 
Key Insights 
Blending Climate and Gender in Financing 
The effective integration of climate and gender 
perspectives in financing initiatives can yield 
positive outcomes, especially in sectors like 
urban mobility and energy. Urban mobility 
projects, for instance, can be designed with a 
gendered lens, enhancing workforce 
participation rates for women. However, 
challenges persist in sectors like energy, 
necessitating tailored approaches for blending 
climate and gender considerations. 
 
Data Challenges in Gender-Related Metrics 
Obtaining gender-related data for reporting and 
analysis poses a significant challenge despite 
reporting standards emphasizing gender 
metrics. The need for sensitizing organizations 
on reporting gender-related information was 
highlighted. Building internal capacities and 
creating structures supporting gender-friendly 
policies are essential to navigate the 
complexities of data collection. 
 
Investment Philosophy and Gender 
Mainstreaming 
Mainstreaming gender in investment processes 
involves considerations like sensitization, 
flexible post-maternity policies, and intentional 
efforts in organization design. Gender 
considerations can eliminate biases in 
investment processes, it has been increasingly 
observed. This includes creating roles that are 
women-friendly and supporting women 
founders through mentorship and networking. 
During a panel discussion, a proposal was made 
for SIDBI to build a gender and climate-focused 
portfolio at the grassroots level. The panel 
discussed the financial parameters necessary 
for such initiatives with a specific focus on 
gender and climate objectives. Perspectives 
were shared on regulatory costs associated with 
supporting women in the workforce could be 
offset through philanthropic blended capital. 
They emphasized the potential benefits of 
initiatives like setting up daycare facilities and 
proposed framing these costs as R&D 
investments to showcase long-term advantages. 
While on the other hand, concerns were raised 
about global competition for funds and 
questions why companies would invest in such

=== PAGE 175 ===
GIFS-GroW Annual Event – Conference Proceedings 
 
51 
 
initiatives abroad when they could use the 
funds domestically. The debate reflects the 
intricacies of balancing financial considerations, 
regulatory support, and global competition in 
advancing gender and climate goals. 
Role of Blended Finance in Gender and Climate 
Initiatives 
Blended finance, involving concessional finance, 
plays a crucial role in supporting gender and 
climate initiatives, but aligning financial 
parameters poses challenges. The panel 
highlighted that while blended finance offers 
support, practical challenges need addressing to 
align expectations of financial and gender 
experts. Sustainability-linked products and 
strong dialogues between borrowers and 
lenders were deemed effective. 
 
Performance Impact of Women Borrowers 
Studies suggest that financial products perform 
better when women are borrowers, 
emphasizing the importance of reporting 
mandates and investor focus on gender metrics. 
The potential advantages of reporting 
mandates, where investors prioritize gender 
metrics, acting as a driving force for institutions 
to utilize gender-related information effectively 
are significant. 
 
Future Expectations and Aspirations 
The session concluded with aspirations for a 
future where women and men share equal 
vulnerability to climate change, leading to an 
overall reduction in vulnerability, particularly 
for economically vulnerable sections. The panel 
envisioned a future with increased integration 
of women into diverse fields, particularly in 
Science, Technology, Engineering, and 
Mathematics (STEM), and improved working 
conditions to sustain their participation. 
Building capacities across both rural and urban 
women and fostering platforms like GroW for 
collaborative efforts were highlighted as 
essential steps in this vision for the future.

=== PAGE 176 ===
ANNEXURE – AGENDA 
Timing 
Topic 
Details 
10am - 10:30am 
Opening 
Registration, coffee, networking   
10:30am - 11:00am 
Session I: Voices from GRoW 
Entrepreneurs 
Introduction by Kruthika Jerome, Shakti Sustainable Energy 
Foundation (5 mins) 
What access for women entrepreneurs in financial institutions? (5 
mins each) 
• 
Ms. Kalyani Shinde, Godaam Innovations (climate smart 
post-harvest solutions) 
• 
Ms. Chaitsi Ahuja, Founder of Brown Living 
• 
Ms. Sahar Mansoor, Bare Necessities (sustainable home 
and personal care products) 
• 
Ms. Vanita Prasad, REVY Environmental Solutions (waste 
management services) 
11:00am - 11:45am 
 
Session II: Policy Perspective on 
Climate Financing Landscape 
India: developments in the 
banking sector and regulation  
Proposed Panelists: 
- 
Mr. V Chandrasekar, Senior Advisor, IBA 
- 
Mr. Sunil Nair, CGM, RBI 
Moderated by - Mr. Sivasubramanian Ramann, CMD, SIDBI 
12:00pm -12:45pm 
Session IV: Sharing of GIFS 
achievements by Founding 
Partners? 
- 
GIFS Report Card 
- 
Introduction to the G2FG 
Platform (Shakti) 
- 
GRoW Network (AFD) 
Speakers: (15 mins each) 
- 
Mr. Nitin Desai, Member of Board, SSEF 
- 
Mr. Sivasubramanian Ramann, IA&AS, Chairman & Managing 
Director, SIDBI  
- 
Ms. Audrey Brulé - Françoise, Deputy Head Financial Systems 
Division, AFD 
12:45pm - 2.00 pm 
Networking Lunch 
Theme Sessions 
2:00pm - 2:45pm 
Session V: Industrial association 
session: what is their green 
aspiration? 
Feedback from Companies’ representatives regarding access to 
climate finance: aspirations, successes and difficulties 
Potential questions to be answered:  
(i) 
What are they looking for (in terms of products, scale, 
level of involvement from the banker)?  
(ii) 
What are the difficulties they encounter? can they share 
a success story? 
Speakers: (15 Min each) 
1. 
Mr. Rajiv Chawla, Chairman, IamSMEofIndia

=== PAGE 177 ===
GIFS-GroW Annual Event – Conference Proceedings 
53 
2.
Mr. Anil Bhardwaj, Secretary General, FISME
3.
Ms. Madhu Tyagi, President, COWE India
Moderated by - Mr. R. K. Singh, CGM, SIDBI 
2:45pm - 3:30pm 
Session VI - lessons learnt of G20 
Presidency for the Indian 
financial sector and perspective 
+ COP28 messages and
takeaways in Indian Context
Proposed Panelists: 
-
Mr. Dhruba Purkayastha, Director, CPI
-
Mr. Vivek Adhia, Associate Director, BCG
-
Ms. Neha Kumar, Climate Bond Initiative
-
Mr. Shubhashis Dey, Director of Climate Policy Program at
the Shakti Sustainable Energy Foundation
-
Mr. Mukund Govindarajan, ECube Investment
Moderated by - Mr. R. K. Singh, CGM, SIDBI
Break - 15 Minutes 
3:45pm - 4:30pm 
Session VII: GRoW Session – 
Panel Discussion: The Nexus of 
Women and Green Finance 
across Stakeholders 
Discuss how climate outcomes can be improved from two lenses: 
(i) increased access to finance for women climate entrepreneurs;
(ii) increased participation from women in green finance. Focus on
key challenges to be addressed and what GRoW is doing to bridge
the gaps.
Proposed Panelists: 
-
Ms. Ekta Mehra (Senior Sector Specialist), KFW
-
Ms. Smitha Hari, President, AuctusESG 
-
Ms. Shruti Srivastava, Investment Director, Avaana Capital
Moderated by – Ms. Neetu Chitkara, MD & Partner, BCG
4:30pm - 4.45pm 
Summing Up 
By GIFS Partner(s) 
4.45pm - 6.00pm 
Networking Tea 
____________
