=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 24.2.20857
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 24.2.20857
creationDate: D:20240624100654+09'00'
modDate: D:20240624100823+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
15 – 18 July 2024 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 10 
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
24 June 2024 
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum XIV 
Funding proposal package for FP239 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled "Building Climate Resilience for Food and Livelihoods in 
the Horn of Africa (BREFOL)"; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page b 
3 
135 
141 
146 
163 
175 
Table of Content 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
Secretariat’s assessment 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment  
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
Gender documentation 
178

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
Building Climate Resilience for Food and Livelihoods in 
the Horn of Africa (BREFOL) 
Country(ies): 
Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, and South Sudan 
Accredited Entity: 
The African Development Bank (AfDB). 
Date of first submission: 
[2023/05/27]  
Date of current submission 
[2024/06/18]  
Version number 
[V.007]

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0 
 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 2 OF 15 
 
 
 
 
Abbreviation 
 Definition 
AAAP 
Africa Adaptation Accelerator Program  
ACS 
Agricultural Cooperative Society  
AD 
Agro-dealer  
ADF  
African Development Fund  
AE 
Accredited Entity 
AFAWA 
Affirmative Finance Action for Women in Africa  
AfDB 
African Development Bank (AfDB).  
AFOLU 
Agriculture, Forests, and Other Land Use 
AML/CFT 
Anti-Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism  
ARA  
Adaptation Result Area 
ASALs 
Arid and Semi-arid Lands  
AVC 
Agropastoral Value Chain 
BDCW 
BREFOL Direct Credit Window  
BDICW 
BREFOL Direct Insurance Credit Window  
BREFOL 
Building Climate Resilience for Food and Livelihoods in the Horn of Africa 
CBs 
Commercial Banks  
CDD 
Maximum Number of Consecutive Dry Days 
CDI 
Combined Drought Indicator 
CFRA 
Country Fiduciary Risk Assessment  
CIEWS 
Climate Information and Early Warning System  
CLMCP 
Community Land Management Committees and Platforms 
CMIPs 
Coupled Model Inter-comparison Programs  
COVID-19 
Coronavirus 2019 
CPAR 
Country Procurement Assessment Report 
CRU  
Climatic Research Unit  
CRVA 
Climate Risk and Vulnerability Assessment  
CSA 
Climate-Smart Agriculture 
CSOs 
Civil Society Organizations  
CSP 
Country Strategy Papers  
CWD 
Consecutive Wet Day 
DACCS  
African Union-Draft Africa Climate Change Strategy 
DRM  
Disaster Risk Management  
DRs 
Discount Rates  
DRSLP 
Drought Resilience and Sustainable Livelihoods Programme 
EA 
Economic Analysis 
EDRMC 
Ethiopian Disaster Risk Management Commission 
EE 
Executing Entities  
EFA 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
EIRR 
Economic Internal rate of Return  
ENPV 
Economic Net Present Value 
ESIAs 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessments  
ESMFs 
Environmental and Social Management Frameworks  
ESMPs 
Environmental and Social Management Plans   
EWS 
Early warning systems  
FA 
Financial Analysis  
FAA 
Funded Activity Agreement  
FAO 
Food and Agricultural Organization 
FBAs 
Farm-based Associated   
FCMB 
First City Monument Bank 
FEWS NET 
Famine Early Warning Systems Network  
FIRR 
Financial Internal Rate of Return  
FMA 
Financial Management Arrangement  
FNPV 
Financial Net Present Value

=== PAGE 6 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 3 OF 15 
 
 
FSI 
Fragile State Index 
FSNWG 
Food Security and Nutrition Working Group  
GALS 
Gender Action Learning System  
GCA 
Global Centre on Adaptation  
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GFFA 
Global Forum on Food and Agriculture 
GGW 
Great Green Wall  
GHA 
Greater Horn of Africa 
GHGs 
Green House Gases  
HCVI 
Hunger and Climate Vulnerability Index  
HoA 
Horn of Africa  
HWF 
Heat Wave Frequency  
ICEWARN 
IGAD Conflict Early Warning and Response Mechanism  
ICG 
International Crisis Group 
ICPAC 
IGAD Climate Prediction and Applications Center 
ICPALD 
IGAD Centre for Pastoral and Livestock Development  
IDDRSI 
IGAD’s Drought Disaster Resilience and Sustainability Initiative  
IES 
IGAD Executive Secretariat  
IFAD 
International Fund for Agricultural Development  
IFI 
International Financial Institutions 
IFRAH 
IGAD Food Security, Nutrition and Resilience Analysis Hub  
IGAD 
Intergovernmental Authority on Development 
IGADD 
Intergovernmental Authority on Drought and Development  
IGREENFIN  Inclusive Green Financing Initiative 
ILRI 
the International Livestock Research Institute 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
IPC 
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification  
IPCC 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  
IPCU 
IDDRSI Platform Coordinating Unit  
IPMT 
Integrated Pest Management Technology  
IPRs 
Independent Procurement Reviews  
IRAPP 
IGAD Regional Aids Programme  
ISFM 
Integrated Soil Fertility Management 
ISSP 
IGAD Security Sector Programme  
LoC 
Line of Credit 
LPFIs 
Local Private Financial Institutions 
LUCF 
Land-Use Change and Forestry  
MAD 
Meteorological and Agricultural Drought  
MDAs 
Ministries, Departments and Agencies 
MENA 
Middle East and North Africa 
MFI 
Microfinance institution 
MIRR  
Modified Internal Rate of Return  
MoAF 
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry  
MoLFR 
Ministry of Livestock, Forestry and Range 
MoA 
Ministry of Agriculture  
MoAWFL 
Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Fisheries and Livestock  
MoAWFLC 
Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Fisheries and Livestock, and Cooperatives
 
MoCEF 
Ministry of Commerce Economics and Finance  
MoFE 
Ministry of Finance, Ethiopia  
MoFP 
Ministry of Finance and Planning, South Sudan  
MoFK 
Ministry of Finance, Kenya  
MoFS 
Ministry of Finance, Somalia  
MoIL 
Ministry of Irrigation and Lowlands 
MoU 
Memorandums of Understanding

=== PAGE 7 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 4 OF 15 
 
 
MRA 
Mitigation Results Area  
MSME 
Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises  
MtCO2e 
Metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent 
NAPA 
National Adaptation Programmes of Action 
NAPs 
National Adaptation Plans  
NDAs 
National Designated Authorities  
NDCs 
Nationally Determined Contributions  
ND-GAIN 
Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative 
NDVI 
Normalized Difference Vegetation Index  
NGOs 
Non-governmental Organizations  
NMA 
National Meteorological Agency 
NMS 
National Meteorological Services 
NPCU 
National Program Coordination Unit  
NTF 
Nigeria Trust Fund  
NTEP 
National Treasury and Economic Planning 
OECD 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
PARs 
Project Appraisal Reports  
PCU 
Platform Coordinating Unit  
PDAP 
Procurement Development Action Plan  
PEAPA 
Programme Executing Agency Procurement Assessment 
PEPs 
Politically Exposed Persons  
PFIs 
Public Financial Institutions  
PIA 
Priority Intervention Areas  
PIUs 
Project Implementing Units  
PMUs 
Project Management Units 
PPP 
Private-Public Partnerships  
PPM 
Participatory Pasture Management 
PTCs 
Pastoralist Training Centers 
RCP 
Representative Concentration Pathway  
RETs 
Renewable energy technologies  
RMCs.  
Regional Member Countries  
RPSC 
Regional Program Steering Committee 
SACCOs 
Savings and Credit Cooperative Organizations  
SBDs 
Standard Bidding Documents   
SC 
Sub-Component 
SME 
Small and Medium-sized Enterprise 
SMI 
Small and Medium-sized Industry 
SPEI 
Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index  
SPI 
Standardized Precipitation Index      
TAAT 
Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation Program  
TADs  
Transboundary Animal Diseases  
TFRA 
Task Force on Rural Africa 
ToC 
Theory of Change 
TOT 
Training-of-Trainers 
UA 
Units of Account  
UBA 
United Bank for Africa 
UNDP 
United Nations Development Programme 
UNHCR 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
USSD 
Unstructured Supplementary Service Data 
VHI 
Vegetation Health Index

=== PAGE 8 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE 5 OF 15 
 
 
WABEs 
Women in Agribusiness Enterprises  
WASH 
Water Sanitation and Hygiene 
WFP 
World Food Programme 
WHO  
World Health Organization 
WMO 
World Meteorological Organization   
WOP 
Without Project  
WP 
With Project 
WSDI 
Warm Spell Duration  
YABEs 
Youths in Agribusiness Enterprises

=== PAGE 9 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 1 
 
A. PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or programme 
Programme 
A.2. Public or 
private sector 
Public 
A.3. Request for Proposals 
(RFP) 
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
The applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets below. 
 
GCF  
contribution 
Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total 
18% 
11% 
☒  Energy generation and access 
7% 
5% 
☐  Low-emission transport 
 
 
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances 
 
 
☒  Forestry and land use 
11% 
6% 
Adaptation total 
82% 
89% 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities 
34.4 % 
25.4% 
☒  Health and well-being, and food and water security 
32.0% 
58.5% 
☐  Infrastructure and built environment 
 
 
☒  Ecosystems and ecosystem services 
15.6%     
5.1% 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided 
or removed / sequestered) 
14.1 MtCO2eq 
A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries 
reached) 
Direct and indirect beneficiaries 
~4.68 million 
direct 
beneficiaries2 
(ADF 
1.859,451.0  
 + GCF  
     2,835,280.0   
million) at least 
50% women 
~15.55 million 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
(ADF 
10,198,282 
+ GCF          
5,350,100   
million) at least 
50% women 
1.9% of total 
population  
 
6.4% of total 
population 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance3)  
USD 335,30 million 
(GCF 151.00 million + 
ADF & Others USD 
184,30 million) 
A.9. Project size 
Large (Over USD 250 million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
 USD151.0 million 
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
☒  Grant 
USD 90.70 Million 
☒  Loan 
USD 60.30 Million 
☐  Guarantee Enter number 
☐  Equity  
 
    Enter number 
☐  Results-based payment    Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
7(84) years(months) 
A.12. Total lifespan 
25 (300) years(months) 
A.13. Expected date of AE 
internal approval 
 
9/30/2024 
A.14. ESS category  
Refer to the AE’s safeguard policy 
and GCF ESS Standards to assess 
your FP category. 
 
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included in 
the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐

=== PAGE 10 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2 
 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g., GEF, AF, CIF, 
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
• 
The Government of Djibouti, acting through its Ministry of Commerce, 
Economy and Finance (MoCEF) and its Ministry of Agriculture, Water, 
Fisheries and Livestock (MoAWFL); 
• 
The Government of Ethiopia, acting through the Ministry of Finance of 
Ethiopia (MoFE) and the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA); 
• 
The Government of Kenya, acting through the National Treasury and 
Economic Planning (NTEP) and the Ministry of Agriculture, Water, 
Fisheries, Livestock and Cooperatives (MoAWFLC);  
• 
The Government of Somalia, acting through its Ministry of Finance, 
Somalia (MOFS) and Ministry of Livestock, Forestry and Range 
(MoLFR);  
• 
The Government of South Sudan, through its Ministry of Finance and 
Planning, South Sudan (MoFP) and Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry 
(MoAF); 
• 
The Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
The HoA region faces increased vulnerability due to highly variable rainfall patterns leading to extreme 
weather events such as floods and droughts, resulting in humanitarian emergencies, food insecurity and 
infrastructure damage. Therefore, the proposed GCF-AfDB programme entitled "Building Climate Resilience 
for Food and Livelihoods in the Horn of Africa (BREFOL)" aims to address the pressing issue of climate 
change and variability in the Horn of Africa (HoA) region, specifically targeting Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, 
Somalia and South Sudan in addition to the IGAD region. The specific objective of the programme is to 
reduce the vulnerability and increase the resilience of agro-pastoral and pastoral communities to climate-
induced food insecurity and to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the region. This will be achieved 
by providing each beneficiary community with a package of resilience solutions, including i) infrastructure for 
water harvesting and agro-pastoral development, ii) support for sustainable land management development, 
iii) access to innovative climate-smart technologies and best practices, iv) access to renewable energy, v) 
capacity building for cooperatives and agribusiness Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) on 
entrepreneurship, vi) access to credit, and vii) access to climate services, early warning and index insurance. 
AfDB financing will focus on providing i) agro-pastoral production infrastructure, ii) support for sustainable 
land management, iiii) access to innovation, iv) capacity building for cooperatives, and v) infrastructure to 
generate climate information. GCF funding will complement the required resilience package by providing 
climate finance and promoting low-carbon technologies to enable these communities to be better equipped 
and prepared to cope with climate and other environmental hazards. With an estimated budget of USD 
335.29 million, the programme aims to build resilience to the impacts of climate change by integrating climate 
change considerations into agricultural practices. Key constraints to climate adaptation that the programme 
seeks to overcome include limited access to concessional finance, political instability, weak governance, 
infrastructure gaps and limited access to climate information. The outputs of the programme are expected 
to lead to three main outcomes: Increased adoption of climate-resilient solutions; enhanced carbon 
sequestration and reduced greenhouse gas emissions of agropastoral value chain (AVC) and; strengthened 
adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities. Additionally, the program aims to bring about co-benefits such 
improved livelihoods opportunities and ecosystem services in line with regional strategies and national 
commitments. The programme will be implemented by host countries' Ministries of Agriculture, with regional 
coordination through the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and its subsidiary bodies. 
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition 
to the GCF contribution (i.e., GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or 
programme described in the funding proposal. 
2 See Annex 23 for computations 
3 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.

=== PAGE 11 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3 
 
 
 
 
 
4 http://www.unep.org/GEAS/.  
5  ICPAC (2018). Greater Horn of Africa Climate and Food Security Atlas. IGAD. 
http://www.icpac.net/index.php/applications/research-development.html.  
6 Refers to the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC), which is a standardized tool that aims to classify the 
severity and magnitude of food insecurity.  The IPC scale, which is comparable across countries, ranges from Minimal—
IPC 1—to Famine—IPC 5. 
7 USAID (2022): Horn of Africa – Complex Emergency. https://reliefweb.int/attachments/a062f05d-c9a6-49f4-aed0-
a84de6508ddd/2022_08_19%20USG%20Horn%20of%20Africa%20Complex%20Emergency%20Fact%20Sheet%20%232.
pdf.  
B. PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
1. 
The Horn of Africa (HoA) is one of the most food insecure regions in the world. The eight countries in 
the HoA - including Djibouti, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Kenya, Somalia, Sudan, South Sudan and Uganda 
(Figure B.1.1) - have a combined population of about 250 million people, of whom 160 million (or about 
64 per cent) live in areas where food is extremely4.  
 
2. 
In addition, about 80% of the region is classified as arid 
and semi-arid land (ASAL), with about 40% of the total 
land area classified as ecologically low productive land 
due to poor climatic conditions coupled with severe 
environmental degradation resulting from both natural 
conditions and human activities 5 . Since the 1970s, 
several of these countries have been threatened by 
famine at least once every decade (a frequency that has 
recently increased to once every three to five years). In 
Somalia, for example, the Famine Early Warning 
Systems Network (FEWS NET) predicts that the total 
number of people experiencing crisis-IPC 36 or higher 
levels of acute food insecurity will increase significantly 
to more than 1.6 million. These projections are based 
on expected desert locust crop and pasture losses, the 
impact of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic on 
domestic market supply chains and household food and 
income sources, increasing seasonal climate extremes, 
and the reduced ability of poor households to cope with 
shocks and agricultural losses. Reports from the Food 
Security and Nutrition Working Group (FSNWG) 
indicate that between 18.6 and 21.1 million people in 
Ethiopia, Kenya and Somalia are expected to 
experience crisis-IPC 3 or worsening levels of acute 
food insecurity due to drought. The number of people in 
need of emergency food assistance to meet their basic 
needs is expected to rise to as many as 26 million 
people in the three countries by February 2023, due to 
consecutive seasons of poor rainfall in 2022 and 20237. 
2023. 
Figure B.1.1: Map of the Horn of Africa 
show station points used to plot the mean 
annual cycles of rainfall and temperature 
and elevation in meters above sea level. 
3. 
Similarly, in Djibouti, an estimated 60,000 Djiboutians and refugees in the country are at Crisis-IPC 3 
or worse and in urgent need of food assistance. The situation is not much different in Ethiopia, where 
an estimated 8.1 million people are currently in Stressed or Crisis-IPC 2 and IPC 3 respectively. This 
has been attributed to localised flooding, conflict, insecurity, poor macroeconomic factors, desert locust 
infestation and the ongoing negative impact of past poor harvests. In South Sudan, an estimated 6 
million people - about 51 percent of South Sudan's total population - could face crisis (IPC 3) or worse 
levels of acute food insecurity at the peak of the lean season from May to June, requiring urgent food

=== PAGE 12 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4 
 
 
 
 
 
8 USAID (2020). Food Assistance Fact Sheet South Sudan 
9 IPCC (2018). Summary for Policy Makers (Draft).  
10 ICPAC (2018). Greater Horn of Africa Climate and Food Security Atlas. IGAD.  
11 University of Notre Dame (2020). Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative. URL: https://gain.nd.edu/our-work/country-
index/ 
12 WMO (2020) State of the Climate in Africa 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/1275_WMO_State_of_the_Climate_in_Africa_2020_en.pdf  
13 The plotted precipitation and temperature datasets were retrieved from CHIRPSv2 and CRU, respectively 
assistance8. According to the latest IPC analysis, the main drivers of the high levels of acute food 
insecurity in the country include the negative impact of flooding and violence on livelihood activities, 
COVID-19, poor macroeconomic conditions, cereal production shortfalls, poor access to livestock 
products and increased food prices due to the COVID-19 pandemic.  
4. 
The situation is exacerbated by the effects of climate change, population growth (estimated at 3% per 
year) and declining per capita agricultural production capacity. Climate change and climate extremes 
will exacerbate the fragility of food production systems and the natural resource base in environments 
prone to degradation, desertification and water stress, and in regions where poverty undermines the 
ability of rural people to take precautionary measures, thereby increasing their vulnerability. The HoA 
region is currently classified as one of the most disaster-prone regions in the world9.  More than two-
thirds of the total population is currently at greatest risk from seasonal droughts and recurrent flash 
floods, which are likely to increase livestock, crop and human diseases, land degradation, reduced 
crop production, increased crop failures, livestock diseases and deaths10.  On the other hand, extreme 
demographic pressure (estimated at 3% per year) is a major concern in the region. Population growth 
continues to outpace growth in agricultural production, adding to the challenges of poverty and food 
insecurity in the region. This is particularly worrying for countries where the capacity to prepare and 
plan for impending disasters remains extremely low, as measured by their Notre Dame Global 
Adaptation Initiative (ND-GAIN) indices. The ND-GAIN indices11 for these countries suggest a strong 
need for investment and innovation to improve preparedness and resilience to the impacts of climate 
change. With the exception of Djibouti, the HoA countries are among the 20 per cent most vulnerable 
to climate change in the world, and four (Eritrea, Ethiopia, Somalia and Sudan) are among the 10 per 
cent most vulnerable. Despite significant progress in reducing extreme poverty and food insecurity 
through several resilience-building programmes in the HoA, climatic shocks continue to pose a 
significant threat to food security, especially for the poor. Vulnerable people are trapped in a cycle of 
chronic hunger and poverty because they lack the capacity to cope with increasing, more frequent and 
intense risks and their impacts. Climate shocks are also increasing displacement and migration 
patterns. According to the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), by 2020, 12% of all new 
population displacements worldwide will occur in the East and Horn of Africa region, with more than 
1.2 million new disaster-related displacements12. 
 
Climate Vulnerabilities, Impacts, and Adaptation Options  
Climate Vulnerabilities:  
5. 
The historical seasonal cycle of precipitation and temperature (mean, minimum and maximum) for 
selected stations in Ethiopia (Bole), Sudan (El Nahud), South Sudan (Wau), Kenya (Dagoretti), 
Somalia (Mogadishu), Djibouti (Djibouti), Uganda (Kabale) and Eritrea (Asmara) for the period 1981-
201913 is presented in Figure B.1.2 below. As observed (Figure B.1.2), stations across the HoA exhibit 
different characteristics depending on their geographical location. Some stations show unimodal 
precipitation seasons, while others show bimodal seasons. This corresponds to single temperature 
peaks at some stations and double peaks at others. For example, the observed rainfall at Bole is 
unimodal with a maximum monthly rainfall peak of about 264 mm/month in August. Double temperature 
peaks are also observed at the station between the seasons of March-May and September-November. 
Temperatures vary from about 7°C (min) to 26.3°C (max) at the station. En Nahud in the southern part 
of Sudan also shows a similar pattern of unimodal rainfall, but with distinct double temperature peaks 
in May (39oC) and October (37oC). The observed maximum mean monthly rainfall at this station is 
about 120 mm. Wau in Southern Sudan experiences an early onset of rainfall compared to the stations 
in Sudan. Although the temperature at Wau peaks in the same month as El Nahud, the magnitude is 
lower, and the mean monthly rainfall is higher (about 193 mm/month). Both Dagoretti in Kenya and

=== PAGE 13 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5 
 
 
 
 
 
14 Greater Horn of Africa Climate Risk and Food Security Atlas 
Mogadishu in Somalia experience bimodal rainy seasons with different first peaks in April and May 
respectively, but the second peak is observed in November. Both stations experience two temperature 
maxima. Djibouti experiences a year-round wet season with a single temperature maximum in July, 
although the magnitude of the mean monthly rainfall is lower (i.e. less than 35 mm/month). This can 
be explained by the influence of a precipitation area over the western equatorial Indian Ocean, which 
affects the distribution of rainfall along the HoA coast14. Perennial rainfall is also observed in Kabale, 
Uganda, with bimodal rainfall seasons in MAM (March-April-May) and SON (September-November), 
while Asmara, Eritrea, experiences unimodal rainfall peaking in July. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure B.1.2: Monthly Climatology of precipitation, mean, minimum and maximum temperature 
for El Nahud in Sudan, Bole in Ethiopia, Wau in South Sudan, Dagoretti in Kenya, Somalia, 
Djibouti city in Djibouti reference to 1981 -2019. The analysis is done based on observed 
station data.  
 
6. 
Observed trends in precipitation, minimum and maximum temperature for the period 1976-2005 are 
shown in Figure B.1.3a. As observed, trends in precipitation range from -9 to 9 mm/month/decade over 
the entire HoA. Positive trends are observed over most of southern Sudan, southern Sudan, 
northwestern Uganda, northern Ethiopia, all of Djibouti and parts of Somalia. These trends are 
statistically significant only in the northeastern axis of Ethiopia. On the other hand, negative trends are

=== PAGE 14 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6 
 
 
 
 
 
15 Kew, S. F., Philip, S. Y., Hauser, M., Hobbins, M., Wanders, N., van Oldenborgh, G. J., van der Wiel, K., Veldkamp, T. I. 
E., Kimutai, J., Funk, C., and Otto, F. E. L.: Impact of precipitation and increasing temperatures on drought trends in eastern 
Africa, Earth Syst. Dynam., 12, 17–35, https://doi.org/10.5194/esd-12-17-2021, 2021. 
observed in most parts of Kenya, especially in the central and southern parts of the country. Declining 
trends are also observed in the southern parts of Ethiopia and the northern part of Eritrea. Some parts 
of Somalia and eastern Uganda have also experienced a decrease in rainfall. However, the observed 
negative trends are not statistically significant. With regard to temperature, a general nighttime 
warming trend is observed over the entire HoA, except for a few areas over the northeastern parts of 
Ethiopia, where a decreasing trend of about -0.15 oC/decade was observed. The observed temperature 
trends are statistically significant over a larger spatial extent of the HoA. The observed warming trend 
in maximum temperature is relatively large in the central region of HoA and in the northwestern flank 
for minimum temperature. The observed precipitation deficits in some parts of the region and the large-
scale increases in temperature are factors that contribute to increased evaporation, which in turn can 
lead to increased water demand and thus intensified drought impacts15.  
 
 
 
 
Figure B.1.3a: Observed trends in precipitation, minimum and maximum temperature for the 
period 1976-2005. Stippling denotes areas where trends are statistically significant at 0.05 
level  
7. 
7. Analysis of area-averaged rainfall and temperature over the region based on CRU data for the 
period 1900-2020 is also shown in Figure B.1.3b. The results show that the region has experienced 
high inter-annual rainfall variability with no clear trend of increasing or decreasing rainfall. The period 
from the 1970s to the late 2000s was characterised by a decreasing rainfall trend, while the last decade 
(2011-2020) was characterised by a series of wet years. For temperature, however, there has been a 
consistent regional warming trend over the last forty years (1981 to 2020), and this is one of the key 
indicators of climate change in the region. Inter-annual variability in rainfall, intra-seasonal changes in 
rainfall and increases in temperature are threatening crop productivity, with farmers experiencing 
declining yields and some areas becoming less suitable for the production of major crops.

=== PAGE 15 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7 
 
 
 
 
 
16 The assessment of future climate change in the GHA countries are based on projections produced by the Coupled Model 
Inter-comparison Programs (CMIPs), overseen by the World Climate Research Program. Data presented is CMIP6, derived 
from the Sixth phase of the CMIPs. The CMIPs form the data foundation of the IPCC Assessment Reports. CMIP6 supports 
the IPCC's Sixth Assessment Report. Projected data is presented at a 1.0º x 1.0º (100km x 100km) resolution. 
Figure B.1.3b: Anomalies of annual total rainfall (top) and temperature (bottom)（°C) for the 
IGAD region from CRU data for the period from 1900 to 2020 relative to 1961 to 1990 average. 
Blue bars indicate cooler-than-average years; red bars show warmer-than-average years. 
 
8. 
8. Climate projections for the period 2021-2050 16  show a general increase in annual mean 
temperatures under the RCP4.5 (medium-low) and RCP8.5 (high) emission scenarios. Under the 
medium-low emissions scenario, the annual mean near-surface temperature is projected to increase 
by more than 1oC and 1.6oC, respectively, in most countries of the HoA region (Figure B.1.4a). The 
difference between the projected period (2021-2050) and the baseline period (1976-2005) is 
statistically significant at the 0.05 level over some areas in the central and most of the southern parts 
of the region. Warming under RCP8.5 is projected to be high, reaching up to 2.4oC, as shown in Figure 
B.1.4. More intense warming is projected to occur during the March-April-May (MAM) season. The 
MAM season is important for most of the region, especially in sectors sensitive to rainfall variability. 
Therefore, increased temperature and precipitation variability during this season can negatively affect 
food security and key production sectors due to water scarcity and heat stress.  
 
Figure B.1.4a: Projected change in mean temperature in the Horn of Africa for the period 
2021-2050 under RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 emission scenarios. The change is computed 
relative to 1976-2005 base period. Stippling denotes areas where differences are 
statistically significant at 0.05 level. 
 
9. 
Projected changes in the spatial distribution of precipitation under the RCP4.5 scenario indicate that 
widespread wet conditions are likely over the southern part of the region. On the other hand, 
precipitation deficits are projected under RCP4.5 over the whole of Sudan, Eritrea, central and northern

=== PAGE 16 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 
 
 
 
17 Ibid. 
parts of southern Sudan, northern and western Ethiopia and southern Uganda. Other parts, including 
all of Somalia, Djibouti, south-eastern Ethiopia, northern Uganda and Kenya, are projected to receive 
more precipitation under the same emissions scenario. The increase in precipitation is only significant 
in southern Kenya and a small part of Uganda. Under the RCP8.5 scenario, precipitation deficits are 
projected to increase in parts of the region.  The spatial extent of the deficit extends further into the 
south of the region and is statistically significant mainly around the central area of the HoA. It is 
expected that regions with more precipitation are likely to experience an increase in the frequency of 
heavy rainfall and flood events, while those with projected deficits are likely to experience intense 
droughts in the HoA region. Flood events pose major risks to the populations living in these areas and 
often result in negative impacts such as human displacement, deaths, destruction and/or loss of 
property, damage to crops and arable land, as well as loss of productive assets such as livestock due 
to deaths17.  The Greater Horn of Africa Climate Risk and Food Security Atlas shows that since the 
1990s, the GHA region has experienced a number of flood events with varying impacts. The number 
of incidents varies across the region, with Ethiopia having the highest number of incidents (20), 
followed by Somalia, Sudan and Tanzania (18). Fewer people were affected in Djibouti than in the 
other countries. The highest number of people affected by a single flood event was in Somalia, followed 
by Sudan, Kenya and Uganda. The average number is highest in Sudan and South Sudan. These 
conditions are expected to worsen under wetter climate conditions, as expected under the RCP4.5 
scenario. This variability calls for improved monitoring systems to enhance preparedness and planning. 
10. In addition to projected changes in spatial distribution, time series analyses of annual precipitation and 
temperature anomalies averaged over the IGAD region based on multi-model ensemble simulations 
for the two scenarios (RCP4.5 and RCP8.5) have been presented to quantify uncertainties in future 
projections associated with climate models and scenarios (Figure B.1.4b). Under RCP4.5, models 
project a likelihood of small and consistent temperature increases in future periods. Under this 
scenario, the region is expected to experience a temperature increase of around 1.5-3.5oC. Under 
RCP8.5, higher temperature changes of up to 4-6oC are projected over the region. The temperature 
increase under this scenario is faster than under RCP4.5, especially between 2050 and 2100. For 
precipitation, the models show strong inter-annual variability in the future compared to the historical 
period. This variability is projected to be higher under RCP8.5 than under RCP4.5, with recurrent wet 
and dry periods.

=== PAGE 17 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 
 
 
 
18 Sarah Osima et al. (2018).  Environ. Res. Lett. 13 065004. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aaba1b.  
19 Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs (2018). Climate Change Profile: Greater Horn of Africa. 
http://www.government.nl/foreign-policy-evaluations.  
20 Masilin Gudoshava et al 2020 Environ. Res. Lett. 15 034037. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ab6b33.  
21https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/.  
Figure B.1.4b: Time series of annual rainfall (top) and temperature (bottom) anomalies 
averaged over the IGAD region for the two scenarios (RCP4.5 and RCP8.5) for the period 1951-
2100 with respect to 1971-2000 base period based on ensemble of simulations.  
 
11. Other useful indicators for assessing climate change, impacts and associated costs include the World 
Meteorological Organization (WMO) Expert Team Core Sector Indicators such as Standardised 
Precipitation Index (SPI), Standardised Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI), Warm Season 
Duration Index (WSDI), Heat Wave Frequency (HWF), Maximum Consecutive Dry Days (CDD), 
Maximum Consecutive Wet Days (CWD), Normalised Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) and 
Meteorological and Agricultural Drought (MAD). The projected change in these indices was calculated 
for the period 2021-2050 (using scenario modelling) in the future and the reference period (1976-2005) 
under two representative concentration pathways (i.e. RCP4.5 and 8.5 emission scenarios). These 
extreme climate indicators are useful for designing sector-specific programmes, especially in regions 
that are extremely vulnerable to climate change and extreme climate events. Appendix 1.1 (a&b) 
shows the calculated SPI for the region. Under the RCP4.5 emissions scenario, moderate drought is 
projected to occur over most of Sudan, Eritrea, northern South Sudan and Ethiopia and southern 
Uganda, while moderate wetness is projected to occur over all of Somalia, northern Uganda, south-
western and eastern Kenya and south-eastern Ethiopia. Under RCP8.5, moderate drought is expected 
to intensify across the HoA, with parts of Sudan, South Sudan, Ethiopia and Uganda likely to 
experience severe drought (i.e. SPI < -1.5). Similar but stronger signals are observed for SPEI 
Appendix 1.1(c&d), where extreme drought (i.e. SPEI < -2) is expected to dominate the northern 
region of Sudan, although not statistically significant. In general, a statistically significant increase in 
warm spells is likely to occur across the HoA domain with WSDI, particularly under RCP4.5, where the 
hotspots (warm spells > 100 days) are in Ethiopia, Kenya and Uganda Appendix 1.1(e&f). The change 
is expected to intensify under RCP8.5, but at a lower level of significance. The frequency of heatwaves 
is also projected to increase by 50 days over the entire HoA region under the RCP4.5 and 8.5 emission 
scenarios Appendix (g&h). Consistent with the literature, days with extreme heat (DHI > 35oC) are 
projected to increase over most of the GHA region (Osima et al. 2018;18 Netherlands Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, 2018;19 and Gudoshava et al. 2020 20).  It is important to note that while global climate 
and weather monitoring systems are useful for providing an overview of the general situation, localised 
information systems are critical for providing information at the local level and are therefore useful for 
more detailed planning. As such, BREFOL will be more useful if it includes components aimed at 
generating and disseminating local information. 
12. Similarly, Appendix 1.2 shows that under RCP8.5, CDD (defined as a day without agriculturally 
significant rainfall with a threshold of 1 mm/ day)21is projected to increase over most of the GHA region,

=== PAGE 18 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 
 
 
 
22 ICPAC/WFP (2018). Greater Horn of Africa Climate Risk and Food Security Atlas. 
http://www.icpac.net/index.php/applications/research-development.html.  
23 Both are proxies’ measures used in assessing meteorological and agricultural drought conditions in the literature.  
24 https://reliefweb.int/organization/ocha.  
with more pronounced effects in north-eastern Ethiopia; the White Nile region of Sudan; the northern 
region of South Sudan; the coastal, north-eastern and Rift Valley regions of Kenya; central, western 
and northern parts of Somalia; and all of Djibouti and Eritrea. However, CDD is projected to decrease 
in the southern parts of the region under RCP4.5, although the change is not significant. The projected 
increase in CDD could affect crop growth and development, which in turn could affect food security in 
the affected regions. This is a clear indication of the need to formulate actionable policies aimed at 
adapting to drier days in the future. In Appendix 1.3, CWD (defined as a day with a rainfall threshold 
equal to or greater than 1 mm/day) is projected to decrease over most of the region, particularly in 
southern Sudan, western South Sudan, western Ethiopia, southern Eritrea, Uganda, and northwestern 
and southeastern Kenya. Some areas, including northern Ethiopia and central parts of southern Sudan, 
are expected to experience increases in CWD. Again, the projected increase in CWD in certain parts 
of the region calls for actionable strategies to adapt to or take advantage of localised impacts such as 
flooding in the region. Frequent flooding has had a strong impact on poverty reduction, food security, 
livelihoods and human capital of several communities in the GHA region, as shown in Appendix 1.4.  
13. Appendices 1.5 and 1.6 present the Normalised Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) and a proxy for 
MAD. While NDVI measures the presence or absence of live green vegetation and is very important 
for livestock management in terms of pasture availability in terms of abundance and scarcity, MAD is 
a proxy measure of meteorological and agricultural drought conditions on a seasonal time scale22.  This 
new approach, developed in the Atlas, combines the traditional SPI and the Vegetation Health Index 
(VHI),23 using a standardised method of layer combination described in detail in the Atlas, to produce 
a Combined Drought Indicator (CDI) for the region (Appendix 1.5). As can be seen from the NDVI 
maps, most of the pastoral areas, usually located in the eastern part of the region, tend to have lower 
vegetation performance compared to the non-pastoral areas of the region. This information is crucial 
for livestock management, especially in terms of pasture availability in terms of abundance and 
scarcity. Similarly, the CDIs (Appendix 1.6) show that the impact of drought varies across the region, 
affecting different locations at different times and to different degrees. In particular, the end of the 
2008/2009 La Nina events, which led to the 2009 MAM drought conditions that affected almost the 
entire GHA region, is well represented in the combined map. The extent of the 2010/2011 drought in 
the GHA is also clearly visible on the CDI map.  
14. The aggregated annual drought maps for the region show that drought is an inescapable feature of the 
GHA region, particularly in the semi-arid areas where an estimated 75 per cent of the labour force is 
engaged in smallholder rain-fed agriculture, and therefore its impact on crops and human populations 
can be acute, as illustrated in Appendices 1.7 and 1.8. For example, the severe drought of 2010/11 
in Kenya, Somalia and south-eastern Ethiopia affected around ten million people, with more than 
250,000 deaths in Somalia. Similarly, statistics from the EM DAT global database show that since 
1990, Ethiopia, Kenya and Somalia have experienced more droughts than other countries in the region. 
The highest number (maximum) of people affected in any one episode was in Kenya, with over 20 
million people affected, followed by Ethiopia and then Sudan. This led to animal deaths and a 
significant drop in their market prices, with milk production falling significantly for most affected 
households. Wildlife in these areas has also been severely affected. The food security situation in the 
region has also deteriorated. The increasing trend, especially in late 2015 and 2016, is linked to the El 
Niño drought that affected parts of the northern sector countries such as Ethiopia, Sudan and Djibouti. 
This led to poor production and livestock losses, affecting household food security in these countries. 
More than 9.5 million livestock - on which pastoralist families depend for food and livelihoods - have 
already died across the region, including 4 million in Ethiopia, 2.5 million in Kenya and over 3 million 
in Somalia, with many more at risk24. 
 
Sectoral impacts  
15. Details of the sectoral impacts of climate change and extreme climate events on key sectors of the 
economy are presented in Table B.1.1 below, with key citations. These include impacts on: 1)

=== PAGE 19 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture and livelihoods (i.e, changes in soil health/fertility, heat stress on crop and livestock 
production, scarcity of pasture and water for crop production and livestock rearing due to delayed 
onset, increased occurrence of pests/pathogens, desert locust infestation, occurrence of tick and skin 
diseases in camels, cattle, goats and sheep, increase in post-harvest losses and spoilage of animal 
products, shifts in planting/harvesting seasons with devastating impacts on productivity, etc.), 2) Water 
resources and energy (large interannual and interdecadal rainfall variability resulting in increased 
frequency of floods and droughts affecting water availability for crop and livestock production, reduced 
surface water quality, increased run-off, erosion and subsequent sedimentation, Reduced quantity and 
quality of water in shallow wells and springs due to increased run-off and evaporation rates, increased 
damage to water infrastructure and transport networks, more variable hydrological regime leading to 
increased frequency of floods, which will complicate future dam management, especially during 
intense rainfall events, and unreliability of hydropower generation due to more variable river flows; 3) 
Forestry (increased fire risk: drier conditions will increase fire risk, making forest fires more frequent 
and intense, leading to degradation, increase in invasive species such as Prosopis juliflora and Acacia 
drepanolobium in e.g. Afar and Somali regions where they cause significant socio-cultural damage, 
changes in forest-dependent livelihoods due to changes in forest extent, impacts on species with 
narrow ecological ranges (e. g. In Uganda, the disappearance of medicinal plant species has been 
consistently reported, while eucalyptus forests have been attacked by insect pests (tree lice), 
especially during the prolonged dry season, and increased incidence of pathogenic fungi has been 
observed to have moved into previously disease-free areas, causing widespread damage to forest 
plantations; and 4) Health (incidence of vector-borne diseases, increased incidence of malaria in 
highland areas not currently suitable for transmission, and increased Rift Valley fever, more days of 
the year exceeding critical heat health thresholds (temperatures above 31°C are associated with 
increased mortality and risk of non-communicable diseases, which disproportionately affect children, 
the elderly, migrant workers, and the poor), (temperatures above 31°C are associated with increased 
mortality and risk of non-communicable diseases disproportionately affecting children, the elderly, 
migrant workers and those working outdoors), changes in the nutritional value of crops associated with 
lower child nutritional status, increased disease burden in the under-18 population, bacterial growth 
facilitated by contaminated water sources as a result of flooding, increasing the likely incidence of 
diarrhoeal and other water-related diseases. 
 
Table B.1.1: Summary of Climate Hazards, Impacts and likely Adaptation Options for the HoA 
Hazard/ 
Key 
Citations 
Consulted 
Likely Impacts  
Potential Adaptation Options 
 
Agriculture and Livelihoods  
• Rising 
temperatures 
especially 
seasonal mean 
temperature. 
• Prolonged dry 
spells  
• Rainfall variability 
• Increased extreme 
precipitation 
events 
⚫ 
Increased water and 
heat stress for crops and 
livestock, lowering the 
productivity of pastoral 
livelihoods and 
negatively impacting the 
production of important 
crops such as maize, 
wheat, cotton, and 
coffee.  
⚫ 
Scarcity of pasture and 
water for crop production 
and livestock rearing 
because of delayed 
onset  
⚫ 
Rangelands have 
become continuously 
degraded due to 
⚫ 
Promotion of agroforestry (mixing trees and 
agricultural crops): provides food security, 
erosion control (the trees keep the soil 
together, less will be lost), soil fertility (trees 
have a fertilizing effect on their environment) 
and moisture balance as well as an addition 
source of fuel (wood), all of which are 
important in climate change adaptation 
creating a buffer for the local environment 
when dealing with the changes 
⚫ 
Investing in fodder banks, crop/livestock 
integration, improvements to grazing 
corridors, efficient watering technologies, 
vaccination, pest monitoring and control 
systems, intensification of cultivated 
pastures and resilient livestock breeds. 
⚫ 
Promotion of robust policy and technological 
interventions that enhance the adoption of 
Key Citations 
1. Richardson, K., 
Calow, R., 
Pichon, F., New,

=== PAGE 20 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 
 
 
S. and Osborne, 
R. (2022) 
Climate risk 
report for the 
East Africa 
region. Met 
Office, ODI, 
FCDO. 
https://reliefweb.i
nt/attachments/5
821f8e6-c172-
4c3e-a6fa-
cb91c95707bc/C
limate%20risk%2
0report%20for%
20the%20East%
20Africa%20regi
on.pdf.   
2. World Bank 
Climate Change 
Knowledge 
Portal. 
http://sdwebx.wo
rldbank.org/clima
teportal/countryp
rofile/home.cfm?
page=country_pr
ofile&CCode=KE
N&ThisTab=Clim
ateFuture..  
3. Government of 
Netherlands 
(2019). Climate 
Change Profile: 
Greater Horn of 
Africa. 
https://reliefweb
.int/attachments
/1eea6572-
e1bd-3eef-
b9d6-
09242b0c9316/
Greater%2BHor
n%2Bof%2BAfri
ca.pdf.  
4. IGAD Climate 
Prediction & 
Application 
Centre (ICPAC) / 
World Food 
Programme 
(WFP) Regional 
Bureau for East 
and Central 
Africa, Nairobi, 
persistent droughts and 
overgrazing. 
⚫ 
Flooding events from 
heavy precipitation 
resulting to livestock 
deaths and loss of 
agriculture. 
⚫ 
Changes in soil 
health/fertility affecting 
crops yields and pasture 
growth for livestock 
productivity. 
⚫ 
Land degradation and 
soil erosion will be 
exacerbated by more 
intense rainfall events, 
posing risks to the 
natural resource base, 
agricultural productivity 
and subsequently food 
security, particularly in 
already degraded areas. 
⚫ 
Cash crops such as tea, 
coffee and cocoa are 
impacted as the ability to 
shift farming to higher 
(cooler) altitudes is 
limited  
⚫ 
Increases in the 
occurrence of 
pests/pathogens – 
cassava mosaic, leaf 
rust, coffee rust, berry 
borer, potato taste 
defect, brown rot disease 
etc. 
⚫ 
Post-harvest losses; 
spoilage of animal 
products because of the 
inability to effectively 
process agricultural 
products and safely store 
seeds, grains and other 
perishable products. 
⚫ 
Shifts in timing of 
planting/harvesting as a 
result prolonged dry spell 
⚫ 
Damage to road network 
caused by extreme 
weather events such as 
flooding, landslide, 
erosion etc., leading to 
decreasing access to 
finance, markets, and 
extension services.  
climate-smart agriculture (CSA) practices 
such as precision farming and regenerative 
or conservation agriculture, adoption of 
climate adapted seed varieties, integrated 
soil fertility management (ISFM) programs, 
soil and water conservation techniques etc. 
⚫ 
Diversification (crops and income), to deal 
with uncertain weather conditions: timing of 
the rains, temperatures, hours of sunshine / 
shade. 
⚫ 
Use of improved seeds, crop varieties, and 
livestock breeds and other.  
⚫ 
Sustainable agricultural practices and 
technologies such as integrated pest 
management, integrated soil management, 
and agricultural system diversification etc.    
⚫ 
Improvements in supply chains logistics and 
distribution, appropriate packaging solutions, 
modern storage facilities, and cold chains 
including training in post-harvest 
management practices.  
⚫ 
Promoting precision farming 
⚫ 
Enhancing access to climate information 
early warning system (CIEWS) and agro-
advisory services such as, planting time, 
good farm management practices, irrigation 
schedules, use of farm manure and choice 
of inorganic fertilizers, suitable crop types 
and varieties to be planted, weeding 
regimes, the available seed suppliers, crop 
pests and diseases prevention and control 
measures. 
⚫ 
Introducing actions that include improved 
and climate-resilient crop varieties and 
livestock breeds; innovative adaptation 
practices and technologies; improving 
natural resource management (land, water, 
ecosystems, biodiversity) and use of other 
production inputs.).    
⚫ 
Promoting access to innovative financing 
mechanisms such as crop/ livestock 
insurance programs, digital advisory 
services, and climate finance. 
⚫ 
Developing entrepreneurship skills and 
increasing access to finance and markets for 
the most marginalized groups in the society. 
⚫ 
Leveraging climate financing products from 
the private sector to invest in climate 
resilient livelihood option programs

=== PAGE 21 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 
 
 
(2017). Greater 
Horn of Africa 
Climate Risk 
and Food 
Security 
Atlas.https://relie
fweb.int/attachm
ents/d82fb041-
59a6-3b16-9421-
f921049dd67e/W
FP-
0000098939.pdf.  
Water Resource & Energy 
• Rising 
temperatures 
• Increased 
frequency of 
intense 
precipitation 
events 
• Decreased dry 
season 
precipitation 
 
Key Citations 
 
5. Oiro, S. et al.   
(2020). 
https ://aura.abd
n.ac.uk/bitstream
/handle/2164/15
773/Oiro_et_al_d
epletion_ground
water_hydrogeol
ogy_journal_vor.
pdf?sequence=1
&isAllowed=y. 
6. Arcanjo, M. 
(2020). 
http://climate.org/
wp-
content/uploads/
2020/05/Water-
Security-in-the-
Horn-of-
Africa.pdf.  
7. SIPRI (2020). 
https://www.sipri.
org/sites/default/f
iles/2020-
03/sipripp54_0.p
df. 
8. Hirwa, H. (2021). 
https://doi.org/10
⚫ 
Reduced surface water 
quality 
⚫ 
Increased sedimentation 
and erosion 
⚫ 
Reduced water quantity 
and quality in shallow 
wells and springs due to 
increased rates of 
evaporation 
⚫ 
Increased damage to 
water infrastructure and 
transportation networks 
⚫ 
More variable 
hydrological regime 
leading to higher flood 
frequency that will 
complicate future dam 
management especially 
during intense 
precipitation.  
⚫ 
Unreliability of 
hydroelectricity 
production due to more 
variable river flows 
⚫ 
Investments in safe water and sanitation 
(WASH) are, by their nature, risk-reducing, 
since they lessen people’s dependence on 
more climate-vulnerable, poorer quality 
sources (rivers, streams, ponds etc.), and 
free up time – particularly for woman and 
girls – for more productive activities, as well 
as improving long-term health and nutrition 
⚫ 
Promoting good watershed management 
practices that protect water sources from 
increased drought and water quality risk, 
while also protecting or rehabilitating 
landscapes that act as carbon sinks in the 
natural environment.  
⚫ 
Investing in coastal protection, hydro-agro-
meteorological early warning systems, 
improved water management, and urban 
planning to reduce the vulnerability of risks 
posed by flooding caused by intense 
precipitation.  
⚫ 
Investing in early warning for early action 
food security Hub to support early detection 
and diagnosis of emerging food insecurity 
crises related to water scarcity. 
⚫ 
Development of flood prediction system, 
avoiding development in flood prone areas 
and building flood preventing infrastructure 
(dykes and levees) were needed. 
⚫ 
Investing in projects that increase energy 
access, including through renewable energy 
and improved energy efficiency through 
energy saving education plans.  
⚫ 
Promoting technological improvements, 
including energy efficiency, battery storage, 
waste recycling to energy, green hydrogen, 
nuclear developments, carbon storage, and 
decarbonization techniques. 
Planning and implementing a wood-energy 
programme that includes legislation for 
forest management to minimize the cutting 
of natural forest but could also provide safe

=== PAGE 22 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 
 
 
 
25 Greater Horn of Africa Climate and Food Security Atlas (2018), https://www.icpac.net/documents/3/17-
00072_IGAD_Climate_Risk_and_Food_Security_Atlas.pdf 
.3390/su131164
83.  
 
 
 
wood stoves for those who use open fire or 
other forms of unsafe (self-made) equipment 
and education to use, or promotion of, other 
forms of energy.  
Human Health 
• Rising 
temperatures 
especially daily 
maximum and 
minimum 
• Increased 
frequency of 
intense 
precipitation 
• Changing rainfall 
patterns and rising 
temperatures 
• Increasing 
temperature 
extremes 
• More flood events 
 
Key Citations 
9. Muga et al., 
(2021). 
https://doi.org/10
.1371/journal.pnt
d.0009166.   
10. Nnko et al., 
(2021). 
https ://doi.org/1
0.1371/journal.p
ntd.0009081.   
11. Rother, (2020). 
Rother H.A. 
(2020) 
Controlling and 
preventing 
climate-sensitive 
noncommunicabl
e diseases in 
urban sub-
Saharan Africa. 
Sci Total 
Environ, 
722:137772. 
• 
More days of the year 
exceeding critical heat-
health thresholds; 
temperatures above 31°C 
and associated with 
increased mortality and 
risks of non-
communicable diseases 
which disproportionately 
affect children, the 
elderly, migrant workers, 
and those working 
outdoors. 
• 
Impacts on nutritional 
value of crops which is 
associated with lower 
nutritional status for 
children, increasing the 
disease burden as the 
under-18 population is 
projected to increase 
considerably. 
• 
More flood events that 
contaminate water 
sources and longer 
stretches of higher 
temperatures that 
facilitate bacterial growth 
increase the likely 
incidence of diarrheal and 
other water-related 
diseases.   
• 
Expanded ranges of 
disease vectors (e.g., 
mosquitos) and increased 
transmission of infectious 
diseases such as malaria 
and Monkeypox virus 
• 
Increased incidence of 
diarrheal diseases 
(particularly cholera) 
• 
Priority adaptation measures concerning 
public health aim for the development of 
early warning systems, improved water basin 
management for potable water, urban 
planning, and environmental management. 
Additionally, improved training of health 
workers, better sanitation policies, expanded 
public education, and greater disease and 
epidemic monitoring will further reduce the 
risks to public health. 
 
Climate Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (CRVA)  
16. This subsection is largely based on the CRVA conducted in the Greater Horn of Africa Climate Risk 
and Food Security Atlas25. The Hunger and Climate Vulnerability Index (HCVI) was developed in the

=== PAGE 23 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 
 
 
 
26 IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2012. Special report on managing the risks of extreme events and 
disasters to advance climate change adaptation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
27 https://www.icpac.net/documents/3/17-00072_IGAD_Climate_Risk_and_Food_Security_Atlas.pdf.  
Atlas as a tool for understanding climate risks to food security at lower administrative levels in the HoA. 
It shows the relative vulnerability of the region's food-insecure population to climate risks at the district 
level. The HCVI analysis goes beyond the impact of climate on crop yields and provides a multi-
dimensional analysis of vulnerability, while highlighting the critical role of adaptive capacity in 
determining vulnerability. The approach provides an important starting point for monitoring 
vulnerability, evaluating programme effectiveness and/or examining plausible impacts of climate 
change. It is based on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's (IPCC 2013)26 definition of 
vulnerability to climate change. That is, the relationship between the degree of climate stress on 
populations (exposure), the degree of responsiveness to stress (sensitivity), and the ability of 
populations to adapt to climate change (adaptive capacity)27. The composite index includes socio-
economic and environmental indicators that are highly correlated and relevant to food insecurity in 
general. A total of six indicators were used in the assessment (Table B.1.2). Two for exposure 
(frequency of floods and droughts), two for sensitivity (forest cover and rainfed agriculture) and 
two for adaptive capacity (population below poverty line and rural population), as summarised in 
the table below. 
 
17. Table B.1.2: Indicators considered in the Hunger and Climate Vulnerability Index (HCVI) for the HOA 
 
Component 
Profile 
Indicator 
Exposure 
Climate hazards  
· Frequency of droughts*  
· Frequency of floods* 
· Mean annual temperature* 
· Frequency of Storms 
· Long-term trend in temperature  
· Death toll 
· Mortality per 100,000 inhabitants 
· Economic losses (US $) 
· Losses per GDP (%)    
Sensitivity 
Environment 
· Forest cover* (% of total area) 
Agriculture 
· Rain-fed agriculture* (% of total 
agriculture) 
· Crop yields (yield per ha – kg/ha) 
· Poverty index 
Adaptive capacity 
Infrastructure 
· Market access* 
· Water access rural population (%) 
· Water access urban population (%) 
· Paved roads (% of all roads) 
· Governance 
Socioeconomic indicators 
· Total population below poverty line* ($ 2 
per day PPP) (%) 
· Rural population* (%) 
· Decadal Population growth (%) 
· Vulnerable employment (%) 
Hunger and Climate Vulnerability Index (HCVI) = Exposure X Sensitivity / Adaptive Capacity  
*Indicators used are those with good correlation (correlation coefficient ≥ 0.3) with Food Security Indicators  
 
18. Figures B.1.5a, b, c and d present the analysis of the HCVI for the HoA considering the three 
components (adaptive capacity, sensitivity and exposure). Starting with exposure to climate stress, 
as measured by the frequency of floods and droughts (Figure B.1.5a), the analysis shows that the

=== PAGE 24 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 
 
 
five countries are in the range of high to very high exposure to climate stress. In southern Sudan, 
where high to very high exposure is more pronounced in the western parts of the country, eastern 
Ethiopia, northern Somalia and high exposure in the south, including Kenya, where the eastern parts 
of the country suffer from high exposure to frequent floods and droughts. Very high exposure to 
frequent floods and droughts in Kenya is most pronounced in the south-eastern parts of the country, 
as shown in Figure B.1.5a.  
19. In terms of sensitivity - measured in terms of forest cover and rainfed agriculture (Figure B.1.5b) 
- countries with high to very high sensitivity are South Sudan (the entire coastline from north to south), 
Ethiopia (north-central), northern Somalia and certain parts of western Kenya. In terms of adaptive 
capacity - measured by the total population below the poverty line ($2 per day PPP) and the 
percentage of the population living in rural areas - South Sudan and Ethiopia have high to very 
high adaptive capacity, as shown in Figure B.1.5c. In contrast, most parts of Kenya and Somalia have 
the lowest adaptive capacity. 
20. The results of the combined climate and food insecurity analysis (HCVI), which includes the 
components of exposure (a), sensitivity (b) and adaptive capacity (c), are presented in Figure B1.5d 
(HCVI). The results for Ethiopia show that part of the western highlands is highly vulnerable compared 
to the rest of the country. This is due to its heavy reliance on rain-fed production, and therefore rainfall 
variability has a major impact on production and food security. Other areas of high vulnerability include 
the northeastern region (parts of Afar and Tigray) and the southeastern pastoral areas. For Djibouti, 
taking into account the three components (adaptive capacity, sensitivity and exposure), parts of Obock, 
Tadjourah, Dikhill and Djibouti city are among the areas with the highest vulnerability to climate shocks 
and food insecurity. In Kenya, Figure B.1.5d shows that pastoral areas are more vulnerable compared 
to the rest of the country, while in Somalia, most parts of the country are highly vulnerable due to the 
fact that climatic shocks are prominent in most areas. The north is more vulnerable to climatic shocks 
than the rest of the country and the population has low adaptive capacity. The results are similar for 
Southern Sudan, where the HCVI identified many areas of the country as vulnerable due to high levels 
of food insecurity, underdeveloped agriculture and infrastructure, among other factors. Sensitivity to 
climate-related risks is high in agricultural production areas in the west and south.

=== PAGE 25 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure B.1.5. Assessment of climate risk and vulnerability in HoA. Source:  ICPAC (2018). 
 
21. Green House Gases (GHGs) Emissions Profiles  
Figure B.1 .6 below illustrates the GHG emissions profile for the five countries in the HoA, showing 
Ethiopia's emissions at 204.7 MtCO2e, with agriculture as the main contributor (112. 5MtCO2e), 
followed by land-use change and forestry (32.4MtCO2e), energy (51.01MtCO2e), waste (4.9MtCO2e), 
industrial processes (3.9MtCO2e) and bunker fuels (2.32MtCO2e). Sudan recorded emissions of 
130.64MtCO₂e, led by agriculture (75.6MtCO2e), followed by energy (27.8MtCO2e), Land-Use 
Change and Forestry (LUCF) (21.0MtCO2e), waste (3.75MtCO2e), industrial processes 
(2.52MtCO₂e), and bunker fuels (0.74MtCO₂e). Similarly, South Sudan's emissions in 2018 totalled 
over 68.5MtCO2e, mainly from Agriculture (49.36MtCO2e), LUCF (9.8MtCO2e), Energy (6.7MtCO2e), 
Waste (2.5MtCO2e), Bunker Fuels (0.19MtCO2e), and Industrial Processes (0.09MtCO2e). In 
Somalia, emissions in 2018 were mainly from agriculture and LUCF (39.51MtCO₂e), followed by waste 
and energy (5.53MtCO₂e), with smaller contributions from industrial processes (0.28MtCO₂e) and 
bunker fuels (0.24MtCO₂e). In Kenya, emissions from different sectors were 47.7 MtCO₂e, -7.6 
MtCO₂e, 28.5 MtCO₂e, 4.9 MtCO₂e, 3.9 MtCO₂e and 2.3 MtCO₂e, while in Djibouti the contributions 
were 0. 71MtCO₂e, 0.0MtCO₂e, 0.38MtCO₂e, 0.20MtCO₂e, 0.19MtCO₂e and 0.34MtCO₂e 
respectively, totalling 1.4MtCO₂e for 2019.

=== PAGE 26 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 
 
 
22. At current emission levels, these countries plan to keep their respective emissions close to the world 
average of 7.58 MtCO2e by 2035 or neutral by 2050. This will be achieved by reducing their respective 
carbon footprints and by pursuing green growth pathways in all key economic sectors, particularly 
agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU), including energy.  By supporting activities to increase 
tree cover, BREFOL will help to improve GHG sequestration and thereby reduce emissions. BREFOL 
will support agro-forestry initiatives that lead to improved soil health, increased agricultural production 
while increasing tree cover, and increased household income from wood and non-wood farm products, 
thereby increasing household resilience. 
 
 
Figure B.1.6: GHGs emissions profiles for these five target countries and Sudan in the HoA as of 
2019, for which the latest historical GHG emissions statistics are available at the NDC 
Partnership. 
 
23. Adaptation/mitigation needs: The proposed programme, Building Climate Resilience for Food 
and Livelihoods in the Horn of Africa (BREFOL), is highly consistent with the countries' legal 
frameworks or action plans on climate change (Table B.1.3). In particular, the focus on natural resource 
and environmental management; market access, trade and finance; improved production and 
livelihood diversification; disaster risk management; research, knowledge management and 
technology transfer; coordination, institutional strengthening and partnerships; and human capital, 
gender and social development is consistent with the IGAD Drought Disaster Resilience and 
Sustainability Initiative (IDDRSI) strategy and the Horn of Africa Regional Resilience Framework 
3.0 (Table B.1.4). In addition, the programme is part of the AfDB and the Global Centre on Adaptation's 
Africa Adaptation Acceleration Programme, which aims to catalyse climate-resilient actions through a 
triple-win approach to address the impacts of COVID-19, climate change and the economy. In addition, 
the programme is aligned with the AfDB's Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022) and supports its twin 
objectives (inclusive growth and transition to green growth) and its three special focus areas 
(agriculture and food security, fragile states, and gender). The programme will also contribute to 
achieving three of the AfDB's High 5 development priorities: Feeding Africa, Integrating Africa and 
Improving the Quality of Life for African People.

=== PAGE 27 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 
 
 
24. Table B.1.3: Country’s Regulatory Framework/Action Plans on Climate Change 
Country 
Regulatory 
Framework or 
Action Plan 
Adaptation/Mitigation Commitments 
Targeted 
Sectors 
Means of 
Implementati
on 
Djibouti 
• Green Economy 
Strategy 
• National 
Strategy on 
Climate Change  
• First NDC 
(2016) 
• Reduce vulnerability to droughts 
• Protect against rising average sea 
levels; 
• Develop access to water; 
• Protect biodiversity; 
• Strengthen the resilience of rural 
populations. 
• Low energy lightbulbs 
• Administrative buildings thermal 
rehabilitation 
• Energy audit for buildings  
• Installation of 60 MW onshore wind 
turbines in Goubet by 2025 
• Three (250MW) solar power plants 
by 2025 
• 1000 ha reforestation 
• Efficient cook stoves 
• Efficient appliances for households 
operated using renewable energy 
resources and products 
• Energy from waste– 
Biodigester/Biogas Systems 
• Energy & 
Efficiency 
Mitigation & 
Adaptation = 
$6.413B 
Ethiopia 
• Climate 
Resilient Green 
Economy 
Strategy,  
• Programme of 
Adaptation to 
Climate 
Change,  
• National 
Strategy for CC 
adaptation and 
mitigation,  
• First NDC 
(2017) and 
Updated NDC 
2021. 
• Ethiopia’s Long-
Term Low 
Emission and 
Climate 
Resilient 
Development 
Strategy (2020-
2050) 
• Sustainable agricultural land 
management practices  
• Reduction in preharvest losses  
• Carbon sequestration in grasslands  
• Lowlands Livelihood Resilience 
Project  
• Fuel switch and biomass efficiency 
(improved cookstoves)  
• Reforestation  
• Landscape restoration 
• Enhancement of livestock 
productivity  
• Agricultural mechanization  
• Increase in the share of poultry  
• Oilseed feeding to reduce emissions 
from enteric fermentation 
• Energy efficiency  
• Transport electrification  
• Public transport expansion  
• Industry fuel switch 
• Use of organic fertilizer and crop 
residues 
• Clinker substitution in cement 
• Reduction of waste per capita  
• Waste separation and composting  
• Wastewater management 
• Reduce preharvest losses in crop 
production 
• Increase climate resilient agricultural 
practices 
• Increase irrigation schemes 
• AFOLU & 
Livestock.  
• Energy & 
Efficiency.  
• IPPU;  
• Infrastructure.  
• Managed 
Soils  
• Waste 
Management 
Mitigation = 
$281.3B; 
Adaptation = 
$$40.5B

=== PAGE 28 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 
 
 
Kenya 
• Kenya Vision 
2030,  
• Kenya National 
Adaptation Plan 
(NAP) 2015-
2030 National 
Climate Change 
Response 
Strategy 
• National Policy 
on Climate 
Finance 
• First NDC and 
Updated NDC 
(2020): 
• Presidential 
directive to 
increase 
tree/forest cover 
to 15% by 
planting 15 
billion trees in 
the next 5 
years. 
• Enhancing the adaptative capacity 
and climate resilience in all sectors 
and at the national and county levels,  
• Innovative livelihood strategies to 
enhance local communities' 
resilience,  
• Enhancing the adaptative capacity 
and climate resilience in all sectors 
and at the national and county levels 
• Build the capacity build of the private 
sector (formal and informal) so as to 
enhance the resilience of their 
investments e.g., through 
identification of new products and 
services that are more resilient to 
climate change impacts. 
• Develop fiscal incentive measures to 
encourage businesses to undertake 
investment in adaptation and 
resilience building measures. 
• Implement long term private sector 
investment in adaptation and 
resilience building measures. 
• Develop and implement a pilot 
project on climate resilient fish 
species and the related value chain. 
• Upscale sustainable aquaculture 
initiatives 
• Strengthen land use management 
systems including rangeland 
management, fodder banks and 
strategic reserves. 
• Develop new feeds.  
• Promote livelihood diversification and 
market access (camels, indigenous 
poultry, beekeeping, rabbits, 
emerging livestock - quails, guinea 
fowls, ostriches etc.). 
• Establish price stabilization schemes 
and strategic livestock-based food 
reserves. • Restore degraded 
grazing lands. 
• Innovative livelihood strategies to 
enhance local communities' 
resilience.  
• Renewable energy expansion 
• Enhancement of energy and 
resource efficiency across all sectors 
• Tree cover of at least 10% of the 
land area 
• Land degradation neutrality 
• Scaling nature-based solutions for 
mitigation 
• Clean cookstoves  
• Low-carbon and efficient transport 
• Climate Smart Agriculture 
• Sustainable waste management 
• Coastal zone management 
• Uptake of climate risk management 
tools, early warning system 
• AFOLU, 
• Renewable 
Energy & 
Energy 
Efficiency,  
• Transport,  
• Waste 
management 
• Blue 
economy 
Mitigation 
$17.7B 
Adaptation 
$43.9B

=== PAGE 29 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 
 
 
• Update of adaptation technology 
• Strengthening tools for monitoring, 
evaluation and learning tools 
• Enhancement of blue and ocean 
economy 
Somalia 
• National 
Adaptation 
Programme of 
Action (NAPA) 
• First NDC & 
Updated NDC 
(2021) 
• Solar power lighting, 
• Efficient stoves & kilns for charcoal 
making, 
• Large scale water capture and 
storage facilities,  
• Biogas production from 
biodegradable feedstock,  
• Charcoal production from invasive 
Prosopis plant & replacement with 
crop production,  
• Action for E savings (turn off) and 
recycling 
• Energy & 
Efficiency  
• AFOLU 
N/A 
South 
Sudan 
National 
Adaptation 
Programme of 
Action (NAPA) and 
First NDC and 
Updated NDC 
(2021) 
• Increase the use of clean and 
carbon-neutral energy 
• Declare 20% of natural forests as 
reserve forests to protect it from 
deforestation.  
• Prioritize the enhancement of climate 
resilience in the agricultural sector 
• Promote alternative sources of 
energy to reduce deforestation and 
the consequent loss of livelihood 
options. 
• Introduce fire management plans to 
prevent the spread of wildfires during 
periods of drought.  
• Establish emissions standards for 
vehicles 
• Energy 
generation 
and energy 
end use 
• Transport 
• Land Use 
and Land 
Use Change 
Mitigation & 
Adaptation =  
$50B 
    Source: Adopted from Africa NDC Hub. Available at:  https://africandchub.org/.  
 
25. Table B.1.4: Alignment of BREFOL to IDDRSI Strategy and the HoRN Regional Resilience 
Framework 3.0 
IDDRSI Priority Intervention 
Areas (PIAs) 
HoA Resilience 3.0 Framework 
Intermediate Results (IRs) 
BREFOL Intervention 
Areas-Sub-components 
(SC) 
A. Natural Resources and 
Environment Management  
1.1. Water resources development 
and management  
1.2. Rangeland management and 
pasture development  
1.3. Securing equitable access to 
natural resources  
1.4. Environmental management 
including biodiversity  
1.5. Development of renewable 
energy 
IR 2.1. Strengthened collaboration, 
learning and adaptation of state, non-state 
actors, and communities  
IR 2.3. Strengthened capacity and 
systems of local, national, and regional 
institutions 
SC 1-1: Developing climate-
resilient infrastructure 
(Water resources, energy, 
markets, and ICTs etc.) 
SC 1-2: Supporting the 
sustainable management of 
agropastoral land. 
  
B. Market Access, Trade and 
Financial Resources  
2.1. Transport, market, and 
infrastructure development  
IR 1.1. Diversified, sustainable and 
resilient economic opportunities 
IR 1.3. Maintaining livelihood opportunities 
and access to financial services 
SC 2-1: Increasing access 
to digital advisory services 
and markets

=== PAGE 30 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 
 
 
2.2. Security livestock mobility  
2.3. Access to secure and 
affordable financial services  
2.4. Strengthening regional and 
cross-border trade  
2.5. Development and 
harmonization of financial services 
in the IGAD region 
IR 1.4. Increased and secure access to 
market infrastructure 
IR 1.5. Prioritizing private sector-led trade 
and investment approaches 
IR 4.2. Improved and sustained health, 
nutrition, and hygiene practices 
IR 4.3. Increased and sustained 
availability of, access to, and utilization of 
WASH 
services. 
SC 2-2: Developing 
entrepreneurship skills and 
increasing access to 
finance 
SC 2-3: Increasing access 
to innovative financing for 
farmers organizations and 
MSMEs 
C. Enhanced Production and 
Livelihood Diversification 
3.1. Livestock production, health, 
and nutrition 
3.2. Crop production and 
productivity 
3.3. Fisheries development 
3.4. Income diversification 
3.5. Productive safety net 
(chronically food insecure) 
3.6. Productive safety net 2 
(graduating from safety 
net) 
3.7. Transboundary Disease and 
SPS Measures and Standard 
IR 1.2. Intensified, sustainable and 
resilient agricultural and livestock market 
systems 
IR 1.1. Diversified, sustainable and 
resilient economic opportunities 
IR 1.2. Intensified, sustainable and 
resilient agricultural and livestock market 
systems 
SC 1-3: Improving access 
to climate-smart 
innovations, and 
technologies 
 
D. Disaster Risk Management 
4.1. Early warning systems and 
Response 
4.2. Contingency planning 
4.3. Disaster risk reduction and 
climate change adaptation 
4.4. Reduction of vulnerability to 
climate related hazards and natural 
disasters 
IR 2.1. Strengthened collaboration, 
learning and adaptation of state, non-state 
actors, and 
Communities 
SC 3-1: Enhancing climate 
services infrastructure 
 
 
E. Research, Knowledge 
Management, and 
Technology Transfer 
5.1. Support to applied adaptive 
research  
5.2. Advisory and extension 
services 
5.3. Knowledge management and 
communication  
5.4. Promote the network of national 
and regional dryland collaborative, 
adaptive, and applied 
research centres 
5.5. Alignment of applied and 
adaptive research with 
development priorities of the 
resilience agenda 
I.R 2.2. Strengthened knowledge 
management and communication of 
innovative research and practices. 
IR 2.1. Strengthened collaboration, 
learning and adaptation of state, non-state 
actors, and communities 
SC 3-2: Strengthening 
operational capacity for 
resilience 
 
F. Coordination, institutional 
strengthening, and 
partnerships 
7.1. Coordination and platform 
management 
7.2. Institutional strengthening and 
capacity building 
7.3. Enhancing partnerships 
7.4. Resource mobilization 
IR 2.1. Strengthened collaboration, 
learning and adaptation of state, non-state 
actors, and communities 
IR 2.3. Strengthened capacity and 
systems of local, national, and regional 
institutions 
 SC 3-3: Strengthening 
operational capacity for 
resilience

=== PAGE 31 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 
 
 
 
28 OECD (2022), States of Fragility 2022, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/c7fedf5e-en. 
29 The Fund for Peace (2022). https://fragilestatesindex.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/07/22-FSI-Report-Final.pdf.  
30 https://fragilestatesindex.org/.  
7.5. Monitoring, Evaluation, and 
Learning 
G. Human Capital, Gender, and 
Social Development 
7.1. Access to health and nutrition 
7.2. Access to education and 
training 
7.3. Promote gender equality, 
women’s empowerment. 
IR 3.1 Improved educational attainment 
IR 3.2 Improved vocational, 
entrepreneurship 
and employment skills 
IR 3.3 Financial capabilities 
IR 3.4 Aspirations, self-efficacy, and 
confidence to adapt 
IR 4.1. Increased and sustained 
availability of access to, and utilization of 
health services 
IR 4.2. Improved and sustained health, 
nutrition, and hygiene practices 
SC 1-1: Developing climate-
resilient infrastructure 
(Water resources, energy, 
markets, and ICTs etc.) 
SC 2-2: Developing 
entrepreneurship skills and 
increasing access to 
finance for women and 
youths 
SC 3-2: Strengthening 
operational capacity for 
resilience 
 
26. Root causes to climate change adaptation and mitigation 
Table B.1.5 below summarises the drivers, barriers and risks to climate change adaptation and 
mitigation in the HoA region.  
27. Root cause No. 1: Extreme poverty and food insecurity:  Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia and 
South Sudan have a combined population of approximately 250 million, which is projected to increase 
by 5% by 2050. Within this population, an estimated 160 million people (or nearly 64%) live in rural 
areas that are highly vulnerable to environmental degradation. Alarmingly, about 40% of these rural 
areas are classified as having low environmental production potential, rendering them economically 
unproductive due to adverse climatic conditions and severe land and environmental degradation 
resulting from unsustainable land use practices or human-induced activities. As a result, the rapid 
growth of the rural population exacerbates the challenge of increasing agricultural productivity under 
uncertain climatic conditions. This challenge is particularly acute given that more than 40% of the 
region's population lives below the $1 a day poverty line, adding to the urgency of addressing extreme 
poverty and food insecurity.  
28. Root Cause No. 2: Climate change and environmental degradation – This factor has exacerbated 
the challenges facing the Horn of Africa (HoA) and its rural poor. Over the past two decades, severe 
droughts have become more frequent, including in 2002-2003 in Ethiopia, 2005-2006 in equatorial 
East Africa, and 2010-2011 across the Horn of Africa. In recent years, below-average rainfall has led 
to prolonged droughts in Somalia, southern and south-eastern Ethiopia, and northern and eastern 
Kenya, with devastating impacts on agriculture and livelihoods. At the same time, severe floods, such 
as those in South Sudan in 2020 and 2021, have caused extensive damage to infrastructure and loss 
of life. These climate-related disasters have had a profound economic impact, particularly on rural 
communities, leading to crop failures, famine and increased migration to urban areas. According to the 
UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, more than 36.1 million people across the 
Horn of Africa have been affected by drought since October 2020, with millions of livestock 
lost. 
29. Root cause No. 3: Fragility - According to the OECD (2022)28, fragility is the combination of exposure 
to risks and insufficient coping capacity of the state, system and/or communities to manage, absorb or 
mitigate those risks. In the latest 2022 Fragile State Index (FSI)29, Ethiopia, South Sudan, Kenya, 
Somalia and Djibouti rank 11th, 8th, 4th, 32nd, 2nd and 49th respectively, with four out of the five 
countries (Somalia, South Sudan and Ethiopia) classified as vulnerable to collapse30.  This is largely 
due to political violence; protests sparked by economic grievances, for example in Somalia; successive 
failed rains leading to drought conditions that have left over 36.1 million people severely food insecure 
and hundreds of thousands displaced from their homes; armed conflict; pastoralist and communal 
resource conflicts; increasing poverty; and humanitarian disasters. All of these have affected many 
vulnerable communities and poor rural households. Unfortunately, these poor rural communities and 
households do not have the resources to absorb or mitigate such risks. Fragility also creates an

=== PAGE 32 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 
 
 
 
31 AfDB (2022). https://www.afdb.org/en/contacts.  
32 Eloff, P. (2021) Armed Conflict, Organised Violence, and Food Insecurity in South Sudan. World Food Programme. 
https://fscluster.org/sites/default/files/documents/03022021_conflict_and_fsl_fslc_final.pdf.  
33 World Bank (2021) Horn of Africa Regional Economic Memorandum. https://www.hoainitiative.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/0-HoA-
REM-Overview-combined.pdf 
34 UNDP (2022) AFRICA’S PROMISE: The UNDP Renewed Strategic Offer in Africa. 
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/migration/gw/207c01616c26cedb6b14d278c8523d5758d74fa4cb4688047e94db2f2746dd
cf.pdf  
35 IMF (2021) Regional Economic Outlook for Sub-Saharan Africa. 
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/REO/SSA/Issues/2021/10/21/regional-economic-outlook-for-sub-saharan-africa-october-2021 
36 FAO (2018) Africa Regional Overview of Food Security and Nutrition 2018. http://www.fao.org/3/ca2710en/ca2710en.pdf 
37 WHO (2023) Public Health Situation Analysis. https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/default-source/documents/emergencies/greater-horn-of-
africa--public-health-situation-analysis-january-2023.pdf?sfvrsn=ab0b51db_4&download=true 
38 FAO (2023) Food Policy Monitoring in the Near East and North Africa region. https://www.fao.org/3/cc9189en/cc9189en.pdf 
40 UN (2021) Promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa. 
https://www.un.org/osaa/sites/www.un.org.osaa/files/docs/2109875_osaa_sg_report_web_new.pdf 
41 World Food Programme. (2020). Horn of Africa: Desert Locust Crisis - Situation Report No. 10. Rome. 
42 United Nations Development Programme. (2018). Regional Human Development Report for Africa: Accelerating Gender Equality and 
Women's Empowerment in Africa. New York. 
43 International Crisis Group. (2019). Climate Change, Ethiopia's Conflict and the Horn's Famine Threat. Africa Report No. 274. Brussels. 
44 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. (2021). Global Trends Forced Displacement in 2020. Geneva. 
45 United Nations Environment Programme. (2017). The Horn of Africa: Abundance amid Adversity. Nairobi. 
unhealthy investment environment for private sector growth and investors. Given the fragile nature of 
the region, the Leveraging Strategic Private Sector Investment for Fragile States Project31 has 
become a key initiative through which the AfDB seeks to promote private sector development in the 
region.   
30. Root cause No. 4: Conflicts - Conflict in the HoA plays a major role in food insecurity in the region. 
In South Sudan, for example, conflict-induced famines in 2017 and 2021 left more than 2.5 million 
people on the brink of starvation and death. These conflicts have affected the country's main 
'breadbasket', where mixed cereal-root crop livelihoods include maize, sorghum, millet and livestock. 
As reported in (Eloff, 2021)32, in times of conflict, agriculture is disrupted, and the mobility of pastoralists 
is restricted. Rural populations are forced to flee, prioritising their physical security over food security. 
The same dynamic is playing out in other conflict-affected countries in the region. For example, 
violence is currently causing severe food insecurity in the Tigray region of Ethiopia, and in Uganda, 
conflict has been linked to food insecurity.  
 
Table B.1.5: Summary matrix of the root causes, barriers and risks to climate change adaptation and 
mitigation in the HoA region 
S/
N 
Root Causes 
Barriers to be addressed 
Risks/Problem 
 1 
Extreme poverty and 
food insecurity: (1)  
Political instability and 
conflict (World Bank, 
202133), (2) Weak 
governance and 
institutional capacity 
(UNDP, 202234), (3) 
Economic challenges and 
inequalities (IMF, 202135), 
(4) Environmental 
degradation and climate 
change (FAO, 201836), (5) 
Limited access to 
education and healthcare 
(WHO, 202337), (6) Food 
price volatility and market 
access (FAO, 202038), and 
(7) Displacement and 
To address these root causes 
would comprehensive 
strategies that prioritize 
peacebuilding, good 
governance, economic 
development, environmental 
sustainability, social 
protection, and inclusive 
growth (United Nations, 
202140). 
  The associated risks include:  
• 
Malnutrition and health risks: 
(WFP, 202041). 
• 
Economic instability (UNDP, 
201842) 
• 
Social unrest and conflict (ICG, 
201943) 
• 
Forced migration and displacement 
(UNHCR, 202144) 
• 
Environmental degradation (UNEP, 
201745)

=== PAGE 33 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 
 
 
 
39 UNHCR (2020) East and Horn of Africa and the Great Lakes. 
https://reporting.unhcr.org/sites/default/files/ga2020/pdf/Chapter_EastHornGreatLakes.pdf 
46 The Fund for Peace (2022). https://fragilestatesindex.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/07/22-FSI-Report-Final.pdf.  
refugee crises (UNHCR, 
202039).   
 2. 
Climate change and 
environmental 
degradation: (1) 
Prolonged drought events 
for example, the 2005-
2006 over equatorial east 
Africa, 2008-2010 over 
Sudan, northern Kenya, 
and the Horn of Africa, the 
2010-11 in the Horn of 
Africa, 2015-16 in 
Ethiopia, the October-
December 2020, March-
May 2021, October-
December 2021 and 
March-May 2022 lean 
seasons that affected 
parts of Somalia, southern 
and south-eastern 
Ethiopia, and northern and 
eastern Kenya.  (2)  Heavy 
rainfall and severe floods 
(3) Prolonged dry spells 
etc.     
•  Inadequate finance and 
funding gaps (80% funding 
gap as only 20% of the 
annual cost of adaptation in 
the region comes from public 
budgets).   
• High indebtedness of the 
countries, suggest that 
addressing extreme climate 
events, would require 
additional adaptation 
finance from both 
development partners and 
the private sector 
• Access to climate finance 
for smallholder farmers and 
pastoralists 
• Disaster risk management 
(early warning systems and 
response, contingency 
planning, disaster risk 
reduction and climate 
change adaptation, and 
reduction of vulnerability to 
climate related hazards and 
natural disasters) 
• Coordination, institutional 
strengthening, and 
partnerships 
• Context-specific climate 
risks and vulnerability 
assessments. 
• Gender inequality in climate 
change adaptation. 
 
•  Increases heat stress:  under 
prolonged heat stress depletion of 
carbohydrate reserves and plant 
starvation are observed 
• Increases the occurrence of 
pests/pathogens – cassava mosaic, 
leaf rust, coffee rust, berry borer, 
potato taste defect, brown rot disease 
etc. 
• Increases post-harvest losses; 
spoilage of animal products because of 
the inability to effectively process 
agricultural products and safely store 
seeds, grains and other perishable 
products. 
• Shifts in timing of planting/harvesting 
as a result prolonged drought period 
• Damage to road network caused by 
extreme weather events such as 
flooding, landslide, erosion etc., 
leading to decreasing access to 
finance, markets, and extension 
services.  
• Increased damage to water 
infrastructure and transportation 
networks 
• Unreliability of hydroelectricity 
production due to more variable river 
flows 
• Expanded ranges of disease vectors 
(e.g., mosquitos) and increased 
transmission of infectious diseases 
such as malaria and Monkeypox virus 
• Increasing loss of property and 
infrastructure associated with rising 
flood events  
• Increased incidence of diarrheal 
diseases (particularly cholera) 
 3 
Fragility: All the five 
countries are highly 
exposure to risks and 
have insufficient coping 
capacities to manage, 
absorb or mitigate such 
risks. In the recent Fragile 
State Index (FSI)46, 
Ethiopia, South Sudan, 
Kenya, Somalia and 
Djibouti rank 11th, 8th, 4th, 
32nd, 2nd, and 49th 
respectively, with three out 
of the five countries 
(Somalia, South Sudan, 
and Ethiopia), classified as 
• Linking peacebuilding, 
climate change adaptation 
and sustainable livelihoods. 
• Promoting context specific 
assessments tools used to 
inform national and regional 
efforts. For example, 
IDDRSI Strategy. 
• Coordination, institutional 
strengthening, and 
partnerships 
• Inadequate finance and 
funding gaps 
• Land fragmentation 
• High indebtedness of the 
countries, suggest that 
•   Political violence 
• Social unrest 
• Food and livelihood insecurities  
• Environmental-induced migration 
• Armed and resource conflicts  
• Rising poverty 
• Humanitarian disasters 
• Unhealthy investment environment 
inconducive for the growth of the 
private sector investors.

=== PAGE 34 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 
 
 
 
47 https://fragilestatesindex.org/.  
vulnerable to collapse.47 
This is due mainly to 
political violence, protests 
sparked by economic 
grievances, drought 
conditions, armed 
conflicts, resource 
conflicts among 
pastoralists and 
communities, rising 
poverty, and humanitarian 
disasters. 
addressing fragility would 
require additional adaptation 
finance from development 
partners and the private 
sector 
• Enabling environment for 
private-sector led growth. 
• Gender inequality 
 
 4 
 Conflicts: Human and 
resource conflicts play a 
major role in food and 
livelihood insecurity in the 
HoA region. For example, 
the 2017 and 2021 
famines caused by 
conflicts in South Sudan 
hit over 2.5 million people 
living them on the brink of 
starvation and death. 
Similarly, violence is 
currently driving severe 
food insecurity in the 
Tigray region of Ethiopia 
• Linking peacebuilding, 
climate change adaptation 
and sustainable livelihoods. 
• Promoting context specific 
assessments tools used to 
inform national and regional 
efforts. For example, 
IDDRSI Strategy 
• Coordination, institutional 
strengthening, and 
partnerships 
• Land fragmentation 
• Access to climate finance 
for smallholder farmers and 
pastoralists 
• High indebtedness of the 
countries, suggest that 
addressing conflicts, would 
require additional adaptation 
finance from development 
partners and the private 
sector 
• Programs linking 
peacebuilding, climate 
change adaptation and 
sustainable livelihoods. 
• Institutional strengthening 
and capacity gap 
deficiencies 
• Gender inequality 
• Support for inclusive 
technical dialogues on the 
evolving understanding of 
climate security 
•  Political violence and insecurity 
• Social unrest 
• Food and livelihood insecurity  
• Livelihood distortion  
• Environmental-induced migration 
• Armed and resource conflicts  
• Rising poverty 
• humanitarian disasters 
Unhealthy investment environment 
conducive for the growth of the private 
sector and investors. 
 
31. Other complementary initiatives on which BREFOL builds and key lessons learned: There are 
several past (Appendix 1.9a &b) and ongoing (Appendix 1.10) climate change adaptation/mitigation 
programmes/projects in the HoA on which BREFOL builds. While the past initiatives were consulted to 
draw key lessons from their implementation, some of the ongoing initiatives were consulted either to 
avoid duplication of efforts and/or to identify existing gaps to be filled by BREFOL. As part of the Feed 
Africa strategy, AfDB implemented the regional Drought Resilience and Sustainable Livelihoods 
Programme (DRSLP) from 2012-2021, which aimed to reduce poverty and food insecurity and 
accelerate sustainable economic growth in the Greater Horn of Africa (HOA). BREFOL builds on the 
achievements and lessons learnt from DRSLP, in particular by capitalising on the infrastructure built

=== PAGE 35 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 
 
 
and managed. BREFOL also builds on IFAD's Inclusive Green Financing Initiative (IGREENFIN I): 
Greening Agricultural Banks & the Financial Sector to Foster Climate Resilient, Low Emission 
Smallholder Agriculture in the Great Green Wall (GGW) countries - Phase I. This initiative, which aims 
to support the greening of agricultural banks and the financial sector to foster climate resilient, low 
emission smallholder agriculture in Burkina Faso, Chad, Côte d'Ivoire, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, 
Ghana, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal and Sudan, provided very useful insights for the 
design of BREFOL. Similarly, IGAD's Drought Disaster Resilience and Sustainability Initiative (IDDRSI) 
strategy and the Horn of Africa Regional Resilience Framework 3.0 were very instrumental in 
packaging the sub-investment activities of BREFOL. The African Union's Draft Africa Climate Change 
Strategy - DACCS (2020 - 2030) also played a key role in narrowing down BREFOL's sub-investments 
in line with the region's adaptation needs. 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram)

=== PAGE 36 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
 
 
 
 
 
48 IGAD’s Drought Disaster Resilience and Sustainability Initiative (IDDRSI) Strategy 
https://faolex.fao.org/docs/pdf/igad215119.pdf 
32. Description of the problem: The Horn of Africa is one of the most disaster-prone regions in the world, 
with crippling food insecurity resulting from multiple hazards in the region. Since the 1970s, several 
countries in the HoA have been threatened by famine at least once every decade. It is worth noting 
that the frequency of these hazards and disasters has recently increased to every 3-5 years. The 
development of programmes that can strengthen the resilience of communities in the region is of 
paramount importance. The Food Security and Nutrition Working Group (FSNWG), for example, 
predicts that between 18.6 and 21.1 million people in Ethiopia, Kenya and Somalia are likely to face 
crisis-IPC 3 or worse levels of acute food insecurity due to drought. The number of people in need of 
emergency food assistance to meet basic needs could rise to as many as 26 million people in the three 
countries by February 2023 if a fifth consecutive season of poor rainfall occurs between October and 
December, as early projections suggest is likely. As noted above, extreme poverty and food insecurity 
(root cause #1), climate change and environmental degradation (root cause #2), fragility (root cause 
#3) and conflict (root cause #4) are some of the key drivers of recurrent food crises, hunger and 
famine in the region. Unfortunately, the high indebtedness of these countries severely constrains public 
spending to address some of the key challenges facing the region. Similarly, their highly fragile nature 
(Somalia, South Sudan and Ethiopia are prone and vulnerable to armed conflict). Exposure to frequent 
conflict acts as a disincentive to the inflow of private financial resources: critical for the creation of self-
sustaining green/circular economy activities, sustainable wealth creation and green job opportunities. 
For smallholder farmers and pastoralists, who account for more than 80% of all low-return subsistence 
farming activities, lack of access to financial resources often limits their ability to adapt. The end result 
is often violent conflict over land use and resources, environmentally induced migration and exposure 
to vicious poverty traps.  
33. Preferred adaptation solution: The preferred short-, medium- and long-term adaptation solutions to 
the above issues at the regional level, particularly for IGAD member states, are contained in the IGAD 
Drought Disaster Resilience and Sustainability Initiative (IDDRSI) Strategy48. At the national level, 
preferred adaptation solutions are expressed in each country's legal framework or action plan on 
climate change (Table B.1.3). BREFOL is key to the implementation of the IDDRSI strategy at the 
regional and national levels in the short, medium and long term, including the realisation of the Fund's 
impact at the global level. Specifically, at the global level, BREFOL contributes by increasing the 
adaptive capacity and resilience of 1) vulnerable people and communities, 2) the health and well-being 
as well as food and water security of the target population, and 3) the environment and ecosystems 
and ecosystem services in the target areas. In terms of mitigation co-benefits, BREFOL contributes 
through reduced emissions from: 1) facilitating access to renewable energy (solar and bio-digesters), 
and 2) improved forest cover and land use change. At the regional and national levels, BREFOL 
contributes to 1) supporting, developing and rehabilitating climate resilient infrastructure (water 
resources, energy, market integration, cross-border health and research facilities, road networks, ICTs, 
etc.), and 2) supporting sustainable forest management. ) and 2) supporting sustainable management 
of agro-pastoral production systems (IDDRSI PIA 1); 3) increasing access to digital information flows 
and advisory services, especially on markets and trade; 4) developing entrepreneurship skills and 
increasing access to finance for vulnerable groups, especially women and youth; and 5) increasing 
access to innovative financing for smallholder farmers, pastoralists and agribusiness MSMEs (IDDRSI 
PIA 2); 6) improve access to climate-smart innovations and technologies (IDDRSI PIA 3); 7) improve 
climate service infrastructure and extension services, and 8) promote climate risk finance and 
insurance to cushion vulnerable smallholder production systems (IDDRSI PIA 4); and finally, 9) support 
gender-sensitive climate regulatory framework reforms and institutional strengthening for climate-
smart planning and development (IDDRSI PIAs 5,6 & 7).  
34. To support the implementation of the key activities of the ‘BREFOL Preferred Adaptation Solution’, 
the AfDB will draw on the approaches developed under three of its ongoing special initiatives to support 
BREFOL in the HoA region. These initiatives include: 1) The Technologies for African Agricultural 
Transformation (TAAT) programme, which aims to help the continent realise its vast potential 
through the adoption of high-impact innovative technologies to increase agricultural production (see, 
for example, Appendix 2.1 for TAAT success stories in the continent); 2) AFAWA (Affirmative

=== PAGE 37 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
 
 
 
 
Finance Action for Women in Africa), which aims to empower women and bridge the $42 billion 
financing gap facing women in Africa (see, for example, Appendix 2.2 for AFAWA success stories on 
the continent); and 3) The AfDB-GCA (Global Centre on Adaptation) Africa Adaptation 
Accelerator Programme (AAAP), which specialises in scaling up access to digital extension services 
and technologies and related data-driven agricultural and financial services for at least 30 million 
smallholder farmers in Africa across 26 countries (see Appendix 2.3 for AfDB-GCA AAAP success 
stories). Figure B.2.1 shows the integration of AfDB special initiatives into the programme. 
 
Figure B.2.1: Integration of AfDB Special Initiatives into BREFOL 
 
35. Expected outputs of BREFOL: The main expected outputs of BREFOL include: 1) 
construction/rehabilitation 
of 
538 
water 
availability 
and 
mobilisation 
infrastructures; 
2) 
construction/rehabilitation of 5,980 ha of community irrigation schemes; 3) construction/rehabilitation 
of 152 community livestock infrastructures (livestock markets, livestock health centres, etc.); 4) 
rehabilitation and management of 102,000 ha of degraded rangelands through agroforestry and 
afforestation programmes; 5) introduction of climate-smart innovations (improved resilient seeds for 
crops and fodder) to more than 542,000 (278,000 + 64,000) smallholder farmers and pastoralists. to 
more than 542,000 (278,000 + 264,000) smallholder farmers and pastoralists to increase agricultural 
and fodder production; 6) Establishment and deployment of 5 digital extension services through PPP 
to benefit more than 1,142,000 smallholder farmers and pastoralists; 7) Construction and rehabilitation 
of 125 rural markets; 8) Installation and operation of 125 agro-meteorological stations; 9)  
Operationalisation of 3 cross-border Memoranda of Understanding to facilitate the control and 
management of transboundary animal diseases and zoonoses in border areas, including 3 cross-
border veterinary laboratories to facilitate cost-benefit analysis of integrated pest management 
technologies (IPMT) to control crop and livestock pests and diseases such as fall armyworm, 
arboviruses in transhumant cattle and locust invasion; 10) Building resilience of 4.9 million direct 
beneficiaries and over 18. 7 million indirect beneficiaries, their health and well-being, as well as food 
and water security, improved ecosystems and ecosystem services through improved land use and 
management practices; 11) improved access to renewable energy (co-benefit to climate change 
mitigation), resulting in reduced post-harvest losses and emission reductions through increased carbon 
sequestration of 14.1 million tCO2e; 12) leveraged an additional USD 8. 9 million through a blended 
finance approach in fragile states (Ethiopia and Djibouti); 13) promoting green/circular economy 
activities with a view to gender mainstreaming, leading to gender-sensitive sustainable wealth creation 
Component 1: 
Strengthening Pastoral and 
Agropastoral Production 
Systems’ Resilience to 
Climate Change
Output 
1.3: Increased 
adoption of climate-
smart innovations
AfDB-TAAT – approach adopted to upscale Output 1.3
Component 2: Supporting 
low carbon and resilient 
Development of 
Agribusinesses
Output 2.1: Increased 
access to digital 
advisory services and 
markets
GCA/AfDB  - AAAP – approach adopted to upscale Output 2.1
Output 2.2: Developed 
inclusive MSMEs and 
cooperatives with access to 
climate financing
AfDB - AFAWA – approach adopted to upscale Output 2.2
Climate-smart Tech 
Dissemination
Digital Advisory Services
Women empowerment

=== PAGE 38 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 
 
 
and green job opportunities; and 143) strengthening operational capacity to build climate resilience at 
community, national and regional levels. 
 
36. Potential Barriers addressed by BREFOL:  
37. Barrier No 1. Lack of access to concessional finance for smallholder farmers and pastoralists 
to adapt to climate change:  Timely access to finance is critical to cope with the debilitating effects 
of climate change and extreme weather events that characterise the HoA region. Not infrequently, 
smallholder farmers do not have access to credit facilities to purchase agricultural inputs such as 
climate-smart seed varieties, fertilizers and farm implements, and to adopt climate-smart agricultural 
practices to cope with sudden disasters such as seasonal droughts and flash floods. This is illustrated 
by statistics on access to finance from the World Bank's Global Findex Database, which shows that on 
average only 22% of smallholder farmers in the HoA have an account with a financial institution, less 
than 7% are able to borrow from a financial institution, while only about 6% of the active farming 
population is able to borrow to start, operate or expand a farm or business. With such low access to 
formal finance in an environment characterised by extreme climate events (droughts and floods), 
fragility, conflict and population explosion, building resilience at scale is almost impossible.  The main 
constraints to accessing credit are: i) the high market interest rate (12-18%), ii) the limited capacity of 
smallholders to guarantee the credit requested due to the high risks of the agricultural sector, iii) the 
limited capacity of smallholders to finance the design of bankable projects, and iv) the limited 
management capacity of smallholders, which increases the risk of non-repayment of loans. 
38. Barrier No 2. Political instability, Insecurity, and Weak Governance: Political instability, insecurity 
and weak governance are severely hampering efforts to achieve climate-resilient food and livelihood 
systems in the Horn of Africa, affecting Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia and South Sudan. According 
to the Fragile States Index 2021, all five countries are among the world's most fragile states, with 
Somalia and South Sudan in the top ten. In 2021, conflict and insecurity displaced more than 5.9 million 
people in Somalia, while in South Sudan some 7.9 million people were in need of humanitarian 
assistance due to conflict-related displacement (UNOCHA, 2021). Weak governance exacerbates 
these challenges, with Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia and South Sudan scoring below the global 
average on the World Bank's Worldwide Governance Indicators, particularly in terms of political 
stability and government effectiveness (World Bank, 2021). This combination of political instability, 
insecurity, and weak governance hampers the implementation of climate adaptation and mitigation 
measures, increases vulnerability to climate-related shocks, and undermines efforts to build resilience 
and ensure sustainable food and livelihood systems in the region.  
39. Barrier No 3. Infrastructure, policy, and technologies gaps and limited access to climate 
information:  Countries in the HoA face many challenges in terms of preparedness and readiness to 
respond to sudden climate shocks in the region due to infrastructure, technology and capacity gaps. 
Access to reliable and timely weather information in formats that are easily accessible to end-users 
such as farmers and pastoralists, especially in the event of sudden disasters such as drought and 
famine, is still limited in the region and needs to be widely promoted. Similarly, the availability of digital 
technology services, which have been shown to significantly improve the resilience of people and 
communities, also during the crisis, has not been widely promoted in the region, partly due to low 
private sector participation. Similarly, innovative financing mechanisms such as crop and livestock 
insurance, which can help farmers and pastoralists manage agricultural and livestock risks, especially 
during seasonal droughts and lean seasons, suffer from low enrolment rates due to weak institutions 
and capacity constraints. Capacity gaps also exist in terms of the extent of ministerial coordination on 
climate change interventions, adequate mainstreaming of climate change into policies and projects, 
and the development of bankable proposals that qualify for access to climate finance from international 
climate funds to scale up mitigation and adaptation activities. 
40. Barrier No 4. Low private sector involvement in fragile states: As discussed under Activity 5.2 of 
the DACCS (2020 – 2030): After most governments, the private sector is often the next biggest 
spender on the continent. For example, there are many private entrepreneurs with vested interests in 
lucrative renewable energy, energy conservation, waste recycling and other businesses for profit and 
not necessarily as climate change adaptation and mitigation or NDC interventions. Beyond these 
green/cradle-to-grave ventures, the private sector also offers various types of private finance such as

=== PAGE 39 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31 
 
 
 
 
debt, equity, guarantees, insurance products, etc., which have great potential to bridge the adaptation 
financing gap in Africa. Unfortunately, they often lack the incentives and other enabling instruments to 
create a self-sustaining green/circular economy, sustainable wealth creation and jobs in the region. 
This is particularly true in fragile states, which attract even fewer private companies because of the 
high-risk profile associated with them. The creation of effective win-win private-private (2P), private-
public (3P) and public-private-producer (4P) partnerships brings together combined expertise and 
resources to accelerate the achievement of results and increase the impact of green investment 
projects in the region, creating more wealth while contributing to the goals. Government budgets and 
donor funding have finite limits. However, there is virtually no limit to profit-seeking private capital. So, 
creating new profit opportunities for private capital through investments that address climate change 
opens the doors to this vast source of capital. Concessional green finance from the GCF, together with 
the AfDB's Strategic Private Sector Investment for Fragile States project, can help cascade 
effective win-win private-private and private-public partnerships for a strong green/circular economy 
in the HoA region. 
41. Barrier No 5. Weak implementation capacity risk at local and national levels:  Weak 
implementation capacity at both local and national levels poses a significant risk to achieving climate-
resilient food security and livelihoods in Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia and South Sudan. At the 
local level, limited resources, technical expertise and institutional capacity hinder the effective 
implementation of climate change adaptation and mitigation strategies, agricultural practices and 
disaster risk reduction measures. Local communities often lack access to information, technology, and 
financial resources needed to cope with climate-related shocks and build resilience (UNDP, 2018). 
Furthermore, inadequate coordination and collaboration among local stakeholders further hampers 
efforts to address climate change impacts and sustainably manage natural resources.  
42. Taken together, this means that addressing the HoA problem through the combination of well-designed 
programme interventions discussed in Section B.3 will help trigger a paradigm shift towards low-carbon 
and climate-resilient development pathways in the HoA. However, this assumes that: (1) extreme 
climate events (risk no. 1); (2) insufficient participation of women and youth in programme activities; 
and (3) economic downturns due to COVID-19 and other pandemics (risk no. 3) are well managed.  
43. The overall objective of this programme is to reduce the vulnerability of the region to climate-induced 
food insecurity by mobilising climate and other sources of adaptation finance needed to strengthen the 
resilience and adaptive capacity of the five IGAD countries in the HoA. The region will be equipped 
and better prepared to face the challenges of food insecurity caused by climate and other 
environmental hazards such as drought, floods, locust invasion, land degradation, etc. The highlight 
of the programme intervention is presented in the Theory of Change (ToC, Figure B.2.2).

=== PAGE 40 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure B.2.2: Theory of change for BREFOL 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization 
Outcomes
Activities
Barriers, Risks, and Root Causes
Assumptions
1)
The AfDB employs a multifaceted approach that combines due diligence, risk assessments, capacity building, 
stakeholder engagement, and policy enforcement to proactively manage and mitigate the challenges associated with 
political instability, conflict, and corruption.
2)
The participating Governments promote sound fiscal policies, social investment programmes, international cooperation, 
public financial management, transparent budgeting, and conflicts prevention and resolution efforts, thereby ensuring 
financial stability and sustainable economic development.
3)
Based on the dynamic regional landscape and the prevailing priorities of the organization, IGAD employs strategies 
such as conflict prevention and resolution, peacebuilding, governance and anti-corruption initiatives, capacity building, 
and diplomatic engagement to nurture regional stability, proactively prevent conflicts, and facilitate the promotion of 
sustainable development in HoA.
4)
The capacity of IGAD and EEs (PMUs) will be strengthened by the recruitment of senior fiduciary and M&E staff. Also, 
the management training will be conducted for all the EEs PMU
5)
Respective host country PMUs learn lessons among each other during the implementation to improve their respective 
performance. 
Activity 1.1.1: Construct or 
rehabilitate and manage water 
harvesting infrastructure
Activity 1.1.2: Construct or 
rehabilitate and manage community 
irrigation schemes
Activity 1.1.3: Construct or 
rehabilitate and manage community 
livestock infrastructure
Activity 1.2.1: Train communities on 
sustainable land management best 
practices
Activity 1.2.2: Support sustainable 
rangeland management and 
agroforestry 
Activity 1.3.1: Provide extension 
services and deploy climate-smart 
innovations to improve agricultural 
and fodder production  
Activity 1.3.2: Disseminate resilient 
varieties to improve agricultural and 
fodder production 
[Barriers] 
Barrier No 1. Lack of access to concessional finance for smallholder farmers and pastoralists to adapt to climate change.
Barrier No. 2. Political instability, Insecurity, and Weak governance.
Barrier No 3. Infrastructure, policy, and technologies gaps, and limited access to climate information
Barrier No 4. Low private sector engagement in fragile states context.
Barrier No. 5: Weak implementation capacity risk at local and national levels.
Activity 2.1.1: Establish and deploy 
digital advisory services using PPP 
mechanism
Activity 2.1.2: Construct rural markets 
Activity 2.2.1: Train women and youth 
on entrepreneurial skills in renewable 
energy technologies and/or AVC 
development including access to credit 
line
Activity 2.2.2: Facilitate access for 
women and youth groups to renewable 
energy (solar and biodigester systems) 
to enhance alternative income 
generation 
Activity 2.2.3: Design and 
operationalise innovative credit lines via 
selected local PFIs, in participating 
countries.
Activity 2.2.4: Provide technical 
assistance to MSMEs, local PFIs, and 
cooperatives to create an enabling 
environment for credit access and 
sustainability
Activity 3.1.1: Expand agrometeorological 
stations network to generate data for 
climate advisory services 
Activity 3.1.2: Integrate and disseminate 
climate information and early warning into 
the established digital advisory services
Activity 3.2.1: Support delivery of climate 
regulatory framework and mainstreaming 
of climate change into agricultural sector 
policies and strategies
[Risks] 
Risk No. 1: Extreme climate events.
Risk No. 2: Lack of access to credit facilities
Risk No. 3: Changes in Governments’ sector strategies
Risk No.4: Risk of uneven uptake among countries
OUTCOME 1
Increased adoption of 
climate-resilient solutions
Goal 
Statement
IF climate finance is mobilized to strengthen the resilience of agropastoral and pastoral communities, and to 
promote low carbon technologies in the Horn of Africa THEN the vulnerability to climate-induced food insecurity and 
GHG emissions will be reduced BECAUSE the region will be better equipped and prepared to manage climate and 
other environmental-related hazards
Output 2.1
Increased access 
to digital advisory 
services and 
markets.
Output 3.1: 
Enhanced access 
to climate 
information and 
early warning 
systems
Outputs
OUTCOME 2
Enhanced carbon 
sequestration and 
reduced greenhouse 
gas emissions of AVC
OUTCOME 3
Strengthened adaptive 
capacity of vulnerable 
communities
[Root Causes] 
Root Cause No 1. Extreme poverty and food insecurity.
Root Cause No 2. Climate Change and environmental 
degradation
Root Cause No 3. Fragility
Root Cause No 4. Conflicts
Component 1
Component 2
Component 3
Output 1.1: 
Climate 
resilient
infrastructure 
built/rehabilit
ated.
Output 1.2:
Improved 
sustainable 
land 
management 
practices
Output 1.3:
Increased 
adoption of 
climate-
smart 
innovations
Output 2.2:
Developed 
inclusive MSMEs 
and cooperatives 
with access to 
climate financing
Output 3.2:
Strengthened 
regulatory and policy 
frameworks and 
institutional capacity 
for climate resilience.
CO-BENEFIT 2 
Ecosystem 
services 
improved
CO-BENEFIT 1 
Improved 
livelihoods 
opportunities

=== PAGE 41 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
 
 
 
 
 
49 Please refer to Annex 17 for the multiple country progam information 
Fill in the GCF results area table below to map each project/programme outcome identified in section B.2(a) to the contributing 
GCF results area(s) by referring to the description of eight results areas provided in the guidance note.  
Outcome 
number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation 
and access 
 
MRA 2 
Low-emission 
transport 
 
MRA 3 
Building, 
cities, 
industries, 
appliances 
MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use 
ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities 
ARA 2 
Health, well-
being, food 
and water 
security 
ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment 
ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services 
Outcome 1 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☒ 
Outcome 2 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Outcome 3 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
If any co-benefits have been identified in section B.2(a), fill in the Co-benefit table below to map each co-benefit to the 
corresponding category as defined in the FP guidance note. 
Co-benefit 
number 
Co-benefit 
Environmenta
l 
Social 
Economic 
Gender 
Adaptation 
Mitigation 
Co-benefit 1 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Co-benefit 2 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) 
44. The proposed programme:  Building Climate Resilience for Food and Livelihoods in the Horn of 
Africa (BREFOL)49, estimated at USD 335.30 million (AfDB + Country USD 184.29 million + GCF USD 
151.0 million), will trigger a paradigm shift towards secure and increased agropastoral production and 
income generation in the HoA. Through the construction and rehabilitation of physical infrastructure 
and climate resilient assets (e.g., water mobilisation infrastructure, community irrigation schemes and 
areas, livestock markets, animal health facilities, rangelands and pastures); training and capacity 
building in agribusiness development, entrepreneurship and adoption of climate-smart agricultural 
technologies and innovations; improving access to climate finance, digital markets and digital 
extension services; access to climate information and early warning systems (CIEWS); and ensuring 
the creation of an enabling environment (institutional strengthening and regulatory and policy 
framework reforms); BREFOL is strategically positioned to "catalyse impact" beyond the initial 
duration of the AfDB and GCF investments.  
45. The program mainstreams gender across the proposed initiatives economic advantages, such as 
women's empowerment (economically and financially) through access to credit facilities, including 
other gender-related benefits, such as the development and promotion of women-led agribusiness 
MSMEs. Women are known to demonstrate solid repayment behaviour, and have solid track 
record as savers, often through informal institutions such as unregulated Savings and Credit 
Cooperative Organizations (SACCOs) and Rotating Savings and Credit Associations (ROSCAs). 
Another compelling characteristic of women finance behaviour is that they typically reinvest up to 
90% of their income in the education, health and nutrition of their family and community, compared 
to up to 40% for men. This means that investing in women's businesses can transform lives and 
societies. Moreover, it seeks to yield social benefits by improving women's economic 
independence, which may have positive social, cultural, and political implications in the region.  
46. Environmental co-benefits are expected through the promotion of resilient agropastoral production 
systems by encouraging the adoption of best practices in sustainable land management and 
agroforestry, leading to improved ecosystem services and increased soil organic carbon. In addition,

=== PAGE 42 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 
 
 
the programme envisages the installation of 4.8 MW of solar photovoltaic systems for solar irrigation, 
lighting and processing, as well as the potential generation of biogas energy from over 3,890 m3 of 
biodigesters to be installed under the programme.  
47. GCF support and participation in the BREFOL programme is therefore of paramount importance.  First, 
concessional resources from the GCF will help to bridge the existing adaptation finance gaps for these 
countries. For example, Ethiopia's Enhanced NDC estimates that the country's adaptation and 
mitigation need in the six priority sectors will require a total investment of USD 40.5 billion and USD 
281.3 billion, respectively. Similarly, that for Kenya highlights that the investment and costs required 
by the international community for both mitigation and adaptation would be over $61.1 billion. 
Estimates for Djibouti and South Sudan are $6.4 billion and $50.0 billion respectively. Although an 
estimated 20% of the annual adaptation costs in the region will come from public budgets, this is clearly 
insufficient, with a financing gap of 80%. Given the high level of indebtedness of the countries, it is 
clear that the implementation of planned investments such as BREFOL would require additional 
funding from the GCF and other development partners. This was highlighted in the 5th Intermediate 
Outcome of the African Union Draft Africa Climate Change Strategy - DACCS (2020-2030) for 
these countries.  
48. Second, as highlighted under barrier #4, the private sector has a key role to play in scaling up 
adaptation finance, especially in fragile contexts such as the HoA region. Unfortunately, the private 
sector often lacks the incentives and other enabling instruments needed to attract private capital to 
climate-sensitive sectors in the region. Again, concessional resources from the GCF are critical to 
unlocking private capital in the region. For example, for an initial investment of $24.35 million from 
GCF concessional resources, BREFOL, through its Direct Credit Window (BDCW) to PFIs, would help 
leverage an additional $5.49 million (23%) of private capital from local private financial institutions 
(LPFIs) in Djibouti and Ethiopia. This will go a long way towards addressing barrier #1 (lack of access 
to concessional finance for smallholder farmers and pastoralists to adapt to climate change).  
49. Third and finally, GCF funds will support the training of more than 4,395 cooperatives and SMEs in the 
region. These well-trained 4,395 cooperatives and SMEs will be able to mobilise additional resources 
from other commercial banks and microfinance institutions. In addition, we expect this critical mass of 
well-trained cooperatives and SMEs to serve as trainers of trainers (ToT) for other cooperatives and 
SMEs interested in accessing credit from local private financial institutions (PFIs).  
 
50. Table B.3.1 presents the activity mapping of BREFOL (i.e., Baseline Investments versus GCF Financed 
Operations per country). 
Table B.3.1. Activity Mapping for BREFOL Baseline and GCF Interventions 
Component 
Output 
Djibouti 
Ethiopia 
Kenya 
Somalia 
South 
Sudan 
IGAD 
Component 1: 
Strengthening 
Pastoral and 
Agropastoral 
Production 
Systems’ 
Resilience to 
Climate Change 
Output 1.1: Climate resilient 
infrastructure built/rehabilitated 
(Activities 1.1.1 to 1.1.3) 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
N/A 
AfDB 
AfDB 
N/a 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB 
AfDB 
N/A 
AfDB 
N/a 
AfDB 
AfDB 
AfDB 
AfDB 
AfDB 
N/a 
Output 1.2: Improved 
sustainable land management 
practices (Activities 1.2.1 & 
1.2.2) 
AfDB + 
GCF 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
N/A 
AfDB + 
GCF 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB 
Output 1.3: Increased 
adoption of climate-smart 
innovations (Activiities 1.3.1 & 
1.3.2) 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB+ 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
GCF 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
GCF 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
GCF 
GCF 
N/a 
Component 2: 
Supporting low 
carbon and 
resilient 
Output 2.1: Increased access 
to digital advisory services and 
markets (Activities 2.1.1 & 
2.1.2) 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
N/a

=== PAGE 43 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 
 
 
Development of 
Agribusinesses 
Output 2.2: Developed 
inclusive MSMEs and 
cooperatives with access to 
climate financing (Activities 
2.2.1 to 2.2.4) 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB 
AfDB 
AfDB + 
GCF 
N/a 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
GCF 
N/a 
GCF 
GCF 
N/A 
  
N/A 
N/a 
N/A 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB 
N/A 
N/a 
Component 3: 
Strengthening 
Rural 
Communities’ 
Capacity to Adapt 
to Climate 
Change 
Output 3.1: Enhanced access 
to climate information and 
early warning systems 
(Activities 3.1.1 & 3.1.2) 
AfDB 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
N/A 
AfDB + 
GCF 
N/a 
AfDB+ 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
N/A 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
Output 3.2: Strengthened 
regulatory and policy 
frameworks and institutional 
capacity for climate resilience. 
(Activity 3.2.1) 
AfDB+ 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
Component 4: 
Program 
Coordination and 
Knowledge 
Management 
Output 4.1: Project 
management and coordination 
(Activities 4.1.1 to 4.1.4) 
AfDB+ 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB 
AfDB 
AfDB 
AfDB 
AfDB 
AfDB 
AfDB+ 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB + 
GCF 
AfDB 
AfDB 
AfDB 
AfDB 
AfDB 
AfDB 
 
 
51. Description of Programme Components, Outputs and Activities  
Component 1: Strengthening Pastoral and Agropastoral Production Systems’ Resilience to 
Climate Change:  This component aims to strengthen the resilience of pastoral and agropastoral 
production systems to climate change through improved production systems. It implements the 
IDDRSI priority intervention area 1, which aims to improve the management of natural resources 
and the environment in the HoA.  The main expected outputs or results under Component 1 that will 
deliver on IDDRSI PIA 1 are: 
 
52. Output 1.1: Climate resilient infrastructure built/rehabilitated. 
 
53. Activity 1.1.1: Develop and rehabilitate the resilience of infrastructure (AfDB + GCF Financed):   This 
activity will include the construction/rehabilitation and management of infrastructure to secure water 
for agropastoral production in different districts of the respective countries. In Djibouti, for example, the 
programme will include the construction of six (6) water resource mobilisation infrastructures tailored 
to climate change challenges. This will include the construction of micro-dams, related infrastructure 
and gender-sensitive boreholes, as well as the construction of rural drinking water distribution 
networks. In addition, efforts will be made to construct or rehabilitate 50 numbered small earth dams, 
boreholes, covered water pans, shallow wells and water distribution systems. In Ethiopia, the focus 
will be on the construction of 227 multipurpose, demand-driven community water sub-project 
distribution systems/networks, the rehabilitation of 239 existing small-scale, demand-driven water-
related infrastructure, the construction of 25 multipurpose, demand-driven community water sub-
project distribution systems/networks, the rehabilitation of 20 existing small-scale, demand-driven 
water-related infrastructure, and the implementation of 10 resource-rich small-scale irrigation schemes 
to develop 1500 ha of irrigable land. It will also support the operationalisation of 35 effective irrigation 
water user associations (WUAs) through the formulation of resource management guidelines in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Irrigation and Lowlands (MoIL), and the monitoring of physical 
infrastructure projects. In Southern Sudan, activities will include the construction of 42 water pans/small 
earth dams, 22 community berkeds (covered water pans), equipment/upgrading of 3 boreholes, 
training of water infrastructure management committees (with 30% women participation) and technical 
studies for water infrastructure projects.

=== PAGE 44 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
 
 
 
 
54. Activity 1.1.2: Construct or rehabilitate and manage community irrigation schemes (AfDB + GCF 
Financed):  The main objective of this activity is to improve water control and efficiency through the 
construction/rehabilitation of community irrigation systems.  This activity will focus on the development 
of 240 hectares of climate resilient irrigated perimeters in Djibouti, including the maintenance of 
hydraulic structures and the installation of six (6) drinking troughs and standpipes downstream of 
threshold structures for livestock watering and irrigation. In addition, efforts will be made to develop 
390 hectares of climate-resilient irrigation perimeters, including multicultural farmland, through a 
public-private partnership (PPP). In Ethiopia, the programme will develop 900 hectares of demand-
driven small-scale irrigation for crops and fodder. In Kenya, activities will include the rehabilitation and 
development of 800 hectares in seven irrigation schemes, including the rehabilitation of 100 kilometres 
of roads leading to irrigation schemes and the rehabilitation of 112 reservoirs, boreholes, shallow wells 
and sub-surface dams. In Southern Sudan, initiatives will focus on the construction of a 25-kilometre 
access road from Aweil town to a rice scheme and the installation of a chain-link fence for the rice 
irrigation scheme. 
55. Activity 1.1.3 Construct or rehabilitate and manage community livestock infrastructure (AfDB 
Financed): This activity will facilitate the development of community-driven infrastructure to improve 
the resilience of livestock to climate change. Specifically, AfDB funding will be used to conduct two 
technical studies on the management of community livestock infrastructure, including the procurement 
of animal health laboratory products and fisheries resource monitoring and assessment tools in 
Djibouti. In Ethiopia, AfDB funding will support the construction of 15 demand-driven animal health 
posts and 8 other livestock infrastructure facilities such as pastoralist training centres (PTCs), 
extension centres, veterinary clinics and storage facilities. In Kenya, the budget will cover the 
construction of 21 livestock markets, 28 hay sheds, 28 pasture rehabilitation projects, and the 
procurement of equipment for 7 diagnostic laboratories and holding offices. In Somalia, funds will be 
used to equip/upgrade 1 veterinary laboratory, purchase 12 mobile veterinary clinics, introduce 6 
climate-smart improved fodder varieties, support the establishment of fodder banks, map regional 
rangelands, degraded areas for rehabilitation, prosopis control and livestock routes. Regional 
rangeland monitoring infrastructure and drought crisis/early warning systems will also be established. 
In Southern Sudan, funding will support the construction/rehabilitation of 15 veterinary clinics (in 
Southern, Western and Eastern Kapoeta), 18 livestock checkpoints (in Southern, Western and Eastern 
Kapoeta), 14 abattoirs (in Southern, Western and Eastern Kapoeta) and 2 livestock quarantine centres. 
56. The signing and implementation of the cross-border MoUs will be facilitated by IGAD through the IGAD 
Centre for Pastoral Areas and Livestock Development (ICPALD). The aim is to address transboundary 
livestock development challenges. ICPALD has implemented a number of livestock-related 
programmes that contribute to sustainable peace in cross-border border communities. These include: 
(1) Facilitated the signing of a cross-border MoU by ministers to improve the control of transboundary 
animal diseases (TADs). This has helped to synchronise vaccination and reduce outbreaks of TADs 
in cross-border areas, thereby contributing to sustainable cross-border livestock trade. The minimal or 
no loss of livestock due to the control of TADs has helped to sustain livelihoods and reduce the 
vulnerability of youth to extremist activities or misuse by community elites; (2) Enhanced livestock trade 
within Member States and international markets such as Middle East and North Africa (MENA) and 
Asian countries. Our interventions, such as supporting exporters to participate in the GULF 
International Food Fair for three years, helped improve promotion of products to importers and 
attracted new buyers for meat and live animal exporters in the IGAD region, resulting in increased 
sales of products. This has helped pastoralists and agro-pastoralists to sell more livestock and increase 
their income, thereby encouraging pastoralists who had stopped the practice to resume it in order to 
continue earning a living. (3) Facilitated and supported the development, signing and operationalisation 
of the transhumance protocol, which has been adopted in most of the cross-border areas in the region. 
Under this protocol and the Animal Health Production and Health MoU, communities on both sides of 
the border have participated in joint activities and shared rangeland resources, including water and 
grass and forage. These activities have helped to strengthen community relations and peace; and (4) 
ICPALD has supported cross-border communities to establish common livestock markets, which have 
facilitated local trade in livestock and livestock products and other household goods. These cross-
border community interactions are the basis for peace and amicable conflict resolution.

=== PAGE 45 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
 
 
 
 
57. Output 1.2: Improved sustainable land management practices. 
 
58. Activity 1.2.1: Train communities on sustainable land management best practices (AfDB + GCF 
Financed):   This activity aims to scale up the adoption of sustainable land management (SLM) best 
practices by farmers and pastoralists. This will be done through a demand-driven approach to support 
improved agropastoral and pastoral production systems through training and capacity building to 
improve land management systems and practices. The project will train approximately 31,000 farmers 
and pastoralists (50% women) in SLM best practices. In addition, 100 community-based pasture 
management approaches will be developed with the International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), 
using participatory pasture management (PPM) toolkits for dissemination. In Ethiopia, for example, the 
programme will develop and deliver training of trainers (ToT) to over 100 regional and zonal 
stakeholders on sustainable rangeland development techniques and tools and provide 300 technical 
backstopping training sessions for district and grassroots staff. In Kenya, support will be provided to 
accelerate the process of organising, formalising and building the capacity of Community Land 
Management Committees and Platforms (CLMCPs). This will include sensitising communities on land 
rights and interests, organising outreach campaigns to train farmer organisations in small-scale 
irrigation technologies, and providing training to support the sustainable management of agropastoral 
lands covering 6000 hectares. In addition, degraded rangelands will be identified and mapped, 
covering 6000 hectares, and sustainable land management tools will be developed and disseminated 
through training sessions involving 50 stakeholders per country. Reseeding of degraded agropastoral 
land will also be carried out, covering 2000 hectares. In Southern Sudan, efforts will focus on 
developing local capacity to manage land degradation, organising stakeholder consultations, training 
local land management committees and providing communities with technologies for land resource 
use, rehabilitation and restoration. In the IGAD region, the focus will be on developing and 
disseminating tools and approaches for sustainable rangeland management, including training of 
trainers (ToT). 
59. Activity 1.2.2: Support sustainable rangeland management and agroforestry (AfDB + GCF 
Financed):   This investment activity aims to sustainably improve land and rangeland productivity. It 
will support various initiatives to improve rangeland management and regeneration at regional and 
national levels. In Djibouti, for example, AfDB financing will be used to carry out regeneration, 
enrichment and management activities on 25 kilometres of rangeland, including planting trees and 
shrubs, and establishing 1,000 hectares of community forestry. In addition, GCF funding will be used 
to regenerate, enrich and manage a further 500 hectares of rangeland, construct a green wall, establish 
nurseries for endangered species and develop anti-erosion structures in catchment areas. In Ethiopia, 
investments will be made in bush clearing on 31,500 hectares, soil and water conservation measures, 
reseeding and rangeland management, and the purchase of various seeds and agricultural inputs for 
10,000 hectares. GCF funding will promote physical and biological soil and water conservation 
techniques, expand rangeland agroforestry and rehabilitate 600 hectares of rangeland affected by 
invasive plant species. In Kenya, activities will include identification and mapping of degraded 
rangelands, support for land use planning, construction of erosion control structures, support for spring 
protection and soil erosion control, and tree planting in degraded areas. In Somalia, rehabilitation and 
management of 3,500 hectares of rangeland will be carried out, along with dissemination and training 
activities with ILRI. In Southern Sudan, 1,000 kilometres of livestock routes will be 
constructed/rehabilitated, and 3,000 hectares of rangeland will be rehabilitated and managed using 
participatory approaches. In the IGAD region, efforts will focus on operationalising and institutionalising 
the IGAD Regional Rangeland Management Strategic Framework, improving the competitiveness of 
livestock value chains, and assessing cross-border veterinary laboratories. 
 
60. Output 1.3: Increased adoption of climate-smart innovations. 
 
Activity 1.3.1:  Provide extension services and deploy climate-smart innovations to improve 
agricultural and fodder production (AfDB + GCF Financed):  This activity will address a major barrier 
to the uptake of innovation in the region. This is mainly due to limited knowledge of CSA technologies 
and their applications. It will provide extension services and access to resilient improved varieties.  
According to the World Bank (2021), scaling up support for climate-smart agriculture (CSA) across the

=== PAGE 46 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
 
 
 
 
agri-food value chain through robust policy and technology interventions can deliver robust triple-win 
benefits: increasing productivity, reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and improving resilience to 
climate-related shocks. In Djibouti, for example, under this activity, BREFOL will focus on: 1) 
developing and disseminating tools from the catalogue of technologies and good practices with the 
TAAT programme to producers, including women (<30%) and youth (<30%) in the context of climate 
change (AfDB), and 2) drafting an agreement between ISV and DAF to set up trials and multiplication 
of fodder seed production, and purchase and distribute 1,000 improved breeds of goats for restocking 
and livestock feeding (GCF). For Ethiopia, this activity will finance 1) fodder, crop and aquaculture 
production using innovative TAAT technologies (see Annex 2). 1 for TAAT achievements across the 
continent) and TAAT - Technical Assistance for Development of Catalogue of Innovative Technologies 
and Best Practices (AfDB), and 2) Procurement of 30 machinery/equipment to improve fodder 
production, establishment and strengthening of 30 hay storage facilities and fodder banks to stabilise 
fodder supply to agricultural MSMEs, establishment and strengthening of 30 fodder nurseries and 
support to 60 demand-driven and community-based small-scale irrigated drought-tolerant fodder seed 
production activities in selected locations (GCF). In Kenya, the AfDB will invest in capacity building of 
NARES officers, extension workers and farmer organisations on TAAT technologies, as well as access 
to and adoption of new genetics and associated technologies for the fish sector, including the 
production of high quality, low-cost fish feed and improved processing techniques. GCF funds will be 
invested in extension services and demonstrations of innovative technologies to reach 42,000 
pastoralists and smallholder farmers, including capacity building of extension workers and farmer 
organisations on climate-smart fodder technologies. South Sudan, under this activity, will invest GCF 
resources in resilient fodder production systems in the absence of AfDB support by establishing 
additional fodder banks (with farm and fodder handling equipment, fodder storage infrastructure and 
fodder bank operating costs) to benefit 50,000 pastoralists and their 250,000 livestock. In addition, 50 
tonnes of resilient fodder varieties will be provided. Finally, at the regional level, IGAD will invest AfDB 
resources to develop an interactive online tool that will be used by countries to identify the most 
appropriate and easy-to-adopt solutions for their agro-pastoralists, and to organise an interactive 
regional climate smart technology fair. Complementary GCF resources under this activity will support 
the development and dissemination of extension materials on innovative technologies, including 
support for the development of resilient forage systems.   
61. Activity 1.3.2: Disseminate resilient varieties to improve agricultural and fodder production (GCF 
Financed for all countries and AfDB for Kenya):  This activity aims to increase fodder production in the 
5 countries to secure livestock production. It will mainly support commercial fodder production through 
the establishment of fodder banks in pastoralist areas, contributing to improved livelihoods and 
reduced livestock vulnerability. BREFOL will provide more than 264,000 pastoralists in the 5 countries 
with resilient seeds to increase fodder production. In Djibouti, through a partnership with the 
International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), efforts will focus on extension services to train 40,000 
pastoralists/agro-pastoralists in 50 districts on rangeland management and disseminate rangeland 
management plans (RMP). Similarly, in South Sudan, GCF funds will be used to provide extension 
services to 4,000 pastoralists and smallholder farmers. Beneficiaries in the other three countries 
include 120,000 pastoralists in Ethiopia, 50,000 in Kenya and 50,000 in Somalia. 
 
62. Component 2: Supporting Low Carbon and Resilient Development of Agribusinesses:  There is 
a growing emphasis on developing the agribusiness sector to enable vulnerable communities and 
people to adapt to climate change. Agribusiness development, such as access to digital technology 
and markets, entrepreneurship development and access to innovative financial instruments, has the 
potential to boost rural productivity, increase competitiveness and help rebuild better and stronger 
agriculture and food production systems, especially after COVID-19, and address climate change. This 
is an important change pathway to build resilience and address climate change issues through climate 
finance solutions in the HoA (IDDRSI Priority Intervention Area 2. This means facilitating market 
access, trade and financial resources. Thus, in line with IDDRSI PIA 2, Component 2 of BREFOL will 
deliver the following outputs:  
 
63. Output 2.1: Increased access to digital advisory services and markets.

=== PAGE 47 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
 
 
 
 
64. Activity 2.1.1: Establish and deploy digital advisory services using PPP mechanism (AfDB + GCF 
Financed).  Promoting sustainable and resilient agro-pastoral value chain development requires timely 
access to various updated information on technologies, finance, market, climate information, Early 
Warning System (EWS), etc. for all stakeholders. This activity will therefore respond to these important 
needs for which the PPP is adopted to ensure sustainability.  The implementation of this activity will 
build on the digital advisory services approaches developed by AfDB under the African Adaptation 
Acceleration Programme (AAAP, see Appendix 2.3). The activity will support the development of digital 
solutions through public-private partnerships (see Annex 25 for more details).  
 
65.  Proposed Public Private Partnership Approach for scaling Digital Tools: Despite the significant 
growth of digitalization in Africa's agricultural sector, only 33 million of these rural smallholder farmers 
have been registered by the approximately 390 digital companies operating in Africa in 2019, according 
to the CTA/Dalberg Advisors report. However, the report recognizes that "digitalization could be a 
game changer in increasing productivity, profitability and resilience to climate change" and other 
economic stressors. Both the EU-Africa Task Force on Rural Africa (TFRA) report and the Global 
Forum on Food and Agriculture (GFFA) communiqué highlighted the power of digitalization to 
transform agriculture and rural economies. Figure B.3.1 illustrates the importance of digitizing the 
agricultural value chain. 
 
 
       Figure B.3.2: Importance of digitalization on smallholder agriculture: Source CTA/Dalberg Advisors 
 
Report 
66. One of the reasons for the low level of digitisation in African rural communities is the lack of appropriate 
public-private partnerships to scale up the adoption of digital solutions. Other challenges that have 
been identified with lack of traction in the adoption of digital solutions include the following  
• 
The presence of many small agritech start-ups with stand-alone applications that address limited 
agricultural challenges in most project countries. In some countries, such as Kenya, the emergence 
of many agritech startups has led to fragmentation of the sector, and many of these startups have 
not been able to scale beyond a few hundred users.  
• 
Most digital agricultural interventions are government and NGO driven, without a corresponding 
sustainability strategy to ensure the continued use or scaling of the digital solutions beyond the life 
of the projects that sponsored them.  
• 
Lack of privately developed infrastructure to support agricultural services and general lack of public-
private partnerships for business model innovation.  
• 
Lack of market matching platforms for smallholder farmers and pastoralists.    
• 
Limited critical information services for smallholder farmers and agropastoralists on climate-smart 
agronomic practices. Among the reasons for low levels of digitization among African rural 
communities is lack of appropriate public private partnership to scale-up the adoption of digital

=== PAGE 48 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
 
 
 
 
solutions. Other challenges that have been identified with lack of traction in the adoption of digital 
solutions include the following:  
 
67. Methodology for the PPP Business Model Innovation:  The methodology for the selection of the 
private sector partner and the subsequent development and deployment of the digital solutions shall 
include the following procedure, as shown in Figure B.3.2 (see Annex 25 for more details): 
 
 
      Figure B.3.3: Methodology for developing the PPP business model innovation. 
68. Under this activity, AfDB and GCF will: 1) Support over 1,142,000 smallholder farmers (women and 
youth), farmers organization and agribusiness MSMEs to benefit from extension on using digital 
advisory services; and 2) Establish a regional innovation hub/data centre to coordinate and share 
knowledge among innovation partners, governments, and other stakeholders. 
 
69. Activity 2.1.2: Construct rural markets (AfDB + GCF Financed).  Limited access to markets is a major 
constraint for farmers and pastoralists to get the right price for agropastoral products. This activity will 
address this constraint through the construction and development of various market infrastructure 
components in different regions of the participating countries, with the main objective of facilitating 
trade in agropastoral products. In Djibouti, for example, efforts will focus on the construction of two 
community markets and the rehabilitation of rural market roads, as well as the development of livestock 
infrastructure in five community markets. In Ethiopia, efforts will include the construction of 60 km of 
access and feeder roads, six livestock market centres and 30 fodder market centres. Kenya will receive 
support for the establishment of a market with digital extension infrastructure and the construction of 
14 demand-driven rural markets. In Somalia, activities will include the construction of 10 livestock 
market fences and shade structures, as well as technical studies and supervision of marketing 
infrastructure works, and the construction of 17 demand-driven rural markets. In Southern Sudan, 
activities will support the professionalization of agro-pastoral value chains/cooperatives, the 
development of smart maps for livestock routes and climate information, the establishment of a national 
e-registry of pastoralists and farmers, the facilitation of the provision of digital financial services, and 
the construction of 10 demand-driven rural markets. 
 
70. Output 2.2:  Developed inclusive MSMEs and cooperatives with access to climate financing. 
71. Activity 2.2.1: Train women and youth on entrepreneurial skills in renewable energy technologies 
and/or AVC development including access to credit line (AfDB and GCF Financed). Low technical

=== PAGE 49 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
 
 
 
 
and managerial capacity has been a major constraint for women and youth in developing SMEs for 
agricultural value chain (AVC) activities and job creation.  Under this activity, BREFOL will train over 
2,350 women and youth from 772 cooperatives and MSMEs on entrepreneurship in renewable energy 
technologies (solar and biogas) and agribusiness. The aim is to empower producer groups, including 
women's groups, through training, structuring and awareness raising on entrepreneurship, leading to 
the development of business plans for cooperatives and MSMEs. In Ethiopia, support will be provided 
to strengthen existing cooperatives through capacity building and technical assistance, as well as 
tailored training materials for women/youth led MSMEs in multiple languages. In Kenya and Somalia, 
the focus will be on supporting regulatory processes, developing a rural energy catalogue, and training 
youth and women on bio-digesters and solar energy systems. South Sudan will support youth and 
women's groups to develop sub-projects, support youth associations/cooperatives in beekeeping, and 
provide entrepreneurship training for women and youth MSMEs. Training will include business plan 
development and linkages to credit lines and commercial banks. This activity will build on the women's 
empowerment approaches developed under the AfDB's AFAWA programme (see Appendix 2.2).  
72. Activity 2.2.2: Facilitate access for women and youth groups to renewable energy (solar and 
biodigester systems) to enhance alternative income generation (AfDB + GCF Financed).  Limited 
access to energy causes significant post-harvest losses in agro-pastoral production. The fossil energy 
used is a source of greenhouse gas emissions.  Under this activity, more than 10,680 women and 
youth entrepreneurs will be able to access gender-sensitive climate finance to invest in the introduction 
of renewable energy for staple food processing (4.8 MW solar and 3,890m3 (~0.12MW) biodigester 
systems) through the BREFOL Credit Window. In Djibouti, this activity aims to establish a gender-
sensitive financing mechanism tailored to the needs of smallholder farmers, fishers and MSMEs, 
including guarantee funds and access to micro-credit for women, including 0.3 MW of solar for food 
processing to women/youth led MSME/IGA groups. In Ethiopia, the project will build community 
processing units for youth and women, strengthen existing cooperatives, facilitate capacity building for 
district agricultural offices to support MSMEs, purchase equipment for demand-driven processing 
units, coordinate the establishment of women/youth led MSMEs for renewable energy management, 
and establish 700 (3500m3) biodigesters for women/youth led MSMEs. In addition, access to 
renewable energy will be provided, including 1 MW of solar energy for food processing for women and 
youth-led MSMEs. In Kenya, inputs and access to renewable energy such as solar and bio-digesters 
will support alternative income generation for women and youth, including the provision of 1.5 MW of 
solar and 120 m3 of bio-digesters for food processing. In Somalia, renewable energy alternative income 
generation inputs will be provided, including 1.0 MW of solar food preservation systems for women 
and youth groups. South Sudan will receive support for 1 MW of solar and 270 m3 of bio-digester food 
processing systems for women and youth-led associations, as well as training and deployment support. 
73. Activity 2.2.3: Design and operation of innovative credit lines through selected public financial 
institutions (PFIs) in participating countries (GCF funded):   PFIs and the private sector in general do 
not invest significantly in AVC business due to the high-risk nature of the sector. As discussed under 
barrier #4, one way to attract private capital to climate-sensitive sectors is to provide the right 
incentives and an enabling environment suitable for private sector operations. To this end, BREFOL 
will use GCF concessional resources to support the establishment of a dedicated direct lending window 
(BDCW) to provide two local PFIs in Djibouti and Ethiopia with stable, lendable resources to adequately 
address the financing needs of smallholder farmers, pastoralists, agribusiness MSMEs, FBAs and 
other MSMEs, such as cooperatives, with an interest in green/circular economy development (Please 
see Annex 26 for more details of the LPFIs). A total of 1,985 farmer groups, cooperatives and MSMEs 
will benefit from the BDCW, of which at least 50% will be led by women and youth. A legal agreement 
will be signed at the level of the PFI and the beneficiaries (agribusiness MSMEs), without the 
involvement of the EE. During the last stakeholder consultation held from 4 to 14 March (see Annex 
7.1, section 3.4 for Djibouti and Annex 7.2.1, section 3.2 for Ethiopia), two national development 
banks were contacted and agreed to participate in the programme. The two interest rates offered by 
the participating PFIs are relatively lower than the official lending rates in both countries (Table B.3.2). 
The establishment of these dedicated credit lines will not affect the business of the local IFIs, as they 
do not currently lend to this category of actors, and the eligibility criteria will limit access only to farmer 
and herder groups, cooperatives and SMEs.

=== PAGE 50 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
 
 
 
 
 
Table B.3.2: Deposit vs. lending interest rates in participating countries 
 
 
74. In addition, under this activity, BREFOL will encourage existing climate insurance providers to scale 
up weather insurance (WII) coverage for livestock production. This will be done by coordinating the 
design of climate insurance schemes for targeted agri-MSMEs (cooperatives, enterprises, 
aggregators, etc.); developing frameworks that integrate climate insurance into climate finance 
strategies; optimising the use of concessional funds and grants (by providing targeted subsidies, de-
risking investments of producers/enterprises/aggregators; and developing smart subsidy criteria for a 
climate insurance scheme for agri-MSMEs. Under this activity, TA support will be provided to establish 
or strengthen access to digital services for parametric/index insurance in Ethiopia. GCF resources will 
therefore complement AfDB investments to support the establishment of a BEFOL Direct Insurance 
Credit Window (BDICW) with the selected banks. This will help 3,600 smallholder and pastoralist 
groups, MSMEs, FBAs and other agribusiness MSMEs to mitigate climate-related shocks in the region. 
The criteria for the selection of sub-project beneficiaries under Activity 2.3.1 are summarised in Table 
B.3.3, while the sub-activities eligible for funding under the BDCW are listed in Table B.3.4 (subject to 
change on a case-by-case basis). In principle, the project will ensure that each beneficiary of the credit 
line is covered by a sustainability insurance under the BDICW. 
 
 
 Figure B.3.3: BREFOL Direct Credit Window (BDCW) to attract Private Sector Investments in the HOA 
        
75. It is important to emphasise here that the AfDB has been at the forefront of supporting SME 
development in Africa through credit lines, with notable success. For example, in 2016, the AfDB 
approved a $150 million line of credit (LoC) to Nigeria's United Bank for Africa (UBA) Plc to finance 
infrastructure and SME projects, including women-owned enterprises in Nigeria  
(https://www.afdb.org/fr/node/24.) Still in Nigeria, in 2018, the AfDB approved a $50 million LoC to 
Nigeria's Fidelity Bank Plc to support small and medium-sized enterprises and women-owned 
enterprises in selected transformative sectors, including nearly one hundred SMEs in manufacturing, 
Indicator
Deposit interest Rate Lending Interest Rates by FDED & DBE BREFOL Maximum Proposed Rates
Djibouti
Rate (%)
1.70%
12% - 15%
6.00%
Ethiopia
Rate (%)
7.70%
12% - 18%
9.00%
5% matching funds from 
smallholder farmers, pastoralists, 
and micro-enterprises, and 10%
matching funds from small-
medium agribusiness enterprises 
(Crowds in additional $2.25 
million)
Funds Flow
GCF Funds Flow
BREFOL Direct Credit Windows (BDCW)
for the growth of Agribusiness MSMEs 
($24.35 million)
(Crwds in additional $5.49  million) 
from LPFIs as simple co-financing

=== PAGE 51 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
 
 
 
 
 
50 Djibouti | MFW4A - Making Finance Work for Africa.  
51 Ethiopia | MFW4A - Making Finance Work for Africa.  
health and education ( https://www.afdb.org/en/news-and-events.). In 2022, the AfDB approved a $50 
million LoC with Nigeria's First City Monument Bank (FCMB) to support access to finance for small 
and medium-sized enterprises and women-owned businesses. FCMB will use the credit line to expand 
lending activities that will support the country's post-pandemic economic recovery and promote more 
inclusive and climate-resilient growth. It will focus on companies in Nigeria's agribusiness, 
manufacturing, healthcare and renewable energy sectors (https://www.afdb.org/en/news-and-events.). 
76. As the AfDB will have an oversight role over the selected local PFIs, it will ensure that any changes to 
the selection criteria or the disbursement of any sub-loans to the selected beneficiaries are strictly in 
accordance with the sub-loan agreements between the local PFIs and the sub-loan beneficiaries. 
 
77. The financial context of the participating countries under the BDCW and the selected PFIs 
78. Djibouti:   Djibouti's financial system is still very underdeveloped. It is dominated by the banking sector, 
which holds more than 95% of financial sector assets. As of July 2019, the financial landscape 
consisted of 11 banks with majority foreign ownership, including 8 traditional commercial banks and 3 
Islamic banks. The non-bank financial sector consists of 20 licensed financial auxiliaries (foreign 
exchange bureaus and/or remittance offices), 3 microfinance institutions, 2 insurance companies, and 
an economic development fund specialising in SME financing 50. Access to financial services is 
constrained by several factors, including: (i) unemployment and poverty; (ii) low mobile phone and 
internet penetration; (iii) high borrowing costs; and (iv) underdeveloped payment and credit information 
systems.   
79. Digital finance also remains underdeveloped, partly due to limited internet and mobile penetration and 
a lack of institutional and technical capacity (barrier #3). Access to finance for SMEs is a recurring 
problem in Djibouti. Most SMEs operate in the informal sector and do not have access to bank loans. 
SME loans account for only 12% of corporate loans. The limited scope of the credit reporting system 
and the unreliability of the financial information provided by SMEs partly explain the low level of 
business lending. 
 
80. Ethiopia:  Ethiopia's financial sector comprises 18 banking institutions, of which 16 are private and 2 
are public. The total number of bank branches was 4,757, with more than a third (35.3%) located in 
the capital, Addis Ababa. The country has 37 microfinance institutions (MFIs), 17 insurance companies 
(16 of which are private) and 532 agencies.  Most micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) 
and large companies have access to traditional financial services to manage their liquidity. However, 
access to credit is more limited, especially for MSMEs: only 30% have access, compared to 68% of 
large enterprises. Despite a vibrant digital financial subsector, barriers remain, including regulatory 
limits on daily transactions and mobile bank account balances51.  
 
81. Criteria for the selection of sub-project beneficiaries under activity 2.3.1:  
 
82. Definition of Smallholder Farmers:  The definition of smallholder farmers varies from country to 
country. For the purposes of this programme, the most widely used definition of smallholder farmers 
has been adopted, namely farmers with a low asset base and less than 2 hectares of land under 
cultivation. Alternatively, they can be defined as farmers who operate under structural constraints, such 
as sub-optimal access to resources, technology and markets, or with limited resource endowments 
compared to other farmers in the sector. Farming less than 2.0 hectares.  
83. Farmer-based association (FBA): These are associations or organisations established within a given 
territory to address the common needs of their members (smallholder farmers).  
84. Agricultural Cooperative Society (ACS):  Defined as a business association in which farmers pool 
their resources to increase revenues, reduce costs or share risks, depending on the type of 
cooperative.  
85. Agro-dealer (AD): Defined as a locally based entrepreneur who sells seeds, fertiliser and 
agrochemicals to poor farmers in rural areas.

=== PAGE 52 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
 
 
 
 
 
52Afful-Koomson et al. (2014). Economic and Financial Analysis of Small and Medium Food Crops Agro-Processing Firms in 
Ghana. United Nations University Institute for Natural Resources in Africa, Accra, Ghana.  
53 Defined as individuals between 18 and 35 years of age 
86. Producer Organisation (PO): In this context, a PO is defined as any legal entity formed by primary 
producers in the AFOLU and energy sectors that provides for the sharing of profits/benefits among its 
members. This could include, for example, any farmers' association (FBAs, WABEs, YABEs, 
fishermen, poultry, livestock, dairy, vegetable, palm, oil producers, weavers, etc.), cooperative, ESCO, 
etc.  
87. Micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs): The definition of MSMEs varies from country to 
country. However, for this programme, the definition of MSMEs proposed by Afful-Koomson et al. 
(2014)52 will be used. This is based on the following quantitative variables, which are described in 
Table B.3.4 below: 
 
Table B.3.4. Quantitative Variables for Defining MSMEs 
Category 
Quantitative Aspects 
 Medium 
Enterprise 
Employs between thirty and hundred people; has a total annual turn-
over in the range of US$ 20,000 to $ 50,000 and with fixed assets not 
exceeding $1,000,000. 
 Small 
Enterprise 
Employs between ten to twenty-nine people; has a total annual turn-
over in the range of $2,000 to below $20,000, and with fixed assets not 
exceeding more than $100,000. 
 Very Small 
and Micro 
Enterprises 
Employs between one to nine people; has a total annual turn-over 
between $500 and $2,000, and with fixed assets not exceeding 
$10,000.  
        Source: Adopted and modified from Afful-Koomson et al. (2014) 
 
88. A formally registered agribusiness enterprise with more than 51% women’s and youth’s53 ownership 
(more than 51% of the firm’s assets holding or shares are owned by a woman or a youth. This will be 
assessed and validated against firm registration information from the relevant MDAs in charge, and 
the share of profits during the tenor of the sub-loans. 
89. The criteria for selecting FBAs will be like that of the MSMEs as follows:  
 
• 
A formally registered FBA/O with the Ministry of Agriculture or any other relevant body; The size of the 
Association must not be less than 5 members with at least 60% of the members being women or youth; 
• 
Activities are mainly carried out along the agricultural and food systems value chains, including 
renewable energy; 
• 
Track record of loan repayments; 
• 
Operational bank account of more than 2 years; 
• 
Records and bookkeeping; 
• 
Agriculture land holding of between 5 and 15 ha; and 
• 
Any other characteristics deemed necessary by the LPFIs 
 
See Annex 26 for possible eligible activities or investments under the Credit Line Facility.  
 
90. Activity 2.2.4:  Provide technical assistance to MSMEs, local PFIs, and cooperatives to create an 
enabling environment for credit access and sustainability ((AfDB + GCF Financed): Farmers, 
pastoralist groups and SMEs face financial and non-financial constraints in developing the agricultural 
value chain to add value and increase income. This activity aims to support these actors to ensure that 
they have access to credit, but also that they manage it efficiently to increase their income and repay 
the credit. It will therefore provide technical assistance and allocate funds to finance early-stage 
agripreneur start-ups in Ethiopia through grants and repayable grants via business development 
service organisations. It will also conduct a needs assessment to identify eligible agribusiness MSMEs, 
PFIs and cooperatives, coordinate ongoing dialogue, facilitate the review of legal and policy

=== PAGE 53 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
 
 
 
 
frameworks for credit lines suitable for pastoral contexts, support local financial institutions, review 
existing legal and institutional frameworks, and establish six knowledge-sharing platforms with relevant 
stakeholders. In Kenya, the focus will be on capacity building for agro-pastoral communities on index-
based livestock insurance schemes, sensitising the community on youth agribusiness plans for loan 
applications in collaboration with PFIs, creating linkages and networks with PFIs dealing with 
agricultural lending, and providing capacity building on business plan development to support 
agricultural investments. In addition, women and youth will be trained in agro-pastoral value chain 
(AVC) entrepreneurship skills and access to credit will be facilitated to reach 100 MSMEs with a total 
membership of 2,000. The activity also aims to develop a public-private partnership (PPP) framework 
and structure to incentivize private sector insurance companies to introduce index-based livestock 
insurance (IBLI) products, and to design and validate appropriate climate risk contracts for climate and 
livestock insurance in Somalia. A total of 4,395 farmer/pastoralist groups and MSMEs will benefit from 
capacity building in financial management and marketing to improve their management efficiency, 
thereby increasing their ability to repay the loan. 
 
91. Component 3: Strengthening Rural Communities’ Capacity to Adapt to Climate Change:  Efforts 
to strengthen the capacity of agropastoral communities in the HoA to adapt to climate change are 
imperative due to the region's vulnerability to environmental changes exacerbated by climate change. 
The IDDRSI's Priority Area of Intervention (PAI) 4 emphasises disaster risk management (DRM) as 
central to enhancing resilience and food security in the HoA. Climate-related disasters such as 
droughts, floods and unpredictable rainfall patterns pose a significant threat to agricultural productivity 
and livelihoods in the region. By prioritising DRM, initiatives can focus on early warning systems, 
sustainable land management practices and community-based resilience building to mitigate the 
impacts of climate change on agropastoral communities. Such efforts aim to enhance adaptive 
capacity, promote sustainable resource management and ensure food security in the face of the 
challenges posed by a changing climate in the Horn of Africa. Thus, in line with IDDRSI PAI 4, BREFOL 
will deliver the following outputs to improve DRM in the HoA. 
 
92. Output 3.1: Enhanced access to climate information and early warning systems  
93. Activity 3.1.1:  Expanding the network of agro-meteorological stations to generate data for climate 
advisory services - It is essential to expand the network of agro-meteorological stations to increase the 
availability of climate information for improving climate resilience, agricultural planning and livelihoods 
in the HoA. This activity will be key to improving climate resilience and agricultural productivity in 
Ethiopia, Kenya and South Sudan. The installation of agro-meteorological stations will significantly 
improve the capacity to generate accurate and localised weather and climate data, enabling more 
effective climate advisory services. In Ethiopia, twenty-five (25) automatic weather stations will be 
established to strengthen the early warning system and improve weather observation coverage, 
benefiting pastoralists and agro-pastoralists. In Kenya, fourteen (14) stations will be installed, with a 
focus on placing at least two in each county, to improve data generation for climate-informed extension 
services, enabling farmers to make informed decisions. Similarly, in South Sudan, a total of eight (8) 
automated agro-meteorological stations will be installed in project counties to strengthen the network 
infrastructure for digital climate-advisory services and support resilience-building efforts in vulnerable 
communities.  
94. Activity 3.1.2: Integrate and disseminate climate information and early warning into the established 
digital advisory services – This activity will integrate and disseminate climate information and early 
warnings in Ethiopia, Kenya and South Sudan using digital solutions platforms established through the 
PPP mechanism (see Annex 25 on the digital solutions PPP model under Activity 2.1.1). The National 
Meteorological Services (NMS) of the three countries will work with qualified private sector entities 
providing digital agro-advisory solutions to update and integrate climate information into the digital 
solution model. Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) will be signed with the NMSs to facilitate access 
to climate data and information for agropastoral and pastoral communities. The PPP mechanism will 
support coordination, capacity building and monitoring and evaluation efforts with NMS. The 
established PPP will facilitate the collection, synthesis and dissemination of information and create a 
business case. Specifically in Ethiopia, this activity will support the recalibration of the existing ATI

=== PAGE 54 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
 
 
 
 
hotline service to provide tailored advice to the pastoral community, adding features and improving 
usability. In addition, one (1) mobile application for pastoral extension agents will be customised to 
disseminate climate information and early warnings to 700,000 pastoralists and smallholder farmers 
(an average of 100,000 per district). Unstructured Supplementary Service Data (USSD) and Interactive 
Voice Response (IVR) systems for climate information dissemination will also be developed and made 
operational. In Kenya, climate information and early warning systems will be deployed, and technical 
assistance will be provided to train and equip 500,000 pastoralists and smallholder farmers in the use 
of climate services. Similarly, in South Sudan, technical assistance support will be provided to train 
and equip 3,000 pastoralists and smallholder farmers in the use of climate services. 
 
95. Output 3.2: Strengthened regulatory and policy frameworks and institutional capacity for climate 
resilience 
96. Activity 3.2.1: Support delivery of climate regulatory framework and mainstreaming of climate change 
into agricultural sector policies and strategies – The enabling environment is critical to the achievement 
of the objective of BREFOL, especially for the mobilisation of the private sector in the development of 
agribusinesses for value addition to agro-pastoral products. The main constraint to investment for SME 
development is the lack of adequate regulation that can encourage private sector investment. This 
activity will further improve the existing investment and regulatory framework in the participating 
countries (see Annex 9). The activity will also support capacity building for participating countries on 
MRV-related activities. Under this activity, investments will be made to facilitate mainstreaming policy 
dialogues with key stakeholders on climate index-based insurance to advance actionable reforms in 
Ethiopia. Coordination will take place between the National Meteorological Agency (NMA), ATI, 
insurance service providers, the Ethiopian Disaster Risk Management Commission (EDRMC) and 
other key stakeholders to establish independent verification of index insurance and standardisation of 
insurance packages for the agro-pastoral and livestock value chain. In Kenya and Somalia, this activity 
will support the mainstreaming of climate change into sector policies and strategies, including 
dissemination in the agriculture, water, livestock and environment sectors. In South Sudan, the activity 
will support the National Agriculture and Livestock Extension Policy, the Integrated Natural Resources 
Research Policy, the Agriculture Sector Policy and the Pastoralism Policy. At the regional level (IGAD), 
socio-economic and environmental data on vulnerability and resilience will be regularly collected and 
processed. Documentation and sharing of best practices on adaptation and resilience will be 
supported, as well as mapping and assessment of existing climate resilience projects and initiatives. 
Facilitate dialogue on climate change resilience in the region and develop and disseminate a report on 
the state of climate and climate change impacts in the IGAD region. Raise awareness and facilitate 
stakeholder engagement on existing regional and national climate change and adaptation policies and 
strategies, including the Framework for Weather, Water and Climate Services, the IGAD Regional 
Climate Change Strategy and the Climate Change Adaptation Strategy. Support will be provided for 
mapping regional and Member States' requirements for mainstreaming climate change into sectoral 
policies, and for dialogue and platforms for sharing data and experiences on mainstreaming climate 
change into sectoral policies and strategies. A tracking platform on regional and national policies and 
strategies will be developed to support informed sector decisions. Given the high level of discrimination 
against women and girls in the HoA (Barrier No. 5) and the fact that this marginalised group plays a 
crucial role in the management of ecosystem services and food security in the region, the design and 
implementation of gender-sensitive pro-poor programmes and policies will contribute to the economic 
and financial empowerment of women and girls, in line with IDDRSI Priority Area 7. TA support is 
therefore requested from the GCF to conduct feasibility studies in the five IGAD countries to assess 
the feasibility of rehabilitating/developing new cooperative food security banks under the management 
of women-led organisations. 
 
97. Component 4: Program Coordination and Knowledge Management (All countries and IGAD)  
This component will serve as a cornerstone for effective programme management, evaluation and 
coordination and will include several key aspects. Firstly, it will involve the conduct of baseline surveys 
in various areas such as energy use and penetration, socio-economic conditions, assessment of the 
enabling business environment for agribusiness MSMEs, quality of life, agricultural baselines and food

=== PAGE 55 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
 
 
 
 
security. These surveys will provide essential data for assessing the impact and progress of the 
programme. Second, the component will cover project implementation (see Annex 5 for the detailed 
implementation schedule), management and coordination at country and regional levels to ensure 
smooth implementation of activities and alignment with programme objectives. Thirdly, it will address 
procurement and disbursement arrangements for goods, services and consultancy at both project and 
sub-project levels, ensuring transparency and efficiency in resource allocation (see Annex 10 for a 
detailed procurement plan). Fourth, the component will focus on the organisation of procurement and 
implementation at the level of the Executing Entities (EEs) and Project Implementing Units (PIUs) or 
Project Management Units (PMUs), streamlining processes and minimising bottlenecks. Fifth, it will 
oversee financial management arrangements at the level of EEs and PIUs, including preparation of 
audits, financial statements and reporting, ensuring compliance with financial regulations and 
accountability standards. Finally, the component will include monitoring and evaluation of project and 
sub-project performance measurement frameworks, using data from the M&E plan (Annex 11) to track 
progress, identify areas for improvement and ensure achievement of programme objectives. Overall, 
this component will play a key role in facilitating effective coordination, management and knowledge 
dissemination throughout the programme implementation process in order to achieve the outputs listed 
below. 
 
98. Output 4.1: Project management and coordination: Key activities to deliver on this output are: 
99. Activity 4.1.1: Project management and Coordination – This activity will focus on project management 
and coordination to ensure efficient implementation and alignment with programme objectives. Staff 
for the Project Management Unit in Ethiopia, Kenya, Djibouti and IGAD, and the Implementing Agency 
in Somalia and South Sudan will be recruited through a competitive process to ensure transparency 
and to select the most qualified person or entity for the task. Financial and procurement audits will be 
conducted regularly to ensure accountability and transparency, and to ensure that resources are used 
effectively and in accordance with established AfDB policies. This comprehensive approach to project 
management will facilitate smooth implementation, enhance oversight, and build confidence in the 
integrity and effectiveness of the project. Global coordination of the project will be provided by IGAD 
to ensure synergy in the implementation of the national and regional components.  
100. 
Activity 4.1.2: Technical and institutional capacity building - This activity will focus on technical and 
institutional capacity building to enable the effective implementation of the project in the context of 
conflict, fragility and poor governance. In particular, it will focus on building the capacity of stakeholders 
to implement the Gender Action Plan, Environmental and Social Management Frameworks (ESMFs) 
and Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) (see Annex 6). These efforts will include 
training and support to stakeholders involved in these processes, including project staff and relevant 
institutions, to ensure compliance with environmental and social standards. In addition, gender 
mainstreaming will be emphasised throughout the project, integrating gender considerations into all 
aspects of design and implementation. A baseline survey will provide essential data for project design 
and monitoring. Dedicated roles such as project accountant, procurement specialist and project 
coordination support officer will be established to ensure efficient financial management, procurement 
processes and overall project coordination. This comprehensive approach to capacity building and 
staffing will support the successful implementation of the project while promoting environmental and 
social sustainability and gender equality. 
101. 
Activity 4.1.3: Monitoring and Evaluation – This activity includes monitoring and evaluation through 
supervision missions carried out by national and regional focal points (see Annex 11 for detailed 
programme M&E plan). These missions will ensure that project activities are on track and meeting their 
objectives. Regular meetings and workshops will provide an opportunity for stakeholders to discuss 
progress, address challenges and share best practices. The project launch will mark the start of 
implementation and set the stage for effective coordination and cooperation. A mid-term review will 
provide a comprehensive assessment of progress and identify areas for adjustment or improvement 
where necessary. Finally, a project completion report will summarise achievements, lessons learned 
and recommendations for future projects, providing valuable insights for stakeholders and contributing 
to ongoing learning and development in the field.  The costs of conducting the mid-term review and 
the final independent review are covered by the AE Fee (see Annex 12).

=== PAGE 56 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
 
 
 
 
102. 
Activity 4.1.4: Knowledge Management and Communication – This activity will focus on knowledge 
management and communication to facilitate project feasibility and knowledge sharing. This initiative 
will involve the establishment of robust systems for collecting, organising and disseminating project-
related information and best practices. Stakeholders will be kept informed of project developments, 
milestones and results through effective communication channels. This proactive approach to 
knowledge management will enhance project viability by ensuring that decision-makers have access 
to timely and relevant information for informed decision-making. In addition, by promoting knowledge 
sharing among project team members and stakeholders, this activity will foster a culture of learning 
and innovation, ultimately improving the overall effectiveness and sustainability of the project. 
 
103. 
Need for the proposed programme intervention: Both the baseline investment and the GCF 
interventions have been carefully selected to ensure scalability. This means that fewer resources will 
be needed to achieve significant economic benefits. In particular, the programme design uses a 
blended finance structure, introducing innovative financing instruments such as credit lines, matching 
grants and simple co-financing with selected private sector investors and intermediaries (commercial 
banks). This approach will help to de-risk and crowd in private sector capital for resilience building in 
various energy and agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU) value chains in the HOA.  
104. 
BREFOL will provide a credit line of USD 24.35 million to leverage an additional USD 8.72 million 
from two Public Financial Institutions (PFIs) in Dibouti and Ethiopia through the BDCW. These 
additional leveraged resources will help increase the PFIs' loan portfolio to agribusiness MSMEs and 
other programme beneficiaries. BREFOL will also assist farmer organisations and agribusiness 
MSMEs in preparing business plans for PFIs, and beneficiaries' access to the funds will be subject to 
a matching fund contribution of 5-10%: depending on the size of the agribusiness MSMEs.   
105. 
In total, the GCF requested amount of USD 24.35 million in credit lines will help to leverage 35.8% 
more capital, valued at USD 8.72 million as green blended finance.  
106. 
BREFOL will also deploy technological innovations as sub-projects to deliver critical climate-
adaptation advisory services, market linkages, crop protocols, gender and rural/extension services 
through a variety of low- to high-tech channels, depending on the digital development of each country 
(Table B.3.6). It will also scale up the successful technology dissemination approaches of the 
Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) programme, which will increase the 
incomes of smallholder farmers and MSMEs in the HOA. Other key innovations to be scaled up include: 
the approaches of i) the Global Centre on Adaptation's (GCA) Smallholder Adaptation 
Accelerator Programme (AAAP) for digital advisory services, and ii) the Affirmative Finance Action 
for Women in Africa (AFAWA) Technical Assistance (TA), which provides advisory services to 
financial institutions to ensure successful implementation of their product portfolios for women, and 
strengthens the capacity of women entrepreneurs through training to increase business productivity 
and growth.  
 
Table B.3.6: Some key innovations introduced by BREFOL in the HOA 
BREFOL Key Innovations 
Component/ 
Sub-
component 
Type of 
Innovation 
 Purpose 
 Barrier(s) 
Addressed 
• 
Regional integration to improve 
livestock trading, and better control 
of transboundary animal diseases, 
pest, and zoonoses  
C-1; SC 1-1 & 
SC 1-3 
Economic & 
Scientific 
Innovations 
- Facilitate cross-border trading in 
livestock and staple food crops  
- Facilitate control of transboundary 
animal diseases and zoonoses, 
including pest control management  
- Facilitate cost-effectiveness 
analysis of integrated pest 
management technologies to fight 
against fall armyworm, arboviruses 
in transhumant cattle, and locust’s 
invasion 
 Barrier No 5.

=== PAGE 57 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
 
 
 
 
• 
Integration of sustainable land 
management practices 
C-1, SC 1-2 
Technical 
Innovation 
- Promotion of resilient 
agroecological practices among 
smallholder farmers and 
pastoralists to support adaption 
while fostering ecological health 
synergies and mitigation co-benefits 
- Improve soil health and fertility 
- Minimize land conflicts associated 
with fragmentation and degradation  
Barrier No 5 
• 
Scaling up and replication of 
proven agricultural technologies 
and innovations 
• 
 
• 
 
C-1, SC 1-2 
Technology 
Innovation 
- Scale up and disseminate proven 
agricultural technologies and 
innovations to millions of 
smallholder farmers  
- Improve soil health/fertility through 
improved farming practices 
- Minimize agricultural transaction 
costs 
Barrier No 3 
• 
Integration of the Global Centre on 
Adaptation (GCA) Smallholder 
Adaptation Accelerator Program 
(AAAP) to scale up digital advisory 
services and markets in climate 
responsive planning
 
C-2, SC 2-1 
Digital & Market 
Innovations 
Partner with GCA to: 
- Scale up the Smallholder 
Adaptation Accelerator Program 
(AAAP) 
- Facilitate access to digital advisory 
services and markets 
- Reduce the transaction cost of 
doing business in fragile and 
conflicts prone areas 
Barriers No. 1, 3 
& 4. 
• 
Integrate innovative financial 
instruments to help ‘crowd-in’ 
additional private sector finances in 
fragile states  
C-2, SC 2-1 
Financial 
Innovations 
Leveraging on GCF concessional 
finances to: 
 
- Leverage additional private sector 
investments in fragile states 
- De-risk the agriculture and other 
land use sectors in fragile states to 
attract private sector investors. 
- Design innovative financial 
instruments attractive to private 
investors in fragile states 
- Operationalize access to ‘carbon 
credits’ for smallholder farmers   
Barriers No. 1, 3 
& 4  
 
 
 
-  
 
• 
Integrate gender-sensitive food 
security Banks to empower women 
economically and financially 
C-3; C 3-3 
Technological, 
Planning, and 
Implementation 
- Economically empower women and 
girls to fight against gender 
discrimination and income 
inequality.  
- Increased empowerment of women 
to play decision-making role in their 
households in vulnerable 
communities.  
- Increased small–scale or pilot 
adaptation initiatives adapted and 
accessible for women to build 
resilience of vulnerable 
Barrier No. 2

=== PAGE 58 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
 
 
 
 
communities in climate resilient 
activities.  
- Reduced gender disparities in 
women’s employment in vulnerable 
communities by sector.  
 
107. In total, these measures will contribute towards the transition to a low-carbon climate-resilient 
sustainable development pathways. 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
108. 
The Accredited Entity (AE): AfDB:   The African Development Bank Group (hereinafter referred to as AfDB) 
is the Accredited Entity (AE). The AfDB is the premier pan-African development institution promoting economic 
growth and social progress across the continent. It is made up of three institutions, namely 1). The African 
Development Bank (AfDB), established in 1964, 2). The African Development Fund (ADF), a funding window of 
the AfDB, established in 1972, and 3) The Nigeria Trust Fund (NTF), established in 1976. It currently has 81 
members, comprising 54 independent African countries (regional members) and 27 non-African countries (non-
regional members). The AfDB focuses on five development priorities as part of its ten-year strategy (2013-2022) 
to promote inclusive and green growth.  The development priorities, commonly referred to as the 'High 5s', are 
(i) Light Up and Power Africa, (ii) Feed Africa, (iii) Industrialise Africa, (iv) Integrate Africa, and (v) Improve the 
Quality of Life for the People of Africa. This programme is designed to support the realisation of the development 
priorities of "Feeding Africa" and "Improving the Quality of Life for the People of Africa". The AfDB has supported 
several transformative activities and investments in these priority areas. These include financing rural 
infrastructure (such as roads, irrigation, electricity, storage facilities and access to markets) to improve 
agricultural productivity and competitiveness. The AfDB has also supported several initiatives to strengthen 
agriculture and food security, particularly to improve the livelihoods of rural populations in Regional Member 
Countries (RMCs). As agricultural production in rural communities is largely dependent on rain-fed irrigation, they 
are highly vulnerable to extreme weather conditions and uncertainties. It will be unfortunate to pursue an 
integrated approach to improving agricultural production and food security without appropriate risk-sharing 
products, access to affordable finance, especially for women, and services to mitigate the impact of climate risks. 
The AfDB has financed several related projects and programmes in the HOA region. At present, the AfDB's 
portfolio in the HOA is estimated at about UA 2.4 billion and is distributed as shown in Table B.4.1. 
 
Table B.4.1. AfDB’s investment portfolio in the Horn of Africa  
Country 
Djibout
i 
Ethiopia 
Eritrea 
Kenya 
Somalia 
Sudan 
South 
Sudan 
Ugand
a 
Total 
Amount (UA 
Millions) 
107.9 
1,130.0 
68.0 
2 380.0 
69.0 
141.0 
9.6 
918 
2,443.
5 
 
109. 
The AfDB, as the AE, will receive the GCF proceeds in trust and sign the Funding Activity Agreement with 
the GCF. It will sign loan and grant agreements with the Ministries of Finance of Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, 
Somalia and South Sudan.  
 
110. 
Executing Entities (EE):  The Executing Entities (EE) are the Government of Djibouti, acting through the 
Ministry of Commerce, Economy and Finance (MoCEF) and the Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Fisheries and 
Livestock (MoAWFL); the Government of Ethiopia, acting through the Ministry of Finance, Ethiopia (MoFE) and 
the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA); the Government of Kenya, acting through the National Treasury and Economic 
Planning (NTEP), Kenya and the Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Fisheries and Livestock and Cooperatives 
(MoAWFLC); the Government of Somalia, through its Ministry of Finance, Somalia (MoFS) and Ministry of 
Livestock, Forestry and Range (MoLFR); the Government of South Sudan, through its Ministry of Finance and 
Planning, South Sudan (MoFP) and Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MoAF); and the Intergovernmental 
Authority on Development (IGAD), which is a separate legal entity. For Southern Sudan, FAO will act as a third-
party implementing agency. 
111. 
National Designated Authorities (NDAs). The Ministry of Housing, Urban Development and Environment 
(Djibouti), the Environment, Forestry and Climate Change Commission (Ethiopia), the National Treasury (Kenya), 
the Office of the Prime Minister (Somalia) and the Ministry of Environment and Forestry (South Sudan) are the 
respective GCF National Designated Authorities (NDAs) in these countries. They will ensure that the 
programme's activities in each country are aligned with national strategic objectives and priorities. The NDAs will 
be involved throughout the implementation of the Programme and will receive the Annual Performance Report 
(APR) detailing the status of project activities and impacts at country level.

=== PAGE 59 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
 
 
 
 
112. 
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD): The Intergovernmental Authority on Development 
(IGAD) in Eastern Africa was established in 1996 to replace the Intergovernmental Authority on Drought and 
Development (IGADD), established in 1986 to mitigate the effects of recurrent severe droughts and other natural 
disasters that caused widespread famine, environmental degradation and economic hardship in the region. 
Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, Sudan and Uganda took action through the UN to establish the 
intergovernmental body for development and drought control in their region. Eritrea became the seventh member 
after gaining independence in 1993, and South Sudan joined IGAD as the eighth member in 2011.  
113. 
In view of the emerging political and socio-economic challenges, the Assembly of Heads of State and 
Government, meeting in Addis Ababa in April 1995, decided to revitalise IGAD and broaden the areas of 
cooperation between Member States. The new and revitalised IGAD was launched at the 5th Summit of the 
IGAD Assembly of Heads of State and Government held in Djibouti on 25-26 November 1996. The Summit 
endorsed the decision to strengthen regional cooperation in three priority areas: food security and environmental 
protection; economic cooperation, regional integration and social development; and peace and security. 
114. 
IGAD is comprised of four hierarchical policy organs as follows:  
115. 
THE ASSEMBLY OF HEADS OF STATE AND GOVERNMENT is the supreme policy making and regulatory 
organ of the IGAD. It determines the objectives, guidelines and programmes for IGAD and meets once a year. A 
Chairman is elected from the Member States in rotation.  
116. 
THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS is composed of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs and one other Focal Minister 
designated by each member state. The Council formulates policy, approves the work programme and annual 
budget of the Secretariat during its biannual sessions. 
117. 
THE COMMITTEE OF AMBASSADORS is comprised of IGAD Member States’ Ambassadors or 
Plenipotentiaries accredited to the country of IGAD Headquarters. It convenes as often as the need arises to 
advise and guide the Executive Secretary. 
118. 
THE SECRETARIAT is headed by an Executive Secretary appointed by the Assembly of Heads of State and 
Government for a term of four years, renewable once. The Secretariat assists Member States in formulating 
regional projects in the priority areas, facilitates the coordination and harmonisation of development policies, 
mobilises resources to implement regional projects and programmes approved by the Council and reinforces 
national infrastructures necessary for implementing regional projects and policies. 
 
119. 
The Executive Secretary is assisted by Divisions responsible for: 
 
• 
Agriculture and Environment;  
• 
Economic Cooperation and Regional Integration; 
• 
Health Social Development; 
• 
Peace and Security; 
• 
Administration and Finance; and 
• 
Planning Coordination and Partnerships 
 
120. 
In addition to the above-mentioned departments at the headquarters in Djibouti, IGAD has a number of 
specialised institutions and programmes hosted by other member states. These include the IGAD Conflict Early 
Warning and Response Mechanism (CEWARN), the IGAD Security Sector Programme (ISSP), the IGAD Centre 
for Pastoral Area and Livestock Development (ICPALD), the IGAD Climate Prediction and Applications Centre 
(ICPAC) and the IGAD Regional Aids Programme (IRAPP).  In addition, due to the devastating drought that hit 
the IGAD region in 2010-2011, affecting more than 13 million people and exacerbating food insecurity to famine 
levels, IGAD launched the IDDRSI to end drought emergencies through the introduction of innovative sustainable 
development strategies, policies and programmes at member state, transboundary and regional levels aimed at 
building resilience to future climatic and economic shocks. 
 
121. 
At the country level, the following Ministries will act on behalf of the various governments as the EEs:  
• 
The Government of Djibouti, acting through its Ministry of Commerce Economics and Finance (MoCEF), 
and Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Fisheries and Livestock (MoAWFL); 
• 
The Government of Ethiopia, acting through its Ministry of Finance, Ethiopia (MoFE) and Ministry of 
Agriculture, Livestock and Fishery Resources (MoALFR); 
• 
The Government of Kenya, acting through its National Treasury and Economic Planning (NTEP) and 
Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Fisheries and Livestock, and Cooperatives (MoAWFLC);  
• 
The Government of Somalia, acting through its Ministry of Finance, Somalia (MoFS) and Ministry of 
Livestock, Forestry and Range (MoLFR);  
• 
The Government of South Sudan, acting through its Ministry of Finance and Planning, South Sudan 
(MoFP) and Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MoAF);

=== PAGE 60 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
 
 
 
 
• 
The Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD). 
 
122. 
Public Financial Institutions (PFIs):  These are National Development Institutions (NDIs) owned and 
operated by the government or a public body. They differ from private financial institutions in terms of ownership 
(private financial institutions are owned and operated by private individuals or entities).  
 
123. 
Program Implementation:  The overall coordination of the programme, in particular of the regional activities, 
will be carried out by IGAD as the regional implementing agency, working in close liaison with the five national 
governments in the HoA region. While IGAD will be responsible for the regional coordination and management 
of the programme, the institutions of the IGAD Member States will be responsible for the implementation of the 
activities at national level. There will be a legally binding financing agreement (protocol of agreement) between 
AfDB and IGAD based on the grant amount and associated conditions. The IGAD Executive Secretariat (IES) 
and its specialised institutions, including ICPAC (IGAD Climate Prediction and Applications Centre) and ICPALD 
(IGAD Centre for Pastoral and Livestock Development), will provide the necessary technical backstopping for 
regional activities.  
 
124. 
The IGAD Secretariat, through the IDDRSI Platform Coordination Unit (IPCU), will be responsible for 
coordinating the implementation of the Regional Programme. The Regional Programme Coordination Unit, 
established by the IGAD Secretariat, will be responsible for coordinating the programme. Under the supervision 
of a Regional Programme Steering Committee (RPSC), the IPCU will provide coordination support and overall 
guidance to ensure that the goals and objectives of the regional programme component are achieved. The 
mandates of the RPSC include the approval of programme budgets, programme activity reports and annual 
accounts related to the implementation of the overall programme. It will be chaired by the IES in accordance with 
the applicable instrument and its secretariat will be provided by a Regional IDDRSI Coordinator. During the 
implementation of specific regional activities under the programme, ICPAC and ICPALD will each provide 
technical assistance support within the framework and under the terms of a Memorandum of Understanding with 
the IGAD Secretariat. The MoUs will be signed by IGAD through ICPALD with relevant ministries or agencies of 
the participating countries sharing the border. The content of the MoUs will include the 3 IGAD border clusters 
for better control of transboundary animal diseases and zoonoses in border areas. It will also explore the 
possibility of establishing cross-border veterinary laboratories in the 3 IGAD border clusters and enhance the 
competitiveness of livestock value chains in the IGAD region by ensuring that stakeholders comply with the 
Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures in line with market research under the 
African Continental Free Trade Agreement. The Regional Programme Steering Committee (RPSC), which will 
include representatives from the RPCU and the National Programme Coordination Unit (NPCU), to ensure 
synergy and harmonisation in the implementation of the programme at country and regional levels.  
 
125. 
At the national levels, the Executing Entities (EEs) are the Government of Djibouti, acting through The Ministry 
of Commerce Economics and Finance (responsible for the signing of loan and grant agreements with AfDB) and 
the Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Fisheries and Livestock (responsible for project implementation in Djibouti); 
the Government of Ethiopia, acting through The Ministry of Finance (responsible for the signing of the loan and 
grant agreements with AfDB) and the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fishery Resources (responsible for 
project implementation in Ethiopia); the Government of Kenya, acting through the Ministry of Finance  
(responsible for the signing of Loan and Grant Agreements with AfDB), and the Ministry of Agriculture, Water, 
Fisheries and Livestock, and Cooperatives (responsible for project implementation in Kenya); the Government 
of Somalia, acting through the Ministry of Finance (responsible for the signing of loan and grant agreements with 
AfDB) and the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (in charge of project implementation in Somalia); and the 
Government of South Sudan, acting through the of Finance and Economic Planning (responsible for the signing 
of loan and grant agreements with AfDB) and the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (responsible for project 
implementation in South Sudan). 
  
126. 
In line with the AfDB's financing of sovereign operations in member countries, each ministry responsible for 
project/programme implementation is required by law to establish a dedicated Project Management Unit (PMU) 
as part of the loan and grant "agreements" with the AfDB. The PMU must remain operational throughout the life 
of the programme. Among other things, the PMU coordinates directly with the EEs and project stakeholders and 
is responsible for supporting the implementation of day-to-day activities, the technical quality of project outputs, 
and effective stakeholder engagement. The PMU normally consists of a project coordinator, an administration, 
finance and accounting manager, an administration and finance assistant, an accountant, a procurement 
manager, a procurement assistant, a monitoring and evaluation manager, an E&S safeguards expert, an 
infrastructure manager, a private sector development and entrepreneurship expert, an agricultural value chain 
development and rural finance assistant, a communications assistant and support staff.  Within the PMU, the

=== PAGE 61 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
 
 
 
 
staff recruited under the project and those seconded by the Government will together form a project 
implementation team that will ensure sound and effective project implementation. 
 
127.The PMU receives technical and advisory services from a National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) 
chaired by the State Minister of Agriculture or equivalent. The establishment of the NPSC or equivalent is a 
mandatory condition of the Loan and Grant Agreements signed between each country's Ministry of Finance and 
the AfDB. As part of the "Other Conditions" in the legal instruments for the programme - "Agreements", each 
country is required to provide evidence of the establishment of a National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) 
with a composition and terms of reference acceptable to the AfDB.  The NPSC is only a steering committee to 
oversee the implementation of the programme in accordance with the Financing Agreement. There will be no 
legal agreement between the EE and the NPSC. The NPSC, which will meet at least twice a year, will provide 
implementation oversight and policy guidance, and ensure inter-ministerial coordination, harmonisation and 
support for alignment among donors providing related resilience-building programmes. The NPSC will also be 
mandated to review the progress of the project on a semi-annual basis and assess the work plans on an annual 
basis to ensure effective implementation of the project. It is also responsible for approving the country's budgets, 
activity reports and annual accounts. In addition, the NPSC will liaise with the IDDRSI Platform Coordination Unit 
(PCU) to ensure that all resilience-building activities implemented at country level receive the necessary technical 
guidance, oversight and coordination. The Project Coordinator will be the Secretary of the NPSC and the focal 
point for all coordination with the IGAD National Programme Coordination Team, including reporting, as shown 
in Figure B.4.1 below. The allocation of EEs to each activity is shown in Appendix 3. 
 
 
      Figure B.4.1: BREFOL Implementation Arrangements and reporting. See Appendix 4 for summary on financing 
source and assignments of Executing Entities. 
 
128. 
Flow of funds:  As shown in Figure B.4.2, the GCF resources held in trust will be received by the AfDB after 
the signing of the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) and the fulfilment of all requirements for the execution 
and effectiveness of the FAA, as well as for disbursement according to the schedule. The AfDB will sign the Loan 
Agreement (2) and the Grant Agreement (6) with the respective Ministries of Finance (MoFs) of Djibouti, Ethiopia, 
Kenya, Somalia, South Sudan and the IGAD Secretariat in accordance with the AfDB's procedures and policies 
for financing sovereign operations and taking into account the terms and conditions of the Term Sheet for the 
BREFOL programme with the GCF. The Ministry of Finance of each country will disburse GCF non-repayable 
income for activities related to 1) sustainable agro-pastoral land management (C 1-2); 2) access to climate-smart 
innovations and technologies (C 1-3); 3) access to digital extension services and markets (C 2-1); and 4) 
improving access to climate services infrastructure (C 3-1), to the national executing entities (EEs) for the above 
interventions, in accordance with AfDB policies and procedures, such as for procurement and disbursement, 
ESS and gender, among others. The national executing agencies, through their project management units 
Reporting
Project Management
Unit (PMU)
Hosted by the 
respective EE 
Regional Program Steering 
Committee (RPSC)
Chaired by IGAD Executive 
Secretary 
Technical Guidance 
National Project Steering 
Committee (NPSC)
Chaired by the State Minister of 
Agriculture or its  Equivalent 
Technical Assistance (TA) Support 
Beneficiary Group (e.g., Smallholder farmers, Pastoralists, Agribusiness MSMEs, ACS, POs, PFIs, NGOs, and Other BREFOL Partners such as 
National and Regional Research Institutions and Organisations
Programme/project 
agreements including co-
financing arrangements 
Implementing arrangements 
and reporting  
Executing Entities 
(EEs)
Technical Assistance (TA) Support 
Ministries of Finance 
(MoFs)
Representing the 
Governments’ of the five 
IGAD Member States, and 
responsible for signing the 
Loan and Grant Agreements 
with AfDB (AE)

=== PAGE 62 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
 
 
 
 
 
54 The AfDB through its Financial Sector Department will support the respective PMU in carrying out due diligence of selected 
PFIs, in accordance with its mandate to put in place well-functioning financial systems that mobilize and allocate savings, 
supply the credit needs of economic agents, and allocate resources more efficiently while reducing intermediation costs. It will 
equally support the selected PFIs in the screening of sub-project loan applications to ensure strict adherence to BREFOL 
objectives.  
(PMUs), will procure goods and services in accordance with AfDB procurement procedures and policies for the 
implementation of the programme. 
129. 
For the GCF repayable funds (i.e. BREFOL Direct Credit Window (BDCW) and BREFOL Direct Insurance 
Credit Window (BDICW), the Ministry of Finance, with the written approval of the EE for each country (after the 
PFIs have met and complied with all eligibility criteria deemed satisfactory by the EE and the  AE)54, will sign 
loan agreements with the selected public financial institutions (PFIs) in Djibouti and Ethiopia and disburse the 
proceeds to the selected PFIs. Selected local PFIs will further sign loan agreements with selected beneficiaries 
(after the programme beneficiaries have met and fulfilled all eligibility criteria deemed satisfactory by the EE, AE 
and PFI) as shown in Figure B.4.2.  
 
 
Figure B.4.2: BREFOL Flow of Funds        
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
130. 
The Horn of Africa is one of the most disaster-prone regions in the world, suffering from recurrent 
food crises caused by extreme poverty and food insecurity (root cause 1), climate change and 
environmental degradation (root cause 2), fragility (root cause 3) and conflict (root cause 4). 
Unfortunately, these countries' high levels of debt severely constrain public spending to address most 
of the key challenges facing the region. In addition, due to the fragile nature of the region, potential 
private sector investors that could drive green/circular economy jobs and sustainable wealth creation 
in the region are highly risk averse, putting additional pressure on already limited fiscal space. The end 
result is widening inequality, violence, social unrest, political conflicts over land use and resources, 
environmental migration and exposure to vicious poverty traps.  
131. 
In most cases, those typically affected are smallholder farmers, pastoralists and other small-scale 
producers and actors along various value chains, who are typically constrained by resource limitations 
(Barriers Nos. 1 & 3). More worryingly, the recent Covid-19 economic downturn has further affected 
investment activity in the region and target countries. As a result, institutional investors - particularly 
those interested in smallholder agriculture - are becoming more risk averse. 
132. 
The resources requested from the GCF will therefore play a critical role in supporting farmers and 
pastoralists to increase agropastoral production, incentivising and de-risking public and private 
institutional investment, and creating local and regional green business opportunities that will be 
Financial Report
Executing Entities 
(EEs)
GCF Funds Flow
Implementation of BREFOL Regional 
Activities related to activities 1.2.1, 1.2.2, 
1.3.1, 2.1.1, 3.1.2, 3.2.1, 4.1.1 – 4.1.4
Co-financing Flow 
Flow of Funds
PMUs
Ministries of Finance 
(MoFs)
Representing the 
Governments’ of the five 
IGAD Member States, and 
responsible for signing the 
Loan and Grant Agreements 
with AfDB (AE) 
Beneficiary Group (e.g., Smallholder farmers, Pastoralists, 
Agribusiness MSMEs, ACS, POs, NGOs, and Other 
BREFOL Partners such as National Research Institutions 
and Organisations

=== PAGE 63 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
 
 
 
 
 
55 AfDB (2022). https://www.afdb.org/en/contacts.  
attractive to private sector investment in the HoA. A key lesson from other ongoing initiatives in the 
countries and region is the centrality of green blended finance in catalysing a shift towards climate-
resilient and low-emission development pathways for these countries. Without the GCF, leveraging 
additional private sector finance to scale up the priority adaptation actions mentioned above will 
certainly be difficult due to the rising public debt situation in these countries. This has severely 
constrained the fiscal space needed to implement relevant adaptation measures, which are essential 
for building the resilience of smallholder farmers and pastoralists. In addition, the fragile nature of some 
of these countries further discourages the private sector from investing in critical sectors that are 
essential for triggering high transformative impacts within the HoA.   
133. 
The key is to de-risk private sector finance. The GCF is an important player in this area due to the 
highly concessional nature of its funding instruments. In addition, GCF funding typically allows for 
sufficient grace periods and repayment periods that are equally attractive to the private sector. This is 
essentially what is needed to catalyse the priority adaptation inventions proposed in the IDDRSI 
strategy beyond the GCF-funded activities.  
 
Rationale and level of concessionally of the GCF financial instrument 
134. 
Concessional resources from the GCF to BREFOL will help overcome critical barriers and risks to 
climate change adaptation and mitigation in the HoA region. In particular, the existence of large 
financing gaps (Barrier #1) and lack of access to finance for smallholder farmers and pastoralists 
(Barrier #2), as outlined in Section B.2, prevent the region from investing in and implementing the 
large-scale adaptation and mitigation programmes needed to build resilience in the region. Without 
additional funding from development partners and the private sector, as highlighted in the 5th interim 
outcome of the African Union Draft Africa Climate Change Strategy - DACCS (2020 - 2030), scaling 
up the region's adaptation and mitigation efforts may be impossible. The mobilisation of GCF resources 
will be critical in overcoming these barriers to building resilience in the region.  
135. 
The private sector also has a critical role to play in scaling up adaptation finance to build resilience 
in the region. Unfortunately, due to the highly fragile nature of the region (Risk #2), most private sector 
investors are risk averse given the high-risk profile associated with investing in the region. In the latest 
2022 Fragile State Index (FSI), Ethiopia, Sudan, South Sudan, Kenya, Somalia and Djibouti ranked 
11th, 8th, 4th, 32nd, 2nd and 49th respectively, with four out of the five countries (Somalia, South 
Sudan and Ethiopia) classified as fragile.  Thus, the requested concessional green financing from the 
GCF (USD 90.71 million), together with the AfDB's Strategic Private Sector Investment for Fragile 
States Project55, will help to cascade effective win-win private-private and private-public partnerships 
for a strong green/circular economy in the HoA region.  
136. In addition, the high indebtedness of all five IGAD countries, limited access to credit and other financial 
instruments, and the existence of multiple poverty traps are significant constraints to adaptation finance 
in the region. Short funding horizons also make it difficult to fully integrate adaptation measures. 
Ethiopia's financing needs are significant, given its large physical and social infrastructure needs and 
low tax-to-GDP ratio, which is expected to average 10% from 2017 to 2022. The primary deficit plus 
debt service is estimated at close to 4% of GDP. As of June 2022, total public debt stood at around 
57% of GDP, of which just over half was external. In Kenya, public debt increased from 61% of GDP in 
2021 to 72% of GDP in 2022, mainly due to public investment in infrastructure, debt management 
challenges and the COVID-19 crisis. Kenya is now at high risk of debt distress according to the 
International Monetary Fund. The same goes for Somalia, where the IMF's 2022 debt sustainability 
analysis shows that even with interim debt relief, Somalia will remain in debt distress, with debt still at 
around 43.3% of GDP in 2024: above the 30% sustainability threshold. South Sudan's debt risk rating 
improved from debt distress to high risk in October 2022 due to the restructuring of the country's 
commercial debt with Qatar National Bank, which accounts for 46% of external debt. The debt 
restructuring and the clearance of arrears owed to the country also helped to reduce external debt from 
38% of GDP in 2021 to an estimated 28.3% of GDP in 2022. Commercial loans accounted for 81% of 
total external debt in June 2022, followed by multilateral (8%) and bilateral (11%) loans. Based on the 
above analysis, 50% grant and 50% loan financing would be the best GCF instrument required to make

=== PAGE 64 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
 
 
 
 
the BREFOL programme investment in the HoA viable. This is highly justifiable given that the baseline 
investment is split as follows:  76.6% grant financing and 23.4% loan financing.   
 
137. 
A critical mass of GCF investment will crowd-in additional private sector co-finance at 
scale (35.81%), and equally help to train a critical mass of Agribusiness MSMEs (4395) in 
accessing climate finance  
 
138. 
BREFOL seeks a mix of grant and loan financing from the GCF (i.e. $60.30 million senior loan and 
$90.70 million grant financing) to incentivise and de-risk additional private sector financing (13.2% of 
the requested GCF loan amount) in critical areas in various energy and AFOLU value chains for 
resilience building in the HoA, with high mitigation co-benefits (reduced emissions and enhanced 
carbon sinks totalling 14.1 MtCO2).  
139. 
The requested amount will be channelled through a credit line ($24.35 million) to help leverage an 
additional $6.48 million in green blended finance from two LPFIs in Djibouti and Ethiopia, representing 
a 26.1% increase in co-financing for the total credit line amount of $24.35 million.  
140. 
The beneficiaries (smallholders, pastoralists, farmers' organisations and agribusiness MSMEs) will 
also provide matching funds of 5-10%, depending on the size of the enterprise, for a total of $2.25 
million. 
141. 
In total, the requested GCF credit line of $24.53 million will help leverage an additional $8.72 
million in green blended finance (over 35.8% of the GCF credit line investment) and 
approximately 13.2% of the total GCF investment in the programme ($151 million), apart from the 
baseline investment of $184.30 million.  
142. 
Finally, a critical mass of about 4,395 cooperatives and SMEs trained through GCF resources will 
be able to mobilise additional resources from other commercial banks by acquiring skills in business 
proposal development and credit access. Furthermore, we expect this critical mass of trained 
cooperatives and SMEs to serve as trainers of trainers (ToT) for other cooperatives and SMEs 
interested in accessing credit from commercial banks and other private financial institutions in these 
countries.  
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
143. 
First and foremost, the use of different financial instruments in the programme is critical to ensure 
the continuity of the programme beyond GCF funding. As discussed in section B.5, these financial 
instruments will not only help to leverage additional resources from the private sector but will also raise 
awareness among PFIs and other private sector investors of the growing financial benefits associated 
with integrating climate change and green growth instruments into their business strategies and 
operations. As discussed under barrier #2, the private sector offers various types of private finance 
such as debt, equity, guarantees, simple co-financing and insurance products, etc., which have great 
potential to bridge the adaptation financing gap in Africa. Unfortunately, they often lack the incentives 
and other enabling instruments to create a self-sustaining green/circular economy, sustainable wealth 
creation and jobs in fragile states.  Creating new profit opportunities for private capital from investments 
that address climate change, and the green/circular economy opens the doors to this great source of 
capital in the HOA now and in the future. Thus, concessional green financing from the GCF, together 
with the AfDB's Strategic Private Sector Investment for Fragile States project, can help cascade 
effective win-win private-private and private-public partnerships to create a self-sustaining 
green/circular economy, sustainable wealth creation and green jobs in the HoA region. 
144. 
146. 
Secondly, the programme integrates rigorous training and capacity building initiatives for 1) 
inclusive MSMEs and cooperatives with access to climate finance; 2) agribusiness MSMEs on 
renewable energy and AVC development; 3) women and youth on entrepreneurial skills in renewable 
energy technologies and AVC development, including access to credit lines; 4) climate change policy 
mainstreaming; 5) climate change, gender mainstreaming and conflict management, among many 
others. It is expected that this critical mass of trained beneficiaries will help to sustain the programme 
beyond the initial investment (barrier #4). 
145. 
Third, the AFAWA Technical Assistance Programme (ATAP) will contribute to women's economic 
empowerment and improve their creditworthiness. It will also strengthen the capacity of LPFIs to 
understand and respond appropriately to women entrepreneurs, who often lack the financial and

=== PAGE 65 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
business acumen to respond to the needs of financial institutions. This will increase women's access 
to affordable finance, which is currently estimated to have a financing gap of $42 billion across 
business value chains, including $15.6 billion in agriculture alone. BREFOL, through the AGGP, will 
provide women with access to affordable finance to undertake activities along various value chains, 
leading to women's empowerment both financially and economically (addressing barrier #5). This will 
facilitate sustainable wealth creation and green jobs, especially for young girls and youth, who are 
often dependent on women. Thus, financial and economic empowerment of women is an important 
exit strategy for BREFOL in the HoA region.  
146. 
Fourth, ensuring that each eligible sub-loan beneficiary under BREFOL is subject to a 5-10% 
matching fund contribution to access the BREFOL Direct Credit Window (BDCW) with the two 
selected PFIs is very innovative for the long-term sustainability of the programme even after the GCF 
investment. Similarly, ensuring that the two participating PFIs in Djibouti and Ethiopia provide simple 
co-financing (20%) and matching funds (50%) to access GCF concessional resources will help to 
"crowd in" additional private sector resources (USD 6.48 million). The role of the private sector in 
increasing green finance and creating future green jobs can't be overstated. These measures, built 
into BREFOL, will ensure that additional private capital is injected into the programme beyond the 
GCF's initial investment.   
147. 
Fifth, BREFOL will enable smallholder farmers, agribusiness MSMEs, FBAs, ACSs, WABEs and 
POs currently excluded from financial markets to access digital advisory services and markets 
(financial literacy, bank accounts and transactions), enabling them to improve their production and 
incomes and thus compete locally and internationally. This is likely to be sustainable as they will receive 
formal training in business plan development prior to sub-project implementation.  
148. 
Finally, BREFOL will also use technological innovations to deliver critical climate adaptation advice, 
market linkages, crop protocols, gender and rural extension through a variety of low to high tech 
channels, depending on the digital development of each country. It will also replicate and scale 
successful TAAT COMPAC technologies and innovations that can increase the incomes of smallholder 
farmers and agribusiness MSMEs in the HoA region. Other innovations to be scaled up include: the 
Global Centre on Adaptation (GCA) Smallholder Adaptation Accelerator Programme (AAAP), and the 
AFAWA TAP for financial and economic empowerment of women in the HoA. Taken together, these 
activities will contribute to the transition to low-carbon, climate-resilient, sustainable development 
pathways in the HoA.

=== PAGE 66 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
 
 
 
 
 
C. FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + 
vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
151.00 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial 
instrument56 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) Senior loans 
60.30 
30 years 
10 years 
0.5 % 
(vi) Grants 
90.70  
 
 
 
(b) Co-financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
184.2957 
million USD ($)million USD ($) 
Name of institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
African Development 
Fund (ADF) 
Senior 
Loans 
$42.90 
million USD ($)  
30 years 
10 years 
0.5% 
seniorsenior 
African Development 
Fund (ADF 
Grant 
$123.54 
million USD ($)  
 
 
 
Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO) 
Grant 
$0.69 
million USD ($)  
 
 
 
Governments’ 
Contributions 
In kind 
$16.03 
million USD ($)  
 
 
 
Beneficiaries' 
Contribution 
In kind 
 
$1.82 
million USD ($) 
 
 
 
(c) 
Total 
financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
335.30 
million USD ($)  
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 
250 words, 
approximately 0.5 
page) 
Expected contributions from private sector financing 
The programme will leverage additional private sector blended finance to support 
its initiatives, including a simple co-financing contribution of $5.49 from two 
development banks in Djibouti and Ethiopia. Smallholders and micro-enterprises 
will contribute a 5% matching fund, while small and medium-sized enterprises will 
contribute 10%, for a total of $1.80. This combined effort results in a total green 
blended finance of $8.72, demonstrating a collaborative approach to sustainable 
development. 
C.2. Financing by component  
149. 
Please refer to Annex 4 for the detailed program budget plan for BREFOL.  
 
Component 
Output 
Indicativ
e cost 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
million 
USD ($) 
Amount 
Finan
cial 
Instru
ment 
Amount 
Financ
ial 
Instru
ment 
Name of 
Institution
s 
  
million 
USD ($) 
million 
USD ($) 
C 1: 
Strengthening 
Pastoral and 
Agropastoral 
Production 
Systems’ 
Resilience to 
Climate Change 
Output 1.1: Climate 
resilient infrastructure 
built/rehabilitated 
$127,13 
$0,00 
Grant 
$69,95 
Grant 
ADF/Gov't 
$29,15 
Senior 
Loan 
$28,03 
Senior 
Loan 
ADF 
Output 1.2: Improved 
sustainable land 
management practices 
$27,61 
$16,37 
Grant 
$9,06 
Grant 
ADF 
$0,00 
Senior 
Loan 
$2,18 
Senior 
Loan 
ADF 
Output 1.3: Increased 
adoption of climate-smart 
innovations 
$32,97 
$23,56 
Grant 
$8,60 
Grant 
ADF 
$0,00 
Senior 
Loan 
$0,80 
Senior 
Loan 
ADF 
 
56 Please refer to Annex 14 (Term sheet) for additional details on the GCF financing instrument 
57 Please refer to Annex 13 for the co-financing commitment letter

=== PAGE 67 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
 
 
 
 
Sub-total Component 1 
$187,70 
$69,08 
  
$118,62 
  
  
C 2: Supporting 
low carbon and 
resilient 
Development of 
Agribusiness 
Output 2.1: Increased 
access to digital advisory 
services and markets 
$39,24 
$19,46 
Grant 
$12,62 
Grant 
ADF 
$5,00 
Senior 
Loan 
$2,16 
Senior 
Loan 
ADF 
Output 2.2: Developed 
inclusive MSMEs and 
cooperatives with access 
to climate financing 
$52,75 
$13,95 
Grant 
$9,82 
Grant 
ADF 
$26,15 
Senior 
Loan 
$2,84 
Senior 
Loan 
ADF 
Sub-total Component 1 
$91,99 
$64,56 
  
$27,43 
  
  
C 3:   
Strengthening 
Agropastoral 
Communities’ 
Capacity to 
Adapt to 
Climate Change 
  
Output 3.1: Enhanced 
access to climate 
information and early 
warning systems 
$8,76 
$3,58 
Grant 
$4,05 
Grant 
ADF 
$0,00 
Senior 
Loan 
$1,12 
Senior 
Loan 
ADF 
Output 3.2: Strengthened 
regulatory and policy 
frameworks and 
institutional capacity for 
climate resilience. 
$17,90 
$5,81 
Grant 
$9,79 
Grant 
ADF 
$0,00 
Senior 
Loan 
$2,30 
Senior 
Loan 
  
Sub-total Component 3 
$26,66 
$9,39 
  
$17,27 
  
  
C 4:  Program 
Coordination 
and Knowledge 
Management 
  
Output 4.1: Project 
management and 
coordination 
$28,95 
$7,98 
Grant 
$16,82 
Grant 
ADF 
$0.69 
FAO 
$0,00 
Senior 
Loan 
$3,46 
Senior 
Loan 
ADF 
Sub-total Component 4 
$28,95 
$7,98 
  
$20,97 
  
  
Indicative total cost (USD) 
$335,30 
$151,00 
  
$184,29 
  
  
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
150. 
Several categories of capacity development and training activities will be undertaken, 
including: 
• 
Production, dissemination and application of agro-meteorological information;  
• 
Translation of early warning information into guidelines and warnings for government 
agencies, emergency services, aid agencies, agricultural NGOs, extension services, 
farmer organisations and the public. 
• 
 Application of TAAT COMPAC technologies and innovations, Global Centre on 
Adaptation (GCA) and Smallholder Adaptation Accelerator Programme (AAAP). 
• 
Climate-resilient and high-quality gender-responsive business planning and 
development; 
• 
Promotion and adoption of climate-resilient and high-value practices and technologies; 
• 
Preparation of agribusiness development plans; and, 
• 
Accessing climate finance for local PFIs. 
 
151. 
Each category targets a different group of beneficiaries, including:  
• 
Meteorological services, national and regional institutions and insurance providers;   
• 
Farmers and other local value chain actors, smallholder farmers, farmer-based 
associations (FBAs), agricultural cooperative societies (ACSs), agro-dealers (ADs), 
producer organisations (POs), micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), 
commercial banks (CBs) and microfinance institutions (MFIs);   
• 
Extension services, including extension officers from ministries of agriculture, water 
resources, forestry departments, district administrations, commune and village 
extension officers, and private extension providers, including NGOs; 
• 
Women-led agribusinesses and MSMEs; and,  
• 
Ministries and their sub-national departments.

=== PAGE 68 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
 
 
 
 
152. 
Almost 20% of the requested GCF grant will be used to support capacity development of 
these beneficiary groups. The remaining 80% will directly support the construction of 
infrastructure and the acquisition and transfer of climate-resilient technologies and innovations 
to the beneficiary groups through the capacity development activities outlined above.

=== PAGE 69 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
 
 
 
 
D. EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in 
the GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
153. 
BREFOL will contribute to GCF Impact level E.2: Scalability, replicability and sustainability. 
In terms of scalability, there are key innovations introduced by BREFOL with very high potential 
for scalability (see e.g. Table B.3.5). These include the Global Centre on Adaptation's (GCA) 
Smallholder Adaptation Accelerator Programme (AAAP) through digital extension services, 
the Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) programme through its 
innovative technology dissemination approach, and AFAWA's approach to women's 
empowerment. Similarly, in terms of replicability, the above novelty introduced by BREFOL 
comes with significant economic benefits even with less resource commitment. It's therefore very 
attractive for replication in other sectors, markets, geographical regions or countries. In terms of 
sustainability, four main outcomes are expected from the initial investments, which will ensure 
the sustainability of the programme.  
154. 
Mitigation co-benefits: The programme is expected to install a total of 4.8 MW of solar PV 
for solar irrigation, solar lighting and processing systems, and to generate a total of 3,890 m3 
(~0.12 MW) of methane for waste-to-energy (Table D.1.1), thereby reducing fuelwood and fossil 
fuel consumption. Taking into account the carbon sequestration potential of the 102,000 ha of 
rehabilitated rangelands and 29,800 ha of degraded lands/forests rehabilitated and managed 
under agroforestry, Table D.1.1 summarises the mitigation potential of the programme from two 
GCF outcome areas: 1) MRA1-Energy Production and Access; and 2) MRA4-Forestry and Land 
Use (see Annexes 22a-c for the underlying assumptions and calculations). 
155. 
Table D.1.1. Summary of mitigation potentials of the program from two GCF Results Areas: 
Energy generations and access and forestry and landuse – Please refer to Annex 22a, 22b, 22c 
for detailed calculation and methodological note. 
GHG reduction activity 
Capacity 
/ Unit 
Yearly 
GHG 
emissions 
tCO2 
GHG 
emissions 
avoided at 
mid term  
tCO2 
GHG 
emissions 
avoided by 
end of 
programme 
tCO2 
GHG 
emissions 
avoided 
over lifetime 
tCO2 
Off grid solar PV for 
irrigation Systems, 
Lighting and 
Processing Systems - 
MW 
4.8 
                     
6,046  
                          
9,686  
                           
26,614  
                        
135,434  
Installation of 
Biodigester units - m3 
3,890 
                     
6,737  
 10,105  
 30,316  
                        
90,949  
Rehabilitation of 
rangelands ha 
102,000 
                  
320,405  
 274,287  
 1,226,939  
                        
8,010,125  
Land under 
agroforestry - ha 
29,800 
                  
236,513  
 183,941  
 806,312  
                        
5,912,829  
Total 
                 
569,701  
                      
478,025  
 2,090,182  
 14,149,337  
 
 
156. 
To ensure that mitigation results are properly recorded during the implementation period and 
throughout the life of the programme, the necessary resources have been allocated to track 
progress towards the mitigation targets and policies outlined in the Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDCs) of the five countries. The project will support the operationalisation of a 
project-specific Monitoring, Reporting and Verification (MRV) mechanism during the project 
implementation period and will support the necessary institutions to collect the required 
information after the project period. For the PV and biodigester units, the responsibility for 
reporting on the operation of the installed systems will lie with the private contractors to whom

=== PAGE 70 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
 
 
 
 
the contract will be awarded. As indicated in Annex 22b, the price per watt for the PV system 
and the price per m3 for the biodigester will also include the responsibility for monitoring the 
system parameters (installed capacity, energy produced and consumed) and reporting them to 
the Project Implementation Units, which will be trained in reporting. For agroforestry and 
rangeland rehabilitation, the PIUs will be trained to use the FAO EX Ante tool (version 9 or latest) 
to track the amount of GHG emissions avoided during the reporting period.  
157. 
To ensure that MRV is in place for the project after the end of the implementation programme 
(after 7 years), capacity building will be provided during the project implementation period to set 
up a specific MRV mechanism for the project indicators (see Annex 4 - Budget under Component 
3 and Component 4). 
158. 
BREFOL will significantly improve access to and use of climate risk information and agro-
advisory services to guide multiple project interventions to improve agropastoral land 
management. This will directly benefit more than 1,800,000 smallholder farmers, pastoralists and 
vulnerable communities in the HoA. The programme will also construct/rehabilitate some 450 
water mobilisation infrastructures, including the operationalisation of 3 cross-border Memoranda 
of Understanding (MoU) to better control transboundary animal diseases and zoonoses in border 
areas. Other key achievements of the programme include Establishment of 3 cross-border 
veterinary laboratories to facilitate cost-benefit analysis of integrated pest management 
technologies to control fall armyworm, arboviruses in transhumant cattle and locust invasion; 
Restoration of degraded land by bringing about 102,000 ha of degraded agro-pastoral 
rangeland/pasture under sustainable land management practices; Providing about 1,200,000 
smallholder farmers, pastoralists and communities with access to digital and non-digital climate-
resilient innovations and technologies; facilitating carbon trading among smallholder farmers, 
pastoralists and communities, resulting in additional adaptation finance; and strengthening 
operational capacity to build climate resilience at community, national and regional levels. 
 
159. 
BREFOL is expected to directly benefit 1.95 million (GCF plus baseline investments) 
smallholder farmers and pastoralists, who will need to be organised into Farm-based Associated 
(FBAs), Women in Agribusiness Enterprises (WABEs), Youths in Agribusiness Enterprises 
(YABEs), Agricultural Cooperative Societies (ACSs), Producer Organisations, Agro-Dealers 
and Agribusiness MSMEs. It will also indirectly benefit over 7.14 million people (GCF plus 
baseline investments), of which 50% will be women and 50% youth. Other beneficiaries include 
10,495 women-led MSMEs/FBAs, youth-led MSMEs/FBAs ACS and other agribusiness 
MSMEs, and 2 PFIs in Djibouti and Ethiopia. In addition, around 7 Technologies for African 
Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) COMPACT technologies and innovative solutions will be 
transferred to support climate resilient, low emission development during the implementation of 
the programme. The breakdown of beneficiaries is summarised in Table D.1.2.  
 
160. 
 Table D.1.2: Summary of BREFOL Beneficiaries (see Annex 23 for details) 
 
Programme Beneficiaries (Direct Plus Indirect) 
Region 
 Direct 
(ADF)  
 Direct 
(GCF)  
 Total D 
(ADF+GCF)  
 Indirect 
(ADF+GCF)  
 Total(D+I)  
 Male  
 Females  
 % of Total 
Population  
IGAD 
Region 
    
1,849,4
51.0  
   
2,835,2
80.0  
                           
4,684,731.0  
                       
15,548,382.7  
     
20,233,113.7  
     
10,116,5
56.8  
     
10,116,5
56.8  
 
8.3% 
% of Total 
Population 
0.8% 
1.2% 
1.9% 
6.4% 
8.3% 
50.0% 
50.0% 
8.3% 
 
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
161. 
Potential for scaling-up and replication: As shown in Table B.3.4, a key feature of the 
programme is to increase private sector participation in climate change adaptation strategies in 
five IGAD member states in the Horn of Africa (HoA) region. This will be done through financial 
innovations that provide the right incentives and enable instruments that are attractive to private

=== PAGE 71 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
 
 
 
 
sector investors, such as private-public partnerships (3Ps) and public-private-producer 
partnerships (4Ps). These models bring together combined expertise and resources to 
accelerate the delivery of results and increase the impact of green investment opportunities, 
wealth creation and green jobs, especially for the most marginalised (women, girls and youth). 
These models are strongly aligned with the GCF's goal of funding initiatives that catalyse climate 
impact beyond a one-off investment. Similarly, the vision of the BREFOL Direct Credit Window 
(BDCW) and BREFOL Direct Insurance Credit Window (BDICW) models is to use existing 
climate funds (GCF resources) to create an enabling environment that is attractive to private 
sector investors, such as agribusiness MSMEs and weather-based insurance promoters, with a 
vested interest in green/circular business opportunities.  
162. 
With the initial investment of GCF funds and co-financing (US$ 335.29 million), BREFOL 
aims to increase the baseline of private sector investor financing by 13.2% (US$8.72 million) to 
implement additional climate change adaptation initiatives along the energy, agriculture, forest 
and other land use (AFOLU) sectors in the HoA. BREFOL's financial innovations therefore 
represent a profound opportunity to use the 3Ps and 4Ps models to shift the status quo trajectory 
in five IGAD countries towards a low-carbon, climate-resilient pathway that will ensure that the 
energy and AFOLU sectors deliver critical services for decades to come. As a cornerstone 
investment, this GCF investment will already leverage an additional US$2.25 million from direct 
programme beneficiaries in the two participating countries. More importantly, BREFOL's 
financial innovation models will contribute to the larger adaptation initiative of the IDDRSI for the 
next 30 years and the AfDB's Strategic Private Sector Investment for Fragile States Project 
within the continent, further contributing to this potential paradigm shift through further scaling 
and replication. Technical and economic feasibility studies supporting past and proposed 
BREFOL initiatives in the five countries and the IGAD region are provided in Annexes 2.1-2.6. 
163. 
If the financial innovations introduced by BREFOL are successful in the HoA, it is hoped 
that they can be replicated to support other AfDB-anchored programmes across Africa, such as 
the Programme for Integrated Development and Adaptation to Climate Change in the 
Zambezi Watercourse (PIDACC-Zambezi) and the Programme to Strengthen Agriculture 
and Forest Value Chains for Climate Resilience and Reduce Deforestation in Congo and 
DRC (PRAFS). As such, the programme has significant scalability potential, as successful 
implementation can be scaled up immediately through the programme's critical monitoring, 
learning and evaluation components. 
164. 
Another key feature of the programme worthy of up-scaling and replication is the integration 
of the Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) programme. TAAT 
specialises, inter alia, in the scaling up and dissemination of proven agricultural technologies 
and innovations to smallholder farmers on the continent. TAAT is currently being implemented 
in 27 low-income African countries. Under TAAT, the average productivity gains recorded by 
farmers who have received proven agricultural technologies for different commodities are 33% 
for small livestock, 38% for both cassava and maize, 40% for orange and flesh sweet potato, 
42% for rice, 44% for aquaculture (tilapia), 64% for sorghum, 71% for fodder, 80% for millet, 
100% for wheat and 113% for iron-rich beans, with an average across commodities of 62.5%. 
With the introduction of 7 new TAAT COMPAC technologies and innovations in five IGAD 
member countries, successful implementation can be immediately scaled up and replicated in 
other countries in the region.  
165. 
Similarly, the integration of AFAWA (Affirmative Finance Action for Women in Africa) to 
contribute to the economic and financial emancipation and empowerment of marginalised 
women in the HoA offers the greatest potential for scalability and replication in the HoA region: 
where gender discrimination is rampant. AFAWA's sole mandate is to bridge the gender gap in 
access to finance and unlock women's entrepreneurial capacity in Africa, particularly in the 
agricultural sector. This gap is currently estimated at $42 billion for African women across all 
business value chains, including $15.6 billion in agriculture alone. AFAWA therefore aims to 
unlock $1.3-2 billion from local PFIs for on-lending to women entrepreneurs. It's integration into 
the BREFOL programme cannot be overstated in terms of AFAWA's scalability and replication 
potential.

=== PAGE 72 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
 
 
 
 
166. 
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning: BREFOL's potential for knowledge creation 
and learning can't be overemphasised. It is an integral part of several of the programme's 
planned activities and sub-activities. For example, an important activity of BREFOL is to support 
the development of agribusinesses. Key elements of this activity with deep knowledge sharing 
and learning capabilities are: 1) strengthening access to digital extension services and markets; 
2) building project preparation, management and coordination capacities of key Ministries, 
Departments and Agencies (MDAs) in the five countries; 2) training women and youth in 
business skills development in renewable energy technologies (RETs) to help them generate 
alternative income from clean energy; and 3) designing innovative credit lines to local PFIs for 
on-lending to programme beneficiaries. BREFOL expects that many lessons will be learned and 
shared from its innovative credit line windows for other ongoing AfDB programmes in the Congo 
Basin and the Zambezi region of Southern Africa.  
167. 
Another key activity of BREFOL is to improve access to climate information and early warning 
systems (CIEWS) in the HoA region. This will be achieved through data collection, management 
and dissemination to different target audiences and programme beneficiaries. These strategies 
of generating, managing and disseminating climate advisory information to end-users will enable 
vulnerable people, communities and institutions involved in adaptation planning in the HoA to 
continue using climate information and adaptation knowledge after the programme ends. In 
particular, strengthening the capacity of national MET services to develop and maintain 
climate services for forecasting, drought monitoring and forecasting, crop and rangeland 
monitoring, seasonal forecasting, climate information and regular hazard early warnings in an 
actionable format, including support for the organisation of interactive seasonal user forums, will 
ensure that greater knowledge, appreciation and awareness of the identified climate change 
challenges in the HoA will improve future climate-smart planning, even after the programme 
ends. In addition, the programme will consolidate partnerships between private investors, 
government and national, regional and continental climate research institutions, including the 
IGAD Climate Prediction Centre (ICPAC) and ClimDev-Africa, to ensure the exchange of 
information, knowledge and best practices to translate early warning information into guidelines 
and warnings for government agencies, emergency services, aid agencies, agricultural NGOs, 
extension services, farmer organisations and the public. Overall, the knowledge management 
systems developed under this key activity will enable the National Hydromet Services of each 
participating country and other regional climate research centres to continue to provide training 
programmes on climate change adaptation for different types of users after BREFOL 
implementation. 
 
168. 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment: BREFOL will contribute to the 
creation of an enabling environment in three ways. The first is by addressing a critical challenge 
currently facing the African continent as a whole, and the HoA region in particular. This is 
increasing women's access to affordable finance to grow and feed Africa, with an estimated $42 
billion financing gap for African women across business value chains, including $15.6 billion in 
agriculture alone. This challenge has been attributed to 1) Finance: Lending to women in 
agriculture is perceived as riskier, so they face prohibitive interest rates. In addition, women often 
lack traditional collateral and guarantees; 2) Capacity: Financial institutions lack the capacity to 
understand and respond appropriately to women entrepreneurs, who also often lack the financial 
and business acumen to respond to the needs of financial institutions; and 3) Business 
environment: In many African countries, legal and regulatory frameworks hinder women's full 
participation in private sector-led growth.  
 
169. 
The programme is specifically designed to improve access to finance for smallholder farmers 
to build their adaptive capacity, especially women (Barrier #4), and to help reduce gender 
discrimination (Barrier #5). The programme will provide women with access to affordable 
finance to carry out activities along the energy and AFOLU sectors, which will lead to women's 
empowerment. This will facilitate the creation of green jobs, especially for young girls and youth, 
who are often dependent on women. This will be done through a two-pronged approach. First, 
the programme will work with local private financial institutions (PFIs), in collaboration with the

=== PAGE 73 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
 
 
 
 
AGG programme, to provide instruments that specifically target and incentivize lending to 
women agribusiness entrepreneurs, women-led cooperatives and smallholder women farmers. 
Secondly, the programme will support sub-activities that provide basic training programmes 
along the energy and AFOLU sectors. This will facilitate access to credit for the purchase of 
products, improve the creditworthiness of women and young girls, and increase the turnover of 
smallholder farmers. Similarly, sub-activities that provide incentives for women, young girls and 
youth to actively participate in food production using appropriate clean energy technologies will 
be particularly promoted to achieve the goal of creating employment for the most vulnerable 
groups in society.  
170. 
The second enabling environment is the BREFOL Dedicated Direct Credit Window 
(BDCW), specifically designed to provide local Private Financial Institutions (PFIs) with stable 
lendable resources to adequately meet the financing needs of agribusiness MSMEs, and the 
BREFOL Direct Insurance Credit Window (BDICW) model with local PFIs to attract private sector 
participation in promoting access to social protection mechanisms. The two financial innovations 
introduced in the programme will facilitate greater private sector participation in bridging the 
adaptation finance gap (Barrier #1). As discussed under Barrier #2 of the TOC, climate 
resilience activities are often integrated into development interventions or business activities and 
therefore rarely stand alone. For this reason, the private sector has a critical role to play in 
financing adaptation. Beyond managing their own exposure to climate risks, different types of 
private finance - debt, equity, guarantees, insurance products - have great potential to bridge 
the adaptation financing gap on the continent. Unfortunately, the African continent lacks 
companies with the organisational capital to leverage economies of scale and specialisation to 
attract this level of investment for climate-smart planning. This is particularly true in the context 
of fragility, which attracts even fewer private companies, given the high-risk profile associated 
with the region due to potential conflict.   
171. 
The third enabling environment created by BREFOL is: 1) facilitating access to digital 
extension services and markets in the region; 2) facilitating access to climate risk finance and 
insurance mechanisms to protect against the adverse impacts of climate shocks on food and 
agriculture systems; 3) strengthening national climate monitoring and reporting systems; 4) 
developing NDC implementation action plans for adaptation and resilience measures based on 
country commitments to implement the Paris Agreement; 5) constructing and rehabilitating 450 
water mobilisation infrastructure (e.g. small earth dams, boreholes, covered water pans, shallow 
wells, water distribution systems); 6) development of 6,000 ha of irrigated land and rehabilitation 
of 300,000 ha of rangeland/pasture; 7) rehabilitation and development of 100 livestock feed, 
health and market access infrastructure (e.g. livestock markets, animal health posts, mobile 
clinics, veterinary laboratories (including cross-border laboratories in border areas), fodder banks 
or haystacks, feeder roads; 8) facilitating and operationalising 3 cross-border Memoranda of 
Understanding in 3 IGAD border clusters to better control transboundary animal diseases and 
zoonoses in border areas; and 9) establishing cross-border veterinary laboratories in 3 IGAD 
border clusters and increasing the competitiveness of livestock value chains in the IGAD region.  
 
172. 
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies: BREFOL is consistent and in 
alignment with IDDRSI Strategy and the HoRN Regional Resilience Framework as illustrated in 
Table B.1.4. 
 
173. 
 Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with 
relevant national climate change adaptation strategies and plans: As discussed in the 
Programme ToC, addressing the HoA problem through the combination of well-designed 
interventions and packages discussed in Section B.2 will help to trigger a paradigm shift towards 
low-carbon and climate-resilient development pathways. However, this assumes that 1) extreme 
climate events (risk no. 1); 2) insufficient participation of women and youth in programme 
activities (risk no. 2); and; 3) economic downturns due to COVID-19 and other pandemics (risk 
no. 3) are well managed during programme implementation. 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

=== PAGE 74 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
 
 
 
 
174. 
BREFOL will reduce the negative environmental impacts of rangeland degradation by 
improving the behaviour and practices of farmers, pastoralists and communities. It will also have 
significant social benefits in terms of health, climate resilience and risk management. The 
baseline programme will therefore directly contribute to SDG 6 by benefiting an estimated 
306,531 people (50% women, girls and youth) with access to clean and reliable energy, safe 
water and diversified livelihoods, including new access for 900,000 people through digital 
solutions and technological innovations (SDG 9). Climate-smart planning will be improved, 
including mainstreaming climate change and green growth tools in vulnerable communities in 
the HoA region.  The programme will create more than 3.2 million green jobs and restore 
degraded rangelands and pastures, thereby reducing the impact of extreme climate events 
(SDG 13). In addition, the long-term sustainability of the programme will be ensured by 
empowering communities to maintain and manage their assets in the future. The restoration of 
degraded rangelands/pasturelands will contribute to the achievement of SDG15 (Halt and 
reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss) and SDG13 (Combat climate change 
through carbon sequestration and contribute to climate stabilisation). The programme will 
promote climate-resilient nature-based solutions that can help mitigate floods, droughts, erosion 
and landslides (hazards) and reduce vulnerability to climate change, while generating multiple 
benefits for the environment and local communities. This will promote gender equality in access, 
use and management of forests and trees and watersheds, and in the distribution of associated 
benefits, building on existing knowledge (SDG 5). 
175. 
It is important to note that climate change affects men and women differently, depending on 
their different roles and responsibilities at the household and community levels. Women play a 
more important role than men in managing ecosystem services and food security. They 
dominate the frontline in promoting action to tackle the impacts of a changing climate. However, 
women are the most exposed and vulnerable to climate change because they tend to be poorer, 
less educated and not involved in critical political and household decision-making processes 
that affect their lives and well-being. In some cases, cultural norms related to gender may limit 
women's ability to make quick and timely safety decisions in the event of disasters58. 
176. 
BREFOL, through its focus on gender mainstreaming and women's economic empowerment 
through AFAWA, will support the reduction of entrenched gender inequalities in access to 
finance that hinder women's ability to manage current climate risks and adapt their livelihoods 
to long-term climate change trends. BREFOL has set targets: 50% of the loans/grants will go to 
women-led MSMEs/FBAs, WABEs, cooperatives and POs. The other 50% will be allocated to 
men, of which 50% will be allocated to youth-led MSMEs, YABEs, cooperatives and POs in 
which young women participate. Specific actions have been integrated into the programme 
(Activities 2.2.1 & 2.2.2) to strengthen the technical and managerial capacity of women, with the 
aim of providing them with appropriate tools to identify and develop bankable business plans 
and improve their creditworthiness with LPFIs. 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
177. 
Timely access to finance is critical to cope with the debilitating impacts of climate change 
and extreme weather events that are typical of the HoA region (Root cause #2 and Barrier 
#1). Frequently, smallholder farmers, especially women, including women in female-headed 
households, do not have access to credit facilities to purchase agricultural inputs such as 
climate-smart seed varieties, fertilizers and tools, and to adopt climate-smart agricultural 
practices to cope with sudden disasters such as seasonal droughts and flash floods. They also 
lack the skills and enabling environment to increase their productivity and production (barrier 
#4). The situation is further exacerbated by climate change and the recent global COVID-19 
pandemic, which has caused further disruptions throughout the value chains of agriculture and 
food systems. Thus, without concrete measures to ensure greater access to finance and to 
strengthen the adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers, most of whom are women, to invest in 
climate-resilient livelihood options, the development of agriculture and food systems will 
 
58Nellemann, C., R. Verma, and L. Hislop (eds), Women at the frontline of climate change: Gender risks and hopes. A Rapid 
Response Assessment, 2011

=== PAGE 75 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
 
 
 
 
continue in a "business as usual" manner and will only add to the multiple challenges facing the 
region (root causes 1 - 4).  
178. 
It is clear from the root causes that in order to successfully address the adaptation and 
mitigation needs of the region arising from climate extremes and non-climatic drivers, a 
significant number of resources and capacities will be required, far beyond what the actors in 
the region have been able to mobilise so far. Ethiopia's Enhanced NDC estimates a total 
investment requirement of $40.5 billion and $281.3 billion, respectively, to address the country's 
adaptation and mitigation needs in the six priority sectors listed in Table B.1.3. Similarly, for 
Kenya, the investment and costs required by the international community for both mitigation 
and adaptation would be over $61.1 billion. Estimates for Djibouti and South Sudan are $6.4 
billion and $50.0 billion respectively. Although an estimated 20% of the annual adaptation costs 
in the region will come from public budgets, this is clearly insufficient, with a financing gap of 
80%. Given the high level of indebtedness of the countries, it is clear that the implementation 
of such planned investments and projects in the region would require additional financing from 
development partners and the private sector, as highlighted in the 5th Interim Outcome of the 
African Union Draft Africa Climate Change Strategy - DACCS (2020 - 2030). 
179. 
Given that the Horn of Africa is one of the most disaster-prone and food-insecure regions in 
the world, building its resilience and improving its food security is of continental importance: 
a key adaptation measure for the five IGAD member states in the region with a combined 
population of 187.6 million. However, this needs to be achieved through transformative planning, 
mobilising finance and supporting paradigm shifts in different value chains. Given the highly 
transformative nature of BREFOL, funding from the GCF will play a critical role in achieving this, 
given the current debt situation of these countries.  
 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
180. 
A mission from the African Development Bank (AfDB) Group visited the five IGAD countries 
involved in the programme from 10 to 19 June 2019, to identify the components of the 
programme that could help build resilience for food and livelihoods in the Horn of Africa (HoA). 
The mission to identify the HoA programme followed the AfDB's announcement at the February 
2019 roundtable on financing the Sahel Regional Climate Investment Plan (PIC-RS) for 2018-
2030, and to support the implementation of the Priority Programme to Catalyse Climate 
Investments in the Sahel (PPCI) for 2020-2025. 
181. 
The work of the mission was carried out in close cooperation with the Secretariat and 
institutions of the Intergovernmental Agency for Development (IGAD), namely the Agriculture 
and Environment Department (AED), the Planning, Coordination and Partnerships Department 
(DCPP), the Economic Cooperation and Integration Department (DECI) and the Social 
Development Department (DSD), the IGAD Climate Prediction and Application Centre (ICPAC) 
and the ICPALD. The AfDB mission team also liaised with the relevant ministries responsible for 
agricultural development in the five countries involved, and subsequently secured buy-in from 
each country. See Annexes 1.1-1.5 for the No Objection Letters issued by the National 
Designated Authorities of the countries. Discussions were also held with the IDDRISI National 
Resilience Groups in Kenya, Djibouti and Ethiopia. The national meetings were facilitated by the 
IGAD IDDRSI National Focal Points. All the stakeholders met expressed their support for the 
new programme and their desire to see it implemented under the Bank's leadership.  
182. 
The IGAD Secretariat welcomed the Bank's initiative in preparing the HOA programme and 
provided guidance on the need to focus on structuring investments (agro-sylvo-pastoral 
investments, agribusiness, climate services, value chain and marketing) for the most vulnerable 
populations. They also stressed the importance of ensuring better synergy with ongoing 
strategies and actions at both regional and country levels.  
183. 
Consultations with countries highlighted the following considerations: 
• 
The need for aggregation/integration of interventions; concentration of project activities 
• 
Strengthening the quality of project entry, which requires upstream techno-economic, 
environmental and social studies, as well as financial structuring studies and detailed 
designs.

=== PAGE 76 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
 
 
 
 
• 
High staff turnover and inadequate capacity in some countries, which undermines project 
and programme continuity. This requires the recruitment of dedicated staff for the national 
PIUs.  
• 
Synergy with existing programming to avoid duplication 
• 
Land tenure security, which remains a challenge in agricultural and pastoral areas and 
needs to be integrated into programming. 
• 
The need for a clear definition of responsibilities at national and sub-national levels, 
which will require Memoranda of Understanding between national and sub-national 
entities. 
• 
Scaling up mechanisation and technology adoption at national level 
• 
The need for platforms for private sector participation in value chains 
• 
The need to initiate and support youth empowerment programmes; and  
• 
The need to build the resilience of pastoralists. 
 
184. 
Similarly, during the preparation of the feasibility study for the programme, high-level and 
grassroots consultations were held with all stakeholders, including women and youth. 
Workshops were held and individuals were contacted to identify the challenges and needs in 
each country. The large number of people mobilised during the consultations confirms that the 
countries and IGAD are highly committed to the programme and have high expectations of its 
ability to bring about improvements. The feasibility studies involved extensive consultation with 
beneficiary communities in all areas of likely intervention. In addition, the feasibility reports were 
validated through stakeholder workshops in each country. Consultation with beneficiaries and 
stakeholders - communities, women's groups, youth associations, civil society organisations 
(CSOs) and non-governmental organisations (NGOs) - will continue during the implementation 
phase.  
185. 
During the programme preparation and appraisal missions, the Bank consulted widely with 
senior government officials, technical experts and development partners in the region. The final 
design of the programme reflects the views and recommendations of the stakeholders and the 
activities of the programme have been harmonised with other interventions in the region. This 
participatory approach at the design stage will be deepened during implementation. 
Representatives of the programme's beneficiaries will be members of the country project 
steering committee and will be closely involved in monitoring and evaluation. The capacity of 
beneficiary associations and relevant government institutions will be strengthened to better 
manage and coordinate programme activities. 
186. 
As a follow-up to the various consultations held during the preparation of the baseline 
programme, additional consultations were held with countries and IGAD during the preparation 
of the full FP to ensure greater country ownership. Annex 7 provides more details on the 
additional consultative processes and the main inputs from each country. Some key highlights 
from the consultative meetings include the following 
 
• 
Country support for the preparation of market research studies. 
• 
Establishment of PMUs and drafting of ToRs for recruitment of staff. 
• 
Stakeholder consultations with potential local private financial institutions (PFIs). 
• 
Provision of no-objection letters in support of the programme. 
• 
Identification of other potential partners such as UNCCD and NGOs. 
• 
Contributions from the IGAD Climate Prediction and Application Centre (ICPAC) to 
improve the climate context of the programme. 
 
 
187. 
Country summaries are indicated below: 
188. 
Djibouti: The stakeholder engagement meetings (see Annex 7.1) brought together 
government officials, technical advisors to the Minister of Agriculture, representatives of the 
technical directorates and partners of the other ministries, the authorities of the intervention areas 
(Prefect and President of the Regional Councils), the Sub-Directors of Rural Development of the 
project areas, members of the communities, including pastoralists and agropastoralists,

=== PAGE 77 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
 
 
 
 
representatives of farmers' associations and local investors/private financial institutions (PFIs). 
The meetings focused on the design and objectives of BREFOL, including the additional GCF 
funding. Based on the consultations, in summary, participants expressed the need for (i) 
demand-driven water harvesting infrastructure at the community level, (ii) rural markets, (iii) 
drilling of boreholes with solar-powered pumps as fuel is expensive to combat drought, (iv) seed 
production, (v) pasture conservation, (vi) strengthening their capacity to process agricultural 
products, (vii) hydro-agricultural infrastructure such as reservoirs, and (viii) empowerment of 
women and youth through agribusiness and access to finance/concessional loans. Discussions 
with LFIs focus on the management and administration of the credit line. 
189. 
Ethiopia: Stakeholder consultation meetings were held with government officials at federal, 
regional and woreda levels, direct beneficiaries including pastoralists and agropastoralists, 
representatives of farmers' associations and MSMEs, local private financial institutions (PFIs) 
and a Development Bank in Ethiopia (see Annex 7.2.1). The meetings focused on the design 
and objectives of BREFOL, including the additional GCF funding. Based on the consultations, 
participants expressed the need for (i) community-level demand-driven water harvesting 
infrastructure, (ii) rural markets, (iii) drilling and rehabilitation of boreholes with solar-powered 
pumps, (iv) rangeland management, (v) institutional strengthening, (vi) access to credit/finance, 
and (vii) empowerment of women and youth, including access to finance/concessional loans (see 
Ethiopia market study in Annex 7.2.2). Discussions with the PFI and development bank in 
Ethiopia focus on the management and administration of the credit line. 
190. 
Kenya: Stakeholder consultation meetings were held with government officials, direct 
beneficiaries including pastoralists and agropastoralists, and representatives of farmer 
associations and MSMEs (see Stakeholder Engagement Report in Annex 7.5.1). The meetings 
focused on the design and objectives of BREFOL, including the additional GCF funding. Based 
on the discussions, participants expressed the need for (i) demand-driven water harvesting 
infrastructure at the community level, (ii) fodder production and fodder banks, (iii) rangeland 
management, (iv) rural markets, (v) drilling and rehabilitation of boreholes with solar-powered 
pumps, (vi) empowerment of women and youth MSMEs, and (vii) capacity building and 
institutional strengthening (see Kenya market study in annex 7.5.2).  
191. 
Somalia: Stakeholder consultation meetings were held with local government officials, direct 
beneficiaries including pastoralists and agropastoralists, and representatives of NGOs and 
MSMEs (see Annex 7.3.1). The meetings focused on the design and objectives of BREFOL, 
including the additional GCF funding. Based on the discussions, participants expressed the need 
for (i) rural markets, (ii) fodder production and fodder banks, (iii) rangeland management, (iv) 
drilling and rehabilitation of boreholes with solar-powered pumps, and (vi) empowerment of 
women and youth MSMEs and other local stakeholders (see Annexes 7.3.2 - 7.3.3). The 
discussions also presented gender-disaggregated household data in the project areas, list of 
main staples, average daily meal, main livelihoods/income sources, main shocks in the 
communities/areas, key priorities in the communities, fodder status and fodder production. 
192. 
South Sudan: Stakeholder consultation meetings were held with government officials, direct 
beneficiaries including pastoralists/agropastoralists, and representatives of FAO, cooperatives, 
NGOs and MSMEs (see Annex 7.4.1). The meetings focused on the design and objectives of 
BREFOL, including the additional GCF funding. The main shocks experienced in the project area 
include drought/flood/erratic climate, increasing food and energy prices, pest infestation and 
conflicts related to cattle raiding (see Annexes 7.4.2 - 7.4.4). Based on discussions, key priorities 
include access to agricultural inputs and equipment (seeds, tools, ox ploughs and power tillers), 
livestock production, access to water, employment opportunities, rural markets, fodder 
production/fodder banks, pasture management, drilling and rehabilitation of boreholes with solar 
powered pumps, and empowerment of women and youth MSMEs. 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
193. 
In terms of delivering the co-benefits of adaptation and mitigation as envisaged by the Fund, 
BREFOL is highly efficient and very cost-effective. For example, as shown in Table D.6.1, the 
total estimated cost of adaptation per beneficiary is about $71.6. Of this adaptation cost, the 
GCF contributes only USD 28.8 per programme beneficiary, which represents a contribution of

=== PAGE 78 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
 
 
 
 
40.1% and 59.9%, respectively, in terms of financing the adaptation potential for the co-financing 
mobilized by the AfDB and the GCF funding. Similarly, the total estimated cost per tCO2e for the 
programme is about $23.8. The GCF contributes only $1.16 per tCO2e achieved to these 
mitigation costs, representing 4.9% and 95.1% of the mitigation potential of the AfDB co-
financing and GCF funding, respectively. 
 
194. 
Table D.6.1: Summary of the efficiency and cost effectiveness of the program 
              
Total Program Funding (mUSD) 
$335.3 
GCF 33Funding (mUSD)  
$151.0 
Program Direct Beneficiaries 
4.7 
Total Emissions Reductions in 25years (mtCo2e)  
14.1 
Estimated Cost per Program Beneficiary 
$71.6 
GCF Amount Allocated for Adaptation 
$134.7 
Estimated GCF cost per Program Beneficiary 
$28.8 
GCF Amount Allocated Mitigation 
$16.3 
Estimated Programme Cost per tCO2e 
$23.8 
Estimated GCF cost per tCO2e 
$1.16 
     
195. 
In order to assess the financial and economic viability of the proposed interventions, including 
the effectiveness of the GCF investment in the Programme, an Economic and Financial Analysis 
(EFA) was carried out (see Annexes 3a&b for the EFA summary and Excel worksheets). A 
summary of the EFA results is presented in Tables D.6.2 & D.6.3 below. Note that the net 
benefits derived from the activity level models, in terms of incremental benefits relative to the 
baseline, are aggregated in both the financial and economic analyses, taking into account the 
scale of the project and its objectives (total area under cultivation in hectares), in order to assess 
the overall benefits generated by the proposed programme interventions. The derived benefits 
are compared with the project costs (estimated from the project budget) to assess the overall 
investment effectiveness indicators for different discount rates (DRs). These are the Economic 
Net Present Value (ENPV), the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) and the Modified 
Internal Rate of Return (MIRR). The financial and economic models of the crop and a summary 
of the economic analysis are provided in the attached Excel spreadsheets (Annex 3b).  
196. 
The financial analysis (FA) has three objectives. 1) Firstly, to assess the financial soundness 
of the development interventions promoted under BREFOL. 2) Second, to examine the impact 
of BREFOL activities on the incomes of smallholder farmers, pastoralists, agribusiness MSMEs, 
Producer Organisations (POs), local PFIs and Farmers Based Associations (FBAs). 3) Thirdly, 
to provide a strong analytical framework for the economic evaluation of BREFOL in the region. 
Such an analysis is important for an overall assessment of BREFOL in terms of society rather 
than on an individual basis (FA).  
197. 
Four scenarios are generally considered for each FA, as shown in the attached Excel 
worksheets (Annex 3b). These are 1) 'model assumptions', which provide the general 
assumptions and parameters used for each FA; 2) 'without project' (WOP) scenario, which is 
the baseline of the analysis; and 'with project' (WP) scenario, which is the proposed activities 
and interventions of the programme. Note that the WOP is the business-as-usual (BAU) 
scenario, where yields are below potential and returns to family labour are expected to be lower, 
although not in all cases. Irrigation is an old farming technique and some traditional farmers, 
particularly those involved in intercropping in the region, have used it. In most of the analyses 
we have included irrigation as a 'drought factor' for both scenarios, given the aridity of the 
region. If this assumption is relaxed in the WOP scenario, it is likely that yields would be below 
potential and returns to family labour would be lower in the WOP scenario. In addition, the use 
of the two scenarios allows us to identify the net benefits of the programme's "incremental 
situation" at the individual and aggregate levels.

=== PAGE 79 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
 
 
 
 
198. 
The FA results show that most of the crop models are profitable from the farmers' perspective. 
The cash flows show that farmers will be able to cover the necessary operating costs. 
Furthermore, with the possible introduction of resilient varieties (TAAT COMPAC Technologies, 
livestock, etc.) into the programme, the potential yields of the selected crops will double, implying 
more cash inflows to farmers. The FA results also confirm that the proposed production 
packages are financially attractive to the participants and that the potential benefits to the 
beneficiary farmers of participating in the activities implemented under BREFOL are financially 
attractive. The cash flows also show that smallholder farmers will be able to meet the necessary 
operating costs, especially with the increased yields associated with the introduction of TAAT 
COMPAC seeds. Farmers may also decide to intercrop some of the horticultural crops (cabbage, 
lettuce and tomatoes) with staple crops or agroforestry to generate more income.  However, as 
our analysis is conservative, this option is not considered here.  
199. 
At an aggregate level, the FA calculates an overall Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) 
of 59.8% for the baseline scenario and average Financial Net Present Values (FNPVs) of 
$477.48 million at a discount rate of 9.6%, $732.13 million at a discount rate of 6%, $586.76 
million at a discount rate of 7.9% and $186.11 million at a discount rate of 19.1%. Further 
sensitivity analysis was performed on the FIRR for various scenarios under the RCP 8.5, such 
as 10% and 20% cost overruns, benefit increases, benefit decreases and 1- and 2-year benefit 
delays.  In all cases, as shown in the table below, the FIRRs were higher than the discount rates, 
and in most cases much higher. The FNPVS were also always positive. This shows that the 
programme is not only very robust from the perspective of the smallholder beneficiary but would 
also remain viable under a wide range of alternatives. 
 
Table D.6.2: Summary table of the key performance indicators of the FA under different 
discount rates 
 
 
200. 
With regard to the Economic Analysis (EA), the EA does several things. First, it assesses the 
economic viability and overall cost-effectiveness of the programme. This is usually done from 
the perspective of society, rather than at the individual and household level as in the FA. This is 
usually done by comparing the aggregate economic benefits with the economic costs of the 
programme and assessing the economic internal rate of return (EIRR). Secondly, it shows how 
sensitive the proposed investments may be to small changes in the model parameters used, 
such as prices, incomes, interest rates, discount rates, etc., due to risks and unforeseen factors. 
Details on sensitivity to model parameters, including EA model assumptions such as economic 
prices and their conversion factors, social discount rates, shadow prices for carbon and the 
Economic Programme Cost (EPC), can be found in the attached Excel spreadsheets.   
201. 
Three performance indicators were calculated for the EA. These are the Economic Net 
Present Value (ENPV), the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) and the Modified 
Internal Rate of Return (MIRR), as shown in the table below. On this basis, the EA calculates 
an overall Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 28.0% for the programme's baseline

=== PAGE 80 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
 
 
 
 
scenario, an overall Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) of USD 112.74 million at a discount 
rate of 11.0%, USD 133.92 million at a discount rate of 10.0%, USD 100.48 million at a discount 
rate of 7.9% and USD 238.11 million at a discount rate of 6.0%.  
202. 
In order to test the stability of the EA model, we performed an additional robustness check 
on key variables of the model. That is, 10 and 20% cost overruns, benefit increases, benefit 
decreases, and 1- and 2-year benefit delays. The results are shown in the table below. In all 
cases, the EIRR and MIRR were higher than the discount rates used, and in most cases much 
higher. The NPVs were also always positive. This shows that the programme is not only very 
robust but would also remain viable under a wide range of alternatives.  
 
Table D.6.3: Summary table of the key EA performance indicators for different discount rates

=== PAGE 81 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
 
 
 
 
 
E. LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework to which the project/programme 
contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus 
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross-cutting proposals, select both. 
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
Following on from the paradigm shifting potential of the project described in Section D.2, the scalability, replicability and sustainability of the proposed climate change adaptation and 
mitigation activities are presented here. Scalability, replicability and sustainability are threatened by the six barriers identified in this proposal. The trios are achieved here through the 
following outputs shown in this table.  
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/programme 
will contribute (Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Scale 
Current private sector 
involvement in climate change 
adaptation and mitigation is very 
limited, especially in the fragile 
countries of the IGAD region. 
This is due to the lack of 
innovative financial mechanisms 
that provide incentives and an 
enabling environment for 
investment in high-risk areas. 
Therefore, creating new profit 
opportunities for private capital 
based on climate change 
adaptation and mitigation 
investments opens the doors for 
private sector investment. 
 
Low 
The scaling-up of most of the results is particularly 
evident in the increased participation of the private 
sector in climate change adaptation strategies in five 
IGAD member states in the Horn of Africa (HoA). The 
enabling financial innovations, such as the BREFOL 
Direct Credit Window (BDCW) and the BREFOL 
Direct Insurance Credit Window (BDICW), are 
expected to help scale up sustainable land 
management for agropastoralism, climate-smart 
innovations, and climate risk finance and insurance 
mechanisms that will help strengthen the climate 
resilience of climate-vulnerable communities. These 
innovative financial mechanisms will provide the right 
incentives and enabling instruments that are 
attractive to private sector investors, such as private-
public partnerships (3Ps) and public-private-producer 
partnerships (4Ps) in agribusiness MSMEs and 
weather-based insurance promoters with an interest 
in green/circular business opportunities in the 
energy, agriculture, forest and other land use 
(AFOLU) sectors in the HoA. 
The project will contribute to 
realizing this target scenario 
through:  
• Output 1.2:  Improved 
sustainable land 
management practices 
• Output 1.3:  Increased 
adoption of climate-smart 
innovations Output 2.3: 
Developed inclusive MSMEs 
and cooperatives with access 
to climate financing 
• Output 3.1: Enhanced access 
to climate information and 
early warning systems

=== PAGE 82 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
 
 
 
 
 
Replicability 
Currently, smallholder farmers 
and the private sector have 
limited access to innovative 
programmes of action and 
climate adaptation and mitigation 
technologies. Unlocking 
innovative financing mechanisms 
that help integrate climate smart 
technologies and climate 
information services could 
support smallholder farmers in 
the IGAD region. Due to the lack 
of human, technical and financial 
capacity, some projects are not 
replicable in other IGAD member 
states, such as the TAAT 
COMPAC technologies and 
innovations. 
Low 
Given the regional nature of the GCF proposal, it is 
designed to be replicable in IGAD member countries 
and beyond. Thus, almost all of the proposed 
activities are designed to be replicable at community, 
country, regional and continental levels (beyond 
IGAD/HoA countries), including 1) development and 
rehabilitation of climate-resilient infrastructure (water 
resources, energy, market integration, cross-border 
health and research facilities, road networks, ICTs, 
etc.); 2) support for sustainable agro-pastoral land 
management; and 3) increasing access to digital 
technologies. ), 2) supporting sustainable agro-
pastoral land management, 3) increasing access to 
digital extension services and markets, 4) developing 
entrepreneurship skills and increasing access to 
finance for women and youth, and 5) increasing 
access to innovative finance for smallholder farmers, 
pastoralists and agribusiness MSMEs; 6) improving 
access to climate-smart innovations and 
technologies; 7) improving climate services 
infrastructure and advisory services; and 8) 
promoting climate risk finance and insurance; and 
finally, 9) supporting gender-sensitive reforms of 
climate regulatory frameworks and institutional 
strengthening for climate-smart planning and 
development. For example, the 7 new TAAT 
COMPAC technologies and innovations are expected 
to be replicated from the pioneer country such as 
Kenya to other IGAD member countries. The holistic 
approaches ensure the successful replicability of the 
results.  
The project will contribute to 
realizing this target scenario 
through: 
• Output 1.1: Climate resilient 
infrastructure 
built/rehabilitated 
• Output 2.2: Developed 
inclusive MSMEs and 
cooperatives with access to 
climate financing. 
 
Sustainability 
Due to the six barriers described 
in Section C, the adaptive 
capacity of smallholder farmers 
and pastoralists is not 
sustainable and vulnerable to the 
climate hazards identified in this 
proposal. Although various 
activities are being implemented, 
Low 
The sustainability of the proposed outputs will require 
effective training of trainers, capacity building, 
increasing access to digital advisory services and 
markets, developing entrepreneurship skills and 
increasing access to finance for women and youth, 
improving climate services infrastructure, providing 
climate risk finance and insurance mechanisms, 
The project will contribute to 
realizing this target scenario 
through: 
• 
Output 2-1: Increased 
access to digital advisory 
services and markets 
• 
Output 2-2: Developed 
inclusive MSMEs and

=== PAGE 83 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
 
 
 
 
 
their sustainability is not 
guaranteed due to the lack of 
adequate supporting institutions, 
infrastructure and capacities. The 
sustainability of the proposed 
programmes could only be 
ensured by strengthening these 
institutions, where some of the 
proposed actions such as 
developing policy frameworks, 
capacity building and building 
robust knowledge management 
are critical. 
strengthening operational capacity for resilience, and 
programme coordination and knowledge 
management will help ensure the sustainability of the 
target scenarios designed for scale-up and 
replication. 
cooperatives with access 
to climate financing and 
access to RE Output 3-1: 
Enhanced access to 
climate information and 
early warning systems 
• 
Output 3-1: Enhanced 
access to climate 
information and early 
warning systems 
• 
Output 3-2: 
Strengthened regulatory 
and policy frameworks 
and institutional capacity 
for climate resilience. 
• 
Outcome 4: Program 
Coordination and 
Knowledge Management 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final59 
Total GHG emission 
reduction 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
 
0 Mt 
CO2 eq. 
 
0.48 MTCO2 
2.1 Mt CO2 
over project 
period 
 
14.1MTCO2 
over lifetime 
Implementation targets for 
solar PV, biodigesters, and 
agro forestry is met as per 
project timelines. 
 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access 
 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Baseline, 
mid-term and 
end term 
assessment 
in each country, 
contract 
agreements, 
0 Mt 
CO2 eq. 
 
19k TCO2 
avoided 
through the 
deployment of 
PV systems 
and 
biodigesters 
56k tCO2 over 
project period 
avoided 
through the 
deployment of 
PV systems 
Regulatory and legal 
Frameworks, and capacity 
in place for solar power 
generation and Biodigester 
installation, and operation 
and maintenance. 
 
 
59 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the 
target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.

=== PAGE 84 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
 
 
 
 
 
procurement 
documents, and 
bill of quantities.  
and 
biodigesters 
 
226kTCO2 
over lifetime 
avoided 
through the 
deployment of 
PV systems 
and 
biodigesters 
 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access 
 
Supplementary 1.3: 
Installed renewable 
energy capacity 
Baseline, 
mid-term and 
end term 
assessment 
in each country, 
contract 
agreements, 
procurement 
documents, and 
bill of quantities.  
0 MWp 
At least 1 MW 
of solar PV 
installed, and a 
capacity of at 
least 0.12MW 
Biodigester 
systems 
installed 
 
 
 
4.8 MW of 
solar and 
0.12MW of 
Biodigester 
systems 
Installed 
 
  
 
 
Regulatory and legal 
Frameworks, and capacity 
in place for solar power 
generation and Biodigester 
installation, and operation 
and maintenance  
MRA4 Forestry and 
land use 
 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Baseline analysis 
report, survey 
results and final 
reports  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 Mt 
CO2 eq. 
 
0.46 MTCO2 
through 
rangeland 
rehabilitation 
and agro 
forestry 
activities 
 
2.0 Mt CO2 
over project 
period through 
rangeland 
rehabilitation 
and agro 
forestry 
activities 
 
13.9MTCO2 
over lifetime 
through 
rangeland 
rehabilitation 
and agro 
forestry 
activities 
 
Enabling environment to put 
in place through IGAD’s 
Centre for Pastoral Area 
and Livestock Development 
(ICPALD), to enact 
behavioural changes in 
sustainable land 
management practices.  
 
Adequate training and 
sensitization programs 
result in behavioural 
changes in land use 
management. 
 
Beneficiaries are therefore 
willing to adopt sustainable 
land management practices

=== PAGE 85 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
 
 
 
 
 
such as agroforestry 
management practices with 
positive environmental 
benefits  
MRA4 Forestry and 
land use 
 
Supplementary 4.1: 
Hectares of terrestrial 
forest, terrestrial non-
forest, freshwater and 
coastal marine areas 
brought under resoration 
and/or improved 
ecosystems 
Baseline analysis 
report, survey 
results and final 
reports  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 ha 
9,000ha of 
pastureland 
placed under 
sustainable 
land 
management 
practices with 
agroforestry 
and 
afforestation 
program 
introduced 
 
 
29,800 ha of 
pastureland 
placed under 
sustainable 
land 
management 
practices with 
agroforestry 
and 
afforestation 
program 
introduced 
 
 
Enabling environment put in 
place through IGAD’s 
Centre for Pastoral Area 
and Livestock Development 
(ICPALD), to enact 
behavioural changes in 
sustainable land 
management practices.  
 
Adequate training and 
sensitization programs 
result in behavioural 
changes in land use 
management. 
 
Beneficiaries are therefore 
willing to adopt sustainable 
land management practices 
such as agroforestry 
management practices with 
positive environmental 
benefits  
Total number of 
programme 
beneficiaries 
Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
 
0 
1,405,419 
(50% male and 
50% female) of 
direct and 
4,664,525 
(50% male and 
50% female) of 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
by end of year 
3 
4,684,731 
(50% male and 
50% female)) 
of direct and 
15,548,383 
(50% male and 
50% female) of 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
by end of year 
7  
Value chain actors, 
communities, and   
institutions etc., are willing 
to adopt climate resilient 
livelihood options & 
technological innovations, 
introduced by the 
programme.

=== PAGE 86 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
 
 
 
 
 
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities 
 
Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
Minutes reports, 
baseline 
assessment 
reports, survey 
results and final 
reports 
 
0 
1,191,870 
(50% male 
and 50% 
female) of 
direct and 
4,056,565 
(50% male 
and 50% 
female) of 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
by end 
3,972,900 
(50% male 
and 50% 
female) of 
direct and 
13,521,883 
(50% male 
and 50% 
female) of 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
by end of year 
7  
Small farm holders and 
pastoralists are willing to 
adopt regenerative 
agriculture and other 
climate-smart practices 
introduced  
 
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities 
 
 
Supplementary 2.4: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) covered 
by new or improved 
early warning systems 
 
Baseline 
assessment 
reports, contract 
agreements, bill of 
quantities, pre-
and post-
intervention 
(qualitative and 
quantitative) 
survey results 
 
 
 
 
0 
At least 
999,126 
pastoralists 
and 
smallholder 
farmers 
received TA 
support for 
training and 
equipping with 
the use of 
climate-
informed agro-
advisory 
services and 
2,317,080 
indirect 
beneficiaries of 
which 50% are 
male and 50% 
are female 
A total of 
3,330,420 
pastoralists 
and 
smallholder 
farmers 
received TA 
support for 
training and 
equipping with 
the use of 
climate-
informed agro-
advisory 
services 
and 7,723,600 
indirect 
beneficiaries of 
which 50% are 
male and 50% 
are female 
Farmers and pastoralists 
are trained on how to use 
climate information. 
 
There is adequate medium 
for communicating and 
disseminating climate-base 
agro-advisory services such 
as through users’ friendly 
formats  
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities 
 
 
Supplementary 2.5: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting 
innovations that 
stregthen climate 
change resilience 
Minutes reports, 
baseline 
assessment 
reports, survey 
0 
Climate-
resilient 
innovations 
adopted by 
192,744 direct 
and 1,799,364 
Climate-
resilient 
innovations 
adopted by 
642,489 direct 
and 5,997,883 
Small farm holders and 
pastoralists are willing to 
adopt regenerative 
agriculture and other 
climate-smart practices 
introduced

=== PAGE 87 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
 
 
 
 
 
results and final 
reports 
 
 
indirect 
beneficiaries of 
which 50% are 
male and 50% 
are female 
indirect 
beneficiaries of 
which 50% are 
male and 50% 
are female  
 
 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
 
Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
Baseline 
assessment 
reports survey 
results, and final 
reports. 
 
 
0 
 
213,550 direct 
and 211,950 
indirect of 
which 50% 
females and 
50% males 
have better 
food and water 
security 
 
 
711,831 direct 
and 706,500 
indirect of 
which 50% 
females and 
50% males 
have better 
water and food 
security 
 
 
Smallholder farmers and 
pastoralists have access to 
water mobilization 
infrastructure and tailored 
agro forestry management 
practices and climate 
resilient varieties to 
increase food security 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
 
Supplementary 2.2: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) with 
improved food security 
Baseline 
assessment 
reports survey 
results, and final 
reports. 
 
0 
 
121,590 direct 
and 211,950 
indirect of 
which 50% 
females and 
50% males 
have better 
food security 
 
 
405,300 direct 
and 706,500 
indirect of 
which 50% 
females and 
50% males 
have better 
food security 
 
Smallholder farmers and 
pastoralists have access to 
tailored agro forestry 
management practices and 
climate resilient varieties to 
increase food security 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
 
Supplementary 2.3: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) with more 
climate-resilient water 
security 
Baseline 
assessment 
reports survey 
results, and final 
reports. 
 
0 
91,959 direct 
of which 50% 
females and 
50% males 
have better 
water security 
 
306,531 direct 
of which 50% 
females and 
50% males 
have better 
water security 
 
Smallholder farmers and 
pastoralists have access to 
water mobilization 
infrastructure sensitive to 
gender60 (small earth dams, 
boreholes, covered water 
pans, shallow wells, water 
distribution systems) 
constructed or rehabilitated 
 
60 Gender-sensitive infrastructure is designed, planned, and managed on the basis of systemic consultations with the most vulnerable or disadvantaged (UN Women).

=== PAGE 88 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
 
 
 
 
 
ARA4 Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services 
 
Core 4: Hectares of 
natural resources 
brought under improved 
low-emission and/or 
climate-resilient 
management practice 
Baseline 
assessment 
reports survey 
results, and final 
reports. 
 
0 
 
 
40,000 ha of 
rangeland/past
ureland 
rehabilitated 
 
 
 
102,000 ha of 
rangeland/past
ureland 
rehabilitated 
 
 
 
Smallholder farmers and 
pastoralists are willing to 
participate and adopt new 
sustainable land 
management practices on 
degraded 
rangeland/pastureland   
 
ARA4 Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services 
 
Supplementary 4.1: 
Hectares of terrestrial 
forest, terrestrial non-
forest, freshwater and 
coastal marine areas 
brought under resoration 
and/or improved 
ecosystems 
Baseline 
assessment 
reports survey 
results, and final 
reports. 
 
0 
 
 
40,000 ha of 
rangeland/past
ureland 
rehabilitated 
 
 
 
102,000 ha of 
rangeland/past
ureland 
rehabilitated 
 
 
 
Smallholder farmers and 
pastoralists are willing to 
participate and adopt new 
sustainable land 
management practices on 
degraded 
rangeland/pastureland   
 
 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for current 
state (baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
Core Indicator 6: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to technology 
deployment, 
dissemination, 
development or transfer 
and innovation 
Currently climate smart 
agricultural and 
pastoral technologies 
are not widely 
disseminated and 
applied. The GCF will 
support to undertake 
the economics of 
integrated pest 
management 
technologies to fight 
against fall armyworm, 
arboviruses in 
transhumant cattle, and 
locust’s invasion, and 
upscale  
low 
Techno-economic analysis 
integrated pest management 
technologies to fight against 
fall armyworm, arboviruses in 
transhumant cattle, and 
locust’s invasion completed in 
3 agroecological zones in the 
HOA countries, and 
Technologies for African 
Agricultural Transformation 
(TAAT) Program to over 
278,000 pastoralists and 
smallholder farmers in the 
HOA upscaled. The TAAT are 
a high-impact technologies to 
boost agricultural output. 
 
The GCF support in 
dissemination and 
technology transfer of 
the high-impact 
technologies to boost 
agricultural output. 
 
 
 
Multi-countries

=== PAGE 89 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
 
 
 
 
 
Technologies for 
African Agricultural 
Transformation (TAAT) 
to over 278,000 
pastoralists and 
smallholder farmers in 
the HOA. 
Core Indicator 5: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission climate-
resilient development 
pathways in a country-
driven manner 
Government officials in 
the IGAD member 
countries lack 
adequate capacity to 
develop bankable 
proposals that can 
qualify for climate 
finance, mainstreaming 
climate risk 
management in policy 
documents and plans is 
very weak, and the 
countries don’t yet 
have 
 
NDC implementation 
action plans on 
adaptation and 
resilience interventions 
building on respective 
country’s commitments 
to the implementation 
of the Paris Agreement.  
low 
Government officials in IGAD 
member countries will receive 
training in strengthening their 
capacity to develop bankable 
proposals that can qualify for 
climate finance, 
mainstreaming of climate risk 
management into sectoral and 
national plans, policies and 
strategies in 3 countries, and 
NDC implementation action 
plans on adaptation and 
resilience interventions 
building on country 
commitments to the 
implementation of the Paris 
Agreement completed. 
The GCF funding will 
contribute to 
strengthening the 
capacity of the policy 
makers, and climate 
risk shall be 
incorporated in national 
action plans and 
policies.  
Multi-countries 
Core indicator 7: Degree 
to which GCF 
Investments contribute 
to market 
development/transforma
tion at the sectoral, 
local, or national level 
Due to lack road 
infrastructure that 
hinders access to 
market, lack of 
entrepreneurship skills 
and increasing access 
to finance and markets 
for the most 
low 
About 152 animal feed, 
health, and market access 
infrastructure (e.g., livestock 
markets etc.)  
rehabilitated/developed), 
over 1,100,000 smallholder 
farmers (women and youth), 
farmers organization and 
The GCF will build road 
infrastructure of 
increase access to 
market, enable to 
having access to digital 
advisory services so as 
to have access to their 
products and build their 
Multi-countries

=== PAGE 90 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
 
 
 
 
 
marginalized groups in 
the society, and lack of 
digital advisory 
services and markets 
are some of existing 
conditions of the 
beneficiaries.  
agribusiness MSMEs being 
supported 
in using digital advisory 
services of the market for their 
products, and over 1985 
women and youth 
received inputs 
(entrepreneurship skills) and 
finance to generate alternative 
income from renewable 
energy sources. 
entrepreneurship skills 
to have access to 
renewable energy 
technologies to 
improve their value 
chain for market.  
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards 
The target communities 
don’t have effective 
 knowledge generation 
and learning process, 
use of good practices, 
methodologies, and 
standards. The GCF 
funding is expected to 
address this challenge 
so as they could 
effectively increase 
their adaptation 
capacity. 
low 
Regional innovation hub/data 
centre to coordinate and 
share knowledge among 
innovation partners, 
governments and other 
stakeholders established and 
development of the regional 
capacity building and training 
of trainers on the gender 
action learning system 
(GALS) approach and 
methodology completed 
 
Knowledge 
management systems 
and methodologies 
developed under this 
key activity will enable 
the national hydromet 
services for each 
involved country, and 
other regional climate 
research centres to 
continue providing 
training programmes 
on climate change 
adaptation to different 
types of users after 
BREFOL 
implementation. 
 
Multi-countries 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
 
Project/program
me specific 
Indicator 
 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final

=== PAGE 91 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
 
 
 
 
 
Outcome 1:  Increased adoption of climate-resilient solutions 
Outcome 1:  Increased 
adoption of climate-
resilient solutions 
Number of agro 
pastoralists and 
pastoralists 
benefitting from 
the project 
activities 
 
0 
1,405,419 (50% 
male and 50% 
female) of direct 
and 4,664,525 
(50% male and 
50% female) of 
indirect 
beneficiaries by 
end of year 3 
4,684,731 (50% 
male and 50% 
female)) of direct 
and 15,548,383 
(50% male and 
50% female) of 
indirect 
beneficiaries by 
end of year 7  
Value chain actors, 
communities, and   
institutions etc., are 
willing to adopt 
climate resilient 
livelihood options & 
technological 
innovations, 
introduced by the 
programme. 
 
Output 1-1: Climate 
resilient infrastructure 
built/rehabilitated 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of water 
mobilization 
infrastructure 
(e.g., small earth 
dams etc..) 
constructed or 
rehabilitated and 
managed 
Baseline assessment 
survey results, and 
progress and final 
reports. 
 
 
0 
177 water 
mobilization 
infrastructure 
(i.e., small earth 
dams etc..) 
constructed 
538 
mobilization 
infrastructure 
(e.g., small 
earth dams 
etc..) 
constructed 
 
 
Institutions 
and stakeholders’ 
readiness to 
participate in the 
activities, and IGAD 
member states 
capability in place to 
effectively 
implement the 
regional activities. 
 
 
 
 
 
Community 
mobilization of 
women and youth in 
the IGAD member 
states and effective 
sensitization, 
identification, and 
engagement of 
women and youth at 
the community level 
Area (hectares) 
of community 
irrigation lands 
developed and 
managed  
Baseline assessment, 
feasibility studies, and 
quantitative analysis 
results 
0 
1,950 ha of 
irrigation lands 
developed 
5.980 ha of 
irrigation lands 
developed   
 
Number of 
animal feed, 
health, and 
market access 
infrastructure 
(e.g., livestock 
markets etc.)  
constructed or 
rehabilitated and 
managed 
(number of 
Baseline assessment, 
feasibility studies, and 
quantitative analysis 
results 
0 
47 
infrastructures 
set up 
152 
infrastructures 
set up

=== PAGE 92 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
 
 
 
 
 
infrastructure 
built or equipped) 
to take up jobs in 
land and pasture 
rehabilitation 
Output 1.2: Improved 
sustainable land 
management practices 
 
 
 
 
Number of 
agropastoralists 
and pastoralists 
trained on 
sustainable land 
management 
best practices 
(disaggregated 
by male and 
female) 
 
 
 
Baseline analysis 
report, survey results 
and final reports  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0% 
10,300  
agropastoralists 
and pastoralists 
trained on 
sustainable 
land 
management 
best practices 
 
 
31,300 
agropastoralists 
and pastoralists 
trained on 
sustainable 
land 
management 
best practices 
 
 
Enabling 
environment to put 
in place through 
IGAD’s Centre for 
Pastoral Area and 
Livestock 
Development 
(ICPALD), to enact 
behavioural 
changes in 
sustainable land 
management 
practices.  
 
Number of 
Trainers trained 
at regional level 
on improved 
sustainable land 
management 
Annual Progress 
reports 
0 
30 (50% male 
and 50% 
female) 
100 (50% male 
and 50% 
female) 
Enabling 
environment put in 
place through 
IGAD’s Centre for 
Pastoral Area and 
Livestock 
Development 
(ICPALD), to train 
trainers

=== PAGE 93 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85 
 
 
 
 
 
Area (hectares) 
of degraded 
rangeland 
rehabilitated and 
managed  
 
 
 
Baseline assessment, 
progress and final 
reports  
 
 
 
 
 
0 
32,600ha 
102,000 ha 
Community 
mobilization of 
women and youth in 
the IGAD member 
states and effective 
sensitization, 
identification, and 
engagement of 
women and youth at 
the community level 
to take up jobs in 
land and pasture 
rehabilitation 
Number of cross 
border 
rangelands 
(cluster) 
sustainably 
managed 
Baseline assessment, 
progress and final 
reports  
 
0 
1 
3 
Enabling 
environment put in 
place through 
IGAD’s Centre for 
Pastoral Area and 
Livestock 
Development 
(ICPALD), to enact 
behavioural 
changes in 
sustainable land 
management 
practices 
Area (hectares) 
of degraded land/ 
forest 
rehabilitated and 
managed under 
agroforestry and 
plantation 
Baseline assessment, 
progress and final 
reports  
 
0 
9,000 ha 
29,800 ha 
Community 
mobilization of 
women and youth in 
the IGAD member 
states and effective 
sensitization, 
identification, and 
engagement of 
women and youth at 
the community level

=== PAGE 94 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86 
 
 
 
 
 
to take up jobs in 
land and pasture 
rehabilitation 
Output 1.3: Increased 
adoption of climate-
smart innovations 
 
 
Number of small 
holder farmers 
and pastoralists 
benefiting from 
extension 
services 
(disaggregated 
by male and 
female) 
Baseline assessment, 
progress and final 
reports  
 
0 
90,000 (50% 
male and 50% 
female) 
278,000 (50% 
male and 50% 
female) 
Community 
mobilization of 
women and youth in 
the IGAD member 
states and effective 
sensitization, 
identification, and 
engagement of 
women and youth at 
the community  
Number of 
trainers trained 
on tools for 
extension 
services on 
climate smart 
innovations/disse
mination 
Training reports 
progress and final 
reports  
 
0 
80 (50% male 
and 50% 
female) 
250 (50% male 
and 50% 
female) 
Enabling 
environment put in 
place to train 
trainers 
Number of 
beneficiaries 
receiving resilient 
varieties to 
improve 
agricultural and 
fodder production 
Bill of quantities, 
contracts, quantitative 
and qualitative analysis 
reports, and final 
reports 
 
0 
83,750 (50% 
male and 50% 
female) 
264,000 (50% 
male and 50% 
female) 
Enabling 
environment are in 
place for scaling up 
TAAT COMPAC 
technologies and 
innovations 
 
Outcome 2: Enhanced carbon sequestration and reduced greenhouse gas emission of AVC 
 
Outcome 2: Enhanced 
carbon sequestration 
and reduced 
greenhouse gas 
emission of AVC 
Amount of GHG 
emissions 
avoided through 
project activities 
 
0 Mt 
CO2 eq. 
 
0.48 MTCO2 
2.1 Mt CO2 over 
project period 
 
14.1 MTCO2 
over lifetime 
Implementation 
targets for solar PV, 
biodigesters, and agro 
forestry is met as per 
project timelines.

=== PAGE 95 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 2-1: Increased 
access to digital 
advisory services and 
markets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of digital 
advisory 
services 
established 
through PPP 
mechanism 
Baseline assessment, 
progress and final 
reports  
 
0 
5 (one each in 
Djibouti, 
Ethiopia, 
Kenya, 
Somalia, and 
South Sudan) 
5 (one each in 
Djibouti, 
Ethiopia, 
Kenya, 
Somalia, and 
South Sudan) 
Conducive 
environment in 
place in all 5 
countries to enable 
signature of PPP for 
the setting up of 
digital advisory 
services. 
Number of small 
holder farmers 
and pastoralist 
benefiting from 
the established 
and deployed 
digital advisory 
services 
(disaggregated 
by male and 
female)  
Baseline assessment 
reports, qualitative and 
quantitative 
assessment reports, 
and bill of quantities, 
contract agreements 
 
0 
500,000 (50% 
male and 50% 
female) 
1,592,000 (50% 
male and 50% 
female) 
Effective 
communication and 
dissemination 
mechanisms put in 
place for using 
digital advisory 
services 
Number of 
regional 
infrastructure 
(hubs) developed 
for supporting 
digital advisory 
services 
Baseline assessment, 
progress and final 
reports  
 
0 
2 
2 
Enabling 
environment in 
place to facilitate 
IGAD’s mission of 
coordinating and 
sharing knowledge 
among innovation 
partners, 
governments and 
other stakeholders 
established 
Number of rural 
markets 
constructed 
included access 
Baseline assessment, 
progress and final 
reports  
 
0 
30 (2 in 
Djibouti, 6 in 
Ethiopia, 7 in 
Kenya, 10 in 
Somalia, 5 in 
South Sudan) 
95 (7 in 
Djibouti, 37 in 
Ethiopia, 14 in 
Kenya, 27 in 
Somalia, and 
10 in South 
Institutions 
and stakeholders’ 
readiness to 
participate in the 
activities, and IGAD 
member states

=== PAGE 96 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88 
 
 
 
 
 
at the end of 
year 3 
Sudan) at the 
end of year 7 
capability in place to 
effectively 
implement the 
activities 
 
Output 2.2: Developed 
inclusive MSMEs and 
cooperatives with 
access to climate 
financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of 
women and 
youth groups and 
cooperatives 
trained on 
renewable 
energy and/or 
AVC 
development and 
having access to 
credit 
Baseline assessment 
reports, contracts and 
direct purchase 
agreements, bill of 
quantities, pre-and 
post-intervention 
(qualitative and 
quantitative) survey 
results 
 
0 
123 
410 
Technical 
assistance (TA) 
support provided to 
women and youth 
on entrepreneurial 
development in 
renewable energy 
utilization and or 
AVC development 
 
Number of 
agribusiness 
MSMEs trained 
on renewable 
energy and/or 
AVC 
development 
and having 
access to credit 
Budget, Baseline 
assessment reports, 
pre-and post-
intervention (qualitative 
and quantitative) 
survey results 
 
 
0 
114 (50% male 
and 50% 
female owned) 
362 (50% male 
and 50% 
female owned) 
Credit lines are 
made available 
through local PFIs 
for on-lending to 
program 
beneficiaries 
 
Number of 
people including 
women in female 
headed 
households and 
youth with a 
target of 50% to 
receive inputs 
and finance to 
generate 
alternative 
Budget, Baseline 
assessment reports, 
pre-and post-
intervention (qualitative 
and quantitative) 
survey results 
 
0 
2,800 (50% 
male and 50% 
female) 
10,680 (50% 
male and 50% 
female) 
Budget, Baseline 
assessment reports, 
pre-and post-
intervention 
(qualitative and 
quantitative) survey 
results 
Mid-term and final 
evaluation reports, 
contract 
agreements, bill of

=== PAGE 97 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89 
 
 
 
 
 
income from 
renewable 
energy sources 
such as solar 
and biodigesters 
quantities, 
procurement 
documents, and 
survey results 
Capacity in MW 
of solar PV 
installed 
Mid-term and final 
evaluation reports, 
contract agreements, 
bill of quantities, 
procurement 
documents, and survey 
results 
0 
2.8 MW 
(0.3MW in 
Djibouti, 0.5MW 
in Ethiopia, 
1MW in Kenya, 
0.5MW in 
Somalia, 
0.5MW in South 
Sudan) at the 
end of year 3 
4.8 MW 
(0.3MW in 
Djibouti, 1MW 
in Ethiopia, 
1.5MW in 
Kenya, 1MW in 
Somalia, 1MW 
in South Sudan) 
at the end of 
year 7 
Enabling 
environment 
created for private 
sector investment in 
renewable energy 
generation: 4.8 MW 
of solar and 
3,890m3 of 
Biodigester systems 
Capacity in cubic 
meter of 
biodigesters 
installed 
Mid-term and final 
evaluation reports, 
contract agreements, bill 
of quantities, 
procurement documents, 
and survey results 
0 
2,160 m3 
(2000m3 in 
Ethiopia, 60m3 in 
Kenya, 100m3 in 
South Sudan) at 
the end of year 
3 
3,890 m3 (3500m3 
in Ethiopia, 
120m3 in Kenya, 
270m3 in South 
Sudan) at the 
end of year 7 
Enabling environment 
created for private 
sector investment in 
renewable energy 
generation: 4.8 MW of 
solar and 3,890m3 of 
Biodigester systems 
 
Number of small 
holder farmers, 
organizations and 
agribusiness 
MSMEs including 
women and youth 
headed 
households being 
eligible for getting 
access to 
innovative climate 
financing (credit) 
supported 
Budget, Baseline 
assessment reports, 
pre-and post-
intervention (qualitative 
and quantitative) 
survey results 
 
0 
660 (50% male 
and 50% 
female) 
1,985 (50% 
male and 50% 
female) 
Credit lines are 
made available 
through local PFIs 
for on-lending to 
program 
beneficiaries

=== PAGE 98 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of small 
holder farmers, 
organizations and 
agribusiness 
MSMEs including 
women and youth 
headed 
households being 
covered by 
Climate Insurance 
Budget, Baseline 
assessment reports, 
pre-and post-
intervention (qualitative 
and quantitative) survey 
results 
 
0 
1,200 (50% 
male and 50% 
female) 
3,600 (50% 
male and 50% 
female) 
Climate insurances 
are made available 
through PFIs 
Number of 
agribusiness 
MSMEs and 
cooperatives 
including women 
and youth headed 
households being 
eligible for getting 
access to 
innovative climate 
financing (credit 
and insurance) 
supported 
Budget, Baseline 
assessment reports, 
pre-and post-
intervention (qualitative 
and quantitative) survey 
results 
 
0 
1,460 members 
of agribusiness 
MSMEs and 
cooperatives (73) 
including women 
and youth 
headed 
households have 
access to 
innovative 
climate financing 
4,395 members 
of agribusiness 
MSMEs and 
cooperatives 
(219) including 
women and youth 
headed 
households have 
access to 
innovative 
climate financing 
Credit line and 
Climate insurance are 
made available 
through PFIs 
 
 
 
 
Outcome 3: Strengthened adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities 
Outcome 3: 
Strengthened adaptive 
capacity of vulnerable 
communities 
Number of 
climate-related 
agricultural 
policies, 
regulations, or 
laws enacted with 
the use of climate 
information 
 
0 
5 climate-related 
agricultural 
policies, 
regulations, or 
laws enacted 
with the use of 
climate 
information 
21 climate-
related 
agricultural 
policies, 
regulations, or 
laws enacted 
with the use of 
climate 
information 
Institutions and 
stakeholders readily 
engage with TA 
provided and show 
political will to 
streamline climate 
related policies  
Output 3.1: Enhanced 
access to climate 
information and early 
warning systems 
 
Number of 
agrometeorologic
al stations 
installed and 
generating 
Bill of quantities, 
contracts, quantitative 
and qualitative analysis 
reports, and final reports 
 
0 
25 (4 in Djibouti, 
10 in Ethiopia, 7 
in Kenya, 4 in 
South Sudan) at 
the end of year 3 
56 (8 in Djibouti, 
25 in Ethiopia, 14 
in Kenya, 8 in 
South Sudan) at 
the end of year 7 
Institutions 
and stakeholders’ 
readiness to 
participate in the 
activities, and IGAD

=== PAGE 99 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91 
 
 
 
 
 
weather and 
climate data 
member states 
capability in place to 
effectively 
implement the 
regional activities. 
 
Number of 
pastoralists and 
smallholder 
farmers (women 
and youth 
including women 
in female headed 
households) with 
a target of 40% 
having access to 
and use of 
climate-informed 
agro-advisory 
services 
Baseline assessment 
reports, contract 
agreements, bill of 
quantities, pre-and post-
intervention (qualitative 
and quantitative) survey 
results 
 
 
0 
500,000 (50% 
male and 50% 
female) 
1,592,000 (50% 
male and 50% 
female) 
Beneficiaries are 
willing to be trained 
in the use of climate-
informed agro-
advisory services 
through innovations 
introduced into the 
program for scaling 
up climate 
information services 
(CIS). 
 
Number of 
trainers trained on 
the use of climate 
services including 
early warning 
systems and data 
use 
Training reports, 
progress and final 
reports  
 
0 
65 (50% male 
and 50% 
female) 
200 (50% male 
and 50% 
female) 
Enabling 
environment put in 
place to train 
trainers 
Number of tools 
for harmonisation 
early warning and 
climate services 
developed at 
regional level 
Baseline assessment, 
progress reports, 
Midterm and final 
reports  
 
0 
2 
2 
Institutions 
and stakeholders’ 
readiness to 
participate in the 
activities, and IGAD 
member states 
capability in place to 
effectively 
implement the 
regional activities.

=== PAGE 100 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 3.2: Strengthened 
regulatory and policy 
frameworks and 
institutional capacity for 
climate resilience. 
 
 
 
 
Number of 
climate-related 
agricultural 
policies, 
regulations, or 
laws enacted or 
updated 
Gazetted policies, 
regulations or laws, 
progress reports, 
Midterm and final 
reports  
 
0 
5 
21 
Institutions and 
stakeholders readily 
engage with TA 
provided and show 
political will to 
streamline climate 
related policies  
Number of 
regional climate 
risk mechanism 
designed and 
operationalised 
Mainstreamed national 
plans and policies, 
contract agreements, 
and pre-and post-
intervention (qualitative 
and quantitative) survey 
results 
 
0 
0 
1 
Enabling 
environment put in 
place for effective 
mainstreaming of 
climate risk 
management into 
sectoral and national 
plans, policies and 
strategies 
 
Number of 
trainers trained on 
mainstreaming 
climate change in 
policies 
Training reports, 
progress and final 
reports  
 
0 
45 (50% male 
and 50% 
female) 
140 (50% male 
and 50% 
female) 
Enabling 
environment put in 
place to train 
trainers 
Number of 
farmers and 
pastoralist made 
aware of climate 
change, gender 
mainstreaming, 
conflict 
management, etc 
Baseline assessment, 
progress reports, 
Midterm and final 
reports  
 
0 
110,000 (50% 
male and 50% 
female) 
336,000 (50% 
male and 50% 
female) 
Beneficiaries are 
willing to be trained 
in the use of climate-
informed agro-
advisory services 
through innovations 
introduced into the 
program for scaling 
up climate 
information services 
(CIS). 
Cross-cutting - Program Coordination and Knowledge Management 
Output 4.1: Project 
management and 
coordination 
Number of 
financial audit 
report 
Progress reports, 
Annual performance 
0 
 18  
 36  
Effective 
coordination and 
management at the

=== PAGE 101 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93 
 
 
 
 
 
reports, midterm and 
final reports 
national and regional 
levels by the 
respective 
governments and 
IGAD 
 
Effectiveness of 
program M&E 
systems at the 
national and regional 
levels 
 
Effective and 
efficient M&E 
reporting 
 
 
Number of 
procurement 
audit report 
Annual audit reports 
0 
 18  
 36  
Annual 
performance 
report 
Annual performance 
reports 
0 
 18  
 36  
Number of 
capacity-building 
activities aimed 
at enhancing 
understanding 
and 
implementation 
of climate-smart 
agricultural 
practices and the 
program 
Training reports, 
progress and final 
reports  
 
0 
 36 (50% male 
and 50% 
female 
participation) 
 72 (50% male 
and 50% 
female 
participation) 
Number of 
established M&E 
system 
 
0 
 6  
 6  
Number of 
knowledge 
products 
developed and 
disseminated 
Reports, publications, 
and annual reports 
0 
 18  
 36  
Project/programme co-benefit indicators 
Co-benefit 1 
Number of jobs 
created for 
women and youth 
from rangeland 
and pastureland 
rehabilitation with 
women including 
women in female 
Baseline assessment 
reports 
0% 
25,000 jobs 
created or 
sustained with at 
least 60% of 
jobs allocated to 
women and 
youth including 
women in 
80,000 jobs 
created or 
sustained with at 
least 60% of 
jobs allocated to 
women and 
youth including 
women in 
Number of jobs 
created for women 
and youth from 
rangeland and 
pastureland 
rehabilitation with 
women including 
women in female

=== PAGE 102 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94 
 
 
 
 
 
headed 
households 
involved in seed 
preparations for 
rehabilitation of 
lands 
female headed 
households 
female headed 
households 
headed households 
involved in seed 
preparations for 
rehabilitation of lands 
Co benefit 2  
Ecosystem 
services improved 
Annual Performance 
Report and national 
statistic records 
0 ha 
49,000 ha of 
rangelands / 
forests with 
improved 
ecosystem 
services  
131,800 ha of 
rangelands / 
forests with 
improved 
ecosystem 
services 
Activities related to 
rangeland 
rehabilitation and 
agro forestry are 
effectively 
implemented. 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities 
Description 
Sub-
activiti
es 
Deliverables  
Activity 1.1.1:  Construct 
or rehabilitate and manage 
water harvesting 
infrastructure 
 
Activity 1.1.2: Construct or 
rehabilitate and manage 
community irrigation 
schemes 
 
Activity 1.1.3: Construct or 
rehabilitate and manage 
community livestock 
infrastructure 
 
 
The major activities include construction/rehabilitation of water 
mobilization infrastructure; development of irrigation lands and 
rehabilitation of rangeland/pastureland, rehabilitation of animal feed, 
health, and market access infrastructure, facilitating and 
operationalizing of cross-border memorandums of understanding to 
better control transboundary animal diseases and zoonoses in border 
areas. 
N/A 
• 
538 mobilization infrastructure (i.e., small earth 
dams etc..) constructed,   
• 
5980 ha of irrigation lands developed,  
• 
152 animal feed, health, and market access 
infrastructure (e.g., livestock markets etc.)  
rehabilitated/developed,  
 
Activity 1.2.1: Train 
communities on 
sustainable land 
management best 
practices 
 
Introduction of pastureland sustainable land management practices 
with agroforestry and afforestation program, with community 
agroforestry and afforestation committees being set up and women 
including women in female headed households to serve as leaders 
and members of these committees,  land loss and land restoration 
study, an assessment of land tenure patterns and corridors, design of 
tools, and the production of catalogues for land conflicts for 
N/A 
• 
31,300 agropastoralists and pastoralists 
trained on sustainable land management best 
practices 
• 
100 trainers trained at regional level on 
improved sustainable land management 
• 
102,000 ha of rangeland/pastureland 
rehabilitated,

=== PAGE 103 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 95 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 1.2.2: Support 
sustainable rangeland 
management and 
agroforestry 
 
 
 
transformation to enhance resilience and adaptation to climate 
change, land planning for  climate smart villages and local 
development plan at community, mapping exercise to identify 
smallholder farmers and pastoralists who must be organized into 
Farm-based Associated (FBAs).  Enhancement, management and 
regeneration of rangelands at regional and national level will also be 
supported.  
• 
3 cross border rangelands (cluster) sustainably 
managed 
• 
29,800 ha of degraded land/ forest 
rehabilitated and managed under agroforestry 
and plantation 
 
Activity 1.3.1: Provide 
extension services and 
deploy climate-smart 
innovations to improve 
agricultural and fodder 
production 
 
Activity 1.3.2: Disseminate 
resilient varieties to 
improve agricultural and 
fodder production  
 
The three transformative areas under this activity include investing in 
the validation and cost-effectiveness analysis of integrated pest 
management technologies to fight against fall armyworm, arboviruses 
in transhumant cattle, and locusts invasion, developing regional 
guidelines on integrated pest management control and facilitating the 
signing of a regional MoU between animal health services and 
research institutions; and upscaling the Technologies for African 
Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) Program to pastoralists and 
smallholder farmers in the HOA.  This activity will also support 
commercial production of fodder in pastoralists areas; contributing to 
improved livelihood and reduced vulnerability 
N/A 
• 
278,000 small holder farmers and pastoralists 
benefiting from extension services 
• 
250 trainers trained on tools for extension 
services on climate smart 
innovations/dissemination 
• 
264,000 beneficiaries receiving resilient 
varieties to improve agricultural and fodder 
production  
Activity 2.1.1: Establish 
and deploy digital advisory 
services using PPP 
mechanism 
Activity 2.1.2: Construct 
rural markets 
This activity will support the development of digital solutions through 
public private partnership 
The initiative will also support smallholder farmers (women and 
youth), farmers organization and agribusiness MSMEs to benefit from 
extension on using digital advisory services; and establish a regional 
innovation hub/data centre to coordinate and share knowledge 
among innovation partners, governments and other stakeholders. 
This activity will also involve the construction and development of 
various market infrastructure components across different regions of 
the participating countries 
N/A 
• 
5 of digital advisory services established 
through PPP mechanism 
• 
1,142,000 small holder farmers and pastoralist 
benefiting from the established and deployed 
digital advisory services 
• 
2 regional infrastructure (hubs) developed for 
supporting digital advisory services 
• 
125 rural markets constructed included access 
 
Activity 2.2.1: Train 
women and youth on 
entrepreneurial skills in 
renewable energy 
technologies and/or AVC 
development including 
access to credit line 
 
Activity 2.2.2: Facilitate 
access for women and 
youth groups to renewable 
Under this activity, AfDB and GCF will provide training to over 1985 
women and youth on entrepreneurship in renewable energy 
technologies (Solar and Biogas).  The focus is to empower producer 
groups, including women's groups, by providing training, structuring, 
and raising awareness of entrepreneurship, leading to the 
development of business plans for cooperatives and MSMEs. 
BREFOL will support the establishment of a Dedicated Direct Credit 
Window (BDCW) to provide local private financial institutions (PFIs) 
with stable lendable resources to adequately meet the financing 
needs of smallholder farmers, pastoralists, MSMEs, FBAs and other 
N/A 
• 
410 groups women and youth and 
cooperatives trained on renewable energy 
and/or AVC development and having access 
to credit 
• 
362 agribusiness MSMEs trained on 
renewable energy and/or AVC development 
and having access to credit 
• 
10,680 people including women in female 
headed households and youth with a target of 
50% to receive inputs and finance to generate

=== PAGE 104 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 96 
 
 
 
 
 
energy (solar and 
biodigester systems) to 
enhance alternative 
income generation 
 
Activity 2.2.3: Design and 
operationalise innovative 
credit lines via selected 
local PFIs, in participating 
countries. 
 
Activity 2.2.4: Provide 
technical assistance to 
MSMEs, local PFIs, and 
cooperatives to create an 
enabling environment for 
credit access and 
sustainability 
 
 
agribusiness MSMEs with vested interest in green/circular economy 
development 
alternative income from renewable energy 
sources such as solar and biodigesters 
• 
4.8 MW of solar PV installed 
• 
3,890 meter cube of biodigesters installed 
• 
1985 small holder farmers, organizations, and 
agribusiness MSMEs including women and 
youth headed households being eligible for 
getting access to innovative climate financing 
(credit) supported 
• 
3,600 small holder farmers, organizations, and 
agribusiness MSMEs including women and 
youth headed households being covered by 
Climate Insurance 
• 
4,395 agribusiness MSMEs and cooperatives 
including women and youth headed 
households being eligible for getting access to 
innovative climate financing (credit and 
insurance) supported 
• 
 
Activity 3.1.1: Expand 
agrometeorological 
stations network to 
generate data for climate 
advisory services 
 
Activity 3.1.2: Integrate 
and disseminate climate 
information and early 
warning into the 
established digital 
advisory services 
The project will support to expand the agrometeorological stations 
network to improve climate resilience, agricultural planning, and 
livelihoods in the HoA. This activity will be pivotal in enhancing 
climate resilience and agricultural productivity in Ethiopia, Kenya, and 
South Sudan. By installing agrometeorological stations, the capacity 
to generate accurate and localized weather and climate data will be 
significantly improved, facilitating more effective climate advisory 
services. This activity will also integrate and disseminate climate 
information and early warnings in Ethiopia, Kenya, and South Sudan 
using digital solution platforms established through the PPP 
mechanism 
N/A 
• 
128 agrometeorological stations installed and 
generating weather and climate data 
• 
1,100,000 pastoralists and smallholder farmers 
(women and youth including women in female 
headed households) with a target of 40% 
having access to and use of climate-informed 
agro-advisory services 
• 
200 of trainers trained on the use of climate 
services including early warning systems and 
data use 
• 
2 tools for harmonisation early warning and 
climate services developed at regional level 
 
Activity 3.2.1: Support 
delivery of climate 
regulatory framework and 
mainstreaming of climate 
change into agricultural 
sector policies and 
strategies 
Investment will be directed to facilitate mainstreaming policy 
dialogues with key stakeholders on climate index-based insurance to 
advance actionable reforms in Ethiopia. There will be coordination 
among the National Meteorological Agency (NMA), ATI, insurance 
service providers. 
N/A 
• 
21 climate-related agricultural policies, 
regulations, or laws enacted or updated 
• 
1 regional climate risk mechanism designed 
and operationalised 
• 
140 trainers trained on mainstreaming climate 
change in policies

=== PAGE 105 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
336,000 farmers and pastoralist made aware 
of climate change, gender mainstreaming, 
conflict management, etc 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
203. 
 Monitoring of the programme 
All projects financed under the Facility will be monitored by the AfDB's portfolio management team in accordance with relevant internal policies 
and procedures. The AfDB, as the accredited executing agency, will be responsible for directly monitoring implementation conditions and 
reporting periodically to the GCF under terms to be agreed between the AfDB and the GCF. All projects financed under the Facility will comply 
with AfDB standards and procedures for appraisal, approval, monitoring and supervision, involving representatives or all relevant teams 
(engineers, lawyers, project finance specialists, procurement experts, E&S specialists, gender specialists, climate finance officers, financial 
management officers, supervision and monitoring specialists). The implementation and monitoring of each stage of the project will be guided 
and managed by the AfDB Project Lifecycle Management Framework. The key task managers who will carry out due diligence, implementation 
supervision, risk monitoring and mitigation will be located in the relevant teams at Headquarters and in the IGAD regional and country offices. 
 
204. 
Reporting 
1) Reporting by project companies to the AfDB will be in line with the standard loan agreement and the AfDB will conduct a semi-annual 
supervision. 
 
2) AfDB reporting to the GCF: The AfDB will comply with the relevant GCF policies (as specified in the AMA) in the reporting and evaluation 
arrangements for this framework. The AfDB will submit the Annual Performance Report (APR) to the GCF during the seven-year implementation 
period. In addition, a semi-annual activity report on the status of individual subprojects financed by the GCF will be provided during the life of the 
sub-loans. For the TA component, reports from the beneficiaries will be consolidated by the AfDB for reporting to the GCF. In addition, an 
inception report, mid-term evaluation report, final evaluation report, and financial information reports will be submitted (semi-annually throughout 
the life of the programme), as agreed under the AMA and FAA. 
 
205. 
Evaluation 
The evaluation arrangements for this framework will be in line with the relevant AfDB and GCF policies. Both the mid-term and final independent 
evaluations will be carried out by the AfDB's Independent Evaluation Department (IDEV). The AfDB's independent evaluation work will be guided 
by internationally accepted principles for the evaluation of development assistance, in particular the Organisation for Economic Co-operation

=== PAGE 106 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 98 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and Development Assistance Committee's (OECD DAC) Evaluation Guiding Principles and the Evaluation Cooperation Group's (ECG) good 
practice standards.

=== PAGE 107 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 99 
 
 
 
 
F. RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
Please describe financial, technical, operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing (ML/TF), sanctions, 
prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the 
proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.  
 
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability 
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact 
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistle-blowers or witnesses, as well as 
fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
206. 
This risk arises when agriculture, rangelands and food production systems are affected by many 
uncontrollable events, often related to weather, biology and the environment, including excessive or 
insufficient rainfall, extreme temperatures, diseases and zoonoses, and land degradation. This may also 
be due to low levels of technology adoption and access to finance. Key factors for this risk include 
natural conditions, biological and environmental hazards, technology levels, natural disasters, finance, 
demand and policy decisions.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
207. 
The mitigation measures put in place through the program include:  
● Increasing access to affordable finances to smallholder farmers, pastoralists, and other 
agribusiness MSMEs to adapt to climate change, 
● Enhancing access to climate-informed advisory services in agriculture and food production systems 
● Introducing sustainable land management practices such as agroforestry and carbon farming in 
degraded rangeland/pastureland. 
● Facilitating cost-effectiveness analysis of integrated pest management technologies to fight against 
fall armyworm, arboviruses in transhumant cattle, and locust’s invasion 
● Increasing the preparedness and readiness of smallholder farmers, pastoralists, and institutions to 
adapt to climate change and climate extremes 
● Promoting greater private sector participation in green/circular economic building activities. 
● Integration of technological innovations in agriculture such as the Technologies for African 
Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) Program, and the Global Centre on Adaptation (GCA) 
Smallholder Adaptation Accelerator Program (AAAP) to scale up digital advisory services and 
markets in climate responsive planning 
● Provision of access to improved seed varieties, pest control and surveillance services through 
cross-border MoUs. 
● Scaling up and disseminate proven agricultural technologies and innovations to millions of 
smallholder farmers  
● Introducing cross-border memorandums of understanding to better control transboundary animal 
diseases and zoonoses in border areas. 
● Capacity building in agroecological systems that promote crop diversification and therefore 
reducing risks to crop diseases and weather shocks.  
● 
Introducing social protection mechanisms such as weather-based crop/livestock insurance 
programs. 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Credit 
Medium 
Medium

=== PAGE 108 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 100 
 
 
 
 
Description 
208. 
Timely access to finance is critical to cope with the debilitating impacts of climate change and extreme 
weather events that characterise the HoA region. Not infrequently, smallholder farmers do not have 
access to credit facilities to purchase agricultural inputs such as climate-smart seed varieties, fertilizers 
and farm implements, and to adopt climate-smart agricultural practices to cope with sudden disasters 
such as seasonal droughts and flash floods. This is illustrated by statistics on access to finance from 
the World Bank's Global Findex Database, which shows that on average only 22% of smallholder 
farmers in the HoA have an account with a financial institution, and less than 7% are able to borrow from 
a financial institution, while only about 6% of the active farming population is able to borrow to start, 
operate or expand a farm or business. With such low access to credit in an environment characterised 
by extreme climate events (droughts and floods), fragility, conflict and population explosion, building 
resilience at scale is almost impossible. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
209. 
The mitigation measures put in place through the program include:  
• 
Integration of innovative financial instruments to help ‘crowd-in’ additional private sector finances 
for resilience building in the region. 
• 
Introducing carbon credit schemes to help increase access to finance and building of the adaptive 
capacity of smallholder farmers and pastoralists in the region. 
• 
Establishing dedicated credit windows to increase access to finance to invest in different value 
chains.  
• 
Training farmers and business holders on the principles of business and financial planning and 
management.  
• 
Ensuring diversified source of incomes for the participants such as through carbon farming, use of 
renewable energy in food crops processing.  
• 
Broadening climate finance access based for smallholder farmers, pastoralists, agribusiness 
MSMEs etc., from different financial sources such as from local PFIs, private investors, insurance 
promoters, and beneficiary groups.  
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
210. 
This risk can arise from changes in government sector strategies and policies, the political and 
governance context of countries (insecurity and conflict), and non-compliance with the Bank's fiduciary 
guidelines, resulting in implementation delays. It may also be due to limited coordination between 
agencies and stakeholders, and weak implementation capacity within Project Management Units 
(PMUs).  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
211. 
The mitigation measures put in place through the program include:  
• 
Building communities’ resilience to climate change is a priority for the region and for the five 
participating IGAD countries. The involved governments are maintaining adequate political 
commitment to implementing the program and maintain their effort on promoting sector specific 
strategies and policies conducive for the implementation of BREFOL.  
• 
IGAD has put in place a conflict resolution mechanism that might reduce the challenges of insecurity 
and conflicts. The Program is itself expected to foster peace among conflicting communities. 
• 
BREFOL will build the capacity of the program staff and the program’s beneficiaries. Lessons learnt 
from the DRSLP have been integrated in the program’s design and the implementation plan, 
• 
The Bank will continue to run fiduciary clinics to strengthen capacity. 
• 
In some participating countries, the program will use PMUs that are already running DRSLP to be 
strengthened with the addition of specialized staff. Additional capacity building/training will be 
provided. AfDB will also conduct annual fiduciary clinics to address any remaining capacity gaps.

=== PAGE 109 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 101 
 
 
 
 
Bank staff will conduct regular supervision missions and audits and follow up closely to monitor 
adherence to Bank standards and procedures as a way of securing value for money. 
212. 
Additionally, a study has been conducted to determine how economic, institutional, political, cultural, 
and structural problems in the HoA countries may contribute to fragility and conflict (see Annex 24 for 
the Fragility assessment report). This assessment contributes to a better understanding of how 
vulnerable the host nations are in their particular setting and how to generate useful information that 
could be incorporated into projects, programs, and strategies for development. 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
ML/FT 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
213. 
This risk can manifest itself in scenarios characterised by a lack of integrity among programme 
beneficiaries, the involvement of politically exposed persons (PEPs), the presence of sanctions, civil, 
criminal and regulatory backgrounds, and potential anti-money laundering and countering the financing 
of terrorism (AML/CFT) issues. In such situations, vulnerability to financial impropriety, illegal activities 
and compliance breaches becomes a significant concern, requiring thorough scrutiny and risk mitigation 
measures. An integrity assessment has been carried out on the executing agencies. This integrity 
assessment was conducted using the principles of integrity due diligence, namely beneficial ownership, 
politically exposed person risk, sanctions risk, civil, criminal and regulatory background, and AML/CFT 
& integrity policy assessment. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
214. 
The mitigation measures put in place through the program include: 
• 
The Bank will constantly monitor its counterparties through its supervision activities. This process is 
also strengthened by the daily automated sanctions, PEP, and adverse media monitoring on Bank’s 
counterparties. 
• 
All outgoing payments from the Bank will be automatically screened against sanctions lists through 
Swift. 
• 
A training program will be defined on an annual basis in consultation with the relevant Bank’s units. 
Training and Capacity Building is an integral part of the Bank preventive activities around 
sanctionable practices and ML/TF. The main audience will be staff from Project Implementation Units 
and the training topics will focus mainly on the Bank’s integrity framework and ML/TF issues in Project 
Management. 
• 
Specific integrity clauses are incorporated in all project documentation between the Bank and its 
counterparties. These clauses include including Audit & Inspection Rights, Adherence to the Bank 
Integrity Framework, Transposition of due diligence requirements for final beneficiaries. 
• 
The Bank’s has different oversight mechanisms that will ensure that any indicator of sanctionable 
practices is reported to the Integrity and Anti-Corruption Office for investigation with a sanction 
mechanism for substantiated cases. The Bank also has a whistleblowing policy which provides 
several channels for raising concerns related to sanctionable practices and provisions to protect 
whistle blowers from retaliation. 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other-- Risk of uneven uptake 
among countries 
-Medium 
Medium 
Description 
There may be challenges in the use of resources during implementation, which could lead to uneven 
uptake between countries. For example, if a country has a lower take-up rate, the funds allocated to that 
country may remain unused, which could affect the climate impact of the project. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The mitigation measures retained are 
• 
Firstly, flexibility of resource reallocation in most secure areas of the country in case of conflict and 
• 
Secondly, restructuring of the financing plan among countries, if necessary, as last option, after the 
mid-term review to transfer resource to most competitive countries.

=== PAGE 110 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 102 
 
 
 
 
G. GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
215. 
BREFOL is a climate change adaptation operation that aims to improve the resilience of communities 
and agropastoral production systems with minimal negative environmental and social impacts. As a 
result, the Bank's integrated safeguards system has classified the programme as Category 2, meaning 
that site-specific programme activities are expected to have only moderate environmental and social 
risks and impacts that can be managed through the instruments proposed in the programme's 
environmental and social safeguards instruments, Environmental and Social Impact Assessments 
(ESIAs), Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and Environmental and Social 
Management Frameworks (ESMFs). The ESIA/ESMP and ESMF reports were validated by the 
participating countries and disclosed both in-country and on the Bank's website in accordance with the 
30-day disclosure requirement before the BREFOL was submitted to the AfDB Board of Directors for 
consideration.  
 
216. 
BREFOL will have a significant positive impact on the environment and ecosystems in the Horn of 
Africa. In particular, it will: (i) improve natural resource management at local, national and regional levels; 
(ii) improve access to infrastructure for water, animal health and access to markets; (iii) rehabilitate 
rangelands and pastures; (iv) improve productivity/production in the livestock, crop, forestry and pastoral 
sectors; (v) increase the number of farmers and pastoralists using climate services; and (vi) conserve 
rangelands and soils and prevent erosion.  
 
217. 
The disclosed ESMF (see Annex 6 for details) outlines measures to minimise and mitigate the 
potential negative impacts of the programme and to optimise its benefits. The implementation of 
environmental measures will involve various stakeholders, including governments, local authorities, 
communities, grassroots organisations, NGOs, local people, women, the private sector, research 
institutes, etc. The environmental monitoring of the programme will be carried out by the entity 
responsible for environmental and social safeguards in each country. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
218. 
Information from the gender assessment reports and consultations with stakeholders during the 
assessment mission in the five participating countries indicate that women in male- and female-headed 
households in agropastoral communities face several gender-based barriers (see Annex 8). These 
barriers include harmful traditional practices, low levels of literacy and less power over intra- and extra-
household decisions on productive resources. These conditions undermine women's well-being, 
economic empowerment and gender equality as a whole. In addition, women have less access to social 
infrastructure and services, and their low levels of literacy and marketable skills mean that they are less 
active in the labour market. If these challenges are not addressed during programme implementation, 
they could hamper women's participation in BREFOL, hinder women's economic empowerment and 
undermine gender equality. For this reason, BREFOL has budgeted for a gender action plan at regional 
and national levels. The plan uses the Gender Action Learning System (GALS) approach, which seeks 
to transform harmful and disadvantageous socio-cultural gender norms and practices that significantly 
hinder women's empowerment and gender equality. Based on the regional components of the 
programme and the GALS methodology, BREFOL will train national champions to support planned 
women's economic empowerment activities. In these activities, women will act as the main agents of 
change and men as their allies. An additional concern is the role of women in the agribusiness activities 
planned by the programme: this role could increase women's workload, as women are already 
responsible for household and family activities. To address this concern, BREFOL has budgeted for 
gender-sensitive infrastructure that will reduce women's workload and poverty, and remove barriers to 
childcare, by building children's playgrounds and crèches, and locating boreholes near villages and 
residential areas, solar energy systems and bio-digesters. Of the 1.6 million people who will benefit from 
climate-informed agricultural extension services, 50% will be women and 30% will be youth (males and 
females aged 18-35). In addition, a climate risk insurance scheme will be established through a public-

=== PAGE 111 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 103 
 
 
 
 
private partnership to de-risk existing and new agribusiness MSMEs in the project areas (see Annex 16 
for proposed intervention areas). 
 
219. 
221. 
In the Bank's gender marker system, BREFOL is classified as GEN II. This category indicates 
that, by the end of the programme period, the programme is expected to have generated several positive 
outcomes for women. For example, it is expected to increase the incomes of women involved in agro-
pastoral value chains (the output indicator for this outcome is the increase in annual per capita income 
for women in both male- and female-headed households) and to create jobs for women and youth. The 
programme is also expected to improve women's access to social services and infrastructure, which will 
reduce women's labour and time poverty and enable women to participate in more livelihood 
diversification activities. A regional gender analysis and the corresponding gender action plan with a 
regional budget allocation are provided as Annex 8 to the FP. In summary, it is envisaged that BREFOL 
will reduce women's gender-related challenges and empower women economically by improving their 
access to productive resources and gender-sensitive infrastructure and services. 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
220. 
222. 
AfDB's fiduciary and financial management measures for BREFOL in upstream engagement 
with programme countries during the preparation of Country Strategy Papers (CSPs), where fiduciary 
risks and country capacity were assessed in the Country Fiduciary Risk Assessment (CFRA). This is a 
key document for dialogue with the country on the risk assessment and agreed mitigation actions to 
address identified fiduciary risks, including corruption and AML/CFT and prohibited practices issues. 
The AE has also carried out an integrity assessment using the principles of integrity due diligence, 
namely beneficial ownership, the presence of politically exposed persons (PEPs), the existence of 
sanctions, civil, criminal and regulatory background and AML/CFT of the EEs. 
 
221. 
Generally, the Financial Management Arrangement (FMA) of BREFOL, requires:  
• 
Accounting Management: Legal agreements require BREFOL participating countries to: (i) 
maintain accounts and records and prepare financial statements for projects and subprojects 
financed from AfDB resources and resources administered by the AfDB; and (ii) establish accounting, 
administrative, and financial procedures in manuals. These accounts and records should justify the 
use of funds disbursed to the programme or project and be prepared in accordance with applicable 
accounting standards. 
 
• 
Accounting standards and practices: Although accounting standards and practices may vary from 
country to country, the accounts of the programme or sub-project under BREFOL, irrespective of the 
system adopted, shall comply with the principles of transparent management and provide 
comprehensive information on the following aspects 1) accountability for the funds provided to the 
programme or sub-project; these funds may include the proceeds of the AfDB loan or grant, or other 
resources from co-financiers and counterpart funds; 2) disclosure of expenditure and specific 
information on components financed under the programme.  
 
222. Programme Financial Statements: The programme or sub-projects financial statements prepared 
under BREFOL shall include:  
 
- 
For all projects: i) Statement of Income (funds received from AfDB, counterpart funds and, where 
applicable, co-financiers) and Expenditure (expenditure incurred both for the current year and 
accumulated to date) showing separately AfDB funds, counterpart and co-financiers funds and cash 
balances; 2) Statement of Special Account(s); 3) Notes to the Financial Statements describing the 
applicable accounting principles used and a detailed analysis of the main accounts. 
 
- 
For revenue generating sub-projects under BREFOL (in addition to the requirements above): i) a 
balance sheet showing the accumulated funds of the project, bank balances and other assets and 
liabilities of the project at the end of each financial year; ii) a profit and loss account (or an operating

=== PAGE 112 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 104 
 
 
 
 
account or an income and expenditure account or a profit and loss account); and iii) a cash flow 
statement showing the cash flows during each financial year. 
 
- 
As an annex to the financial statements prepared under BREFOL, the following would be included 
as an annex to the financial statements of all projects under the programme: i) a reconciliation 
between the amount shown as "received from the Bank" and the amount shown as disbursed by the 
AfDB. The reconciliation should indicate the methods used for disbursement, i.e. special account, 
direct payment or reimbursement guarantee, and the reimbursement methods with those 
recommended in the Project Appraisal Reports (PARs) and the Disbursement Letter; and ii) a 
comprehensive list of all fixed assets acquired with dates, value and condition of the assets. 
 
• 
Financial reporting: BREFOL participating countries are required to provide regular and 
comprehensive accounting and financial information on the programme and sub-projects under the 
programme. The information should detail the various uses of the loan and grant proceeds. Financial 
systems and financial communication reports may vary depending on the type of sub-project, lending 
instrument and country. The AfDB may not require a standard format but will ensure that reports 
submitted for review and consideration are sufficiently informative. 
 
• 
Retention and filing of documents: Each country participating in the BREFOL programme is 
required to maintain and preserve programme/sub-project documents and supporting documents 
and to make them available to AfDB representatives as required. 
 
• 
Retention of documentation: The AfDB's General Conditions require each country participating in 
the programme to retain all documents relating to the loan proceeds so that they can be audited by 
external auditors or the AfDB's representative. Documentation should be retained in a manner that 
is readily accessible. 
 
• 
Audit: The general conditions of the loan and grant agreements require that all programme and sub-
project accounts be audited annually in accordance with relevant generally accepted standards. 
According to the standard terms of reference (ToR) for external audits of AfDB-financed programmes 
or projects, the auditor is required, among other things, to examine relevant documents, review 
internal financial control mechanisms to identify deficiencies and weaknesses that could affect the 
efficiency of the project, form an opinion on the quality of the financial statements, and confirm that 
the funds granted to the project have been used for their intended purpose. Each country must have 
the accounts of the project or programme audited by qualified and independent auditors who meet 
AfDB requirements. In countries where the audit is entrusted to the Auditor General's Office (AGO) 
under the supervision of the government, the AfDB may approve the appointment of this office, 
provided that the matter is discussed during programme/project appraisal and loan negotiations, and 
the audit is conducted in accordance with the AfDB's standard terms of reference for the audit of 
AfDB-financed projects/programmes. The audited financial statements, auditor's report and 
management letter must be received by the AfDB no later than six months after the end of the 
financial year to which they relate. Failure to comply with this requirement will result in the immediate 
suspension of further replenishments to the Special Account. 
 
223. 
Procurement and Disbursement Arrangements 
• 
Procurement Arrangements: The procurement of goods (including services other than consultancy 
services), works and the acquisition of consultancy services financed under BREFOL will be carried 
out in accordance with the Procurement Framework for Bank Group-financed Operations, 2015 
Edition, and in compliance with the provisions of the GCF FAA (see Annex 10 for the detailed 
procurement plan). More specifically, procurements will be made in accordance with the AfDB's 
Procurement Methods and Procedures (BPP), based on the relevant Standard Bidding Documents 
(SBDs) for goods and works contracts, as well as consulting services, for which the BPP is considered 
the most appropriate. Indeed, following an analysis of the procurement systems of the five BREFOL 
participating countries, the procurement systems and procedures of Djibouti, Somalia and South

=== PAGE 113 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 105 
 
 
 
 
Sudan were considered to be weak.  On this basis, it was decided to apply the AfDB's procurement 
methods and procedures in Djibouti, Somalia and South Sudan. In Ethiopia and Kenya, BREFOL 
will use each country's procurement system for national competitive bidding and procurement of 
goods and works, subject to the conditions for Ethiopia and Kenya discussed above. When these two 
countries procure packages of goods, works and consultancy services through open international 
competitive bidding, the AfDB's procurement methods and procedures will apply.   
 
224. 
Disbursement: The disbursement methods to be used to mobilise project funding are: (i) the direct 
payment method; (ii) the special fund/revolving fund method; and (iii) the reimbursement method. Direct 
payments will be made in respect of contracts for works, goods and services signed between borrowers 
and suppliers in accordance with AfDB procurement rules and procedures and national procurement 
laws. The special account method will be used to settle operating expenses, training costs, field mission 
costs, etc. It requires the opening of a special account with the central banks of the five participating 
countries, which will in turn transfer all funds received from the AfDB to the PMU account opened with 
a bank acceptable to the AfDB. The opening of the bank account will be a condition precedent to the 
first disbursement. The reimbursement method will be used when eligible expenditures of all project 
funds are pre-financed with the prior approval of the AfDB. Disbursements will be made in accordance 
with the List of Goods and Services and AfDB's policies and procedures as described in the Project 
Disbursement Manual.  
 
225. 
Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement of Grants and Loan under BREFOL: The obligation 
of AfDB to make the first disbursement of the respective grants and loan shall be subject to the entry 
into force of the respective Protocol of Agreements (POA) and the Loan Agreement (LA), in accordance 
with the provisions set out in the POA and LA, and the submission of evidence, in a form and substance 
acceptable to AfDB, of fulfilment by the Recipient or Borrower of the following conditions:  
 
i. 
Submission of evidence of the recruitment/appointment of staff for the Project Management Unit 
(PMU) for each country, and a Regional Program Coordination Unit (RPCU) for IGAD with 
qualifications and terms of reference acceptable to the AfDB.  
 
Other conditions:  
226. 
The Borrower/ Recipient shall provide to the AfDB, within six months after the first disbursement:  
 
Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, South Sudan:  
 
ii. 
Submission of the evidence of the establishment of the National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) 
with composition and terms of reference acceptable to AfDB.  
iii. 
Provision of Counterpart Contribution, as stipulated in the respective loan/grant agreements  
 
IGAD:  
 
i. 
Submission of the evidence of the establishment of the Regional Program Steering Committee 
(RPSC), which will include representatives from the regional programme coordination unit (RPCU),  
IGAD Climate Prediction and Applications Centre (ICPAC), the IGAD Pastoral Centre for Livestock 
and Pastoral Development (ICPALD), the IGAD Food Security, Nutrition and Resilience Analysis Hub 
(IFRAH),  and representatives from the National Program Steering Committees (NPSCs), within three 
months of the first disbursement of the Grant.  
 
227. 
Undertakings:  
 
The Borrower/ Recipients undertakes to: 
ii. 
carry out the Program in accordance with the Environmental and Social Management Plans 
(“ESMPs”), and the Bank’s Safeguards Policies and the applicable national legislation in a manner 
and in substance satisfactory to the AfDB;

=== PAGE 114 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 106 
 
 
 
 
iii. 
prepare and submit to the AfDB Project Reports, including quarterly reports on the implementation 
of the ESMPs including any deficiencies identified and the corrective measures thereto;  
iv. 
refrain from taking any action which would prevent or interfere with the implementation of the ESMPs, 
including any amendment, suspension, waiver, and/or voidance of any provision thereof, whether in 
whole or in part, without the prior written concurrence of the AfDB;  
v. 
each of the Borrower/Recipient shall cause its respective relevant sector ministry to provide 
coordination for implementation of country Projects; and  
vi. 
each of the Borrower/Recipient shall cause the establishment of a National Project Steering 
Committee (NPSC) which shall be responsible for respective country Project oversight, overall policy 
guidance, strategic direction, and review and approval of work plans and budgets. 
 
228. 
Programme Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E): Simply refers to the process of procurement-
related M&E throughout the programme (and procurement) cycle.  The information to be monitored for 
the programme and sub-projects under the programme will be identified in the Programme Executing 
Agency Procurement Assessment (EAPA), drawing on sources such as the Country Procurement 
Assessment Report (CPAR). Capacity development as outlined in the Procurement Development Action 
Plan (PDAP) will also be subject to M&E throughout programme implementation. The AfDB's primary 
monitoring tools are post-procurement reviews (PPRs), procurement audits (PAs), independent 
procurement reviews (IPRs), and other miscellaneous reviews associated with AfDB programme or 
project-related supervision and monitoring.  
229. 
In all five participating countries, including IGAD, the programme will be implemented over a period 
of 84 months. The M&E Officers to be appointed from the PMUs and the Regional Programme 
Coordination Unit (RCU) will be responsible for collecting all data, including gender-disaggregated data 
at all levels where possible, analysing and compiling information on physical achievements and financial 
implementation. To this end, he/she will have at his/her disposal a roadmap with quantitative indicators 
of the programme's progress, relating to the implementation of the sub-components. This monitoring will 
enable the preparation of quarterly progress reports in accordance with the Bank's format and 
procedures: physical objective, level of achievement, expected costs, actual costs, variances and 
explanations for any variances. This information will be used to prepare the quarterly, mid-year and 
annual performance programme reports by the respective EE together with the NPSC and RPSC. In 
addition, the countries will recruit the necessary expertise to develop a harmonised, gender- and conflict-
sensitive monitoring and evaluation mechanism and prepare an implementation manual to 
operationalise the collection and processing of national and regional data and the reporting of results 
against the indicators set out in the logical and M&E frameworks. In addition to the review work of the 
Steering Committee, the AfDB will conduct two monitoring missions per year, in addition to a mid-term 
review mission. The mid-term review will be conducted in year 3. Upon completion of the programme, 
the AfDB and the respective governments will prepare a final report within the required timeframe. 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information. 
 
☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
• 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
• 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 115 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 107 
 
 
 
 
H. ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☒ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☒ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☒ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☒ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☐ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting-projects)61 
☒ 
Annex 23 
BREFOL Beneficiary Estimate 
☒ 
Annex 24 
BREFOL GCF Fragility Assessments 
☒ 
Annex 25 
Digital Solution PPP Model for BREFOL

=== PAGE 116 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 108 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents.  
APPENDICES 
Appendix 1 
Appendix 1.1: Projected change in some selected WMO Expert Team Sector-Specific Climate 
Indices: (a&b) standardized precipitation index (SPI); (c&d) standardized precipitation 
evapotranspiration index; (e&f) warm spell duration (days) and (g&h) heat wave frequency 
(days); in the GHA countries between the period 2021-2050 and reference time (1976-2005) 
under RCP4.5 and 8.5 emission scenarios.  Stippling denotes regions where the difference is 
statistically significant at 0.05 level.  
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
(d) 
(e) 
 
(f ) 
 
 
61 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects.  
☒ 
Annex 26 
BREFOL Eligibility Criteria

=== PAGE 117 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 109 
 
 
 
 
(g) 
(h ) 
 
 
 
Appendix 1.2: Projected change in consecutive dry days (CDD) in the GHA countries 
between the period 2021-2050 and reference time (1976-2005) under RCP4.5 and 8.5 
emission scenarios. Stippling denotes regions where the difference is statistically significant 
at 0.05 level.  
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1.3: Projected change in consecutive wet days (CWD) in the GHA countries 
between the period 2021-2050 and reference time (1976-2005) under RCP4.5 and 8.5 
emission scenarios.  Stippling denotes regions where the difference is statistically significant 
at 0.05 level.

=== PAGE 118 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1.4: Number of People Affected by Floods in the HoA Region beginning from 90s 
 
 
       Source: Adapted from the Climate Risks and Food Security Atlas of the GHA based on EM DAT Database

=== PAGE 119 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 111 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1.5: Mean Monthly Vegetation Status (NDVI) in the GHA Region 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1.6: Combined Seasonal Drought Conditions in the HoA (2009 - 2015)

=== PAGE 120 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 112

=== PAGE 121 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 113 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1.7: Number of People Affected by Droughts in the HoA Region beginning from 90s 
 
Source: Adapted from the Climate Risks and Food Security Atlas of the GHA based on EM DAT Database 
 
Appendix 1.8: Trends in Number of Food Insecure People (IPC Phase 3 and above or in 
need of Humanitarian Assistance) in the HoA Since October 2010 
 
Source: Adapted from the Climate Risks and Food Security Atlas of the GHA based on EM DAT Database

=== PAGE 122 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 114 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1.9a:  
Past Climate Finance Projects in the HoA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1.9b:  
Past Climate Finance Projects in the HoA

=== PAGE 123 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 115 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1.10: 
Some Selected Ongoing Experiences in the HoA 
Initiatives / Projects 
/Programs 
Indicative Amount 
Intervention Areas 
Program to Build Resilience for 
Food and Nutrition Security in 
the Horn of Africa (BREFONS) - 
2021-2027 
UA 149 million (AfDB) 
Designed as a follow-up phase of the DRSLP with 
the sole objective of improving the living 
standards for women, youth, and the population in 
general in the HoA (Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, 
Somalia, South Sudan, and Sudan). 
“Agricultural Climate Resilience 
Enhancement Initiative 
USD 6.8 million 
(Adaptation Fund)  
The goal of the project is to develop and 
implement adaptation strategies and measures

=== PAGE 124 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 116 
 
 
 
 
(ACREI).” Targeted countries 
include Ethiopia, Kenya, and 
Uganda (2017) 
that will strengthen the resilience of vulnerable 
smallholder farmers, agro-pastoralists, and 
pastoralists in the Horn of Africa to climate 
variability and change in line with the IDDRSI 
programme, the National Adaptation Programme 
of Action (NAPAs) and Development 
Strategies/Visions of participating countries. 
Multinational (Somalia/Sudan) 
Rural Livelihoods Adaptation to 
Climate Change in the Horn of 
Africa II (RLACC II)”. 2017 
US $17 million (The 
Global Environment 
Facility-GEF)  
RLACC II aims to enhance rural livelihoods by 
reducing food insecurity through climate adaptive 
measures in pastoral and agro-pastoral 
communities. It is a clear response to the 
devastating drought, environmental degradation, 
and poverty in the Horn of Africa. 
Strengthening Climate 
Information Systems for Climate 
Change Adaptation in the 
Greater Horn of Africa through 
Regional Cooperation 
US $9.5 million. The 
Green Climate Fund 
(GCF) 
The programme aims to strengthen the climate 
resilience of 8 targeted countries (all members of 
Intergovernmental Authority on Development) to 
the climate change impacts of extreme rainfall 
events, extreme droughts and floods that can be 
of transboundary nature and impact several 
countries at the same time. 
The Horn of Africa Climate 
Change Programme (HoA-CCP) 
€ 4.000.000 from the 
Netherlands Ministry of 
Foreign affairs (DGIS), 
A leverage to attract other financial resources and 
sustain the regional programme 
Financing Supports Regional 
Initiative on Communities 
Hosting Refugees - 2016 
$175 Million from the 
International 
Development 
Association (IDA), the 
World Bank’s fund for 
the poorest, and the 
Governments of 
Ethiopia, Uganda, and 
Djibouti 
To mitigate the impact of forced displacement on 
refugee-hosting communities in the Horn of Africa. 
Horn of Africa Regional Initiative 
- 2014 
$8 billion from World 
Bank, United Nations, 
African Union, 
European Union, 
African Development 
Bank, and the Islamic 
Development Bank 
To help the Horn of Africa countries address the 
drivers of fragility and conflict, particularly in 
tackling forced displacement, supporting 
populations in borderlands, and facilitating 
regional economic integration. 
Horn of Africa Initiative - 2021 
$83.6 million from the 
AfDB 
To boost cross-border trade in electricity between 
Ethiopia and Djibouti and to deepen integration in 
the Horn of Africa sub-region. 
COVID-19 Rapid Response 
Facility (CRF) - 2020 
$10 billion from AfDB 
To bolster health systems and disease 
surveillance, enhance infection prevention and 
control, and improve regional coordination by the 
East African Community (EAC) and the 
Intergovernmental Authority on Development 
(IGAD) to contain cross-border transmissions. 
Food and Nutrition Security 
Resilience Programme in the 
Horn of Africa - 2019 
$28 million - FAO 
The Program focusing on addressing the cause-
effect relationship between conflict and food 
insecurity in Somalia, South Sudan and Sudan, 
and seeks to set good examples of how to build 
food system resilience in protracted crises.

=== PAGE 125 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 117 
 
 
 
 
Resilient 
Landscapes 
and 
Livelihoods Project (FP136 - 
Ethiopia) – Approved in August 
2020 
 
$296 million from GCF 
and World Bank 
The Project aimed at improving climate resilience, 
land productivity and carbon storage and increase 
access to diversified livelihood activities in selected 
rural watersheds. 
Cooling facility (FP177-Multi-
country including Somalia) 
$879.8 million from 
GCF and World Bank 
An innovative, multi-sector and multi-country 
programmatic financing mechanism to help 
address the key sustainable development 
challenge of providing access to cooling while 
minimizing negative climate impacts. 
Inclusive Green Financing 
Initiative (IGREENFIN I): 
Greening 
Agricultural Banks & the 
Financial Sector to Foster 
Climate 
Resilient, Low Emission 
Smallholder Agriculture in the 
Great Green 
Wall (GGW) countries - Phase I 
(FP183 – Multi-country including 
Djibouti, Sudan and Ethiopia) 
€177.482 million from 
GCF and IFAD 
A cross-cutting programme will enhance access to 
credit and technical assistance for local farmers, 
farmers’ organizations, cooperatives and micro 
and small sized enterprises.

=== PAGE 126 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 118 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 2: 
2.1  Technologies for African Agriculture Transformation (TAAT) 
TAAT is an AfDB flagship program, which offers a wide range of technology brokerage services to 
assist African countries. The services include the latest climate-smart technologies, their accompanying 
management practices, and post-harvest and value-addition interventions. Different strategies are 
offered for different commodities but are usually combined to strengthen national food systems. The 
overall goal of TAAT which is an integral part of AfDB’s Feed Africa Strategy (2016–2025) is to radically 
transform African agriculture into a competitive sector by deploying high-impact, proven agricultural 
technologies to raise agricultural productivity in Africa; mitigate risks and promote diversification and 
processing in 18 agricultural value chains within eight priority intervention areas, namely: self-
sufficiency in rice production; cassava intensification; food and nutrition security in the Sahel; 
transforming African Savannahs into breadbaskets; revitalizing tree plantations; expanding horticulture; 
increasing Africa’s wheat production and achieving self-sufficiency in inland fish production. These’ 
work alongside six enabler domains that address transversal issues such as soil fertility management, 
water management, and capacity development, policy support, attracting African youth in agribusiness, 
and fall armyworm response.  
 
TAAT's partnership with the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) 
Centres and Advanced Agricultural Research Institutes, the world's largest global agricultural 
innovation network and provider of climate smart agricultural technologies. The CGIAR and Advanced 
Agricultural Research Institutes work in consortium with the National Agricultural Research and 
Extension Systems (NARES), Private sector, and Ministries of Agriculture. TAAT program has emerged 
as a cornerstone in the deployment of climate-smart innovations and technologies, particularly in the 
agricultural sector. This is achieved through a strategic focus on innovative farming solutions, large-
scale deployment of proven agricultural technologies, and the promotion of Climate Smart Agriculture 
(CSA) technologies and innovations.  
 
Climate-Smart Farming Solutions: 
Soil and Water Conservation Techniques: TAAT spearheads the adoption of innovative soil and water 
conservation techniques such as Zai, Half-moons, and Contour Lines Technique. These soil and water 
conservation techniques, specifically demonstrated to boost sorghum, maize millet production in the 
Sahel region, and dry areas in East  
Low-Cost Irrigation Technologies: Through its Water Enabler Compact (TAAT-WEC), TAAT promotes 
the use of cost-effective and easily deployable irrigation and water management technologies. This 
initiative not only improves water management and irrigation practices but also contributes significantly 
to climate-smart agriculture. 
 
Maize activities and Impact on Productivity: 
Drought-Tolerant Maize Varieties: The TAAT Maize Compact, led by the African Agricultural 
Technology Foundation (AATF), is disseminating climate-smart maize technologies such as the Water 
Efficient Maize Varieties and other breeding programs across 14 countries in Africa. These 
technologies are disseminated through a strong Public-Private Partnership (PPP) with significant 
participation of commercial seed companies, farmer groups, commodity associations, and National 
Agricultural Research Systems (NARS). When drought hit the Southern Africa region in 2019, TAAT 
deployed drought-tolerant maize varieties, which were cultivated by 5.2 million households on 841,000 
hectares. As a result, farmers survived the drought, allowing maize production to expand by 631,000 
metric tons of maize, with a value of USD 107 million. The TAAT Maize Compact also facilitated the 
establishment of 4,256 demonstration plots, conducted 757 field days, and distributed 84,321 free 
small-pack seeds to boost the scale-up of over 17,340 tons of climate-smart maize seeds. 
Market Linkages and Strategic Partnerships: The Maize Compact facilitates linkages between 
farmers and input/output markets, ensuring a ready market for maize grain at fair prices. Collaborations 
with agro-processors, grain off-takers, and millers have resulted in value-added products such as maize 
flour and stockfeed. TAAT, through its innovative approach of aggregating farmers into groups, has

=== PAGE 127 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 119 
 
 
 
 
facilitated contractual partnerships with maize off-takers, creating a demand for certified drought-
tolerant maize seed and ensuring a stable market for farmers. 
 
TAAT's Impact on Wheat Production: 
Wheat Seed Activities: In Ethiopia, following the recent successful and nationwide deployment of heat-
tolerant wheat varieties, the irrigated wheat area was rapidly expanded from less than 5,000 ha in 
2018/19 to 187,240 ha in 2020/21 and 650,000 ha in 2021/22. On average, yields of wheat increased 
on average from 2.0 tons/ha to 4 tons/ha. Ethiopia’s wheat production increased by an additional 1.6 
million metric tonnes in 2022, and the country achieved self-sufficiency in wheat production.  Ethiopia 
says it is poised to export wheat for the first time in the coming wheat season. This model is being 
upscaled to other East African countries of Sudan, Tanzania, etc.  
Strategic Initiative and Capacity Building: TAAT places a strong emphasis on capacity building, 
providing hands-on training for seed technicians, pioneer farmers, and youth engaged in community-
based seed production. The program's approach involves the establishment of Innovation Platform (IP) 
sites, promoting the adoption of heat-tolerant wheat varieties with associated management packages. 
 
Sustainable Livestock Production: 
Comprehensive Livestock Technologies: TAAT's involvement in sustainable livestock production 
includes water storage facilities, feed mixers, slaughtering equipment, rotational grazing, eco-friendly 
production equipment. The program also emphasizes research on high-performance animal breeds 
with enhanced yield and quality and  the soil mapping to support integrated soil fertility management 
usage in the production of livestock feed. The program supports the processing of livestock waste into 
compost, contributing to sustainable waste management practices. Private sector participation is 
encouraged through the Risk Sharing Facility (RSF), to finance private enterprises involved in livestock 
production. 
 
Sustainable Horticulture and Vegetable Production: 
Climate-Resilient Varieties and Precision Farming: TAAT through its compact led by WorldVeg focuses 
on introducing heat-tolerant, high-yield, and disease-resistant varieties in horticulture and vegetable 
production. TAAT promotes precision farming, changes in cropping patterns, and the use of early 
warning systems for sustainable horticulture and vegetable production. Moreover, soil mapping guides 
fertilizer use, and efficient water management policies are implemented to ensure sustainable practices 
in horticulture and vegetable production. 
 
Sustainable Staple Crops Production: 
Climate-Resilient Staple Crops production: TAAT focuses on sustainable intensification of adapted 
cassava, maize, rice, and soya seed varieties. The program advocates for the use of improved short-
cycle, heat, and drought-tolerant rice, cassava, maize, and soybean varieties. The program 
emphasizes the production of early generation seeds (EGS) and the construction of Semi-Autotrophic 
Hydroponics technology (SAH) centers for rapid multiplication of seed and demo trials. Integrated rice-
based farming systems, efficient irrigation, the use of climate-resilient cultivars, weather-proof farming 
equipment and post-harvest facilities contribute to sustainable staple crops production. The adoption 
of no-tillage practices, organic fertilizers, and precision farming techniques further enhances climate-
smart agriculture. 
Innovative Financing and Climate Forecasting: Innovative financing, including the Risk Sharing Facility 
(RSF), and crop insurance schemes are introduced to attract private sector participation in staple crops 
production. TAAT emphasizes the importance of climate forecasting and monitoring systems, 
leveraging remote sensing technologies for informed decision-making. 
 
In summary, TAAT's multifaceted approach encompasses innovative farming techniques, adoption of 
climate-smart technologies, strategic partnerships, and capacity building. This comprehensive strategy 
is instrumental in deploying climate-smart innovations and technologies, ensuring increased 
productivity, improved income for farmers, and addressing challenges related to climate change in the 
agricultural sector. The program's success stories in various agricultural domains showcase its vital 
role in advancing sustainable practices across the African continent.

=== PAGE 128 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 120 
 
 
 
 
 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
The Monitoring and Evaluation of Agri-Science Uptake in Research and Extension (MPRO) is a well 
thought out monitoring and evaluation system providing a new cutting-edge data collection architecture 
that uses analytical tools and latest methods for tracking progress and assessing performance results 
based on defined program indicators. Fully deployed in TAAT spanning in 31 countries with a 
powerface data collection interface, the tool uses innovative analytical tools to showcase 
implementation progress of ongoing field work and provides access to real time data highlighting how 
TAAT is positively impacting smallholder farmer behaviours that lead to transformative change. This 
innovative platform provides a holistic and comprehensive data collection, analysis, and visualization 
solution, offering valuable insights through an intuitive, interactive dashboard. The project’s M&E 
system and related activities will be financed and supported by funds allocated to the M&E. Using the 
project’s M&E planned budget, this existing digital tool MPRO will be applied to this project and used 
to inform progress on adaptation to the M&E systems in each of the participating countries. This 
involves ensuring data is correctly and timely gathered on adaptation related activities in each 
participating country. The MPRO Platform has been designed to encourage reshare and reuse of the 
M&E data for: (i) routinely monitoring the progress in real-time beyond indicators and reporting, (ii) 
continuously providing insightful evidence of achievement for management decision making to improve 
implementation, (iii) Interactive dashboards for data visualization and (iv) enhanced performance 
reporting. The platform automatically aggregates data and has information available in an organized 
space saving time, resources, and reduces the risk of errors when retrieving data. The system will 
empower the entire ecosystem of partners and stakeholders across all targeted countries in IGAD to 
make informed decision as a pivotal digitally enabled system in the new cutting-edge Tech enabled-
M&E arena. Additionally, MPRO is interoperable with other Management Information Systems (MIS). 
In this case, no duplicate efforts will be needed both for AfDB and GCF internal M&E systems to receive 
data in real-time. The platform which is already effective, will be populated with results, and greater 
resources and expertise will be dedicated to M&E activities, particularly at the community level and to 
inform progress on adaptation. 
 
2.2  Affirmative Finance Action for Women in Africa (AFAWA) 
 
Affirmative Finance Action for Women in Africa (AFAWA) is a pan-African initiative to bridge the USD 
42 billion financing gap facing women in all countries in Africa, with the aim of strengthening enabling 
environments and stakeholder capacity. Financing will be in-form of loans (concessional and market-
rate). AFAWA adopts a holistic approach through three pillars. AFAWA finance leverages the AfDB’s 
financial instruments and has two innovative solutions to drastically transform the banking and financial 
landscape in Africa and to create incentives for lending to women in business: (i) USD 300 million risk-
sharing instrument to unlock USD 3 billion in credit for women businesses and enterprises in Africa. 
This mechanism will build upon the existing network of commercial banks and microfinance institutions 
to create structural change and lasting impact for women, and (ii) rating system to evaluate financial 
institutions based on the share and quality of their lending to women, and their socio-economic impact. 
Top institutions will be rewarded with preferential financing terms from AfDB. AFAWA technical 
assistance provides advisory services to financial institutions to ensure successful implementation of 
their product portfolios for women and strengthens the capacity of women entrepreneurs through 
training to enhance business productivity and growth. AFAWA technical assistance provides advisory 
services to financial institutions to ensure successful implementation of their product portfolios for 
women and strengthens the capacity of women entrepreneurs through training to enhance business 
productivity and growth. AFAWA enabling environment engages with African Governments and other 
key stakeholders to support legal, policy and regulatory reforms and strike down the structural barriers 
impeding women in business. 
 
Through the Bank's commitment to fostering access to finance and technical support for Women-led 
Small and Medium Enterprises (WSMEs), AFAWA achieved significant milestones in 2023, a year of 
resilience and transformation. In collaboration with 96 financial institutions across 32 regional member 
countries, AFAWA unlocked a cumulative lending of about USD 1.6 billion by leveraging on the Bank’s

=== PAGE 129 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 121 
 
 
 
 
investments and AFAWA risk sharing mechanism implemented by the African Guarantee Fund (AGF). 
As of end of 2023, AFAWA counts a cumulative amount of USD 54.5 million approved and signed 
technical assistance projects, which participate in strengthening Partners Financial Institutions’ value 
propositions for women market; strengthening the women entrepreneurs’ capacities; and shaping a 
conducive enabling environment for women’s access to finance on the continent. AFAWA’s deployment 
after two years has contributed to multiply the volume of the Bank’s investments towards WSMEs 
benefiting a total of 7,193 vibrant women-led SMEs continent-wide. 
 
Enhancing Visibility and Empowering Financial Institutions: Throughout 2023, AFAWA extended its 
reach beyond Tanzania and the Democratic Republic of Congo, organizing 4 additional AFAWA 
Finance Series, in partnership with the African Guarantee Fund (AGF) in Ghana (February), Angola 
(March), Nigeria (October), and Kenya (November). These events focused on advocating with 
Countries’ Central Banks for crucial actions and reforms, resulting cumulatively in the training of over 
500 bankers and Financial Ecosystem practitioners over two days, emphasizing smart-gender investing 
and building strong value propositions for WSMEs. 
 
Strengthening the ecosystem and Championing Reform Advocacy: AFAWA has played a pivotal role 
in policy reform, currently supporting 20 member countries in developing gender-responsive policies 
for WSMEs’ access to finance in partnership with the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI). 
Simultaneously, the program is partnering with 10 Women Entrepreneurship Enablers to support over 
8,000 WSMEs in accessing finance in 20 African countries. 
 
On special projects, the Bank through AFAWA signed an agreement in February 2023 with Femmes 
Afrique Solidarite under the African Union Empowering women in agriculture initiative to capacitate 
women cooperatives in the cashew sector in Tanzania. The USD 280,000 grant will enable the women 
to increase their cashew production from 500 to 3,000 metric tonnes while meeting the quality standers 
required by cashew off-takers. During the month of March 2023, the Bank through AFAWA signed $425 
million Technical Assistance grant with Banque du Commerce et d’Industrie de Mauritanie to support 
its goals of supporting access to finance for WSMEs in Mauritania, Mali, Guinea, and Senegal. The 
grant follows a $7 million trade facility to BCI signed in 2022. With the support of AFAWA under the 
Guarantee for Growth (G4G) program, Zambia National Commercial Bank (ZANACO) launched the 
Zee Women’s Banking program, that is extending credit facilities to all women in the program with no 
collateral requirements. In the context of the launch, ZANACO hosted its inaugural Zee Women’s 
Banking Awards, on March 07 in Lusaka, to celebrate the accomplishments of the women 
entrepreneurs who have made a positive impact in their areas of expertise. Awards were presented in 
categories such as: Entrepreneurs of the Year, CEO of the Year, Creative of the Year, Rising Star 
Youth, among others awarded to top performers in their sector. 
 
The Bank together with AGF went on a business development mission to Djibouti in March 2024 to 
explore opportunities for AFAWA through the financial sector and potentially at government level with 
the recently approved project with the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI). Following the mission 
colleagues from AGF are discussing with some of the financial institutions who have expressed initial 
interest in the AFAWA Guarantee Mechanism. AFAWA in partnership with the African Guarantee Fund 
and the African Bankers’ Award has integrated a new award category, namely the AFAWA Bank of the 
Year Award, which goes to the bank that has greatly incorporated the development and growth of 
WSMEs as an integrated part of their SME strategy. Letshego Microfinance Bank Nigeria h allocated 
63% of its 5,115 loans to support women-led small businesses through their innovative Step Up Loan 
solution. 
 
Pathway towards Unlocking USD 5 billion and Bridging the Gender Financial Gap in Africa: Looking 
ahead, AfDB commitment to unlocking the targeted USD 5 billion remains strong. A comprehensive 
approach will guide AFAWA’s efforts on fostering lasting partnerships and synergies while accelerating 
mainstreaming AFAWA into the bank’s operations across the sectors and the regions. In 2024, AFAWA 
intends to enhance efforts in pursuing de-risking, empowering, and transforming the landscape for 
women-led SMEs in Africa while ensuring a greater impact and inclusive growth for years to come.

=== PAGE 130 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 122 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3 
The Africa Adaptation Acceleration Program (AAAP) 
 
The AAAP is an initiative to scale up adaptation efforts and mobilise USD 25 billion to support climate-
resilient development in Africa. Led by the African Development Bank (AfDB) and the Global Centre on 
Adaptation, the programme focuses on strengthening the capacity of African countries to adapt to the 
impacts of climate change. It comprises several pillars addressing critical areas such as agriculture and 
food security, resilient infrastructure, youth empowerment for entrepreneurship and job creation in 
climate adaptation and resilience, and innovative financing initiatives.  
 
Agriculture and food security pillar: Agriculture is vital to Africa's economies, employing more than 
half the population and contributing 25% to GDP. However, climate change poses significant 
challenges to the continent's agriculture, affecting food security and incomes, particularly for women 
and rural households. The use of digital technology offers potential solutions, with estimates of 40-70% 
increases in yields and incomes. However, some 250 million people, including smallholder farmers and 
pastoralists, lack access to digital agricultural services. The Agriculture and Food Security Pillar aims 
to scale up the adoption of climate-smart digital technologies and related data-driven agricultural and 
financial services for at least 30 million farmers in Africa by 2025, leading to improved food security for 
at least 10 million people in 26 least developed countries. Projects supported include Programme to 
Build Resilience for Food and Nutrition Security in the Horn of Africa (BREFONS, 331,914 euros). In 
this project, AAAP's added value is evident through the provision of upstream technical assistance to 
ensure the integration of climate-smart digital technologies for adaptation into the project. This includes 
several completed tasks such as the preparation of Digital Adaptation Profiles for Kenya & Ethiopia, 
technical reports on agricultural insurance support, and national multi-stakeholder workshops to identify 
key digital adaptation solutions. The project aims to achieve several outcomes, including benefiting 1.3 
million farmers and pastoralists and 15 million livestock through the use of gender-responsive climate 
services. It aims to create 55,000 jobs for youth and women, while cultivating 170,000 hectares using 
digital climate-smart solutions. 
 
National Integrated Livestock Development Programme in Senegal Phase 1 (PNDIES P1, €300,000). 
The objective of the programme is to contribute to the development of competitive, climate-resilient and 
job-creating value chains for youth and women. In pursuit of this goal, the AAAP has provided several 
value-added activities. These include conducting an evidence-based assessment of PNDIES' climate 
vulnerability and identifying strategic options for integrating digital and smart agriculture to address 
climate change. In addition, AAAP has analysed the climate vulnerability of livestock value chains to 
inform adaptation strategies. It has also identified constraints and opportunities for private sector 
investment in digital tools for adaptation, facilitated multi-stakeholder dialogues and actions to increase 
commitment to climate adaptation in the livestock sector, and conducted capacity building for livestock 
professional associations on the use of digital tools to build resilience in the livestock sector. 
 
Programme to Build Resilience to Food and Nutrition Insecurity in the Sahel (P2 P2RS, €409,163). The 
programme aims to contribute to the improvement of living conditions and food and nutrition security in 
the Sahel and West Africa region. AAAP added value to the programme through the dissemination of 
climate information services, in particular by promoting public-private partnerships to facilitate the 
sustainable production of hydro-climatic information and services, thereby creating employment 
opportunities for young people. In Niger, the project supported the organisation of a regional fair on 
best practices and technological innovations for climate change adaptation, mitigation and resilience, 
including digital solutions. In The Gambia, the project focused on upgrading the electronic farmer 
registry and integrating project beneficiaries, providing digital/mobile extension services through 
agritech providers, and supporting the development and implementation of national frameworks for 
climate services. Through these initiatives, the project strengthened regional cooperation and used 
digital technologies to promote climate resilience and adaptation in the target countries and regional 
entities covered by the project.

=== PAGE 131 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 123 
 
 
 
 
Programme for Integrated Development and Adaptation to Climate Change in the Zambezi River Basin 
(PIDACC Zambezi, EUR 417,937). In this African Development Bank investment, the AAAP has made 
significant progress on several fronts. It carried out mapping exercises to identify digital technologies 
suitable for climate adaptation and to highlight their applicability in different sectors. It has also 
deepened understanding of the challenges and opportunities associated with using digital tools for 
climate adaptation. By providing actionable recommendations and facilitating engagement 
opportunities, the AAAP has strengthened climate adaptation efforts through digital technologies. It has 
also developed a comprehensive database cataloguing existing technologies, their applications in 
agriculture and digital solutions for climate adaptation. AAAP also facilitated training sessions on key 
topics such as water accounting, integration of remote sensing and hydro-meteorological data for 
sustainable water management, and climate adaptation strategies, including regional climate insurance 
and weather risk pooling. 
 
Climate Resilient Wheat Value Chain Development Project (CREW, €150,000). AAAP's contribution to 
the CREW project is to introduce climate adaptation measures and integrate digital adaptation solutions 
throughout the wheat value chain. This includes assessing local climatic conditions and food security, 
developing micro-regional climate risk maps, and facilitating stakeholder workshops to identify priority 
digital extension mechanisms. In addition, AAAP supports capacity building of extension agents and 
stakeholders involved in the implementation of digital climate advisory services. These efforts aim to 
increase the resilience of Ethiopia's wheat production system, improve wheat production and 
productivity, and promote national wheat self-sufficiency, regional trade and exports. 
 
Mkondvo Ngwavuma Water Augmentation Programme (MNWAP, €249,952). The overall objective of 
MNWAP is to improve food security, poverty reduction and climate change resilience by supporting the 
development of water and irrigation infrastructure in Eswatini. The project will contribute to poverty 
reduction in the target region. Increased production will lead to higher incomes for producers and 
improve their social and economic well-being. AAAP will contribute to increasing agricultural 
productivity and growth in the agricultural sector, and significantly improve food and nutrition security 
and incomes by providing climate risk assessments to improve the project.  The project will transform 
approximately 9,400 hectares of uncultivated land into diversified commercial cash crops. The 
programme aims to create 100,000 direct jobs and many more indirect employment opportunities. 
 
Technical assistance: Stakeholder workshops were conducted in all regions of Africa to prioritise digital 
extension mechanisms and promote the adoption of Digital Climate Advisory Services (DCAS). These 
trainings aimed to inform and strengthen the capacity of selected public and private actors, enabling 
them to share knowledge, best practices and experiences, and explore innovative approaches to 
promote the adoption of DCAS in their respective regions. The training focused on the design and 
implementation of DCAS projects tailored to reach the last mile, thereby empowering farmers to 
improve food security and climate resilience. To date, more than 500 participants have been trained in 
South, East, West and Central Africa.

=== PAGE 132 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 124 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 3: 
Table A.4: Assignment of EEs  
Component 
Output 
Activity 
Financin
g Source 
Executing Entity 
(EE) 
Component 1: 
Strengthening Pastoral 
and Agropastoral 
Production Systems’ 
Resilience to Climate 
Change 
Output 1.1: Climate 
resilient infrastructure 
built/rehabilitated 
Activity 1.1.1: Construct 
or rehabilitate and 
manage water harvesting 
infrastructure 
ADF 
Grant 
MoAWFL, Djibouti;  
MoA, Ethiopia;  
MoLFR, Somalia;  
MoAF, South 
Sudan 
Gov't 
Contributi
ons 
GCF 
Loan 
Activity 1.1.2: Construct 
or rehabilitate and 
manage community 
irrigation schemes 
ADF 
Grant 
MoAWFL, Djibouti;  
MoA, Ethiopia; 
MoAWFLC, Kenya;   
MoAF, South 
Sudan 
GCF 
Loan 
Activity 1.1.3: Construct 
or rehabilitate and 
manage community 
livestock infrastructure 
ADF 
Grant 
MoAWFL, Djibouti;  
MoA, Ethiopia; 
MoAWFLC, Kenya;  
MoLFR, Somalia;  
MoAF, South 
Sudan 
ADF 
Loan 
Output 1.2: Improved 
sustainable land 
management practices 
Activity 1.2.1: Train 
communities on 
sustainable land 
management best 
practices 
ADF 
Grant 
MoAWFL, Djibouti;  
MoA, Ethiopia; 
MoAWFLC, Kenya;   
MoAF, South 
Sudan; 
IGAD 
ADF 
Loan 
GCF 
Grant 
Activity 1.2.2: Support 
sustainable rangeland 
management and 
agroforestry 
ADF 
Grant 
MoAWFL, Djibouti;  
MoA, Ethiopia; 
MoAWFLC, Kenya;  
MoLFR, Somalia;  
MoAF, South 
Sudan; 
IGAD 
ADF 
Loan 
GCF 
Grant 
Output 1.3: Increased 
adoption of climate-
smart innovations 
Activity 1.3.1: Provide 
extension services and 
deploy climate-smart 
innovations to improve 
agricultural and fodder 
production 
ADF 
Grant 
MoAWFL, Djibouti;  
MoA, Ethiopia; 
MoAWFLC, Kenya;  
MoLFR, Somalia;  
MoAF, South 
Sudan; 
IGAD 
ADF 
Loan 
GCF 
Grant

=== PAGE 133 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 125 
 
 
 
 
Activity 1.3.2: 
Disseminate resilient 
varieties to improve 
agricultural and fodder 
production 
ADF 
Loan 
MoAWFL, Djibouti;  
MoA, Ethiopia; 
MoAWFLC, Kenya;  
MoLFR, Somalia;  
MoAF, South 
Sudan 
GCF 
Grant 
Component 2: 
Supporting low carbon 
and resilient 
Development of 
Agribusiness 
Output 2.1: Increased 
access to digital advisory 
services and markets 
Activity 2.1.1: Establish 
and deploy digital advisory 
services using PPP 
mechanism 
ADF 
Grant 
MoAWFL, Djibouti;  
MoA, Ethiopia; 
MoAWFLC, Kenya;  
MoLFR, Somalia;  
MoAF, South 
Sudan; 
IGAD 
ADF 
Loan 
GCF 
Grant 
Activity 2.1.2: Construct 
rural markets  
ADF 
Grant 
MoAWFL, Djibouti;  
MoA, Ethiopia; 
MoAWFLC, Kenya;  
MoLFR, Somalia;  
MoAF, South 
Sudan; 
GCF 
Grant 
GCF 
Loan 
Output 2.2: Developed 
inclusive MSMEs and 
cooperatives with access 
to climate financing 
Activity 2.2.1: Train 
women and youth on 
entrepreneurial skills 
development in renewable 
energy technologies 
ADF 
Grant 
MoAWFL, Djibouti;  
MoA, Ethiopia; 
MoAWFLC, Kenya;  
MoLFR, Somalia;  
MoAF, South 
Sudan; 
ADF 
Loan 
GCF 
Grant 
Activity 2.2.2: Facilitate 
access for women and 
youth groups to renewable 
energy (solar and 
biodigester systems) to 
enhance alternative 
income generation 
ADF 
Grant 
MoAWFL, Djibouti;  
MoA, Ethiopia; 
MoAWFLC, Kenya;  
MoLFR, Somalia;  
MoAF, South 
Sudan; 
GCF 
Grant 
Activity 2.2.3: Design and 
operationalise innovative 
credit lines via selected 
local PFIs, in participating 
countries. 
GCF 
Grant 
MoAWFL, Djibouti;  
MoA, Ethiopia 
GCF 
Loan 
Activity 2.2.4: Provide 
technical assistance to 
MSMEs, local PFIs, and 
cooperatives to create an 
enabling environment for 
credit access and 
sustainability 
ADF 
Grant 
MoA, Ethiopia; 
MoAWFLC, Kenya;  
MoLFR, Somalia;  
ADF 
Loan 
GCF 
Grant 
Component 3: 
Strengthening Rural 
Communities’ Capacity 
to Adapt to Climate 
Change 
Output 3.1: Enhanced 
access to climate 
information and early 
warning systems 
Activity 3.1.1: Expand 
agrometeorological 
stations network to 
generate data for climate 
advisory services 
ADF 
Grant 
MoAWFL, Djibouti;  
MoA, Ethiopia; 
MoAWFLC, Kenya;   
MoAF, South 
Sudan; 
ADF 
Loan 
GCF 
Grant

=== PAGE 134 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 126 
 
 
 
 
Activity 3.1.2: Integrate 
and disseminate climate 
information and early 
warning into the 
established digital 
advisory services  
ADF 
Grant 
MoAWFL, Djibouti;  
MoA, Ethiopia; 
MoAWFLC, Kenya;   
MoAF, South 
Sudan; 
IGAD 
ADF 
Loan 
GCF 
Grant 
Output 3.2: 
Strengthened regulatory 
and policy frameworks 
and institutional capacity 
for climate resilience. 
Activity 3.2.1: Support 
delivery of climate 
regulatory framework and 
mainstreaming of climate 
change into agricultural 
sector policies and 
strategies 
ADF 
Grant 
MoAWFL, Djibouti;  
MoA, Ethiopia; 
MoAWFLC, Kenya;  
MoLFR, Somalia;  
MoAF, South 
Sudan; 
IGAD 
ADF 
Loan 
GCF 
Grant 
Component 4: 
Program Coordination 
and Knowledge 
Management 
Output 4.1: Project 
management and 
coordination 
Activity 4.1.1: Project 
management and 
Coordination 
ADF 
Grant 
MoAWFL, Djibouti;  
MoA, Ethiopia; 
MoAWFLC, Kenya;  
MoLFR, Somalia;  
MoAF, South 
Sudan; 
IGAD 
ADF 
Loan 
GCF 
Grant 
Activity 4.1.2: Technical 
and institutional capacity 
building 
ADF 
Grant 
MoAWFL, Djibouti;  
MoA, Ethiopia; 
MoAWFLC, Kenya;  
MoLFR, Somalia;  
MoAF, South 
Sudan; 
IGAD 
ADF 
Loan 
Activity 4.1.3: Monitoring 
and Evaluation 
ADF 
Grant 
MoAWFL, Djibouti;  
MoA, Ethiopia; 
MoAWFLC, Kenya;  
MoLFR, Somalia;  
MoAF, South 
Sudan; 
IGAD 
GCF 
Grant 
Activity 4.1.4: Knowledge 
Management and 
Communication 
ADF 
Grant 
MoAWFL, Djibouti;  
MoA, Ethiopia; 
MoAWFLC, Kenya;  
MoLFR, Somalia;  
MoAF, South 
Sudan; 
IGAD

=== PAGE 135 ===
*ê
â*
RepueLroue oe D.lreoul
Ururtr-Écnlrrr-PRrx
MITIsTTRT DE L'ENVIRoNNEIMENT
ET DU Drvrlopprvrxt DunRatr
LE SECRÉTAIRE CÉruÉNEI
N.t+0
Djibouti, le 0 g ApR ZglJ
MEDD
is+++ L^;.lt+=*l'
ù*Jl - Ëlrt,*^Jl -;r-3Jl
âj-J+ll î,:l:s
Ll rr,,, Jl 4J^jillJ
ptrJt g,r.ïl
aSr
\J
,-.à,i ^"-
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by the African Development Bank regarding program to
Build Resilience and Food Security in the Horn of Africa
Dear lVladam, Sir,
WgL"t"t to the programme titled Program to Build Resilience and Food Security in the Horn of Africa
(BREF?A1S) in Diibouti as included in the funding proposal submitted by African Devetopment Bank to
us on '17 December 2021 .
The undersigned is the duly authortzed representative of Ministry of Environment and Sustainable
Developpement, the Nationat Designated Authority of Djibouti.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.0B/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we
hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included inlhe funding proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The government of Djibouti has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding
proposal;
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the natjonal priorities
strategies and plans of D1ibouti;
(c) ln accordance with the GCF's environmentaland social safeguards, the programme as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws ànd regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programmeas included
in the funding proposal has been duly followed
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within the
scope of the programme
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
To: The Executive Director
Green Climate Fund ("GCF")
Kind regards,
Ministry of Envi
@
nd Su
t
nable
g,
| +zs3 3s-Bs-22
18
ent
BP 11
Secretary
Dini
No-objection letters issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 137 ===
REPUBLIC OF KENYA 
I 
I 
THE NATIONAL TREASURY AND ECONOMIC PLANNING 
Telegraphic Address: 22921 
FAX NO. 310833 
Telephone: 2252299 
I 
When Replying Please Quote 
Ref: TNT/CONF/36/021/C/ (96) 
Ms. Mufalda Duarte 
Executive Director 
Green Climate Fund 
G-Tower, 24-4 Songdo-dong 
Yeonsu-gu 
lncheon City, Republic of Korea 
THE NATIONAL TREASURY 
PO BOX 30007 -00100 
NAIROBI 
Date: November 16, 2023 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by the African Development Bank- Agriculture Research, 
Production and Sustaina,bility Division - regarding Financing the Program to Build 
Resilience and Food Security in the Horn of Africa. 
We refer to the programme titled "Program to Build Resilience and Food Security in the Horn 
of Africa (BREFONS)" as included in the funding proposal submitted by the Africa Development 
Bank on Noveµiber, 13 2023. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the National Treasury, the National 
Designated Authority of Kenya. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we 
hereby communicate our no-objection to the project as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a) The Government of Kenya has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding 
proposal; 
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national 
priorities, strategies and plans of Kenya;

=== PAGE 138 ===
(c) In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the programme as 
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and 
regulations. 
We also i::onfirm that our national process for ascert~ining no-objection to 1the programme as 
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. Further, we confirm that our no-objection 
applies to all projects or activities to be implemented within the scope of the prol!'rarnme. 
I 
I 
I 
V 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website. 
, Yow-s 5/A. 
DR. CHRIS Kl 
0, CBS 
PRINCIPAL SECRETARY/NATIONAL TREASURY 
Copy to: 
Prof. Njuguna Ndung'u, CBS 
Cabinet Secretary 
The National Treasury and Economic Planning 
NAIROBI 
Laouali GARBA 
Division Manager 
Agriculture Research, Production and Sustainability Division (AHAl.2) 
African Development Bank 
'

=== PAGE 141 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Building Climate Resilience for Food and Livelihoods in the 
Horn of Africa (BREFOL) 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
African Development Bank (AfDB) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, and South Sudan 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, February 2, 2024 
Language(s) of disclosure 
Djibouti: French 
Ethiopia: English, Amharic 
Kenya: English  
Somalia: English, Somali  
South Sudan: English 
Explanation on language 
Due to the African Development Bank’s multicultural status 
and depending on the country’s preference, all 
communications are made through the use of one of the two 
official languages, English and French. In Ethiopia and 
Somalia, where the official languages are Amharic and 
Somali, respectively, we have also published the documents 
in these languages.   
Link to disclosure 
Djibouti 
English: 
https://www.afdb.org/sites/default/files/djibouti_cges_drl
sp_ii_vf_30.09.21_-_version_anglaise.pdf 
French: 
http://www.maepe-
rh.dj/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=91
&Itemid=374 
Ethiopia 
English: 
https://www.afdb.org/sites/default/files/esmf_main_repor
t_final_21_september_2021_ethiopia_0.pdf 
Amharic: 
http://moa.gov.et/images/2023/BREFONS______ESMF.pdf 
Kenya 
English: 
https://www.afdb.org/sites/default/files/kenya_esmf_final
-revised_.pdf

=== PAGE 142 ===
Somalia 
English: 
https://www.afdb.org/sites/default/files/environmental_a
nd_social_management_framework_-_brefons_-_somalia.pdf  
 
Somali: 
https://molfr.gov.so/wp-
content/uploads/2024/01/Somali-Version-ESMF-
report.pdf 
 
South Sudan 
English:  
https://www.afdb.org/sites/default/files/ssd_environment
al_and_social_management_framework_ssd-
_hoa_project_em2.pdf 
Other link(s) 
AfDB 
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational-
program-build-resilience-food-and-nutrition-security-horn-
africa-p-z1-c00-073   
 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and Fisheries of 
Djibouti 
French:  
http://www.maepe-
rh.dj/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=91
&Itemid=374  
 
Ministry of Agriculture of Ethiopia 
English: 
http://moa.gov.et/images/2023/Ethiopia_ESMF_version_G
CF24Jan2024.pdf 
 
Amharic:  
http://moa.gov.et/images/2023/BREFONS______ESMF.pdf 
 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and 
Cooperatives of Kenya 
English: 
https://kilimo.go.ke/wp-
content/uploads/2024/01/ENVIRONMENTAL-AND-
SOCIAL-MANAGEMENT-FRAMEWORK-ESMF-FOR-
BREFONS.pdf 
 
Ministry of Livestock Forestry & Range of Somalia  
English:  
https://molfr.gov.so/wp-
content/uploads/2024/01/Somalia_ESMF-
version_GCF25Jan2024-1.pdf  
 
Somali: 
https://molfr.gov.so/wp-
content/uploads/2024/01/Somali-Version-ESMF-
report.pdf

=== PAGE 143 ===
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security of South 
Sudan 
English:  
https://mafs.gov.ss/wp-
content/uploads/2024/01/South_Sudan_ESMF_version_GC
F24Jan2024.pdf   
Remarks 
A framework for an ESIA consistent with the requirements 
for a Category B programme is contained in the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
for each of the target countries. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, February 2, 2024 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English, Amharic, French, and Somali  
Explanation on language 
Due to the African Development Bank’s multicultural status 
and depending on the country’s preference, all 
communications are made through the use of one of the two 
official languages, English and French. In Ethiopia and 
Somalia, where the official languages are Amharic and 
Somali, respectively, we have also published the documents 
in these languages 
Link to disclosure 
Djibouti 
English: 
https://www.afdb.org/sites/default/files/djibouti_cges_drl
sp_ii_vf_30.09.21_-_version_anglaise.pdf  
 
French: 
http://www.maepe-
rh.dj/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=91
&Itemid=374 
 
Ethiopia 
English: 
https://www.afdb.org/sites/default/files/esmf_main_repor
t_final_21_september_2021_ethiopia_0.pdf  
 
Amharic: 
http://moa.gov.et/images/2023/BREFONS______ESMF.pdf  
 
Kenya 
English:https://www.afdb.org/sites/default/files/kenya_es
mf_final-revised_.pdf 
 
Somalia 
English: 
https://www.afdb.org/sites/default/files/environmental_a
nd_social_management_framework_-_brefons_-_somalia.pdf  
 
Somali: 
https://molfr.gov.so/wp-
content/uploads/2024/01/Somali-Version-ESMF-
report.pdf 
 
South Sudan 
English:

=== PAGE 144 ===
https://www.afdb.org/sites/default/files/ssd_environment
al_and_social_management_framework_ssd-
_hoa_project_em2.pdf 
Other link(s) 
AfDB 
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/multinational-
program-build-resilience-food-and-nutrition-security-horn-
africa-p-z1-c00-073   
 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and Fisheries of 
Djibouti 
French:  
http://www.maepe-
rh.dj/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=91
&Itemid=374  
 
Ministry of Agriculture of Ethiopia 
English: 
http://moa.gov.et/images/2023/Ethiopia_ESMF_version_G
CF24Jan2024.pdf 
 
Amharic:  
http://moa.gov.et/images/2023/BREFONS______ESMF.pdf 
 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and 
Cooperatives of Kenya 
English: 
https://kilimo.go.ke/wp-
content/uploads/2024/01/ENVIRONMENTAL-AND-
SOCIAL-MANAGEMENT-FRAMEWORK-ESMF-FOR-
BREFONS.pdf 
 
Ministry of Livestock Forestry & Range of Somalia  
English:  
https://molfr.gov.so/wp-
content/uploads/2024/01/Somalia_ESMF-
version_GCF25Jan2024-1.pdf  
 
Somali: 
https://molfr.gov.so/wp-
content/uploads/2024/01/Somali-Version-ESMF-
report.pdf 
 
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security of South 
Sudan 
English:  
https://mafs.gov.ss/wp-
content/uploads/2024/01/South_Sudan_ESMF_version_GC
F24Jan2024.pdf 
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
programme is contained in the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) for each of the target 
countries. 
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A

=== PAGE 145 ===
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Friday, February 2, 2024 
Place 
Djibouti 
Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Fisheries and Livestock 
(MoAWFL), Zone Boulaos – BP: 4250, Djibouti – République 
de Djibouti 
Ethiopia 
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), PO Box 62347, Addis Ababa, 
Ethiopia 
Kenya 
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development, 
Cathedral Road, Nairobi, P. O. Box 30028-00100 Kenya 
Somalia 
Ministry of Livestock, Forestry and Range, Warta Nabada 
District 
Mogadishu, Somalia 
South Sudan 
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, Ministries 
Complex, Juba, South Sudan.  
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
Monday, September 30, 2024 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting 
Monday, July 15, 2024 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 146 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 146 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP239 
Proposal name: 
Building Climate Resilience for Food and Livelihoods in the Horn 
of Africa (BREFOL) 
Accredited entity: 
African Development Bank (AfDB) 
Country/(ies): 
Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia and South Sudan 
Project/programme size: 
Large 
I.
Overall assessment of the Secretariat
1.
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following
remarks:
Strengths 
Points of caution 
The programme presents innovative 
solutions to improve, at scale, the adaptive 
capacity of communities in the Horn of Africa 
through improved production and 
productivity of local agricultural and food 
systems and improved management of 
rangeland and agropastoral landscapes. 
As three of the five target countries are 
currently affected by conflict, and social and 
institutional fragility, there are additional 
risks for a timely and synchronized 
implementation of the programme. Several 
mitigation measures, including separate 
disbursement per country and reallocation 
clauses, have been included in the design. 
The focus on agribusiness development, 
especially youth and women-led micro, small 
and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), and 
the deployment of innovative financial 
instruments including credit lines and simple 
co-financing with selected private investors 
and intermediary financial institutions will 
help to stimulate investment for building 
climate change resilience through 
transformation of the agricultural and food 
systems and management of rangeland 
ecosystems in the Horn of Africa region. 
Implementation through both national and 
regional institutions is commendable, 
because it will enable building on the existing 
capacities, structures and governance 
mechanisms in the Horn of Africa, while 
continuing to build the region’s capacity at all 
levels.

=== PAGE 147 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 147 
 
 
 
 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal in accordance with the 
term sheet agreed between the Secretariat and the accredited entity, and, if considered 
appropriate, subject to the conditions set out in Annex II of document GCF/B.39/02. 
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment 
2.1 
Programme background  
3. 
The Building Climate Resilience for Food and Livelihoods in the Horn of Africa (BREFOL) 
programme is a large-scale intervention aimed at reducing climate-induced food insecurity in 
the Horn of Africa, which is one of the world’s most disaster-prone regions, with debilitating 
food-insecure conditions arising from various hazards in the region. The objective of the 
programme is to enhance the capacity of vulnerable communities across five countries that are 
part of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the region’s economic bloc), namely 
Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia and South Sudan. The programme aims to enable these 
countries to prepare adequately for and manage food insecurity challenges caused by climate 
and other environmental hazards by fostering solutions for mobilizing the financial resources 
needed to strengthen the resilience and adaptive capacity of the vulnerable communities in the 
target countries. 
4. 
The Horn of Africa region is home to approximately 250 million people who are highly 
dependent on the local ecosystems for their survival, 64 per cent of whom live in areas prone to 
extreme food shortages, where the frequency of the threat of famine has increased in the recent 
past, and the need of emergency food assistance to meet basic needs continues to rise. 
Moreover, the region has experienced high inter-annual rainfall variability, along with a 
consistent regional warming trend over the past 40 years (1981–2020), posing a threat to crop 
productivity. This has resulted in farmers experiencing declining crop yields and some areas 
becoming less suitable for production of major crops, thereby further affecting food systems, 
well-being and local livelihood strategies in the region.  
5. 
The programme will overcome these challenges by helping to transition the local food 
systems to diversified agroforestry systems, with more robust species and mix of varieties 
compared with current systems, and by supporting communities to manage and produce an 
array of food and tree crops targeting 4.68 million direct beneficiaries and 16.37 million indirect 
beneficiaries. Through capacity-building and the establishment of the new agroforestry systems, 
communities will be more resilient, better able to cope with shocks and damage, and will also 
benefit from access to finance through a network of local financial institutions to help reinvest 
in and diversify the local food systems.  
6. 
The programme will deliver mitigation co-benefits in the form of reduced and avoided 
emissions that will be achieved through activities aimed at increasing energy access through 
improved vegetation regeneration, improved power generation, and improved forest cover and 
land-use conditions.  
7. 
The programme is requesting USD 151 million of GCF financing, structured in USD 90.70 
million grant financing and USD 60.30 million loan financing. The total cost of the programme, 
including co-financing, is USD 335.30 million, with co-financing primarily in the form of grants 
and loans from the accredited entity (AE), the African Development Bank (AfDB). 
8. 
In terms of environmental and social safeguards (ESS), this proposal has been 
categorized as environmental and social (E&S) risk category I-2. The review by the Secretariat 
confirms the E&S risk category assigned by the AE, although it recommends that the programme 
be re-categorized as E&S risk category B.

=== PAGE 148 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 148 
 
 
 
 
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis 
Component 1: Strengthening pastoral and agropastoral production systems’ resilience to climate 
change (total cost: USD 187.70 million; GCF cost: USD 69.08 million) 
9. 
Component 1 will strengthen the resilience of pastoral and agropastoral production 
systems to climate change by (i) supporting the development of climate-resilient infrastructure; 
(ii) supporting the sustainable management of agropastoral land; and (iii) improving access to 
climate-smart innovations and technologies. This component clearly demonstrates the 
complementarity between the GCF and AfDB investments in developing an integrated approach 
(infrastructure – natural resources management – climate-smart agriculture inputs and 
technologies nexus) to transforming pastoral and agropastoral production systems in response 
to climate change. 
Component 2: Supporting low-carbon and resilient development of agribusinesses (total cost: USD 
91.99 million; GCF cost: USD 64.56 million) 
10. 
Component 2 will support the development of agribusinesses by increasing access to 
digital advisory services and markets, and supporting the development of inclusive MSMEs and 
cooperatives with access to climate financing. Agribusiness opportunities will provide 
significant avenues for livelihood diversification as a strategy for building resilience, especially 
for groups with limited access, such as women and youth. Investments in agribusinesses are 
also expected to greatly contribute to improved and more resilient agricultural production, 
further contributing to the food security of the region. In addition, channelling GCF loans 
through local financial institutions is complemented by technical assistance to these financial 
partners, to ensure a long-term transformation of increased access to finance for smallholders 
and other underserved groups.  
Component 3: Strengthening agropastoral communities’ capacity to adapt to climate change 
(total cost: USD 26.66 million; GCF cost: USD 9.39 million) 
11. 
Component 3 will support the strengthening of agropastoral communities’ capacity to 
adapt to climate change by enhancing the climate services infrastructure, strengthening 
operational capacities for climate regulatory framework reforms, and institutional 
strengthening in the target countries.  
Component 4: Programme coordination and knowledge management (total cost: USD 28.95 
million; GCF cost: USD 7.98 million) 
12. 
Project implementation and monitoring and evaluation costs have been adequately 
provided for, and specific activities have been planned and integrated within the design of the 
programme to ensure that project implementation and monitoring and evaluation processes 
will be effectively coordinated. 
Gender and environmental and social management framework aspects  
13. 
A costed environmental and social management framework (ESMF) was developed for 
each of the programme’s five target countries, outlining specific activities that will sufficiently 
ensure that ESS are put in place and observed throughout the programme’s lifespan. A well-
designed gender assessment and action plan was also developed, laying out costed plans of 
actions that will be undertaken in the five programme countries to ensure that gender equality, 
equity and safeguards will be upheld throughout the lifespan of the programme.

=== PAGE 149 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 149 
 
 
 
 
III. 
Assessment against investment criteria  
3.1 
Impact potential                      
Scale: High 
14. 
The programme presents an innovative structure that will help unlock resilience-
building opportunities and benefits for vulnerable poor communities in the Horn of Africa 
region. The programme will support 4.68 million direct beneficiaries and 16.37 million indirect 
beneficiaries. The communities will be supported to access climate-resilient infrastructure and 
climate-smart innovations and technologies that will help to transform their local food systems 
and livelihoods. The communities will also be supported to develop agribusiness skills and 
capacity to be able to spread their food production and livelihood strategies in a manner that 
will allow for sustainable management of the agropastoral lands on which they depend. 
15. 
The programme will also deliver greenhouse gas emission reductions amounting to 10.7 
megatonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (Mt CO2 eq) in 25 years, particularly from activities 
that will also have the benefits of increasing community access to clean energy and enabling 
communities to attain enhanced ecosystem services from sustainable forest and land 
management practices. 
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
Scale: High 
16. 
BREFOL is an innovative and strategic approach to promoting and increasing the 
participation of the private sector in the development and implementation of climate change 
adaptation strategies in the five target countries. The approach is scalable and can be practically 
implemented across the Horn of Africa region, building on lessons and outputs and outcomes of 
the programme.  
17. 
The programme will adopt a strategic approach to enhancing the adaptive capacity of 
vulnerable communities in the Horn of Africa region by focusing on promoting green 
investment, wealth creation and job opportunities, especially for the most marginalized groups: 
women, girls and youth. This can help to ensure the long-term security and sustainability of 
livelihoods by fostering income levels that can cushion communities from current and future 
climate shocks and impacts. The livelihood opportunities and diversification will further help to 
improve production, productivity and management of land and other natural resources in the 
target areas, thereby improving food and water security in the region. 
18. 
The programme promotes an incentive-based mechanism to create an enabling 
environment for attracting private sector actors to pool expertise and resources through a 
combination of innovative tools such as credit lines, weather-based insurance mechanisms and 
investment vehicles (e.g. MSME agribusinesses). Through this approach, the programme will 
generate an increase in the baseline of financing from private sector investors by up to USD 8.72 
million of green blended finance, which will catalyse investment in climate change adaptation 
initiatives across the energy and agriculture, forest, and other land-use sectors in the Horn of 
Africa.  
19. 
The paradigm shift potential is well embedded across all three components and is well 
designed to be influential over the long term. 
3.3 
Sustainable development potential 
Scale: High 
20. 
The sustainable development potential is embedded in all components of the 
programme and places vulnerable communities at the centre of efforts to strengthen livelihoods

=== PAGE 150 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 150 
 
 
 
 
and the sustainable management of rangeland and agropastoral ecosystems and, through this, 
the creation of jobs, rural entrepreneurship and social benefits. 
21. 
The programme contributes directly towards efforts to achieve the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), in particular SDG 5 (gender equity), SDGs 6 and 7 (access to clean 
energy and water), SDG 9 (technological innovation), SDG 13 (climate action) and SDG 15 
(halting and reversing land degradation and biodiversity loss). 
22. 
The economic, social and environmental co-benefits that the programme offers stem 
from the capacity-strengthening that the programme will provide to communities to enhance 
their ability to create, diversify and sustain livelihood strategies and opportunities for 
themselves. 
23. 
The livelihood opportunities will help to boost production and income, which will in 
turn contribute towards improved productivity and sustainable management of rangeland and 
agropastoral ecosystems by local communities, thus offering communities excellent 
opportunities to create value and economic possibilities across the value chain of the numerous 
products of both livestock and crop-farming systems. This will help to establish resilient 
rangeland and agropastoral landscapes across the target areas, with the potential for scaling up 
to the entire Horn of Africa region. These livelihood security and enhanced ecosystem 
management outcomes will further build resilience in the target communities. 
24. 
The climate resilient and smart infrastructure, financing mechanisms and agribusiness 
approaches that the programme will promote will provide the incentives and architecture to 
foster added value to key commodities and products derived from the livestock and crop-
farming systems and bring innovation and technology into local food systems in the Horn of 
Africa region. These factors will help communities generate, process and transform key 
products, with enhanced access to surrounding markets and thereby further generate security 
and resilience for livelihoods.  
3.4 
Needs of the recipient 
Scale: High 
25. 
The programme targets one of the world’s most disaster-prone regions, where 
debilitating food-insecure conditions arise from various hazards which are compounded by the 
high political fragility of the region. 
26. 
The communities are facing severe challenges from climate change threatening their 
current livelihood strategies and yet they lack the financial resources and access to credit 
facilities to purchase farm inputs such as climate-adapted seed varieties, fertilizers and farm 
implements, and to deploy climate resilient agricultural practices to cope with the frequent 
hazards and the recurrent food crises, hunger and famine that characterize the region. The 
current local livelihood and food systems are not able to withstand the pressure from climate 
change. The proposed interventions, through agribusiness development and the credit lines and 
weather-based insurance mechanisms, will help communities transform their livelihood 
options, local food systems and ecosystems to become resilient and diverse and to foster long-
term food systems and landscapes, thereby building resilience and adaptive capacity.  
27. 
The target countries are heavily indebted and do not have sufficient resources to invest 
in the actions to safeguard their populations from climate-induced hazards and food insecurity. 
The countries and beneficiaries are currently struggling to access finance to support the 
transition they need to secure their well-being, livelihood and food systems. Without access to 
finance and investments, the local food systems will not be able to provide vulnerable 
communities in the region with the safety nets they need. The programme will fill an important 
gap through working with key regional, national and local institutions in both the private and 
public sectors, and will help to foster long-term solutions through financial innovation, building

=== PAGE 151 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 151 
 
 
 
 
access for communities to business skills, local financial institutions and markets. In addition, 
agribusinesses will create pathways for communities in the region to reinvest in the local food 
systems and ecosystems in ways that promote sustainable rangelands and agropastoral 
landscapes. 
3.5 
Country ownership              
      Scale: High 
28. 
Country ownership is well embedded in the programme, which is fully aligned with the 
climate change and broader development aspirations, strategies and policies of all five target 
countries. The programme will promote the development of capacity and structuring of agro-
silvo-pastoral investments, agribusinesses, climate services, value chain and marketing 
mechanisms for the most vulnerable communities in the target countries. The programme also 
places an important focus on ensuring better synergy with ongoing regional and national 
strategies and actions being implemented in the target countries.  
29. 
The programme is aligned with the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), 
National Adaptation Plans (NAPs), National Adaptation Plans of Action (NAPAs), and the GCF 
country programmes of the five target countries. Furthermore, the programme has been 
developed with the strong participation and commitment of the governments of the five target 
countries, as well as the participation and commitment of other national- and local-level 
stakeholders in the countries, involving both high- and grassroot-level stakeholder groups, 
including women and youth. 
30. 
The AE, AfDB, has a long-standing presence in the region and has a wealth of experience 
working with stakeholders and dealing with the development and environmental challenges in 
all five target countries. AfDB offers a unique structure as well as experience and partnerships 
that will facilitate meaningful engagement and involvement of all relevant stakeholders in the 
target countries in the successful implementation and scaling up of the programme activities 
and outputs.  
31. 
The architecture of the programme consists of the governments of the five target 
countries acting through their relevant ministries as the executing entities (EEs). This will 
bolster the integration of local contexts and ownership into the programme’s activities and 
outputs. 
32. 
The programme is built on well-designed stakeholder consultations that were 
conducted throughout the programme development process, ensuring local knowledge, 
innovation and sustainability, and participation is fully embedded in the design of the 
programme. 
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
Scale: Medium to high 
33. 
The programme will directly support poor and vulnerable communities in the Horn of 
Africa region to strengthen, secure, diversify and transform their livelihood and local food 
systems. It will target 4.68 million direct beneficiaries and 15.55 million indirect beneficiaries 
and will drive innovation and transformation by providing access to finance, agribusiness 
techniques and climate resilient infrastructure.  
34. 
The funding amount is well justified to provide the support needed to unlock the 
transition of livelihoods and local food systems and to provide innovative approaches and 
lessons for transforming the agricultural and food systems of the entire Horn of Africa region. 
The programme is fostering an enabling environment for private and public sector investments 
through the structuring and deployment of various innovative financial instruments and 
mechanisms including credit lines, weather-based insurance, and other green blended finance,

=== PAGE 152 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 152 
 
 
 
 
and through collaboration with MSMEs, intermediary financial institutions and other private 
sector actors to propel capacity-building, technology adoption and market access to and for a 
wide variety of key products and value chains in the proposed enhanced agricultural and 
agribusiness systems. The programme thus fosters an innovative approach to help create long-
term financial innovation and sustainability in the Horn of Africa region. 
35. 
The programme also has an innovative exit strategy that will enable scaling up its 
approach to finance across the Horn of Africa and will build access and partnership between 
communities, intermediary financial institutions and other private sector actors for targeting 
local markets with innovative products and commodities from the local agricultural and food 
systems. 
36. 
The programme has a proposed budget of USD 335.30 million, with GCF funding 
representing 45 per cent of the estimated cost at USD 151 million and co-financing at 55 per 
cent or USD 184.30 million. The GCF financing includes a USD 90.70 million grant (27.1 per cent 
of the total funding) and a USD 60.30 million senior loan (18 per cent of total funding). AfDB will 
provide USD 42.9 million in senior loans at a 0.5 per cent interest rate with a 30-year tenor and 
a 10-year grace period (12.8 per cent of the total funding) and support the programme with a 
USD 123.54 million grant (36.8 per cent of total funding), while the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations will provide a grant of USD 0.69 million (0.21 per cent of the 
total funding). The governments and beneficiaries will also make in-kind contributions of USD 
16.03 million (4.8 per cent of the total funding) and USD 1.82 million (0.54 per cent of the total 
funding), respectively.  
37. 
Since the proposed programme involves multiple interventions in different countries, it 
was not possible to conduct a full economic and financial appraisal (EFA) of all the subprojects 
at the ex ante analysis stage. However, a detailed EFA was carried out on a selection of 
indicative subprojects, as outlined in annex 3 of the funding proposal. As per the AfDB policy 
guidelines, all other interventions intended for funding under the funding proposal will be 
thoroughly scrutinized to assess their financial and economic viability. Only subprojects that 
meet the prescribed economic net present value (NPV) and internal rate of return (IRR) 
thresholds will be financed by the programme. 
38. 
The overall aggregate EFA results modelled over 25 years at an average financial 
discount rate of 9.6 per cent and an average economic discount rate of 11 per cent revealed the 
ex ante estimates for financial aggregate results (table 1) and the economic individual and 
aggregate results (table 2). 
Table 1. Overall appraisal of financial results of indicative projects  
Overall aggregate financial discount rate 
9.6% 
 
Financial NPV  
(USD thousands) 
Financial IRR (%) 
Base scenario (WP scenario) 
447.55 
64.2 
costs +10% 
1 518.06 
57.7 
costs +20% 
1 489.37 
52.3 
benefits +10% 
1 730.12 
71.3 
benefits +20% 
1 913.48 
78.4 
benefits –10% 
1 363.39 
57.0 
benefits –20% 
1 180.02 
49.9 
benefits postponed 1 year 
1 464.47 
42.8 
benefits postponed 2 years 
1 494.67 
47.1 
Abbreviations: IRR = internal rate of return, NPV = net present value, WP = worst possible

=== PAGE 153 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 153 
 
 
 
 
Table 2. Overall appraisal of economic aggregate results of indicative projects 
Overall aggregate economic discount rate 
11.0% 
 
Economic NPV (USD 
millions) 
Economic IRR (%) 
Base scenario (WP scenario) 
91.44 
28.3 
costs +10% 
78.43 
24.4 
costs +20% 
65.42 
21.3 
benefits +10% 
113.59 
32.5 
benefits +20% 
135.74 
36.9 
benefits –10% 
69.28 
24.1 
benefits –20% 
47.13 
19.9 
benefits postponed 1 year 
67.07 
21.0 
benefits postponed 2 years 
82.04 
24.4 
Abbreviations: IRR = internal rate of return, NPV = net present value, WP = worst possible 
 
39. 
The EFAs were conducted on the basis of guidelines provided by GCF on a “per 
indicative project” basis for each country of interest. The analysis shows that the proposed 
investments are financially feasible and economically viable. The EFAs suggest that the 
investment is justified, with positive financial and economic NPVs, and financial and economic 
IRRs higher than the chosen discount rates of 9.6 per cent and 11 per cent, respectively. 
Additionally, the EFA sensitivity analyses results indicated that the estimated profitability and 
sustainability of proposed interventions are relatively insensitive to changes in discount rates, 
increase in costs or decrease in benefits, as well as when benefits are postponed by one or two 
years. This in turn suggests that the financial and economic results obtained are robust. 
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
40. 
Programme overview. BREFOL aims to help build climate resilience and food security 
in the five Intergovernmental Authority on Development member countries of the Horn of 
Africa. The programme includes components to strengthen the resilience of pastoral and 
agropastoral production systems such as the development and rehabilitation of water and 
irrigation infrastructure for croplands and pasturelands, including for animal feed, health, and 
market access infrastructure. It also aims to promote sustainable land management practices 
such as agroforestry and afforestation programmes and deploy climate-smart innovations and 
upscaling of technologies to pastoralists and smallholder farmers in the Horn of Africa. The 
programme also seeks to facilitate access to digital advisory services and markets and provide 
entrepreneurial skills development in renewable energy technologies. It also aims to design 
innovative credit lines to local participating financial institutions to finance (i) investments in 
the crop, aquaculture, and livestock value chains; (ii) woodlots for fuelwood; and (iii) the 
restoration of forest and degraded lands. The environmental and social co-benefits of the 
programme include reduced air pollution and improved air quality resulting in better health 
and well-being of the communities. The programme will also contribute to the improvement of 
water supply and security, and will enhance the overall ecosystem and ecosystem services 
through improved forest cover and land-use changes in the target areas.

=== PAGE 154 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 154 
 
 
 
 
41. 
Environmental and social risk category and safeguard instruments. The AE has 
classified the programme as Category I-2 in accordance with its integrated safeguards system 
classification. This is equivalent to GCF’s Category B classification given that the activities to be 
supported will involve development and rehabilitation of water and market access 
infrastructure, and financing of a broad range of value chain activities from production to 
marketing, which will target smallholder beneficiaries. The activities foreseen could have 
potential limited adverse environmental and/or social risks and impacts that individually or 
cumulatively, are few, generally site-specific, largely reversible, and readily addressed through 
mitigation measures. The Secretariat confirms the risk category and that this is within the AE’s 
accreditation level. The AE has submitted an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) for each of the target country (Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, and South 
Sudan).  
42. 
Compliance with GCF’s environmental and social safeguards (ESS) standards. The 
paragraphs below provide a description of the programme’s compliance with the GCF ESS. 
(a) 
ESS1 (Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and 
Impacts). Each participating country has prepared an environmental and social 
management framework (ESMF). The ESMFs provided the procedures to assess and 
manage individual activities (subprojects) of the programme in each country. While the 
general overview of the potential risks and impacts of the programme in each of the 
countries has been described, more detailed analysis of the E&S impacts will be carried 
out in all target locations. The AE’s guidelines will be applied in the conduct of these 
assessments. Participating financial institutions will also be required to have 
operational environmental and social management systems (ESMS) whose standards 
will meet the requirements of the AE’s integrated safeguards system.  
(b) 
ESS2 (Labour and Working Conditions). The ESMFs identified that the target 
countries are mostly signatories to International Labour Organization conventions and 
will comply with the core principles of these fundamental conventions. The ESMFs also 
identified risks in relation to occupational health and safety and basic worker’s rights, 
non-discrimination in employment and benefits, prohibition of child labour and forced 
labour. The frameworks require access of programme and subproject workers to 
grievance redress mechanisms. It is also recommended that the AE and its executing 
entities ensure that labour issues in the primary supply chain are adequately assessed 
and managed as part of the due diligence of the programme’s subprojects.  
(c) 
ESS3 (Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention). The programme is generally 
geared towards efficient use of resources, particularly of water. Hence, the 
infrastructures that are to be developed and rehabilitated under the programme will be 
designed to achieve this. Some of the activities are also designed to complement the 
objectives of establishing the hard infrastructure such as by distributing drought 
tolerant crops to maximize scanty water resources. Nevertheless, the programme’s 
activities will have potential pollution impacts as identified in the ESMFs. These include 
the possibility for soil erosion, noise, air and water pollution impacts due to 
construction activities from earthmoving, spillage and generation of wastes. There is 
also the potential for unsustainable water use and water loss from water harvesting 
structures/reservoirs through evaporation. The potential for siltation of water 
reservoirs due to erosive land use in the upstream areas can also be expected. As 
regards processing and livestock/dairy facilities, there is potential for air and water 
pollution due to the operation and use of chemicals and discharges of waste from 
laboratories and facilities. The ESMFs prescribe the development of waste management 
plans when these issues are identified in site-specific environmental and social impact 
assessments of the activities.

=== PAGE 155 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 155 
 
 
 
 
(d) 
ESS4 (Community Health, Safety and Security). The following hazards are potentially 
relevant based on the current situations of the programme countries. These include 
construction site and route accident hazards, infrastructure collapse hazard for dams 
and water impoundments, and other natural hazards such as dust/sandstorms, locust 
infestation, and severe drought. There are also labour influx-related hazards such as 
potential for cultural conflicts, increased incidence of gender-based violence and/or 
sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEAH), and spread of communicable 
diseases and water and vector-borne diseases. There is also the potential for wild animal 
encounters and incidence of wildfire in rehabilitated rangeland, forests and facilities. 
The agricultural activities could lead to pesticide poisoning and food safety hazard from 
processing facilities supported by the programme. Given that the target countries have a 
significant history or active cases of conflicts, there is potential for the exacerbation of 
conflict as a result of the programme’s activities. Security arrangements may also have 
adverse interactions with the host communities. To mitigate these risks and prevent 
these types of conflicts, the programme will organize public consultations under the 
guidance of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. During the conduct of the 
detailed E&S assessment studies, conflict sensitivity analyses will also be undertaken to 
determine the levels of fragility and likelihood of conflict occurrences on the ground, 
and that appropriate management measures will be developed.  
(e) 
ESS5 (Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement). The ESMFs have assessed 
that land acquisition cannot be ruled out but the risks are low. At least two ESMFs 
(Djibouti and Kenya) have also indicated that subprojects with significant displacements 
will not be funded. The infrastructure envisaged under the programme are expected to 
be small scale and other interventions requiring significant area of lands can be sited in 
government owned lands or beneficiary lands (communal lands), hence land acquisition 
by expropriation would be rare. However, these lands may still be occupied by some 
families/tribes or may have been traditionally accessed by groups of people who are not 
necessarily the beneficiaries of the programme. Thus, during the conduct of site-specific 
environmental and social impact assessments, Resettlement Action Plans which will 
detail land acquisition and resettlement arrangements including on compensation will 
be prepared should this standard be triggered. The programme should also ensure that 
the ESMSs of participating financial institutions shall also cover impacts of land 
acquisition or use by their respective investments.  
(f) 
ESS6 (Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources). The ESMFs have identified risks related to loss or fragmentation and 
degradation of habitat, severance of animal migration routes and pathways (e.g. due to 
reduction in water supply, changes in water flow and drainage, soil erosion, pollution of 
water, soils or air), and loss of plant biodiversity as a result of introduction of invasive 
species such as Prosopis. There is also the potential loss of vegetation and/or natural 
habitat during earthworks and construction activities. The impacts and risks from the 
construction activities can be avoided by application of strict siting criteria. Among the 
strategies to be implemented by the programme are (i) proper inventory of flora and 
fauna; (ii) establishment of buffer zones around conservation and ecologically sensitive 
areas and avoidance or minimization of activity within these zones; (iii) rehabilitation of 
cleared areas with native species; (iv) soliciting advice from biodiversity 
authorities/wildlife specialists, indigenous knowledge experts, traditional natural 
resources management practitioners on appropriate management measures; and (v) 
supporting government initiatives on biodiversity conservation. 
(g) 
GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy & ESS7 (Indigenous Peoples). The scope of the 
programme and activities have potential to impact Indigenous Peoples who are found in 
the countries where the programme will be implemented and thus trigger application of

=== PAGE 156 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 156 
 
 
 
 
the requirements of the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy noting that, regarding potential 
impacts, elements related to Indigenous Peoples safeguards will need to be reinforced in 
the ESMFs for the participating countries. The timeline for provision of the revisions to 
the ESMFs can, exceptionally, be considered no later than effectiveness of the funded 
activity agreement. In line with its roles and functions, the GCF Indigenous Peoples 
Advisory Group is available to provide advice to the AE, which is also encouraged to 
share emerging good practices and success stories with the Advisory Group. 
(h) 
ESS8 (Cultural Heritage). The potential impact on cultural heritage sites in the 
programme areas was identified as one of the risks under the programme. However, 
activities that will adversely impact cultural heritage will be excluded from financing. 
Further, to manage the risk in situations where there is discovery of physical cultural 
resources particularly during construction activities, the ESMFs have developed a 
Chance Find Procedure that outlines the actions required if culturally significant 
resources are encountered during project construction or operation. 
43. 
Sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEAH) safeguarding. The SEAH 
safeguarding approach proposed by the AE is considered inadequate by the Secretariat to 
comply with the SEAH provisions pursuant to the GCF Environmental and Social Policy. 
Although the AE has noted that the programme may exacerbate the pre-existing level of gender-
based violence and SEAH in the target countries and has devised SEAH safeguards as part of the 
country-level ESMFs, only the ESMF for Kenya identifies the potential SEAH risks, mitigation 
measures and the related due diligence process. The Secretariat recommends that the AE take a 
consist approach in assessing and addressing the potential SEAH risks that can be applied in all 
the target countries. The Secretariat also suggests a condition that the AE provide further 
revised ESMFs for Djibouti, Ethiopia, Somalia and South Sudan, incorporating the necessary 
SEAH risk screening, risk mitigation measures, the SEAH due diligences process for subprojects, 
and the procedures for addressing potential SEAH incidences through the grievance redress 
mechanisms (GRMs) per country. 
44. 
Implementation arrangements. Each country covered by the programme will have a 
Project Management Unit or Project Coordinating Unit which will be responsible for the day-to-
day operations of the programme. The Project Management Unit/Project Coordinating Unit 
usually will have E&S safeguard specialists/experts who will manage and monitor 
implementation of the ESMF. Consultants will also be engaged as needed, to provide technical 
review and advice on E&S management measures. At the subnational or region/district levels, 
E&S focal persons will be designated to ensure implementation, monitoring and reporting of the 
management measures. Programme staff will also undergo training on E&S safeguards.  
45. 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure. The programme has 
undergone consultations in each country, often being introduced as a second phase or follow-up 
of a Drought Resilience and Sustainable Livelihood Programme. These consultations were 
conducted with government officials at the national, subnational and local levels. Plans for 
further consultations have been outlined in the ESMFs. Detailed and updated stakeholder 
engagement plans will also be prepared during implementation. Stakeholder engagements will 
be very important given the fragile and conflict-affected situations of most of the programme 
areas.  
46. 
Grievance redress mechanism (GRM). The ESMFs have described GRMs to be 
established in the country for the programme. The mechanisms often involve the setting up of 
independent Grievance Redress Committees at central and region/district levels. The Grievance 
Redress Committees will have representatives from the project-affected persons, municipal 
government officials, local civil society leaders, as well as women and youth groups. These are 
designed to ensure that concerns are proactively identified, apprehensions from impacts of the 
interventions are adequately clarified, and that issues raised by complainants can be resolved in

=== PAGE 157 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 157 
 
 
 
 
an efficient and timely manner. In line with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy, the GCF 
Indigenous Peoples focal point will be available for assistance at any stage, including before a 
claim has been made. 
4.2 
Gender policy  
47. 
The AE has provided a programme-level gender assessment and gender action plan and 
therefore complies with the requirements of the GCF Gender Policy. 
48. 
The gender assessment was conducted through desk reviews and some stakeholder 
consultations with the ministries responsible for women’s affairs and gender experts, but this 
did not cover all five participant countries. The stakeholder consultation for development of the 
gender assessment and gender action plan is limited in scope and in the range of categories of 
stakeholders engaged. 
49. 
The gender assessment indicates that countries have favourable environments to 
promote gender equality and women’s empowerment. Many of the countries have enshrined 
equality between women and men in their constitutions, legal, institutional and political 
frameworks as well as having programmes and projects in operation. Many already have 
established ministries responsible for women’s affairs with devolved structures to support the 
gender mainstreaming agenda. However, although many initiatives exist to address gender 
issues, it is notable that the initiatives and commitments are yet to result in tangible changes in 
the lives of women and there remains a need for much more action in order to meet the 
commitments that have been set. In some instances, progress is impeded by the existence of 
widespread violence against women and girls, high levels of female unemployment and low 
levels of employability among women, who mostly operate in the informal sector in roles that 
are at subsistence level and are not very sustainable. It is also a reality that financial inclusion is 
not prioritized by financial institutions, particularly for women entrepreneurs, which is further 
exacerbated by the slow changes in sociocultural practices.  
50. 
Women have limited ownership or no access to land, productive resources, access to 
finance and credit, or technical support to improve agricultural practices. Access to information 
for women is limited in general, and particularly for climate-related information that is needed 
for making informed decisions or being part of decision-making processes. Literacy rates among 
women are particularly low, given that overall literacy rates across the countries’ populations 
are low. The sociocultural practices maintain women and girls in roles that inhibit their 
contribution to the overall household economy, and their personal growth and development. 
The agriculture sector is affected by such realities where the productivity gaps of women-
owned farms are 20–30 per cent compared with farms of their male counterparts. The 
challenges in accessing agriculture, climate-related services, inputs, advisory services and 
digital and non-digital information for women are much higher than for men, affecting their 
productivity, nutrition and food security. In addition, it is well-known that much of the day-to-
day work and engagement of women (be it in agriculture, entrepreneurship activities, women-
led businesses, farmer associations etc.) rely heavily on natural resources. The detrimental 
impacts of climate change continue to negatively affect opportunities for women in terms of 
their sources of livelihood, income, day-to-day sustenance, and achieving returns on their 
engagements in various farmers’ groups and farm-related activities.  
51. 
The gender assessment recognizes that women-headed households and women in 
polygamous households in particular face more constraints than women in households headed 
by men. The constraints result in women lacking security, facing higher levels of poverty, higher 
levels of workload, and children not being able to attend school. However, women-headed 
households seem to have more economical use of resources at their disposal. Overall, the five 
countries are rated very low on gender-related indices.

=== PAGE 158 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 158 
 
 
 
 
52. 
The gender action plan provides activities that will address the challenges to women 
identified in the gender assessment and will invest in actions to build on the existing roles of 
women in adapting to climate change. Both regional and country-specific gender action plans 
include a host of activities with corresponding indicators, targets, timelines, gender expertise 
and budget.  
53. 
The gender action plan focuses on both cross-cutting regional gender-related issues and 
country-specific gender issues. It should be noted that the country-level gender assessment and 
gender action plans will be further refined during project implementation for each of the 
countries.  
54. 
The regional gender action plan, which covers all five participant countries, focuses on 
capacity-related issues through (i) the development and adaptation of Gender Action Learning 
System toolkits and methodologies, thus improving gender relations and promoting the 
empowerment women by addressing unequal sociocultural norms; (ii) mentorship support to 
the training of trainers for conducting gender-related research; (iii) cross-country learning 
exchanges and documenting best practices; and (iv) the collection of gender-disaggregated data.  
55. 
The country gender action plans include very similar activities aimed at developing the 
leadership as well as technical skills of women; ensuring the active participation of women in 
land-related issues; improving the role and contribution of women in water management 
committees, management groups for land, demonstration sites and agricultural cooperatives; 
and engaging women as entrepreneurs with access to finance and related services. The action 
plans also address other constraints faced by women by making labour-saving and climate-
smart agriculture technologies accessible to women (e.g. energy-saving cookstoves, solar 
panels, and biodigesters). These technologies are aimed at addressing the time constraints and 
workload of women and enabling women’s engagement and participation in decision-making in 
(water) committees, which have a considerable impact on the quality of life as well as fulfilment 
of women’s roles and responsibilities. Activities will focus on sectors where many women in the 
countries are already working, such as enhancing productivity in poultry rearing (i.e. increasing 
the value chain).  
56. 
The Secretariat understands that the current assessments and gender action plans need 
further and deeper consultations at all levels; and notes that the gender assessment (to be 
conducted six months after the inception of the programme) needs to provide sufficient 
opportunities for various stakeholders to engage and influence the design of the country gender 
action plans. The AE needs to make sure that the consultations with women and groups 
representing women’s interests are an integral part of the country-level gender assessments, 
including ensuring equal representation and voice within consultations and on the formulation 
of the GRM. GRM design, use and implementation needs to be responsive to local contexts, and 
the needs of women and vulnerable people.  
4.3 
Risks  
4.3.1. 
Overall programme assessment (medium risk)  
57. 
The Secretariat considers the overall programme as medium risk.  
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(medium risk) 
58. 
The AE, AfDB, demonstrated its capability by reference to its existing portfolio of 
projects and programmes in the Horn of Africa of comparable size or above. The AE is rated AAA 
stable by Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s and Fitch.

=== PAGE 159 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 159 
 
 
 
 
59. 
Each participant country has designated a ministry as an EE. The AE carried out 
institutional assessments of the EEs and recommended measures to reduce fiduciary risks 
incorporated as conditions for GCF disbursements in the term sheet.  
4.3.3. 
Programme-specific execution risks (medium risk) 
60. 
Co-finance: the Secretariat acknowledges the alignment of interests between the AE and 
GCF, with co-financing in the form of grants and loans from the AE (ratio 1:1.22). If co-financing 
does not materialize then this may impede programme implementation; however, the risk is 
adequately mitigated by official approval from the AfDB board in 2021–2022 and by conditions 
for GCF disbursements in the term sheet.  
61. 
Credit risk: the AE will channel GCF loans to the government ministries acting as EEs in 
Djibouti and Ethiopia, totalling USD 60 million or 40 per cent of total GCF financing. GCF is the 
sole lender under the BEFROL direct credit window and the BEFROL direct insurance credit 
window, and assumes the credit risk of intermediate lenders (local private financial institutions, 
insurance providers). Credit risk is high, given the sub-investment grade rating profile of the 
two countries (e.g. Ethiopia Moody’s Caa3/ Standard & Poor’s CCC). In addition, inflationary 
pressure in Ethiopia may lead to a depreciation of the local currency’s exchange rate against the 
United States dollar and increase the cost of servicing a USD-denominated GCF loan. However, 
the highly concessional loans from GCF reduce the financial risk for the countries.  
62. 
Programme viability and concessionality: GCF concessional funding is expected to crowd 
in private sector financing and catalyse investment in climate change adaptation initiatives, 
which would not have been possible otherwise. The Secretariat notes that the high 
concessionality from GCF loans will be passed down to end-borrowers at an agreed margin 
range and considering the prevailing market-based interest rates in the target countries 
(Djibouti, Ethiopia). 
4.3.4. 
Compliance risk (medium risk)  
63. 
This programme addresses food production and security in several countries within the 
Horn of Africa region. Much of this region is challenged by low capacities to instil financial 
integrity controls. However, for this programme, the AE has assessed the risks and has 
proposed a plan to monitor and mitigate such risks. With the imposition of these controls, the 
compliance risk in the programme is measured as “medium”. 
4.3.5. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)  
64. 
In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of result area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.6. 
Recommendation 
65. 
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.  
Summary risk assessment 
Overall programme 
Medium 
Accredited entity (AE)/executing entity (EE) capability 
Medium 
Project-specific execution 
Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration 
Low 
Compliance 
Medium

=== PAGE 160 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 160 
 
 
 
 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
66. 
AfDB will be the AE of this programme. There are six EEs of this programme, as follows:  
(a) 
The Government of Djibouti, acting through its Ministry of Commerce Economics and 
Finance, and Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Fisheries and Livestock; 
(b) 
The Government of Ethiopia, acting through its Ministry of Finance, and Ministry of 
Agriculture, Livestock and Fishery Resources;  
(c) 
The Government of Kenya, acting through its Ministry of Finance, and Ministry of 
Agriculture, Water, Fisheries and Livestock, and Cooperatives;   
(d) 
The Government of Somalia, acting through its Ministry of Finance and Ministry of 
Agriculture and Irrigation;  
(e) 
The Government of South Sudan, acting through its Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Planning and Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry; and 
(f) 
The Intergovernmental Authority on Development.  
67. 
Loan pricing will be equal for all borrowers. Both the GCF loan and AfDB loan are pari 
passu. Although accounting standards and practices may differ from country to country, the 
accounts of the projects and subprojects under BREFOL shall, irrespective of the system 
adopted, comply with the principles of transparent management and provide exhaustive 
information on: (i) accountability of funds provided to the project or subproject (such funds 
may comprise proceeds from the AfDB loan or grant, or other resources from co-financiers and 
counterpart funds); and (ii) disclosure of expenditure and specific information on components 
financed under the programme.  
68. 
All projects financed under the Facility will be monitored by the AfDB Portfolio 
Management team as per the relevant internal policies and procedures. The AfDB – as the 
accredited entity – will be responsible for direct monitoring of implementation conditions and 
reporting periodically to GCF under the terms to be agreed between AfDB and GCF. All projects 
financed under the Facility will comply with the AfDB appraisal, approval, monitoring and 
supervision standards and procedures.  
69. 
The financial reporting should detail the various uses of the loan and grant proceeds. 
The audit arrangements require that all project and subproject accounts are audited each year 
in accordance with the relevant generally accepted standards. The auditor, in accordance with 
the standard terms of reference for external audits of AfDB-financed programmes or projects, is 
required, among other things, to examine pertinent documents, review internal financial control 
mechanisms to identify deficiencies and weaknesses that could affect the efficiency of the 
project, form an opinion on the quality of the financial statements and confirm that the funds 
granted to the project have been used for their intended purpose. Each country must have the 
accounts of the project or programme audited by qualified and independent accountants that 
meet AfDB requirements. In countries where auditing is entrusted to the Auditor General’s 
Office under the supervisory authority of the state, AfDB may approve the designation of this 
Office provided that the matter is discussed at the programme/project appraisal stage as well as 
during the loan negotiations and that the audit is conducted in accordance with AfDB standard 
terms of reference for the audit for AfDB-financed projects/programmes. The audited financial 
statements, the auditor’s report and management letter must be received by AfDB no later than 
six months after the end of the financial year to which they relate. Non-compliance with this 
requirement will result in the immediate suspension of further replenishments to the Special 
Account.

=== PAGE 161 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 161 
 
 
 
 
70. 
The Terms and Condition for the sub-loans is not yet available. To ensure the 
concessionallity is benefited the final borrowers, this will be a condition for the first 
disbursement of the GCF proceeds on the TS. 
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
71. 
As a cross-cutting initiative, the programme aims at generating results across GCF 
mitigation results areas 1 and 4, and adaptation results areas 1, 2 and 4. The programme is 
expected to reach 4.68 million direct beneficiaries and 15.55 million indirect beneficiaries, 
corresponding to 0.8 per cent and 2.9 per cent of the national populations, respectively. At least 
50 per cent of the beneficiaries across both categories are expected to be women. The expected 
mitigation outcome is an emissions reduction of 10.7 Mt CO2 eq over the programme lifespan.  
72. 
The Secretariat has worked with the AE over seven rounds of reviews to refine the 
programme theory of change and significant improvement has been noted. The theory of change 
diagram identifies co-benefits and risks/barriers relevant to the programme.  
73. 
The logical framework has been developed in accordance with the GCF integrated 
results management framework and follows the recommended template. A significant paradigm 
shift potential has been identified for the programme. The AE has provided indicators at the 
project outcome level to facilitate performance management. However, in the latest round of 
review, the AE has been provided with recommendations for improving suggested indicators 
under Outcomes 1 and 3, and providing clarity on means of verification for indicators for 
Outcomes 1, 2 and 3. The AE has defined indicators for assessing the co-benefits listed under the 
programme’s theory of change.  
74. 
Suggestions have also been provided to the AE in the latest round of review to augment 
annex 11 (Monitoring and Evaluation Plan) in line with the latest logical framework. In annex 
23 (Beneficiary Estimation), it has been recommended that the AE should provide further 
details on classification of beneficiaries as direct/indirect and arrangements for avoiding 
double-counting.  
4.6 
Legal assessment 
75. 
The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the AE on 8 November 2017 and it 
became effective on 7 November 2019. 
76. 
The AE has not provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the programme. 
77. 
The proposed programme will be implemented in the following countries in which GCF 
is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, among other things, GCF is not 
protected against litigation or expropriation in these countries, which risks need to be further 
assessed. The countries are as follows: 
(a) 
Republic of Djibouti: The GCF Secretariat provided a draft agreement on privileges and 
immunities and a background note to the Government of the Republic of Djibouti on 26 
October 2017. The latest communication was sent by the GCF Secretariat to the 
Government of the Republic of Djibouti on 05 October 2018. 
(b) 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia: The Secretariat provided a draft agreement 
on privileges and immunities and a background note to the Government of the Federal 
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia most recently on 26 April 2016. The latest 
communication was sent by the GCF Secretariat to the Government of the Federal 
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia on 03 November 2017.

=== PAGE 162 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 162 
 
 
 
 
(c) 
Republic of Kenya: The Secretariat provided a draft agreement on privileges and 
immunities and a background note to the Government of the Republic of Kenya on 30 
September 2015. The latest communication was sent by the Government of the Republic 
of Kenya to the Secretariat on 5 October 2018. 
(d) 
Federal Republic of Somalia: The Secretariat and the Government of the Federal 
Republic of Somalia had a meeting on 8 October 2018. The Secretariat has not yet 
dispatched a draft agreement on privileges and immunities and a background note to 
the Government of the Federal Republic of Somalia hence, negotiations have not yet 
started. 
(e) 
Republic of South Sudan: The Secretariat has not yet dispatched a draft agreement on 
privileges and immunities and a background note to the Government of thew Republic 
of South Sudan hence, negotiations have not yet started. 
78. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have 
both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities and/or 
investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with relevant privileges 
and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by GCF are made only after 
GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in the countries, or 
has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities. 
79. 
To address the matters raised in this section, it is recommended that any approval by 
the Board is made subject to the following conditions:  
(a) 
Submission by the Accredited Entity to the Fund of a certificate or legal opinion, in form 
and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, within 180 days after Board approval, 
confirming that the Accredited Entity has obtained all final internal approvals needed by 
it and has the capacity and authority to implement the proposed programme; 
(b) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval, or the date the 
Accredited Entity has provided a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has 
obtained all final internal approvals, whichever is later; and 
(c) 
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 163 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 163 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP239 
Proposal name: 
Building Climate Resilience for Food and Livelihoods in the Horn 
of Africa (BREFOL) 
Accredited entity: 
African Development Bank (AfDB) 
Country/(ies): 
Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia and South Sudan 
Project/programme size: 
Large 
I.
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel
1.
This is the second submission of the funding proposal for Building Climate Resilience for
Food and Livelihoods in the Horn of Africa (BREFOL) under the standard proposal approval
process.1 The assessment by the independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) is based on the
funding proposal package presented to the iTAP on 3 May 2024 and informed by a set of written
questions and answers further discussed in an online meeting between the iTAP and the
accredited entity (AE) on 21 May 2024.2
2.
The total budget remains at USD 335 million, with a total of USD 151 million (USD 90.7
million as a grant, and USD 60.3 million as a loan) requested from GCF. It also remains a cross-
cutting programme, expecting to contribute to both mitigation and adaptation results areas,
with an implementation period of seven years.
3.
The AE for the programme is the African Development Bank (AfDB).
4.
The executing entities (EEs) of the programme comprise:
(a)
The governments of the five countries (Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia and South
Sudan), acting through their respective ministries responsible for finance and
agriculture, respectively; and
(b)
The Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), the regional organization for
the governments of the [Greater] Horn of Africa Region.3
5.
The proposed programme has four components, as listed in Table 1 below, with their
respective indicative costs and share of total financing.
1 The funding proposal was first submitted to the independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) on 15 December 
2023. The funding proposal was then titled “Program to Build Resilience and Food Security in the Horn of Africa”. It 
was not endorsed by the iTAP at that time but has now been revised and resubmitted, guided by a set of 
recommendations from the iTAP (limited distribution document titled “Assessments and responses of funding 
proposals not endorsed by the independent Technical Advisory Panel”). Prior to the submission of the funding 
proposals, a concept note was presented in April 2022. (https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/program-build-
resilience-and-food-security-horn-africa).  
2 The funding proposal package from 3 May 2024 consists of the funding proposal (clean and track-change versions 
from Secretariat discussions), the questions and answers (Q&A) from the previous submission, a draft Secretariat 
assessment, and 21 annexes. Most annexes contain sub-annexes relating to participant countries, resulting in a 
package with 50 attachments in total. The funding proposal was updated with new greenhouse gas (GHG) emission 
calculations on 22 May 2024, complementing the package with a marked and updated funding proposal (on GHG 
issues) and updated versions of annexes 17 and 22, along with the Q&A from the discussion between the accredited 
entity and the iTAP on 21 May 2024. 
3 The Horn of Africa Region [proper] consists of Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia and Somalia. The Greater Horn of Africa 
includes also Kenya, Sudan, South Sudan and Uganda.

=== PAGE 164 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 164 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: Overview of BREFOL components, outputs, and financing 
Components and outputs 
Amount 
(USD million) 
Share of 
total 
Component 1: Strengthening pastoral and agropastoral production systems’ resilience to 
climate change 
Output 1.1: Climate-resilient built/rehabilitated infrastructure 
Output 1.2: Improved sustainable land management practices 
Output 1.3: Increased adoption of climate-smart innovations 
Subtotal component 1 
187.70 
56% 
 
Component 2: Supporting low-carbon and resilient development of agribusiness 
Output 2.1: Increased access to digital advisory services and markets 
Output 2.2: Developed inclusive micro, small and medium-sized enterprises and cooperatives with 
access to climate financing 
Subtotal component 1 
91.99 
27% 
 
Component 3: Strengthening agropastoral communities’ capacity to adapt to climate change 
Output 3.1: Enhanced access to climate information and early warning systems 
Output 3.2: Strengthened regulatory and policy frameworks and institutional capacity for climate 
resilience 
Subtotal component 3 
26.66 
8% 
 
Component 4: Programme coordination and knowledge management 
Output 4.1: Project management and coordination 
Subtotal component 4 
28.95 
9% 
 
Total project 
335.30 
100% 
Source: Adapted from funding proposal, Annex 4 “Budget by component” BREFOL Budget Revised 15042024. 
6. 
Component 1 receives 56 per cent of the total budget (46 per cent of the GCF 
contribution and 64 per cent of the co-financing). It contains the programme’s single largest 
output (output 1.1) on infrastructure construction and rehabilitation, in itself accounting for 38 
per cent of the total budget (19 per cent of the GCF contribution and 53 per cent of the co-
financing). Output 1.1 will be funded with a USD 70 million grant and USD 28 million loan from 
the African Development Fund (ADF),4 complemented by a USD 29 million loan from GCF. The 
activities under this output are geared towards the construction, rehabilitation and 
management of water harvesting infrastructure, community irrigation schemes, and livestock 
infrastructure. Component 1 also houses outputs 1.2 and 1.3 towards improved land 
management and the adoption of climate-smart innovations, operating with GCF grants (USD 16 
million and 24 million, respectively). 
7. 
Component 2 supports agribusinesses and other enterprises in accessing markets and 
climate credit. The related activities involve extension of digital services, training of women and 
youth on entrepreneurship, renewable energy technologies/solutions, and the extension of 
credit lines. The financing is a mix of grant and loan financing, amounting to a total of 43 per 
cent of the GCF contribution and 15 per cent of the co-financing.  
8. 
The extension of credit, however, is limited to two of the beneficiary countries; 
BREFOL’s Direct Credit Window (BDCW) is to be rolled out through two local private finance 
institutions in Djibouti and Ethiopia. Furthermore, BREFOL will promote existing climate 
insurance providers to scale up weather-based insurance coverage for livestock production. 
GCF resources are to complement AfDB’s investments to support the establishment of a BREFOL 
 
4 The ADF is a funding window for AfDB. It is the concessional arm of the AfDB that provides grants and concessional 
loans to low-income African countries.

=== PAGE 165 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 165 
 
 
 
 
 
Direct Insurance Credit Window with the selected banks. In principle, each beneficiary of the 
credit line is to be covered by insurance. 
9. 
A smaller share of the programme resources are destined for component 3 
(Strengthening Agropastoral Communities’ Capacity to Adapt to Climate Change), under which 
the programme supports regulatory frameworks and enhances access to climate information 
and early warning systems.  
10. 
An outcome and the main pursuit of component 3 in the previous submission was 
strengthened institutional capacity and climate regulatory frameworks. However, the expected 
results in this area have been toned down (and the previous outcome was replaced with 
‘Strengthened adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities’). This toning down of institutional 
capacity enhancement is entirely congruent with the limited effort and budget afforded to such 
activities. In essence, the funding proposal has chosen to focus on infrastructure and credit 
lines.   
11. 
Component 4 (Programme coordination and knowledge management) has a funding 
allocation of USD 29 million, which constitutes 9 per cent of the total budget. This component 
also addresses technical and institutional capacity-building, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), 
as well as knowledge management and communications. 
12. 
The iTAP has reviewed the funding proposal against the six investment criteria of GCF, 
commenting on the overall structure as well as the specifically proposed interventions planned.  
1.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
                        Scale: Medium 
13. 
This cross-cutting programme is to contribute to five GCF results areas; two mitigation 
results Areas (MRAs) and three adaptation results areas (ARAs). These are: MRA 1 – Energy 
generation and access; MRA 4 – Forestry and land use; ARA 1 – Most vulnerable people and 
communities; ARA 2 – Health, well-being, food and water security; and ARA 4 – Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services.5  
14. 
According to the theory of change illustration, the three components contribute in 
different ways to the programme’s outcomes and co-benefits. These are: 
(a) 
Outcome 1:  Increased adoption of climate-resilient solutions; 
(b) 
Outcome 2: Enhanced carbon sequestration and reduced greenhouse gas emissions 
from [agricultural value chains]; 
(c) 
Outcome 3: Strengthened adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities; 
(d) 
Co-benefit 1: Improved livelihood opportunities; and 
(e) 
Co-benefit 2: Ecosystem services improved. 
15. 
The need for greater clarity and logical flow in how activities, outputs, outcomes and co-
benefits contribute towards the overarching goal and results areas was a major issue in the first 
submission of this funding proposal package. The overall consistency has improved but the 
logical flow and the application of the theory of change remains problematic. The iTAP is 
concerned with this design insufficiency and suggests improving the logic and clarity through a 
carefully and comprehensively updated logical framework to guide the implementation and 
monitoring (see condition (i) in the concluding section).  
16. 
The project will support two activities related to MRA 1 (Energy generation and access). 
These are off-grid solar photovoltaics and the installation of biodigester units. The funding 
 
5 Despite 38 per cent of the total budget going into infrastructure construction and rehabilitation, ARA 3 
(Infrastructure and built environment) is not a results area BREFOL anticipates contributing to.

=== PAGE 166 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 166 
 
 
 
 
 
proposal claims a mitigation impact potential of 56,930 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent 
(t CO2 eq) by the end of the seven years of implementation and 226,383 t CO2 eq by the end of 
the 25 years lifespan. The mitigation impact potential of the off-grid solar photovoltaics was 
quantified using a clean development mechanism methodology for small-scale electrification, 
and the mitigation impact potential of the biodigester units was quantified using the 
International Renewable Energy Agency methodology for small-scale biogas capacity 
production. 
17. 
The project also claims a mitigation impact potential from MRA 4 (Forestry and land 
use), specifically from activities for the rehabilitation of rangelands and for agroforestry. The 
mitigation impact potential was quantified using the Ex-Ante Carbon-balance Tool (EX-ACT) 
tool developed by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. The anticipated 
mitigation results are 2,033,251 t CO2 eq by the end of the implementation period and 
13,922,954 t CO2 eq over the lifespan of the project. 
18. 
The iTAP assesses the overall estimation of 2,090,182 tCO2eq by the end of the 
implementation period and 14,149,337 tCO2eq by the end of the project lifespan as sound, clear 
and well justified. However, there is still a lack of clarity about how the climate impact of the 
project will be integrated into the M&E system and/or in the measurement, reporting and 
verification (MRV) system of the participating countries (see condition (i) in the concluding 
section). 
19. 
On adaptation impact potential: The funding proposal indicates an expected adaptation 
outcome with 4.7 million direct beneficiaries. Indirect beneficiaries are assessed as 15.5 million. 
The funding proposal document suggests that at least 50 per cent should be women, while the 
calculations (see Annex 23) indicate exactly 50:50 male/female. In order to reach at least 50 per 
cent women – or even nearly 50 per cent – significant and proactive measures are needed (see 
discussion under section 1.3 (paras. 34–36) and condition (ii) in the concluding section). 
20. 
Annex 23 (Estimation of Beneficiaries) includes different ways to estimate the number 
of beneficiaries, related to different activities. An update of the project’s monitoring framework 
should review the beneficiary estimation methodologies and explore the necessary qualitative 
delineations required to assess and monitor how many can be said to have benefited from the 
programme. Even the use of more qualitative indicators can be explored as a way of drawing 
attention to the logical pathways for how specific activities are meant to contribute to specific 
outputs and broader outcomes (see condition (i) in the concluding section).  
21. 
All BREFOL outcomes are to contribute to ARA 1 ([Enhanced resilience of the] most 
vulnerable people and communities). This might be the case given the general fragility and 
vulnerability of the region. It should be noted, however, that specific methodologies for reaching 
the most vulnerable [within the region] are lacking. The beneficiary contributions for accessing 
credit may be effective in targeting those able to successfully manage credit without specific 
support, but it may also bar the most vulnerable from accessing the concessional climate finance 
facilitated by the programme.6  
22. 
Indirect beneficiary estimates are by definition imprecise, and rough estimates of 
hectares covered or percentages of the population need to be accepted as reasonable. One area 
where a more precise indirect beneficiary calculation would make great sense, however, relates 
to activity 3.1.2 ‘Integrate and disseminate climate information and early warning into the 
established digital advisory services.’ An early warning system could very reasonably be 
expected to reach all people in a given geographic area with climate-related early warnings. The 
present monitoring framework gauges the number of pastoralists with access to climate-
informed agro-advisory services (activity 3.1.1) but in relation to EWS, only the number of 
 
6 The iTAP notes that the beneficiary estimation (or project/programme-specific indicators listed in section E5 of the 
funding proposal) does not count the number of individuals or businesses that actually acquire loans and insurance, 
but only how many are eligible (including women and youth).

=== PAGE 167 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 167 
 
 
 
 
 
trainers trained and the number of tools developed are to be monitored. This could be revisited 
along with the update of the M&E system, as outlined in condition (i) in the concluding section. 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
             Scale: Medium 
23. 
In the GCF context, paradigm shift potential is defined as the degree to which the 
proposed activity can catalyse impact beyond a one-off project or programme investment. To 
the extent that the BREFOL programme can be effectively implemented, there is a good 
potential for catalysing change beyond the one-off investment. 
24. 
If the construction/rehabilitation of water harvesting, irrigation and livestock 
infrastructure is of high quality and communities are interested in using and maintaining such 
infrastructure, then these investments should provide benefits relating to water and food 
security for many years to come (the total lifespan indicated is 25 years).  
25. 
Extension services and training for improved land management and climate-smart 
solutions in agriculture, rangelands and forestry should help communities maintain soil fertility, 
use a better mix of crops, and protect livestock from disease. If successful, this stands to greatly 
enhance livelihoods and adaptive capacity, which should be lasting qualities that improve the 
lives of pastoralists and agropastoralists.  
26. 
Entrepreneurship training and the extension of credit – as connected with climate-smart 
businesses and insurance coverage – may also have lasting positive effects on the local 
community and its ability to cope with climate change and also make mitigation action more 
compatible with sustainable livelihoods.  
27. 
Related to the credit lines, there are great opportunities for GCF to help overcome 
specific barriers to financing. More financing is needed in the region. However, the potential of 
the programme for helping new or vulnerable groups access finance is uncertain. With regard to 
gender, this may depend on the level of success of BREFOL in taking lessons and insights from: 
(a) 
The reportedly highly successful pan-African Affirmative Finance Action for Women in 
Africa (AFAWA); and  
(b) 
The AfDB’s commitment to fostering access to finance and technical support for Women-
led Small and Medium Enterprises. 
28. 
The funding proposal is very vague on ways to strengthen regulatory and policy 
frameworks and/or institutional capacities for climate resilience.7 It seems there will be policy 
dialogues in some of the countries, but with different topical orientations. Policy and regulatory 
frameworks may otherwise be the most direct way of triggering action beyond the project or 
‘one-off investment’, but this is not the path or ‘paradigm shift potential’ opted for by BREFOL. 
29. 
The funding proposal correctly notes that conducive regulatory frameworks are critical 
for climate action as well as for business development. It is hoped that other related initiatives 
by the five country governments do work on the strengthening of institutional capacities for 
climate resilience and the creation of an enabling business environment for climate-smart 
entrepreneurship. Such developments beyond the programme would be important for making 
 
7 The funding proposal (para. 97) suggests that activity 3.2.1 “will further enhance existing investment and regulatory 
framework in the participating countries (see Annex 9)”. Annex 9, titled ‘Legal due diligence’, refers to the 
conditions for loan disbursement, although reference is also made to financial regulations in the beneficiary 
countries, drawing on information from the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development Investment 
Policy Hub (https://investmentpolicy.unctad.org/). Annex 7, including its 13 sub-annexes accounting for 
Stakeholder Engagement and Market Assessments in the beneficiary countries, contain some important research 
and insights on financial regulations and access to credit in some of the countries. The iTAP could not find any 
synthesis or analysis of how BREFOL seeks to enhance policy frameworks, but notes that the funding proposal, 
compared to the previous submission, now refers to and relies more on the contents of Annex 7 and its sub-annexes.

=== PAGE 168 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 168 
 
 
 
 
 
BREFOL’s investments into tools, trainings and infrastructure more effective and sustainable in 
the long run. It would have been desirable for BREFOL to have a stronger plan for activity 3.2.1 
‘Support delivery of climate regulatory framework and mainstreaming of climate change into 
agricultural sector policies and strategies.’  
1.3 
Sustainable development potential                        Scale: Medium to high 
30. 
The theory of change figure (funding proposal, page 32, figure B.2.2) indicates co-
benefits of ‘improved livelihood opportunities’ and ‘ecosystem services improved’. These are 
fully consistent with the activities proposed across the programme. 
31. 
BREFOL also seeks to contribute towards the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 
and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Significant contributions should go towards 
SDG 2 (Zero hunger), SDG 5 (Gender equality), SDG 6 (Clean water and sanitation), SDG 7 
(Affordable and clean energy), SDG 9 (Industry, innovation and infrastructure), SDG 11 
(Sustainable cities and communities), SDG 13 (Climate action through carbon storage and 
contribution towards stabilizing of climate) as well as the restoration of degraded 
rangeland/pastureland as a significant contribution towards SDG 15 (Life on land).   
32. 
The wider (co-)benefits of the proposed programme may be substantial, very much 
depending on the level of success in reaching the most vulnerable people and communities and 
enhancing their health, well-being, and food and water security. 
33. 
The economic and social co-benefits may be the greatest, not least by way of enhancing 
women’s access to credit and enabling further income-generation. If the focus on women is 
successfully maintained throughout the layers of implementation, the gender and social co-
benefits could contribute to women’s economic independence, which in turn may have 
beneficial social, cultural and political spin-offs.  
34. 
However, the Horn of Africa faces serious gender inequalities, which may compromise 
the success of the programme as these hamper the freedom and well-being of women and girls. 
Annex 8 (Gender Analysis and Action Plan) suggests that the key gender inequalities faced by 
women and girls include the limited ownership of, access to, and control over productive 
resources along with extra work burdens relating to caregiving and the gathering of fuelwood, 
fodder, grass for construction and the otherwise reduced mobility outside the home. Other 
factors include low literacy levels leading to low skills, poor salaries and low levels of formal 
employment and reduced representation in political, legal and policymaking institutions. These 
inequalities are rooted in sociocultural patriarchal norms, kinship rules and traditional 
practices. As further pointed out in Annex 8, this affects the way women participate in livelihood 
diversification activities, and will thus have a bearing on the success of the proposed project. 
35. 
The gender action plan (see Annex 8) is specific, budgeted and well elaborated. It is 
however not sufficiently integrated into the funding proposal’s mainstream activities. Moreover, 
the rationale for having activities 2.2.1 and 2.2.2 focus specifically on women and youth, while 
none of the other activities have this focus, is unclear. The prevailing gender discrimination 
could motivate any other activity to (also) have a more specific gender focus and gender-
responsive methodologies. 
36. 
The iTAP notes that consultations with beneficiaries and stakeholders – communities, 
women’s groups, youth associations, civil society organizations (CSOs), and non-governmental 
organizations – will continue in the implementation phase (see para. 185 of the funding 
proposal). This provides the AE with suitable opportunities for developing an updated gender 
action plan that is integrated into the mainstream activities (see condition (ii) in the concluding 
section).

=== PAGE 169 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 169 
 
 
 
 
 
37. 
Environmental co-benefits, as indicated in paragraph 46 of the funding proposal, are 
anticipated through the promotion of resilient agropastoral production systems by promoting 
the adoption of sustainable land management best practices and agroforestry, leading to 
improved ecosystem services and increased soil organic carbon content. Furthermore, BREFOL 
envisions the installation of 4.8 megawatts of solar photovoltaic systems for solar irrigation, 
lighting, and processing, alongside the potential generation of biogas energy from over 3,890 
cubic metres of biodigester capacity that will be installed. 
38. 
One factor which could limit environmental benefits, or even do harm, is the risk of 
overextraction of groundwater. In all five countries, stakeholder consultations came up with the 
idea of “drilling and rehabilitation of boreholes fitted with solar powered pumps” (see 
paragraphs 189–193 of the funding proposal). With the shift from “costly” diesel to “free” solar 
photovoltaics, the iTAP would like to point to the possible risk of overpumping and 
overextraction of groundwater. This risk is heightened where institutional capacities and 
regulatory frameworks are weak, and groundwater monitoring may be absent.   
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
                       Scale: Medium to high 
39. 
The Horn of Africa is one of the world’s most disaster-prone and food-insecure regions. 
Conflict and climate change-intensified drought and flooding, compounded by economic 
downturn, continue to affect millions of citizens, including refugees, internally displaced 
persons and their host communities. Discrimination and threats of violence hamper access to 
the resources needed for the income generation that is essential for accessing food and adapting 
to climate change adaptation. Millions of children suffer from acute malnutrition. There is no 
question about the vulnerability and financing needs of the beneficiary countries and 
populations.  
40. 
The proposed programme also sets out to support the most vulnerable people and 
communities and address gender aspects. These are critical intentions that need even further 
emphasis and critical attention, as highlighted above.  
41. 
The fragility of the region is discussed in relation to governance risks (see paras. 211–
213 of the funding proposal). It is critical for the successful implementation of the programme 
that the level and risk of conflict and lack of capacity be continuously monitored and addressed 
in project management and oversight. Due consideration of fragility and conflict risk also needs 
to be brought into project management and methodologies for programme delivery. Annex 24 
(Fragility and Resilience Assessment) contains important and insightful information about the 
sociopolitical situation of the beneficiary countries, and would be worth updating. Such an 
update could provide opportunity for weaving the insights of the assessment into the 
methodologies for implementing the BREFOL activities (see condition (iii) in the concluding 
section).  
42. 
Updated country-level strategies for managing fragility concerns in an adaptive manner 
during project implementation will be key for the implementation of activities 3.2.1 (Support 
delivery of climate regulatory framework and mainstreaming of climate change into agricultural 
sector policies and strategies) and 4.1.2 (Technical and institutional capacity building).  
43. 
There is also a clear need for climate-smart agrifinance in the region. The BDCW to the 
Djibouti Economic Development Fund and Development Bank of Ethiopia will address the 
much-needed financing needs in the climate sensitive agricultural sector.8 This facility will 
enable the two local private finance institutions to demonstrate how to structure the financing 
and derisk the potential investment activities in the climate-smart agriculture sector. Given the 
prevailing market interest rates, ranging from 12 per cent to 15 per cent in Djibouti, and 12 per 
 
8 See paragraph 73 of the funding proposal, and activity 2.2.3.

=== PAGE 170 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 170 
 
 
 
 
 
cent to 18 per cent in Ethiopia, the BDCW can offer more accessible loans with maximum rates 
of 6 per cent (in Djibouti) and 9 per cent (in Ethiopia), and this includes a parametric insurance 
premium for the loan.9 The lessons to be learned and best practices to be developed can form 
the basis of good lending procedures and financing structures that can also be replicated in the 
other programme countries in future. This should eventually spur some interest in the private 
sector (i.e. local financial institutions and insurance/guarantee companies). 
1.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high 
44. 
The five participating countries – Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia and South Sudan – 
have all provided no-objection letters and will contribute in-kind co-financing. The initial 
concept note for the present endeavour (then titled Building Resilience for Food and Nutrition 
Security) covered seven of the eight IGAD countries.10 Uganda excluded itself, and Sudan was 
unable to participate due to conflict in the country. Hence, five IGAD member States are 
involved in the presently proposed programme.  
45. 
Additional consultations with the participating countries after the first submission of the 
funding proposal to GCF also led to changes in the activity setup between the countries. It 
appears, from AfDB’s responses to the iTAP’s questions, that several countries were not able to 
identify suitable financial institutions to roll out the credit lines. Hence, activities related to the 
BDCW and the related Direct Insurance Credit Window are limited to Djibouti and Ethiopia.  
46. 
At the regional level, this whole endeavour is a follow-on from IGAD’s Drought 
Resilience and Sustainable Livelihoods Program (DRSLP). Lessons learned from the DRSLP have 
been integrated in the programme’s design and the implementation plan. In some participating 
countries, the programme will use project management units that are already running DRSLP, 
which are to be strengthened with the addition of specialized staff. The proposed programme 
aligns with IGAD’s Drought Disaster Resilience and Sustainability Initiative Strategy and the 
HoRN Regional Resilience Framework 3.0. Also, the African Union Draft Africa Climate Change 
Strategy (2020–2030) played a pivotal role in narrowing down the BREFOL subinvestments, 
consistent with the adaptation needs of region. 
47. 
At the national level, the proposed programme aligns with the respective countries’ 
national strategies and action plans on climate change. All of them have submitted at least a first 
(indicative) nationally determined contribution. 
48. 
The participating countries’ capacity to implement funded programmes is essential. The 
ministries and regional organization acting as EEs all operate in critically challenging 
environments and have important capacity needs. Nevertheless, they are also the most suitable 
entities to take on a project of this nature, and their involvement should enable them to develop 
their capacity further. The nationally owned implementation also holds the key to future 
sustainability.  
49. 
The iTAP hence commends the approach of working through regional and national 
entities, and trusts that the AE has incorporated necessary and sufficient means to support and 
develop the implementation capacity of the executing and implementing entities. 
50. 
There has been engagement with CSOs and other stakeholders. The funding proposal 
(para. 185) suggests that “the large number of people mobilized during the consultations 
confirms that countries and IGAD are highly committed to the programme and have high 
expectations of its ability to bring improvements.” 
 
9 See paragraph 74 of the funding proposal, and activity 2.3.1. 
10 https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/program-build-resilience-and-food-security-horn-africa.

=== PAGE 171 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 171 
 
 
 
 
 
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
                        Scale: Medium 
51. 
The total programme funding of USD 335.3 million comprises USD 151.0 million of 
requested GCF funding, and USD 184.3 million in AE/ADF and government co-financing. The co-
financing is hence larger than the amount requested from GCF, demonstrating high commitment 
from the AE and the respective country governments. Table 2 provides an overview of the 
funding by country. 
Table 2: Overview of BREFOL financing by financier and receiving country 
Country/enti
ty financed 
GCF financing (USD million) 
Co-financing: ADF + FAO + Governments + 
beneficiaries (USD million equivalent) 
Total BREFOL 
 
Grant 
Loan 
Total 
GCF 
% of GCF 
Grant 
Loan 
In-kind 
Total 
Co-fin 
% of  
Co-fin 
All 
(USD 
millio
n) 
Per 
cent 
(%) 
Djibouti 
14.02 
14.00 
28.02 
18.6% 
21.45 
 
 
21.45 
12% 
49.47 
14.8% 
Ethiopia 
25.64 
46.30 
71.94 
47.6% 
38.89 
 
 
38.89 
21% 
110.83 
33.1% 
Kenya 
20.10 
0.00 
20.10 
13.3% 
 
42.90 
 
42.90 
23% 
63.00 
18.8% 
Somalia 
8.82 
0.00 
8.82 
5.8% 
21.45 
 
 
21.45 
12% 
30.27 
9.0% 
South Sudan 
14.64 
0.00 
14.64 
9.7% 
36.44 
 
 
36.44 
20% 
51.07 
15.2% 
IGAD 
7.50 
0.00 
7.50 
5.0% 
5.32 
 
 
5.32 
3% 
12.82 
3.8% 
 
 
 
 
 
Governments: 
16.03 
16.03 
9% 
16.03 
4.8% 
 
 
 
 
 
Beneficiaries: 
1.82 
1.82 
1% 
1.82 
0.5% 
Grand total 
90.71 
60.30 
151.01 
100% 
123.55 
42.90 
17.85 
184.30 
100% 
335.30 
100% 
Source: Compiled from funding proposal, Annex 4, ‘Budget Summary’ BREFOL Budget Revised 15042024. 
Abbreviations: ADF = African Development Fund; FAO = Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; 
BREFOL = Building Climate Resilience for Food and Livelihoods in the Horn of Africa; IGAD = Intergovernmental 
Authority on Development. 
52. 
The estimated government co-financing (in-kind) is around 9 per cent of total BREFOL 
resources. It seems mostly geared towards activity 1.1 on infrastructure construction and 
rehabilitation.  
53. 
The programme anticipates leveraging additional private sector co-financing to the tune 
of USD 9 million (see Table 3). It is noted that most of the co-financing is from the Development 
Bank of Ethiopia. Smaller amounts of funding are provided by other sources of matching funds, 
including from small-medium enterprises, smallholder farmers and micro-enterprises.  
Table 3: Expected contributions from private sector financing 
Contributions from Private Sector Financing Channels 
Amount (USD million) 
20% co-financing from the Development Bank of Ethiopia 
5.49 
50% matching fund from Djibouti Economic Development Fund 
0.99 
5% matching fund from smallholder farmers and micro-enterprises 
0.45 
10% matching fund from small-to-medium-sized enterprises 
1.80 
Total Green Blended Finance 
8.72 
Source: Adapted from funding proposal, page 50, table B.3.5.

=== PAGE 172 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 172 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 – Ways for the BREFOL Direct Credit Window to attract private sector investments 
 
Source: Funding proposal, page 43, figure B.3.3. 
54. 
The arrangements for the private sector contribution are illustrated in Figure 1 above. 
Co-financing is to be blended alongside the baseline investment and GCF resources to increase 
the lending portfolio for the BDCW and the BREFOL Direct Insurance Credit Window. 
55. 
On the organization of the credit lines, the lessons learned on key factors contributing to 
the success of AfDB’s ongoing AFAWA programme would still (as recommended also in previous 
iTAP reviews) need to be more clearly incorporated into the rolling out of the innovative credit 
lines (see condition (ii) in the concluding section). 
56. 
The iTAP notes the close connection between credits, advisory services, regulatory 
reforms, as well as blended finance and potential guarantees, and would recommend the AE to 
develop these linkages in a similar manner to ensure cross-programme coherence and solid 
contributions to the enabling environment for continued beneficiary financial prowess and 
economic independence. This was recommended also in the previous review, and is reiterated 
in the proposed condition (i) in the concluding section. 
57. 
On cost-effectiveness, the GCF cost per beneficiary is USD 29 and the cost per t CO2 eq of 
avoided/reduced emissions is USD 31. The calculations are outlined in Table 4. 
Table 4: BREFOL summary of the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of the programme 
Total programme funding (in USD million) 
335.3 
GCF funding (in USD million)  
151.0 
Programme direct beneficiaries (million) 
4.7 
Total emissions reductions in 25 years (million t CO2 eq)  
10.7 
Estimated cost per programme beneficiary 
71.6 
GCF amount allocated for adaptation (in USD million) 
134.7 
Estimated GCF cost per programme beneficiary 
28.8 
GCF amount allocated for mitigation (in USD million) 
16.3 
5% matching funds from 
smallholder farmers, pastoralists, 
and micro-enterprises, and 10%
matching funds from small-
medium agribusiness enterprises 
(Crowds in additional $2.25 
million)
20% Co-financing ($22.5 million) from DBE plus 
50% Matching Fund ($1.97 million) from FDED
(Crowds in additional $5.49 million)
Funds Flow
GCF Funds Flow
BREFOL Direct Credit Windows (BDCW) 
to Djibouti Economic Development 
Fund (FDED), & the Development Bank 
of Ethiopia (DBE) for the growth of 
Agribusiness MSMEs ($24.35 million)
FDED, Djibouti

=== PAGE 173 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 173 
 
 
 
 
 
Estimated programme cost per t CO2 eq 
31.3 
Estimated GCF cost per t CO2 eq 
1.5 
Source: Funding proposal, page 73, table D.6.1. 
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
58. 
The iTAP finds that the proposed initiative BREFOL is well aligned with the updated 
Strategic Plan for the GCF 2024–2027 by accelerating climate action for the most vulnerable.  
59. 
The iTAP also recognizes that the AE, EEs and country teams are committed to 
addressing the important goal of enhancing climate resilience among agropastoral and other 
communities in the Horn of Africa. It is hence of great importance that GCF supports this kind of 
initiative in one of the most climate-affected and vulnerable parts of the world.  
60. 
A general finding (from both the first and second submissions), however, is that the way 
that the programme is structured does not do justice to the needs of the region and the many 
important endeavours proposed. The iTAP hence recommends a set of measures, formulated in 
the conditions below, aimed at enhancing the clarity and manageability of the proposed 
initiative. 
61. 
Hence, the iTAP recommends that the Board approve this funding proposal with the 
following conditions to be fulfilled prior to the first disbursement of GCF proceeds: 
Conditions precedent to the first disbursement of GCF proceeds: 
(a) 
The Accredited Entity shall provide to the GCF, in form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat: 
(i) 
an updated logical framework that is consistent with the theory of change; and 
(ii) 
a detailed monitoring, evaluation and learning plan (MEL Plan) that: 
(1) Clearly outlines milestones towards achieving the Funded Activity outcomes 
and final targets, disaggregated by sex; 
(2) Sets out the definition of indicators and data gathering methods for progress 
in mitigation of, and adaptation to, climate change of specific systems 
proposed in each Host Country;  
(3) Includes the methods for analysing and interpreting the data; 
(4) Includes the description per Host Country of the process to integrate the 
monitoring and evaluation information to the reporting system of the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (M&E system for 
adaptation and MRV system for mitigation); and 
(5) Sets out the steps and responsibilities for knowledge management and 
exchange. 
(b) 
The Accredited Entity shall deliver to the Fund, in form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat, an updated gender action plan that explains how to achieve the stated goal 
of 50 per cent female and 50 per cent male split among direct and indirect beneficiaries 
of the Programme, considering the presently unequal access to resources such as credit, 
land titles or livestock, information and means of communication, as well as the ability 
to autonomously make financial decisions; and 
(c) 
The Accredited Entity shall update, in form and substance satisfactory to the Secretariat, 
the information and analysis contained in Annex 24 to the Funding Proposal, and

=== PAGE 174 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 174 
 
 
 
 
 
prepare corresponding country-level strategies for managing fragility concerns in an 
adaptive manner during project implementation in the Host Countries.

=== PAGE 175 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 175 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP239) 
Proposal name: 
Building Climate Resilience for Food and Livelihoods in the Horn 
of Africa (BREFOL) 
Accredited entity: 
African Development Bank (AfDB) 
Country/(ies): 
Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia and South Sudan 
Project/programme size: 
Large 
Impact potential 
Thank you for your insightful comments and recommendations. Yes, we agree to prepare and 
submit to the GCF Secretariat prior to first disbursement: 
(a)
an updated logical framework that is consistent with the theory of change; and
(b)
a detailed monitoring, evaluation and learning plan (MEL Plan) that:
(i)
Clearly outlines milestones towards achieving the Funded Activity outcomes
and final targets, disaggregated by sex;
(ii)
Sets out the definition of indicators and data gathering methods for progress
in mitigation of, and adaptation to, climate change of specific systems
proposed in each Host Country;
(iii)
Includes the methods for analysing and interpreting the data;
(iv)
Includes the description per Host Country of the process to integrate the
monitoring and evaluation information to the reporting system of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (M&E system for
adaptation and MRV system for mitigation); and
(v)
Sets out the steps and responsibilities for knowledge management and
exchange.
Paradigm shift potential 
These iTAP comments are well noted. As suggested and described in the funding proposal, 
BREFOL leverage lessons and insights from existing African Development Bank (AfDB) 
initiatives such as the highly successful pan-African Affirmative Finance Action for Women in 
Africa (AFAWA). The AfDB is committed to fostering access to finance and technical support 
for Women-led Small and Medium Enterprises.  
Furthermore, BREFOL will encourage the alignment with other related initiatives by the five 
country governments on the strengthening of institutional capacities for climate resilience 
and the creation of an enabling business environment for climate-smart entrepreneurship. 
We also agree that such developments beyond the programme would be important for 
making BREFOL’s investments into tools, trainings and infrastructure more effective and 
sustainable in the long run. 
Sustainable development potential

=== PAGE 176 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 176 
 
 
 
 
As righly noted by iTAP consultations with beneficiaries and stakeholders including 
communities, women’s groups, youth associations, civil society organizations (CSOs), and 
non-governmental organizations, will continue in the implementation phase. We also agree 
that this process will provide suitable opportunities for developing an updated gender action 
plan that is integrated into the mainstream BREFOL activities. 
To address the possible risk of overpumping and overextraction of groundwater, site specific 
geophysical assessment will be performed to ascertain that the selected sites/acquifer can 
support and sustain the proposed drilling or rehabilitation of boreholes. The boreholes will 
not be located on the same location but will be scattered in the target communities based on 
demand. Note that this is the only possible source of water which will induce development 
interventions within the communities. In addition, the solar-powered submersible pumps 
which will be installed in the boreholes will only be pumping water for a short period of time 
during the day into overhead tanks, which will have a cut-off mechanism, and the pump will 
not be working for the rest of the day and at night, which will allow groundwater recharge.  
Needs of the recipient 
Thank you for your comments and for highlighting the unique challenges in the region and 
the need for the proposed BREFOL Direct Credit Window (BDCW).  
The AfDB usual practice applicable to BREFOL will be to employ multifaceted approach that 
combines due diligence, risk assessments, capacity building, stakeholder engagement, and 
policy review to proactively manage and mitigate the challenges associated with fagility and 
conflicts. We agree to regularly update the country-level strategies for managing fragility 
concerns in an adaptive manner during project implementation to facilitate the 
implementation of activities 3.2.1 (Support delivery of climate regulatory framework and 
mainstreaming of climate change into agricultural sector policies and strategies) and 4.1.2 
(Technical and institutional capacity building).  
During BREFOL appraisal, the Bank’s fragility and resilience department will update  
assessment in line with the AfDB “Strategy for Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in 
Africa (2022-2026)”. 
Country ownership 
Thank you for your commendation. The AfDB (AE) will continue to provide necessary support 
to develop the implementation capacity of the executing and implementing entities at 
regional and national level.  
Efficiency and effectiveness 
These comments are well noted. As recommended for the organization and rolling out of the 
innovative credit lines, BREFOL will leverage on the lessons learned on success of AfDB’s 
ongoing AFAWA programme.  
The AE take note of these iTAP recommendations and will ensure clear linkage between the 
proposed credits, advisory services, regulatory reforms, as well as blended finance and 
potential guarantees, and ensure cross-programme coherence and solid contributions to the 
enabling environment for continued beneficiary financial prowess and economic 
independence.

=== PAGE 177 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.14 
Page 177 
 
 
 
 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
Firstly, the AfDB (AE) would like to use this medium to sincerely appreciate the efforts of 
iTAP and insightful comments during the assessment of the BREFOL proposal package. This 
has really helped to improve the quality of the funding proposal. 
Secondly, we accept the following:  
“Conditions precedent to the first disbursement of GCF proceeds:” 
1. 
That the Accredited Entity shall provide to the GCF, in form and substance satisfactory 
to the Secretariat: 
(a) 
an updated logical framework that is consistent with the theory of change; and 
(b) 
a detailed monitoring, evaluation and learning plan (MEL Plan) that: 
(i) 
Clearly outlines milestones towards achieving the Funded Activity outcomes 
and final targets, disaggregated by sex; 
(ii) 
Sets out the definition of indicators and data gathering methods for progress 
in mitigation of, and adaptation to, climate change of specific systems 
proposed in each Host Country;  
(iii) 
Includes the methods for analysing and interpreting the data; 
(iv) 
Includes the description per Host Country of the process to integrate the 
monitoring and evaluation information to the reporting system of the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (M&E system for 
adaptation and MRV system for mitigation); and 
(v) 
Sets out the steps and responsibilities for knowledge management and 
exchange. 
2. 
The Accredited Entity shall deliver to the Fund, in form and substance satisfactory to 
the Secretariat, an updated gender action plan that explains how to achieve the stated goal of 
50 per cent female and 50 per cent male split among direct and indirect beneficiaries of the 
Programme, considering the presently unequal access to resources such as credit, land titles 
or livestock, information and means of communication, as well as the ability to autonomously 
make financial decisions; and 
3. 
The Accredited Entity shall update, in form and substance satisfactory to the 
Secretariat, the information and analysis contained in Annex 24 to the Funding Proposal, and 
prepare corresponding country-level strategies for managing fragility concerns in an adaptive 
manner during project implementation in the Host Countries. 
Lastly, we thank the iTAP, GCF Secretariat, and GCF Task Team (Manager and Support) for the 
invaluable efforts and time taken through out the funding proposal review cycle.

=== PAGE 178 ===
Annex 8. Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
Gender documentation for FP239

=== PAGE 179 ===
BUILDING CLIMATE RESILIENCE FOR FOOD AND LIVELIHOODS IN THE HORN 
OF AFRICA (BREFOL)  
GENDER ANALYSIS AND ACTION PLAN 
DJIBOUTI 
I.
Introduction
The BREFOL Project in Djibouti is classified as Category 2 in the Bank's Gender Marker 
System (GEN II), which means that the project contributes significantly through several of its 
outcomes and objectives to promoting gender equity and women's empowerment. 
The following activities were discussed with all the technicians and experts of the project, 
including the Coordinator, the Monitoring and Evaluation Officer and the Gender Expert for 
the Ministry of Agriculture team; the Program Project Manager and the Djibouti Country 
Project Manager within the Bank. Each of the following activities was deemed already 
integrated or integrable within previously planned activities, including:  
(i)
the implementation of guidelines for gender-sensitive agricultural infrastructure
(within the budget line for technical manuals to be developed by the same firm),
(ii)
consultations with gender-sensitive beneficiaries (with <50% women),
(iii)
general gender training for all stakeholders, including those on the prevention of
risks related to the transmission of HIV-AIDS, STDs but also the risks of gender-
based violence (GBV) or sexual exploitation, harassment and abuse of power
(SEAH) within the project.
(iv)
the deployment in the field of the innovative GALS (Gender Action Learning
System) methodology under the supervision of IGAD and Oxfam at regional level,
(v)
the recruitment of a National Gender Expert.
The reworked table of gender activities in virtual session was shared with all participants with 
also a specific gender questionnaire to collect the country information required during the 
assessment mission, addressed to the Gender Expert, answered with the support of members of 
the Ministry of Agriculture and other national structures (including the Ministry of Women and 
Family). Finally, bilateral meetings between the Gender Experts (AfDB/Djiboutian party) and 
the project team were organized to finalize the project gender activity plan.  
II.
Gender analysis
Regarding the Africa Gender Equality Index (AGI) developed annually by the AfDB and 
UNECA, Djibouti is one of the three countries on the continent not to have because of the lack 
of too many indicators. It is therefore not possible to measure or compare the differences in 
Djibouti's performance vis-à-vis the continental average and other countries from this index. 
This presupposes a very weak consideration of gender issues in national development statistical 
studies, with 1a significant lack of sex-disaggregated data. 
According to the Mo Ibrahim Index of Governance in Africa (IIAG) 2020, at the gender level, 
Djibouti occupies the 52nd place out of 54 in Africa  with a Gender score of 31.8/100 and an 
1 51 of the 54 African countries are included in this index, using data from national sources, and by imputing values 
for data Missing. Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea and South Sudan are not included due to their lack too much important 
indicators. AGI 2019, methodological report, p.25.

=== PAGE 180 ===
improvement of 2.3 points since 2010.2 This indicator measures and aggregates data on (i) 
women's political participation and representation, for which Djibouti scores 50.08/100, (ii) 
equal civil liberties for women, 36.2/100, (iv) equal access to public services for women, where 
Djibouti scores 9.4/100, as well as (v) laws on violence against women for which no score is 
available,  and above all, (iii) socio-economic opportunities for women, sought by this 
agricultural project, whose score is 31/100. 
 
Djiboutian women have limited socio-economic opportunities compared to men. Although 
Djibouti is experiencing high economic growth (8.4%), unemployment is massive and affects 
48.2% of the active population, particularly affecting young people  and women (62.8% and 
65.6% unemployment rate). In the absence of significant private sector development, 41% of 
the workforce work in government or public services. The State remains the country's largest 
employer. However, the administration recruited twice as many men from 2009 to 2017 so that 
the unemployment rate for men even decreased three times more (from 54.6% to 38.7%) than 
that of women (from 68.6% to 63.4%) between 2002 and 2017. Accumulating inequalities 
rooted in traditions and customs limiting their socio-economic role, women experience a low 
level of employability. This leads them to turn mainly to the informal sector. From 2010 to 
2015, the rate of women working in the informal sector even increased significantly (from 
31.7% to 74.3%).  
 
Women's entrepreneurship in Djibouti is paradoxically weak and underdeveloped 
In 2014, despite a recognized dynamism of Djiboutian women, only 16% of new companies 
created were created by women (Ouloufa Abdo Ismaël, Director of ODPIC, 2018). While it 
was almost absent ten years ago, "female entrepreneurship has developed little by little and 
today represents a force for development". The Republic of Djibouti has set itself a target of 
35% of businesses created by women by 2021 by counting on support for the formalization of 
existing activities and support activities for women entrepreneurs affected by unemployment 
and precariousness (ibid.). According to Aicha Hamadou Hamid, it is an economic lever for 
the entire Djiboutian population but also "a way to fight unemployment and the 
marginalization of women in the labor market", the overwhelming majority of whom work in 
the informal sector. Women work every day to feed their families and are very present in the 
subsistence economy, small trade, clothing, cosmetics or handicrafts.  They are penalized by 
the lack of funding and infrastructure.  Several issues surrounding the start-up or expansion 
of women-owned businesses and the identification of socio-cultural problems and barriers 
faced by women entrepreneurs as well as ways and means to overcome them. 
 
Financial inclusion for farmers is very limited, particularly for women farmers. Government 
efforts to combat the exclusion of people from the banking system with the implementation of 
microfinance tools, particularly for women traders known as "charcharis", have led to a 
significant increase in the number of credit beneficiaries and their volume. The number of 
women beneficiaries of credit has increased fifteen-fold (from 800 in 2010 to 12,500 in 2015, 
source: MPFPF, National Gender Policy 2011-2021; Republic of Djibouti, SCAPE 2015-2019, 
p.17), and the volume of credits granted by FD9 (from FDJ 57 million to FDJ 500 million, 
ibid.). However, agricultural activities are ineligible for credit from microfinance 
institutions. The majority of women and girls continue to face many constraints that prevent 
them from taking advantage of Djibouti's growth potential by remaining at the stage of 
"income-generating" activities, which are not very sustainable, with unchanged access to other 
means of production.  
 
 
2 Source: https://iiag.online/data.html?meas=GEND&loc=DJ&view=overview, Retrieved 09/22/21.

=== PAGE 181 ===
This stagnation is due to cultural factors. In rural areas, the girl prepares herself from an early 
age to take on household chores and take charge of the maintenance of the home. Mothers thus 
value the reproductive role of the woman and will sometimes prefer to prepare the little girl for 
the function of future mother and housewife. These factors constrain access to land, livestock 
or inheritance, as well as training factors. Indeed, even though the Family Code guarantees 
equal land rights for women and men (Article 101),  in practice women have little access to 
land and are often even deprived of their inheritance in favour of the men in their family (AFD, 
2020).  
 
Unpaid work and burden of caregiving.  Like many African countries, the weight of socio-
cultural norms confers the majority of unpaid work on women. Djiboutian society is 
patriarchal. With regard to family education and the recognition of the common responsibility 
of men and women to bring up their children, the traditional perception that these 
responsibilities are attributed to the mother still prevails in the Republic of Djibouti. "Men 
leave this burden on women's shoulders. Indeed, it is rare for men to stay at home to care for 
children" (UN/CEDAW, 2010). Mothers thus value the reproductive role of the woman and 
will sometimes prefer to prepare the little girl for the function of future mother and housewife. 
This is especially observed in rural areas where the girl will be prepared from an early age 
to take on household chores and take charge of household maintenance. While the Family 
Code Act has put an end to a large number of forms of discrimination, the persistence of 
patriarchal attitudes and deep-rooted and deep-rooted stereotypes concerning the roles and 
responsibilities of men and women in society that may discriminate against women are 
prevalent in Djibouti. The husband is considered the head of the family, relegating the wife to 
a subordinate role in decision-making concerning the family. These stereotypes still perpetuate 
conventional wisdom that women's role should be limited to the private sphere or, even more 
so, that it is up to them to look after the well-being of the home and family, even if they pursue 
a career. Considerable efforts have been made in the area of information and awareness-raising 
in urban areas. The educated couple recognizes that child-rearing is a shared responsibility of 
both men and women, and misconceptions about the roles of women and girls begin to evolve 
within educated families. On the other hand, Djiboutian rural society still has difficulty 
freeing itself from the weight of these social constructs (UN/CEDAW, 2010). In sum, despite 
notable top-down advances, pockets of conservatism encouraged by customs persist. Work on 
standards seems essential to change mentalities and provide a better balance in the division of 
labour. 
 
Training for women contributes little to their employability. Enrolment in Djibouti's general 
and technical education is growing, but the proportion of girls is stagnating or decreasing, at 
the risk of perpetuating women's poverty. With a literacy rate that is struggling to increase 
(from 43.7% in 2011 to 48.2% in 2017), more women are deprived of assets in the labour 
market, especially rural women whose literacy rate is 16.2%.  This result is well below the 40 
points of increase targeted for 2016.  The goal of parity has not been achieved at the primary 
level, with a gender parity index that has even declined (from 0.98 in 2009 to 0.86 in 2017); 
which jeopardizes the achievement of parity at the average (0.82), secondary (0.83), technical 
(0.72) and higher (0.61) levels of education given the increase in gender gaps with the years of 
schooling. This decline in Djibouti is the result of a slow evolution in girls' enrolment (net 
enrolment rate (NER) from 65.7% in 2011 to 68.7% in 2017) and retention (gross enrolment 
rate (GER) from 68.8% in 2011 to 78.9% in 2017). The construction of gender-sensitive 
infrastructure and school canteens has had tangible effects on the retention of rural girls (GER 
from 21.9% in 2011 to 58.7% in 2017) but has still failed to significantly influence girls' 
dropouts.  The main reason for girls dropping out and dropping out of school is related to 
marriage or the need to go to work for the family.

=== PAGE 182 ===
In the agricultural sector, smallholder farms run by women face a productivity gap of 20-30% 
compared to their male counterparts.  In a context of resource scarcity, a third of women own 
land/farms and women herders own a quarter of the livestock (small ruminants). The effects of 
climate change are worsening the situation of women, even destroying their means of 
production and livelihood. Agriculture in Djibouti is limited to very small areas, due to the lack 
of water for irrigation, and is almost exclusively for self-consumption.  
 
Djibouti also faces challenges in accelerating nutrition and food security. From 2010 to 2013, 
stunting stagnated at 29.7% and acute malnutrition decreased from 10.9% to 17.8% among 
children aged 0-5 years. Given the current health system, 8.98% of the Djiboutian population 
over 55 years of age is in a fragile situation according to the World Bank.  The wasting of 
women (extreme thinness) of childbearing age remains high. Inadequate nutritional practices 
are the causes with micronutrient deficiencies. Women's lower access to knowledge, assets and 
power within the household is a barrier to seeking care. Thus, universal coverage of health 
services remains a challenge, penalizing poor and rural women in particular.  Despite 
increased mobilization of public resources to improve the population's care in terms of  access 
to health care, health inequalities persist, and many challenges remain to consolidate gains 
and continue to expand access to care for populations, particularly in rural and disadvantaged 
urban areas. The maternal mortality rate is very high, at 383 deaths per 100,000 live births 
(PSDs), a figure almost five times higher than the regional average (78/100,000) (World Bank, 
2013). Gender gaps also exist to the detriment of boys who experience more stunting (32% vs. 
27% for girls), more acute malnutrition (19% vs. 16%), and greater health vulnerability. 
According to UNAIDS data, in Djibouti, in 2019, there were 36,800 adults living with HIV 
(among them 56% women and 44% men over 15 years old) and between 500 and about 1,000 
children (UNAIDS). This prevalence among adults aged 15 to 49 years would be 0.8% with a 
downward trend. In terms of family planning and protection against sexually transmitted 
diseases (STDs), the country missed PNG's target of a five-point increase target for 2016 with 
17% of unmet needs.4 
 
According to a study by another bank project in the Dikhil and Ali Sabieh area (INSUCO, 
ESIA, 2019), the population (men and women) knows that the HIV/AIDS virus exists but does 
not necessarily know the transmission channels, prevention mechanisms, or even their own 
HIV status. In rural areas, 56% of non-single women reported knowledge of AIDS (up from 
66% in 2002), but 85% of women with knowledge of AIDS did not know that not using condoms 
was a risk of transmission.  
 
The Covid-19 situation is exacerbating gaps in access to health to the detriment of the elderly 
and women. Indeed, Djibouti has the highest Covid-19 prevalence rate in East Africa, 
recording 1,300 cases of Covid-19 per million inhabitants as of April 28, 2020, according to 
the African Union's Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). At the level of the 
project area, with regard to health infrastructure, the feasibility study of this project mentioned 
the absence of a hospital structure 5in Defaineitou, and the request for the installation of a 
dispensary was made during the consultations of the populations. 
 
13% of female-headed households do not have access to water compared to 10% of their male 
counterparts and 8% of female-headed households use traditional wells to fetch water.), and 
 
3 UNAIDS, Djibouti, https://www.unaids.org/fr/regionscountries/countries/djibouti, consUlté on 30/01/21.  
4 Report on the national response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic, 2014; Country factsheets, HIV/AIDS Estimates, 2017. 
5 Source: Le Monde, April 29, 2020, Covid 19 : U.S. military isolates base in Djibouti, lemonde.fr

=== PAGE 183 ===
the use of improved toilets for which the significant inequalities between urban and rural 
households are based. Only 19% of rural households have access to improved toilets 
compared to 85% for urban households. Depending on the gender of female heads of 
household, there is a four-point difference, to the detriment of those headed by women).  
 
Moreover, it should be emphasized that Djibouti has the specificity of the existence of a very 
vulnerable population, the nomads, in a situation of extreme vulnerability. In 2014, more 
than 98% of nomadic households belonged to the two poorest quintiles of the population, and 
nomads accounted for the largest percentage of food insecure households. Since 2010, massive 
displacements of nomads have been grouped at sites in the north of the country, including Ali 
Sabieh. These populations, who have lost all their livestock, are entirely assisted by aid 
programs from the WFP, the State or donations from philanthropists in the Gulf countries. 42% 
are severely food insecure and 32% moderately food insecure (AGVSAN, 2014, WFP). 
 
Climate change leads nomads to a frantic search for pastures for their livestock and a 
concentration of livestock on watered parts of the country, resulting in overconsumption of 
pastures with its corollary, the destruction of soil. The decrease in grazing areas leads nomadic 
populations to sell or see the death of part of their livestock, animal capital constituting their 
main source of income.  
 
The digital divide hits rural women hardest. In terms of access to information and 
communication technologies (ICTs), strong inequalities prevail to the detriment of female-
headed households and between rural and urban households. Inequalities emerge to the 
detriment of female-headed households for access to the Internet (20% vs. 25% for those with 
a man at the head), mobile phones (67% vs. 78%), and at least one means of information and 
communication technologies (68% vs. 79%). Despite the 2014 "Zero Women Without 
Telephone" campaign in rural areas, the digital divide remains characterised by inequalities 
related to gender and/or place of residence.  Only 2% of rural households headed by women 
have access to the internet (2% compared to 25% of similar urban households), 20% to a mobile 
phone (compared to 80%) and 22% to at least one medium NICT (compared to 80% of urban 
households headed by women). 
 
The provision of inclusive financial services is expanding in Africa to help women smallholder 
farmers overcome some of the constraints mentioned, with insurance, for example, to de-risk 
agricultural financing for women farmers or yield insurance pooling agricultural loans to 
reassure banks and encourage them to support small farms. Africa is the continent most 
vulnerable to climate change and is already prone to a wide variety of natural disasters and 
women in particular do not have collateral for loans. The African Development Bank (and 
several foundations) is encouraging investment in digital financial inclusion in Africa. This 
requires investments in digital infrastructure, policy and regulation, digital products (SMS 
providing agricultural advice), innovation and capacity building with a gender-centric 
approach. 
 
III. 
Gender Analysis within the context of BREFOL Djibouti 
 
The objective of the Programme is to contribute to the improvement of living conditions, 
including for women and youth, food and nutrition security, increased resilience, and peace 
and security in the Horn of Africa. 
 
The watersheds selected in the project area are located in the regions of: 
• Ali Sabieh: Assamo & Ali-Addé & Holl-Holl & Oboley & Daasbiyo, 513 km²

=== PAGE 184 ===
6500 inhabitants, 
• Dikhil : Hanlé & As-Eyla & Harou & Mouloud & Arwo, 1060.8 km², 3500 inhabitants, 
• Weima : Assa-Gaila, Adoyla, Guirror, Gaoura, Defaynatou, Ripta ; Randa, Bankoualé, 
Terdo, Debné, Daimoli, 1949 km², 1500 habitants, 
• Tadjourah, 1949 km², 1500 inhabitants, 
• Djibouti-city Ambouli Zone (population not specified), 
• And Arta: Damerjog, Douda, Attar, 850 km2, 950 inhabitants. 
This corresponds to a total of 25 localities and a total population of more than 12,400 
beneficiaries, including about 6225 women, not counting the nomadic, migrant or refugee 
population who can also carry out subsistence or cash agricultural activities. 
 
Data from a survey conducted by INSUCO (ESIA, 2019) highlight the following facts for some 
localities concerned by this project: 
- the unemployment situation is greatly exacerbated with 75% of people of working age 
unemployed in the  Ali Sabieh region, and 77% in the Arta region. 6 
- this situation particularly affects women (70% of women) while 58% of men are in this 
situation. 7 
 
The needs expressed during the feasibility study of women farmers residing in the project area 
to improve their productivity were as follows: 
✓ The need to reduce dependence on fuel to power the well engine (wish to have solar 
panels to power these engines). 
✓ Have agricultural gardens (although very active in their community, women have less 
than 50% of agricultural gardens).  
✓ The construction of wells.  
✓ The granting of pesticides for plants. 
✓ The construction of protection against the wadi of water in case of rain 
✓ The construction of hydraulic structures, water reservoirs, and micro-dams.  
✓ Logistical means (cars to transport their crops to markets). 
 
IV. 
Actions taken by the Government 
 
At the level of Djibouti's legal, institutional and political framework, significant institutional 
progress in favor of gender equality can be noted on the part of the Djiboutian government with 
the inclusion of the right to gender equality in the national constitution, the ratification of 
international protocols on the promotion of gender equality, as well as the updating of a national 
gender policy (PNG) for the period 2011-2021. Progress on gender equality and the 
empowerment of women and girls is manifested in the prohibition of early marriage, forced 
marriage, repudiation and against moral and sexual harassment, although pockets of 
conservatism encouraged by customs persist.  
 
However, national, political and budgetary instruments to implement these provisions remain 
insufficient (i.e. although recognized as a crime, violence against women, including female 
genital mutilation (FGM), is significant). This is important to note given that in any project, 
the influx of external male labour represents a major impact with the increase in GBV and 
 
6 These data are taken from EDESIC 2015AndDjiboutian Research on Employment, the Informal Sector and 
Consumption and the Djiboutian Household Survey ; of theEDAM 2017, Household Survey, and were collected as 
part of the ESIA, Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the project. 
7 Source: Survey conducted by INSUCO in 2019 as part of the ESIA.

=== PAGE 185 ===
exploitative sexual relations (women and girls, especially migrants, finding themselves forced 
into prostitution). 
 
With regard to the economic opportunities of Djiboutian women, at the initiative of the1st Lady 
of the Republic of Djibouti, UNFD and ODPIC (Djiboutian Office of Industrial and 
Commercial Property), a plan to promote women's entrepreneurship has been launched. 
 
Many initiatives were then born, such as the Centre for Leadership and Entrepreneurship 
(CLE), inaugurated in 2019, set up in partnership with the Ministry of Women and Family, 
which offers women entrepreneurs support in the process of setting up projects, developing 
business plans but also seeking funding. This incubation center also offers young people (men 
and women) an equipped and free space for a period of one year for the creation and 
experimentation of start-ups; Also, the Club des Jeunes Entrepreneurs Djiboutiens (CJED) 
offers a space for the exchange of experience of women entrepreneurs and women wishing to 
undertake, provides assistance in the form of support to strengthen the entrepreneurial skills of 
learners, promotes the coordination of institutions in charge of women's economic 
empowerment and offers expertise for the evaluation of applications of project leaders during 
competitions organized by the  institutions in charge of promoting entrepreneurship. Finally, 
the Women Like Djibouti antenna, supported by ODPIC, supports women working in the 
informal sector to formalize their activities. 
 
The "Djibouti Vision 2035" focuses on renewable energies for the modernization of rural areas 
and the Djiboutian State has undertaken a vast energy infrastructure program with a view to 
improving the living conditions of the population. However, large-scale capital-intensive 
infrastructure projects and other initiatives that create jobs or promote technical training have 
so far benefited women little. This project, which aims to target women and youth, has the 
potential to be a game changer. 
 
The vision of "Djibouti 2035" aims for a situation where "35% of women are economically 
independent". 
 
V. 
Project logical framework and gender-sensitive indicators 
 
Instead of a logical framework (proposed at the regional programme level), a table presenting 
the project components was proposed to the project team with the general gender-sensitive 
project indicators: 
 
 
Project Appraisal Report 
Objective 
RESULT 2: Increase revenues from agro-sylvo-pastoral value chains 
RESULT INDICATOR: Increase in annual per capita income (M/F) 
+30% (M/F) to be precisely 
defined in the baseline study 
RESULT INDICATOR: Creation of additional jobs for youth  
+500 jobs (30% of which are 
women) 
RESULT 3: Strengthen the adaptive capacity of populations to better prepare for and manage climate change 
risks and variations.  
RESULT INDICATOR: Increased access to safe land for youth and 
women. 
2000 (of which 50% of women) 
❚ RESULTS STATEMENT 1: Strengthen the resilience of drought-prone areas and pastoral and agro-sylvo-
pastoral production systems to climate change.

=== PAGE 186 ===
RESULT INDICATOR 1.1: Construction or rehabilitation of climate-resilient and gender-sensitive 
infrastructure. 
RESULT INDICATOR 1.1.1 - Gender-sensitive agricultural and pastoral 
infrastructure / Irrigation land developed of which % intended for groups 
of women  and youth farmers. 8 
35/280ha (of which atleast 30% 
for women and youth) 
RESULT INDICATOR 1.1.2- Managed pastoral land 
45 /2000 ha 
RESULT INDICATOR 1.1.3 - Alternative economic diversification 
infrastructure activities for women. 
175 (40%) 
RESULT INDICATOR 1.2: Sustainable agro-pastoral land management. 
RESULT INDICATORS 1.2.3: Secure land area for youth, women and 
vulnerable groups. 
To be defined in the baseline 
study <(50%) 
RESULT INDICATOR 1.3.1- Access of farmers and pastoralists to 
innovative technologies and practices 
1000 (including atleats 30% 
women and youth) 
❚ RESULTS STATEMENT 2: Supporting agribusiness development 
RESULT INDICATOR 2.2: Inclusive entrepreneurship development 
RESULT INDICATOR 2.2.1- Creation or strengthening of cooperatives 
and SMEs in agro-pastoral value chains, including SMEs and SMIs and 
youth-led SMEs (under 35 years of age). 
50 (35%) 
RESULT INDICATOR 2.2.2 - Access to innovative finance for 
cooperatives, vulnerable groups, SMEs and youth-led SMEs.  
50 (35%) 
RESULT STATEMENT 3: Strengthening capacity to adapt to climate change 
RESULT INDICATOR 3. 3.2- Development of tools and 
reports/Number of stakeholders trained (M/F) 
10 / <50% women beyond those 
trained 
OUTCOME STATEMENT 4: Project Coordination and Management 
Recruitment of a full-time Gender Expert within the project team 
1 
Implementation ofgender action plan (% disbursement) 
100% 
 
VI. 
BREFOL Djibouti Gender Action Plan 
 
The Bank's Gender Strategy focuses on improving access to finance and technical assistance, 
strengthening technical skills, building gender-sensitive infrastructure, and key external 
partnerships of the Gender Strategy 2021-2025. Bank management and the operations team 
demand that gender-specific challenges be taken into account in any Bank-financed project.  
 
In order to address some of the gender gap issues raised in the gender analysis of this project, 
and in line with the ongoing efforts of the Government of Djibouti to improve gender equality 
and equity, it is recommended that the project include the following gender interventions to 
ensure that women and men benefit equitably from the project: 
- 
promotion of financial inclusion and microfinance instruments for rural women, 
- 
verbal, numerical and functional literacy   
- 
support for the structuring of women's agro-pastoral cooperatives and the collective 
acquisition of land and livestock in field schools, 
- 
extension and access to ICTs and renewable energy programmes targeting rural women, 
- 
gender-sensitive agricultural infrastructure, 
- 
extension of gender-sensitive agricultural and energy technologies, 
- 
inclusion of gender analysis in all project studies with sex-disaggregated data collection 
and targeted recommendations, 
- 
specific awareness-raising against gender-based violence. 
 
 
8 A gender-responsive infrastructure will systematically include: consultations with the most vulnerable (ensuring disadvantaged 
voices are taken into account in design, planning and management, UN Women).

=== PAGE 187 ===
Details of the approved activities of the Gender Action Plan, as well as their implementation 
costs, are shown in the table below.

=== PAGE 188 ===
PROJECT TITLE 
Building Climate Resilience for Food and Livelihoods in the Horn of Africa (BREFOL) 
Objective: To contribute to the improvement of living conditions, and food and nutrition security in the Horn of Africa 
CATEGORY SMG 
(GMS) 
GEN II 
Components 
Activities 
Budget in 
USD  
Target(s) 
Indicator 
Responsible(s) 
Timeline 
Component 1.  
Strengthening Pastoral 
and Agropastoral 
Production Systems’ 
Resilience to Climate 
Change 
  
  
Consult communities, especially on 
infrastructure design, groups of 
women (50%) and men (50%). 
 Project  
(to be done 
by national 
gender 
expert) 
50% women, 50% 
young people.  
(nb. to be determined 
from the baseline 
study). 
Nb. of women, nb. of 
young people who were 
consulted  
ERAP / Technical 
partners (Dir. 
Agriculture) / local 
elected officials / 
Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert 
Year 1 
Produce 
a 
manual/guide 
with 
guidelines for the implementation of 
gender-sensitive 
agricultural 
infrastructure (manual that will be 
required in the deliverables of the 
infrastructure technical studies). 
  
 Project (to 
be done by 
national 
gender 
expert)  
1 Guide available to 
project engineers to 
build gender-sensitive 
infrastructure 
Availability of a 
guide/Community 
satisfaction 
(men/women) 
ERAP / Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert 
Years 1-2 
Component 1.  
Strengthening Pastoral 
and Agropastoral 
Production Systems’ 
Resilience to Climate 
Change 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Realize agricultural infrastructures 
taking into account the gender 
dimension: wells, hygiene (improved 
toilets), 
security, 
lighting, 
and 
including 
small 
agricultural 
technologies (e.g. pick-up, solar 
panels, solar pumps, pesticides, 
protection against water wadis, flour 
grinders, home irrigation, chicken 
coops, community markets) and 
gardens (6 minimum) for women 
(<35% minimum of the proposed 
infrastructure budget).  
 Project (to 
be done by 
national 
gender 
expert) 
100% gender-sensitive 
infrastructure30% 
women-specific 
infrastructure1 
women's agricultural 
garden per watershed 
Proportion of gender-
sensitive infrastructure. 
Share of infrastructure 
budget dedicated to 
agricultural and garden 
technologies for women 
 
ERAP / Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert / 
Gender Focal Points 
(PFG)  
Year 2-6

=== PAGE 189 ===
Acquisition of 1000 hens, equipment 
and food and veterinary products for 
one year, exclusively reserved for 
women farmers (100% women) and 
with 100% female management. 
112 536  
Number of women or 
groups of women to be 
defined in the baseline 
study  
Nb. of women 
benefiting from poultry 
houses 
ERAP / Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert 
Year 1-2 
Community 
agroforestry 
(50% 
women and youth) 
 Project (to 
be managed 
by national 
gender 
expert) 
120 
Nb. of hectares 
ERAP / Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert 
Year 1-3 
Develop health and safety measures 
that take into account the needs of 
women. 
 Project (to 
be managed 
by national 
gender 
expert) 
100% of women's 
groups satisfied. 
Share of women's 
groups satisfied. 
ERAP / Business / 
Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert 
Year 1-2 
Train the women beneficiaries of the 
project in leadership and public 
speaking following an agreement 
signed 
with 
the 
Regional 
Directorates (at the beginning of the 
project and then spread over the 
duration of the project once a month). 
 Project (to 
be managed 
by national 
gender 
expert) 
70% of women 
beneficiaries of the 
project 
Number of women 
trained in leadership 
and speaking (baseline 
study) 
Ministry of Health, 
Community Relays / 
Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert 
Years 2-6 
Component 2.  Supporting 
the Development of 
Agribusinesses 
  
  
  
Support 
farmers 
in 
financial 
inclusion (<50% women) in the 
localities of Tadjourah (6), Ali 
Sabieh (3), Dikhil (2), Djibouti-city 
(Ambouli) (50 people per locality, 
per year, 1st registered). Establish an 
agreement with the Ministry of 
Education for the free use of 
classrooms. 
3 718  
2400 people trained 
among the 
beneficiaries of the 
project, including at 
least 1200 women  
Nb. of training and nb. 
of persons benefiting 
from this specific 
training  
ERAP / Ministry of 
Education / UNFD / 
PFG localities - 
regions 
Years 1-6

=== PAGE 190 ===
Carry out a gender analysis on the 
acquisition of land rights with 
specific recommendations for actions 
and budgeted, integrated into the 
baseline study (TDRs with budget 
extension + $ 20,000). 
NB: a questionnaire submitted to the 
project team includes a series of 
questions for which data are missing 
but will need to be integrated into the 
baseline study as well as this 
extension focused on land issues (see 
part 4 of Annex B13). 
20 000 
1 roadmap to support 
farmers in acquiring 
their AOS1 list of 
actions proposed, 
budgeted and validated 
for a phase 2 
Availability of a 
roadmap to support 
farmers in acquiring 
their land cover 
certificates (AOS) with 
validated and budgeted 
actions for a phase 2 (or 
additional funding) 
PIU / Prefectures / 
Gender focal points / 
Local development 
and gender expert / 
Ministry of the Interior 
Years 1-2 
Establish 
partnerships 
with 
the 
engineering 
university, 
business 
schools and vocational technical high 
schools on trade, energy to create 
opportunities for collaboration and 
business with the project farmers 
(role of the Gender Expert and the 
Project Coordinator).  
       -    
4 training institutes 
associated with the 
project / Partnership 
agreements 
Nb. of training 
structures involved in 
the project (school 
support projects, 
volunteering and 
business case studies) 
PIU (Coordinator)/ 
Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert / 
Ministry of Education 
Years 1-7 
Carry out a particular activity with 
the 
communities/cooperatives 
benefiting from the project for a 
simplified procedure (e.g. sending 
requests by email and possibility of 
representation) with the Prefectures 
in partnership with the PFGs of the 
Capitals for the formulation of 
requests and obtaining certificates of 
agricultural occupation of the sub-
projects (role of the Gender Expert 
and the PFG).  
       -    
1 Prefectural 
agreement for a 
simplified procedure 
(email or document) 
Existence of a 
facilitated procedure to 
set up this approach for 
the project 
Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert / 
ERAP / Prefectures 
Year 2-4

=== PAGE 191 ===
Component 2.  Supporting 
the Development of 
Agribusinesses 
  
  
  
  
  
Organize extension sessions on 
women's and men's land rights 
(access to 
rights 
of use 
and 
ownership of reclaimed land to 
ensure 
sustainability 
after 
the 
project) at the start of the project, 
with a view to supporting the most 
vulnerable (20%) and cooperatives 
(100%) in the acquisition of land 
rights (certificates of agricultural 
occupation). 
 Project (to 
be managed 
by national 
gender 
expert) 
Situation at the end of 
the project +20% land 
held by men and 
women.  
Baseline % land owned 
by men/women. 
Project trainers 
(agents) / Gender focal 
points (PFG) localities 
and capitals / Gender 
expert and Dvp. Co. 
Years 1-6 
Establish an agreement with the 
Ministry of the Interior for the 
acquisition 
of 
national 
identity 
documents for refugees, immigrants 
and stateless persons working on 
arable land.  
(to 
be 
managed by 
national 
gender 
expert)  
1 Convention is 
implemented during 
the project 
Existence of a 
convention 
ERAP / Ministry of 
Interior / ONARS / 
IOM / National Expert 
on Gender and 
Community 
Development  
Year 1-2 
Deliver entrepreneurship training to 
business plan and SME development 
(<40% women). 
 Project (to 
be managed 
by national 
gender 
expert) 
40% women 
entrepreneurs, 40% 
women-led businesses 
among the 
beneficiaries of the 
project 
Proportion of women 
entrepreneurs and 
women-led businesses 
among beneficiaries 
Project trainers / PFG 
localities and capitals / 
Gender and 
Community 
Development expert 
Year 2 
Component 2.  Supporting 
the Development of 
Agribusinesses 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Develop community sub-projects to 
provide 
access 
to 
innovative 
technologies to improve the yield of 
agropastoral 
activities, 
e.g. 
renewable 
energy 
(solar 
home 
systems’ kits, pumping), improved 
cooking stoves. Based on demand 
(but at least <35% women). 
 Project (to 
be managed 
by national 
gender 
expert) 
35% of sub-projects 
managed by 
women50% of sub-
projects for the benefit 
of women supported 
Proportion of projects 
developed and led by 
women supported by 
the projectProportion of 
sub-projects for the 
benefit of women 
(expressed needs: i.e. 
solar panels, etc.) 
Number of women 
including women in 
female headed 
households and youth 
accessing clean, reliable 
and affordable solar 
home systems through 
ERAP / Project 
Trainers / Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert 
Years 2-5

=== PAGE 192 ===
the PAYGo system of 
pay to own  
Establishment of a gender-sensitive 
financing mechanism adapted to the 
needs of small farmers, fishermen 
and SMEs (Guarantee Fund) (35% 
women)Promote access to micro-
credits, particularly through GEAs 
(Entry and Affinity Groups) and 
other women's caisse initiatives 
(CTEC, etc.). 
 
 Project (to 
be 
mamanged 
by national 
gender 
expert) 
35% of the budget for 
women entrepreneurs - 
entrepreneurs; or 
£90,000 minimum. 
Percentage of bank 
guarantee/micro-credit 
facility budget for 
women entrepreneurs or 
women-led businesses 
ERAP / Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert 
Year 2 
Policy 
dialogue 
with 
banking 
institutions: 
inclusion 
of 
rural 
women, 
LoC, 
support 
for the 
formalization of jobs in the sector. 
 Project  
1 high-level workshop 
with recommendations 
Nb. of workshops on 
financial inclusion and 
access to land rights for 
farmers in Djibouti 
ERAP / Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert 
Years 1-4 
Component 2.  Supporting 
the Development of 
Agribusinesses 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Study on business opportunities in 
the agricultural value chain for 
domestic and cross-border trade, 
including a chapter on women's trade 
and recommendations for policy 
dialogue. 
 Project (to 
be done by 
national 
gender 
expert) 
1 study on gender-
responsive business 
opportunities 
Existence of a study on 
business opportunities, 
cross-border trade 
ERAP / Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert 
Years 1-2 
Establish 
partnerships 
with 
the 
engineering 
university, 
business 
schools and vocational technical high 
schools on trade, energy to create 
opportunities for collaboration and 
business with the project farmers 
(role of the Gender Expert and the 
Project Coordinator).  
                      
(to be done 
by national 
gender 
expert) 
4 training institutes 
associated with the 
project / Partnership 
agreements 
Nb. of training 
structures involved in 
the project (support 
projects, volunteering 
and business case 
studies) 
PIU (Coordinator)/ 
Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert / 
Ministry of Education 
Years 2-5

=== PAGE 193 ===
Component 3.  
Strengthening 
Agropastoral 
Communities’ Capacity to 
Adapt to Climate Change 
Training 
of 
trainer(s) 
(12) 
or 
refresher 
on 
climate-smart 
agricultural practices (CFS) and 
nutrition, ensuring that 50% of 
women are trained (2 more women). 
 Project (to 
be managed 
by national 
gender 
expert) 
14 Ministry of 
Agriculture officers 
trained or refreshed in 
CSA and nutrition 
(including 12 who will 
be trainers) 
Number of community 
workers trained or 
upgraded 
MORE 
Year 1 
Training in CSA for women's 
farmers' groups (50% women or 
women's groups) throughout the 
project. 
 Project (to 
be managed 
by national 
gender 
expert) 
50% women among 
the beneficiaries of the 
project (baseline) 
Number of project 
beneficiaries trained, 
including 50% women 
70% of project 
beneficiaries 
Project Trainers / 
ERAP 
Year 2-6 
Component 4.  Project 
coordination and 
management 
  
  
  
Recruit a national expert in gender 
and 
community 
development 
through competitive recruitment  
for the ERAP full-time, bilingual in 
English: (i) responsible for the 
implementation of the PAG and its 
integration into the final logical 
framework of the project, (ii) training 
of the project team and gender 
stakeholders, (iii) organization of 
trainings,  (iv) relationship with 
external partners (administrations: 
Prefectures, 
Ministries, 
military 
camps; design office, companies, 
NGOs, National Union of Djiboutian 
Women (UNFD), (v) coordination of 
PFGs of capitals and localities, (vi) 
supervision 
in 
the 
field, 
(vii) 
participation 
in 
the 
complaints 
management committee, COPIL and 
COTECH of the project, (viii) 
periodic reports on gender to the 
Coordinator,  drafting of the gender 
part of the AfDB's periodic reports, 
(ix) Gender and CSO Focal Point at 
the AfDB on the project. 
420 000  
1 competent national 
gender and community 
development expert 
recruited throughout 
the duration of the 
project 
An experienced and 
bilingual national 
gender and community 
development expert in 
English 
MORE 
Year 1 - 7

=== PAGE 194 ===
Train the 12 trainers of the project 
(30% women) on the theme of female 
leadership and gender (including 
gender-based 
violence 
(GBV), 
female genital mutilation, FMG), 
women's economic empowerment, 
sexual 
exploitation 
and 
abuse, 
through the National Union of 
Djiboutian Women (UNFD), as well 
as the 4 Deputy Directors. 
  17 310  
12 trained agents 
including at least 4 
women 
Number of trainers 
trained, including at 
least 30% women 
MFF / UNFD / Gender 
and Community 
Development Expert 
Years 1-2 
Training Awareness/mobilization of 
populations (50% women) and all 
project 
stakeholders 
(companies, 
external 
workers, 
ministries, 
traditional leaders) on gender and 
women's empowerment. 
 Project (to 
be managed 
by national 
gender 
expert) 
According to the 
baseline study 
Number of persons 
(M/F) and stakeholders 
trained  
ERAP / Business / 
Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert 
Year 2-4 
Further train the entire project team 
in gender (gender mainstreaming 
within 
agricultural 
projects, 
in 
climate resilience) and present PAG 
activities to the entire team at the start 
of the project.  (3 half days). 
        -  
MORE (100%) 
Number of project 
employees with more 
in-depth gender training 
Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert 
Year 1 
Component 4.  Project 
coordination and 
management 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Designate   a full-time Gender Focal 
Point per locality (12) (50% women) 
to play a role of facilitator and close  
follow-up: (i) financial inclusion 
courses (opening of bank accounts), 
(ii) coordination (with trainers, the 
Prefecture, the Gender Expert), (iii) 
establishment of the list of people in 
need 
of 
CNI, 
certificates 
of 
agricultural occupation, people to 
register for training, etc.,  (iv) report 
on the activities of his locality to the 
PFG of the Capital, (v) followed 
trainings to become a trainer, (vi) 
writing a monthly report, (vii) 
training and training groups in the 
GALS methodology. 
 Project (to 
be managed 
by national 
gender 
expert) 
12 Gender and 
community 
development focal 
points within localities 
including at least 6 
women 
Existence of a gender 
focal point (PFG) per 
locality, 50% of whom 
are women. 
ERAP / Prefectures / 
Gender Focal Points / 
Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert / 
UNFD 
Year 1

=== PAGE 195 ===
Designate a Gender Focal Point per 
Region (4) part-time in the Sub-
Directorate of each capital (Dikhil, 
Ali Sabieh, Tadjourah, Djibouti-city 
of the 6 watersheds) whose mission 
will be to: (i) report to the Gender 
Expert, (ii) facilitate travel and 
coordination with the prefectures, 
(iii) follow, support the activities of 
the localities, (iv) make supervision - 
monitoring of the field,  (v) write a 
bi-monthly report to the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Gender Expert), (vi) 
train and groups in the GALS 
methodology. 
 Project  
4 Focal points of the 
kind of capitals 
Nb. of PFG by Capital 
Gender and 
community 
development expert / 
Associations, local 
NGOs 
Year 1 
Training of trainers on the Oxfam 
GALS methodology (Gender Action 
Learning System) by IGAD (6 
people, 1 Ministry representative, 5 
days). Necessary to include the 
Gender Expert (as well as the 4PFG 
of the capitals and the Project 
Coordinator). 
 IGAD  
7 people trained 
including 3 women 
minimum 
Number of people 
trained to be SALG 
trainers 
IGAD / ERAP 
Years 1-2 
Train gender focal points in localities 
(12) and regions (4) in the GALS 
methodology with tools translated 
into French and deployed in local 
languages (Somali, Afar) to be able 
to assist GALS trainers (by the 
Gender Expert). 
14 338 
12 Gender focal points 
of localities formed 
Nb. of gender focal 
points of localities 
formed 
Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert / 
UNFD 
Years 1-2 
Train 30 people (15 couples) in local 
language per locality in the GALS 
methodology for 2 years (8 days of 
training in total), i.e. 360 people. 
   34 560  
360 people trained, 
including at least 180 
women 
Nb. of persons trained 
at the GALS 
PFG of the Capitals 
(trained) and Gender 
and Community 
Development Expert

=== PAGE 196 ===
Component 4.  Project 
coordination and 
management 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Actively participate in the complaints 
management mechanism to ensure 
the representation of women (50%), 
monitoring of firms/companies in 
charge of the work, company. 
PGES 
100% of cases resolved 
Number 
of 
cases 
referred 
to 
the 
Complaints 
Management 
Committee 
Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert 
Years 1-7 
Study of the baseline situation with 
sex-disaggregated indicators and  a  
detailed gender analysis  on the 
project 
area 
- 
collection 
and 
monitoring 
of 
sex-disaggregated 
indicators throughout the project 
with the Monitoring and Evaluation 
Expert  
Project 
(50,000) 
1 complete baseline 
taking full account of 
gender 
aspects 
and 
indicators 
Existence of a gender-
sensitive baseline and 
ToRs 
including 
this 
aspect 
ERAP / Monitoring 
Evaluation Expert / 
Design Office / 
Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert / 
PFG 
6 Months 
after 
inception 
Training/prevention workshops on 
GBV, FGM, GBV/SEAH, hygiene, 
HIV-AIDS 
with 
support 
from 
reference institutions on the issue and 
the 
signing 
of 
a 
Charter 
of 
Commitment at the start of the 
project by the Ministry of Women 
and Family (MFF) and partners. 
Additional sessions by the Gender 
Expert as needed  
  56 268  
70% 
of 
the 
beneficiaries 
of 
the 
project (to be defined 
reference 
study) 
including 
50% 
of 
women 
Number of people who 
participated 
in 
the 
training 
workshops 
(<70% 
of 
project 
beneficiaries, 
<50% 
women). 
MFF / Ministry of 
Justice / Police / 
Gender and 
Community 
Development Expert 
Years 2-3 
Organization 
of 
exchange 
workshops, 
and 
national 
and 
international communication on the 
good practices of the project in terms 
of 
gender 
mainstreaming, 
participation in the sharing of lessons 
learned between the countries of the 
program (photos, videos, social 
networks, 
articles, 
interview, 
workshop, etc.). 
  5 000  
2 
virtual 
exchange 
workshops on gender8 
communication objects 
on Djibouti's PAG 
Nb. of virtual gender 
exchange workshopsNb. 
communication objects 
on the implementation 
of Djibouti's PAG 
Gender and National 
Community 
Development Expert / 
IGAD 
Years 3-6 
Integration of gender sensitivity into 
the procurement plan 
Project (to 
be managed 
by national 
gender 
expert) 
100% of PAG budget 
disbursed 
Percentage 
of 
PAG 
disbursement 
MORE / BAD 
Year 1

=== PAGE 197 ===
TOTAL 
733 720

=== PAGE 198 ===
In the event of additional funding or budgetary reserves during project implementation, the 
following activities are desirable: 
• Support for the acquisition of land documents at the Prefecture, coverage of logistical costs 
(travel to prefectures or sub-prefectures: capitals and very remote localities). 
• Verbal, digital, functional and digital literacy (min. 50% women) in the localities of 
Tadjourah (6), Ali Sabieh (3), Dikhil (2), Djibouti-city (Ambouli) following an agreement 
with the Ministry of Education (for the free use of classrooms).  
• Training of gender focal points (trainers) of localities in training in verbal, digital, 
functional and digital literacy (12) by UNFD 
• Extension of the tasks of the Gender Focal Points of the localities (50% women) to also 
deliver digital and functional literacy courses and establish the list of people in need of CNI 
and certificates of agricultural occupation. 
• Strengthening of the early warning system with the establishment of a network of field 
assessors of climate vulnerability equipped (50% women/men) and the representation of 
women on the Committee set up by the Ministry of the Interior. 
• Participatory governance within Climate Smart Villages (CSV) (planned for phase 2) by 
strengthening the participation of women and youth (50%).  
• Equipment for home irrigation ("home water-pumps") and renewable energy solutions 
(solar panels) to intensify agricultural production and/or lighten women's domestic burden. 
• Strategy for the inclusion of vulnerable populations (migrants, nomads) among the 
beneficiaries of the project with measures to combat their food insecurity, 
• Specific support for women's entrepreneurship, for example with the establishment of an 
incubator in national priority agricultural value chains with comprehensive entrepreneurial 
and technical training in these sectors.

=== PAGE 199 ===
ETHIOPIA 
 
Context 
Ethiopia is a low-income country with a population of 112,078, 730 of which 50% are women 
according to the World Bank Data for the country. It is interesting to note that the country has 
made some tremendous progress towards actions to gender equality.  According to the global 
Gender Gap Index of 2020 by the World Economic Forum, Ethiopia ranks 82nd in the 2020 
rankings showing that it has closed 70.5% of its gender gap to date.  Ethiopia has also achieved 
16th position globally in political empowerment with about almost half (47.6%) of its ministers 
being women and 38.8% of parliament seats occupied by women9. It has also operationalized 
various policy and legal instruments designed to promote gender equality for example 
mainstreaming gender within the key national development plans such as the Growth and 
Transformation Plan I and II (GTP); instituting gender budgeting, increased political participation 
by women with a cabinet of 50% women and increased representation of women at regional and 
councils but though lower at federal level; registration of considerable improvements in 
reproductive health and some moderate strides for women’s land rights with about 40% of women 
owning land and 25% owning through joint land certification for women in male headed 
households.  Despite these remarkable results women are still marginalized in the fields of health 
services, education, labour market10 and economic participation and realization of their full 
potential. For example, Ethiopian women are worse off in agricultural productivity, business 
revenues and hourly wages than men due to differential access to productive resources like credit, 
inputs, education, and assets11.  
 
Specific Gender Gaps have resulted in challenges and barriers to women’s economic 
empowerment and achievement of gender equality in Ethiopia.  These include: Limited access to 
basic services like education Gender Parity Index (GPI) is low in secondary and tertiary levels. 
Females are less likely to complete Grade 8 (59.7percent against 64.4percent for male) and 
continue with secondary schooling compared to their male counterparts and more likely to perform 
poorly than boys on grade 10 examination. Apparently, there are fewer females enrolled in higher 
institutions of learning compared to males in undergraduate (34percent) and postgraduate 
(18percent) levels.  Mean years of schooling for females is just 1.6, less than half of the already 
low mean years of schooling for males, at 3.7 years. 
 
Low BMI among women in the reproductive age: Around 22.3 percent of women in the 
reproductive age (15-49 years) are underweight (18.5 >BMI) because of inadequate energy intake 
and/or diseases. The highest proportion of underweight in women is observed in Afar (39.1 
percent), followed by Tigray (34 percent), Gambella (31.8) and Somali (31.2 percent). On the other 
hand, the prevalence of overweight and obesity among non-pregnant women of reproductive age 
(15-49) stands at 29.4 percent in Addis Ababa, while about one-in-five women in Dire Dawa and 
Harar are overweight or obese12 (WFP). 
 
 
9 World Economic Forum (2020). The Global Gender Gap Index 2020 
10 World Bank (2019). Ethiopia Country Diagnostic Note 
11 IGAD (2018). Gender Analysis of the IGAD Drought Disaster  Resilience and Sustainable Initiative and Regional 
Programming Paper (RPP), Volume I.  
12 WFP (2019), Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis (CFSVA)

=== PAGE 200 ===
Harmful traditional practices – FGM and Early Marriages: Around 65 percent of Ethiopian 
women aged 15-49 are victims of FGM. Somali and afar regional states have the highest FGM 
rates with 99 percent of women aged 15-49 having been circumcised. The FGM prevalence has 
decreased from 74 percent in 2005 with a notable decline among younger women (aged 15-19) 
which currently stood at 47 percent in 2016, showing a 24 percent decline over ten years13. Women 
in rural areas are more likely to be circumcised than their urban counter parts (68 percent and 54 
percent respectively). Early marriage is a common practice in Ethiopia, particularly in some parts 
of the country, impacting on the school attendance of girls. The median age at first marriage for 
women is one of the lowest on the continent: 17.1 years. Among women aged 30–34, 27.3 percent 
had married by age 15.6914. More than 58 percent of girls between the ages of 15 and 19 give birth 
sometimes causing physical damages (HDR Ethiopia). A USAID study found that an estimated 
36,000 to 39,000 women in Ethiopia live with obstetric fistula, and over 3,000 additional new 
cases occur each year15.  
 
Gender Based Violence: More than one-third of ever-married women reported that they have 
experienced physical, emotional, or sexual violence from their husband or partner at some point 
in time. As per the 2016 DHS, almost 1 in 4 women reported experience of emotional violence 
and physical violence from a husband or partner. Experience of physical, emotional, or sexual 
violence is higher among older women 40-49 (38 percent), formerly married women (45 percent), 
those living in rural areas (36 percent vs 11 percent for urban). Comparably women in Oromia (39 
percent), Harari (38 percent), and Amhara (37percent) had higher proportion of women 
experiencing domestic violence. Experience of spousal violence decreases with increasing 
educational level and household wealth.  Women from the richest quintile are least likely to report 
ever experiencing sexual violence (4.5percent), while 12.3percent of women in the poorest quintile 
report having experienced it 16. The new Civil Servants Proclamation No. 1064/2017 addressed 
sexual harassment in the workplace prescribing serious disciplinary measures. 
 
Barriers to economic participation – limited access to productive resources: Women fare 
worse off in agricultural productivity, business revenues, and hourly wages than men due largely 
to differential access to productive resources like credit, assets, inputs, and education. Women’s 
low access to formal credit is partly linked to their limited ownership/control of physical assets 
that serve as collateral. Women experience lower returns on investments due to structural issues 
that perpetuate the broader social norms, market failures, and institutional constraints.  The 
Government has prioritized increasing women’s access to agriculture extension services. The 
Women Development and Change Package highlights a set of agricultural extension services from 
which women may benefit. The Growth and Transformation Plan II (GTP II) also has set the target 
of increasing the percentage of rural women farmers who are benefiting from extension services 
to 30 percent. It was reported that in 2019 around 2.8 million women 2,792,600 (32percent female 
headed) women farmers were reached through the agricultural extension services. Though women 
make up more than 40 percent of the agricultural labor force and head approximately 25 percent 
of all farming households, they have less access to land and other factors of production than men. 
On average male-headed households own 2.2 hectares of land compared to 1.7 hectares for female-
 
13 FDRE (2019), Fifth National Report on Progress made in the Implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform 
for Action 
14 World Bank (2019), Ethiopia Gender Diagnostic Report . 
15 Ethiopia Fistula foundation. 
16 Central Statistical Agency (2016), Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey.

=== PAGE 201 ===
headed households.17  Compared to male farm managers, female farm managers control smaller 
plots of land, cultivate fewer crops, use fewer inputs, and are less likely to access extension 
programs and formal credit. Use of inputs tend to involve cash investment and mobility that cash-
constrained and homestead bound women may ill afford. Thus, productivity for female farm-
managers is 23percent lower than their male counterparts18.  
 
Disproportional overrepresented of women in informal sector as workers: According to 
estimates made using 2015/16 HICES data, at least 52.6percent of women and 47.5percent of men 
in the major towns are self-employed19. It is also estimated that 36 percent of women’s work in 
the informal sector20. In this category, women account for about half of the operators in the 
wholesale and retail subsector. As informal workers, women face challenges including a lack of 
working premises and shortage of working capital.  
 
Women’s underrepresentation and undervaluation in the labour market: As reported in the 
AfDB Africa Gender Index, female labour force participation rate was 74.3 (86.6 for male) in 
201821. Unemployed female youth in Ethiopia outnumber unemployed male youth, at 30percent 
and 19percent respectively22. In urban areas female unemployment rate (26.4 percent) is more than 
double as compared to male (12.2).23 There are also significant gender gaps in wages received. 
Males receive 50percent more on average than women. Females earn 69 percent of what males 
earn in the whole economy and 63 percent in industry sector. In manufacturing, even after 
accounting for education and experience, men earn 23 percent more on average24.  
 
Under representation of women in High skill jobs and in managerial positions: 
Close to 60 percent of the female production workers are unskilled (as opposed to 28 percent for 
males). The proportion of females who work as production managers or department heads is less 
than 4 percent, whereas that for males is about 13 percent. Women make up only 20 percent of 
science and engineering professionals, 21 percent of business services agents, and 30 percent of 
information and communication technologies (ICT) technicians25. Women’s share of highly 
qualified professions, senior positions and management is estimated at 30percent26 
 
Impact of COVID 19 on women and girls: Ethiopian women, like elsewhere, are vulnerable to 
infection due to their productive roles as first line health workers, health facility service staff (e.g., 
cleaners, laundry) and reproductive roles (as primary care providers). Overwhelmed health 
services may also hamper women’s access to reproductive health, especially crucial pre-natal 
services, and access to family planning, exacerbating the already high level of maternal deaths in 
the country. With the slowing down of economic activities, more Ethiopian women will be 
particularly vulnerable as many of them depend on subsistence employment and the hardest hit 
self-employment sector, which is characterized by informal business. Increased household stress 
 
17 World Bank (2019), Ethiopia Gender Diagnostic Report . 
18 GIZ (2019), Employment and Labour Market Analysis (ELMA) in Ethiopia. 
19 AfDB (2020), Growth, Inequality and Poverty Reduction and Job Creation in Ethiopia. 
20 UNDP (2018), A Study On Women Manufacturing In Ethiopia. 
21 AfDB (2019), Africa Gender Index 
22 FDRE (2020), Ten Year Perspective Development Plan (2021 – 2030). 
23 Ethiopian Central Statistical Agency (2018), The 2018 urban employment unemployment survey. 
24 UNDP(2018), ETHIOPIA | National Human Development Report. 
25 UNDP(2018), ETHIOPIA | National Human Development Report. 
26 GIZ (2019), Employment and Labour Market Analysis (ELMA) in Ethiopia.

=== PAGE 202 ===
over economic shocks, prolonged periods of coexistence in (small) living quarters, and reduced 
access to critical protection services and support networks during this pandemic could exacerbate 
cases of intimate partner violence in the country. In the absence of a vigorous back-to-school 
campaign, girls’ school dropout is also expected to rise from the current 17.3 percent (elementary 
level). The need for family members to consistently wash their hands to protect themselves from 
infection, and keep homes and other establishments clean adds a new dimension to the water 
collection burden of women. 
 
Lessons learned from Phase I (DRSLP I and DRSLP II)27 of the project, data collected through 
key informant interviews, consultations with gender focal points in the relevant Ministry of 
Agriculture, and non-governmental organizations during the feasibility study period for this 
project in selected project regions indicate that pastoral and agro-pastoral women in Ethiopia are 
doubly marginalized; by virtue of their gender and through their migratory lifestyle making access 
to services difficult. A bigger percentage of the population is found in the rural areas with women 
providing most of the manual labour in agro pastoral communities.  For example, while men 
migrate from one place to another with livestock, women and girls are left at home to take care of 
families during prolonged periods of drought and with very limited resources to support their 
families.  Due to their socio-cultural gender norms, they are forced to walk for long distances in 
search of water, fuel wood, and grass for construction of houses.  This activity pattern puts an extra 
constraint on their time budgets and reduces the amount of time available daily to engage in small 
income earning businesses (IGAD, 2016). 
 
Gender disaggregated information on roles and access to assets and productive inputs by men and 
women remains scant making analysis and targeting difficult. However, consultations and research 
indicate that pastoral women face considerable barriers in accessing land and credit. Where land 
is owned by female heads of households, the parcels of land are much smaller than those jointly 
owned by women and men in male headed households.  At the community and household level, 
patrilineal system of land ownership and inheritance based on customary laws and practices 
override the established laws, institutions and legal frameworks on land ownership such that 
preference is always given to sons versus daughters.  Women in agro pastoral communities also 
have no access to credit in formal microfinance institutions and rely on traditional saving schemes 
to operate small businesses that are not economically viable. They are also often excluded from 
vital information for market and value chains and are not able to access information related to 
climate change resilient agricultural practices due to their low literacy levels and limited 
participation in decision making in community level institutions. This in turn raises their 
vulnerabilities to shocks related to climate change compared to men. (IGAD, 2015; UN Women, 
2014) 
 
The major beneficiaries of the proposed program will be pastoral and agro pastoral communities 
with 30% to 50% being women based on government commitment and number of women reached, 
and their local institutions in 30 districts across 4 administrative regions in Ethiopia.  The primary 
beneficiaries of the proposed project interventions are expected to number about 2,267,736 million 
people (about 441,194 households). These beneficiaries will be selected individuals, households 
 
27 AfDB (2014).  Drought Resilience and Sustainable Livelihoods Program in the Horn of Africa – Project II (DRSLP II).  
Ethiopia Appraisal Report.

=== PAGE 203 ===
(male headed and female headed households), and communities residing in agro pastoral areas in 
four Lowlands regions. They include pure pastoralists (camel, cattle, sheep, and goat owners) and 
agro-pastoralists in the targeted rangelands; those opting out of pastoralism and/or interested in 
taking up alternative forms of livelihood; and the populations in the selected woredas and kebeles.  
 
Specifically, this project targets to build climate resilience for food and livelihoods among 
agropastoral communities and mainstream gender along the project components, thereby reducing 
the gender gap, achieving economic empowerment and gender equality.  One of the main project 
outcomes is to increase income from agro pastoral value chains with increased per capita income 
among women beneficiaries and creation of jobs for women and youth.  Additionally, the project 
targets to increase access to productive resources for youth and women like land, innovative and 
digital financial services tailored to meet the needs of the two marginalized groups, biofortified 
foods to women (in male headed and female headed households) and men within their households, 
participation in sustainable management of agro pastoral lands, and development of agribusinesses 
and agro pastoral value chains for women led and youth led cooperatives. Furthermore, the project 
will also strengthen women’s decision-making role in the household and their community and their 
representation in the membership and leadership of grassroots institutions and organizations.    
 
Therefore, the current project aims to mainstream gender in all components as well as address 
specific issues through targeted activities as outlined in the GAP. The project seeks to empower 
women both within the project areas and in program implementation and aims to achieve 30% to 
50% of those benefiting to be women. It will encourage committees to include a 30% quota for 
women in management and training activities in line with GoE regulations.  The GAP activities 
are supposed to address the persistent challenges and barriers that continue to negatively affect 
women to close the gender gap and achieve economic empowerment for women and youth.  A 
gender expert within the PIU will ensure that the project is implemented in a way that addresses 
the gender issues among agro pastoral communities.  Continuous monitoring and evaluation will 
be carried in a timely manner throughout the project period with gender mainstreamed indicators 
of change as outlined in the project log frame.  
 
Identification of specific gender-based risks and mitigation measures to address identified 
gender gaps, inequalities, or discriminatory practices in the regions targeted for program 
implementation in Ethiopia. 
 
1) Project activities that are dominated by men for example in design of infrastructure like 
boreholes, roads and rehabilitation of such structures can tend to limit the participation of 
women due to socio norms.  This will be minimized through training of women in public 
speaking and making sure that at least 30% of representation in these forums are women 
with again equal representation in leadership positions.  
2) that the project will ensure that women are not underrepresented in all forums across the 
project components (water committees, sustainable management of agro pastoral lands, 
climate smart villages with demonstration sites, access to digital technology on climate 
resilience practices and services etc.) with at least 30% representation.  Also engaging with 
norms will involve transforming the mind-sets of both men and women and their traditional 
and customary leaders especially through gender transformative activities like community

=== PAGE 204 ===
dialogues. In addition, the GALS Approach and methodology should be implemented in 
all regions covered by the project.  If it is not possible, then organized tours to the region 
where such methodology has been implemented should be arranged for other community 
members to learn.  In cases where norms persist and hinder women’s participation in the 
presence of men, then women only groups should be encouraged so that women can share 
their views on their needs, concerns, and interests with respect to implementation and 
management of the project activities so that they are not disadvantaged.  
3) Markets for agro pastoral value chains especially livestock can have the tendency to be 
dominated by men and thus reduce the bargaining power of women with respect to prices 
of livestock and other agro pastoral value chain products. These challenges can be 
addressed through capacity building in public speaking for women, having digital 
platforms packaged and simplified to meet the market needs of women especially 
providing weekly market price targets on agro pastoral value chain products across the 
project regions.  
4) Other challenges related to this project could arise due to time poverty constraints based 
on women’s heavy workload.  Alternative technologies like renewable energy – solar and 
biodigester systems will be made  available to women to reduce their time poverty 
constraints imposed on them by their productive and reproductive roles. Access to 
household water will be enhanced through provision of boreholes within short distances of 
homesteads and villages so that women spend less time travelling to fetch water. For water, 
adequacy during the dry season and accessibility through shorter distance travelled should 
be tackled as priorities. Women will have have quotas (at least 30% participation) in 
reseeding programs and in land rehabilitation programmes 
5) Women have low literacy levels and therefore could face challenges in understanding 
livestock and crop production technologies in agro pastoral value chains.  The project 
should support simplified and packaged crop production technologies and extension 
service training manuals and modules targeting low literacy levels of women to enhance 
food production and nutrition Such modules and technology manuals should be packaged 
in the local languages to meet the needs of women.  Training should be conducted near 
villages and homesteads where women are comfortable to avoid the fear of traveling for 
long distances away from their homesteads based on socio cultural gender norms which 
limit women’s mobility to faraway places without permission from the male heads of 
households and due to their heavy workload. Training periods of time and dates of training 
should be agreed upon based on consultations between women and education extension 
service providers. 
6) Based on intrahousehold control of specific value chains by men and control of income 
from such value chains due to social cultural gender norms based on patrilineal systems in 
the agro pastoral communities, it is advisable to invest in women only value chains 
targeting women to make sure that women have the opportunity to earn income from value 
chains that have no value to men based on gender norms and traditions.  Such vale chains 
include poultry, goat and sheep fattening commonly termed as small stock value chains.  
Studies have shown that when a certain value chain becomes profitable, there is the 
possibility of control by men.  Therefore, the project implementers at the community level

=== PAGE 205 ===
should put in place safeguards to ensure that markets, and market prices and products from 
women only value chains are not taken over by men.  Such safeguards can include women 
organising into cooperatives for poultry, sheep and goat keeping and marketing their 
products as a group and thereafter sharing the income. Processing plants for produce from 
women only value chains are more secure from male dominance if they are operated as 
women only cooperatives for economic empowerment of women  
7) Women are not homogeneous, and care must be taken not to assume that the interests, 
needs and concerns of women are the same. Such an assumption could result in biases in 
identification and participation of women beneficiaries in the project activities.  There are 
women from male headed households and female headed households and younger women.  
Women from female headed households like widows and single mothers should be 
involved in all project activities targeting women using a quota system of representation to 
make sure that all groups and categories of women benefit equally from the project 
activities through representation at all planned activities across the project components.  
 
8) Harmful traditional and customary practices can result in low participation of women in 
the project.  Community mobilization to create awareness against such practices should be 
encouraged through gender transformative action plans for example through community 
wide campaigns against female genital mutilation and early marriages, reproductive health 
awareness and use of capacity building materials simplified and packaged to target 
different local community groups  on behaviour change and use of gender sensitive and 
diversified behaviour change communication strategies to promote women and girls 
empowerment. 
 
9) There could be gender biased implementation of project components by field staff if they 
are not trained on gender mainstreaming into the project cycle activities.  The gender expert 
in the PIU gender expert and coordinator should build the capacity of field staff and gender 
focal points at the local level so that gender is mainstreamed into the project activities to 
achieve empowerment for women and close in the gender gaps identified in agro pastoral 
communities.

=== PAGE 206 ===
PROJECT TITLE 
Resilience Building for Food and Nutrition Security (BREFOL) Programme in the Horn of Africa (HOA) 
Objective: To contribute to the improvement of living conditions and food and nutrition security in the Horn of Africa 
CATEGORY SMG 
(GMS) 
GEN II 
Components 
Activities 
Budget in 
USD  
Target(s) 
Indicator 
Responsible(s) 
Timeline 
Component 1.  
Strengthening the 
resilience of drought-
prone areas and 
pastoral and agro 
pastoral production 
systems to climate 
change 
 
Community 
consultations 
including 
women/men 
groups 
during 
design 
and 
site 
identification 
for 
infrastructure 
development activities  
50,000 
50 
# of community 
consultations for 
development of 
infrastructure  
Community 
stakeholder 
consultation plan 
developed  
Ministry of 
Agriculture/Ministry 
of Women and Social 
Affairs/ 
PIU 
Ongoing  
Leadership training for women 
including public speaking training 
to participate fully in the Climate 
Change adaptation planning and 
range land management. 
 
10,000 
500  
# of  women trained 
Ministry of 
Agriculture/Ministry 
of Women and Social 
Affairs/ 
PIU 
 
Facilitated 
dialogues 
with 
women/community groups during 
site identification   for sustainable 
range land rehabilitation. 
 
20,000 
20 
# of dialogues with 
community groups  on 
sustainable range 
management  
Ministry of 
Agriculture/Ministry 
of Women and Social 
Affairs/ 
PIU 
Gender Expert in PIU 
Year 2 
Payam Land Council, Land 
Committees, and clan leaders land 
management training with 
representations of at least 30% 
women  
 
50,000 
20 
# of training sessions 
with PAYAMs  
# of women who 
participate in land 
management comittees  
Ministry of 
Agriculture/Ministry 
of Women and Social 
Affairs/ 
PIU 
Year 2 
Replicate the Farm Africa gender 
inclusive bylaws in woredas to 
increase women’s participation in 
conservation efforts , range land 
management, agroforestry  and 
decision making.  
 
100,000 
20 
# of woredas that 
adopt bylaws  to 
accelerate  women’s 
participation in 
conservation efforts, 
range land 
management and 
decision making  
Gender Expert in 
PIUs 
Year 2-4  
Participation of youth and women 
groups in the sustainable land 
Project 
budget 
(100,000) 
50,000 
# of women and youth 
who  participate 
PIU 
Ongoing

=== PAGE 207 ===
management practices in agro 
pastoral lands/ 
 
sustainable   land 
management  
Development of water 
infrastructure  
 
9,299.4 
 
200 
 
 
 
 
5000 
Number of water 
infrastructure 
developed to bring 
water close to 
communities  
 
# of households who 
have access to water 
sources closer to their 
homes  
PIU 
Ongoing  
Inclusive 
Entrepreneurship 
Developed 
Tailor made Business 
Development Services for women 
with low literacy levels 
20,000 
500 
# of women trained 
 
PIU 
Year 2-6 
Dialogue between traditional 
leaders and district gender units to 
guarantee women’s access to land 
resources beyond the project 
20,000 
20 
# of communities 
where traditional 
leaders facilitate 
women’s access to 
land   
PIU  
Gender Expert  
Year 2-6 
Gender analysis of selected value 
chains and identification of entry 
points for women’s participation.  
 
30,000 
3 
Gender Analyses 
reports  
PIU  
Year 1-2 
Facilitating the organisation of 
women farmers into cooperatives 
and supporting them to achieve 
some level of formalisation to 
benefit from financing. 
 
Capacity building on cooperative 
education: bylaws, leadership, 
management, and maintenance 
 
50,000 
5000 
#of women who are  
registered members of 
cooperatives  
 
# of  cooperatives 
trained  on governance 
and Agri business 
PIU 
Gender Expert  
Year 2-4  
Provision of renewable energy 
solutions inputs and finance 
(energy saving cookers/solar 
panels for women and female-
headed households) 
 
500,000 
500 
 
 
 
 
# of women who adopt 
use of renewable 
energy solutions  
 
PIU 
Year 3-4

=== PAGE 208 ===
Building capacity for women to 
access resources related to 
renewable energy at the 
group/cooperative level – 
20,000 
150 
# of women who 
access finance for 
renewable energy 
technologies 
 
Year 3-4  
 
Training and support for women  
to access bio digester  units and 
solar systems  
20,000 
200 
# of women trained  
PIU. 
Gender Expert  
Year 3-4  
Gender 
Responsive 
Adaptive Capacity to 
Climate Change 
Training of  pastoralists and 
smallholder farmers on the use of 
climate-informed agro-advisory 
services ( at least 30 % target are 
women)   
Project 
budget  
(100,000) 
 
#  pastoralists using  
climate informed agro 
advisory services  (at 
least 30% women) 
PIU  
Year 2-4  
Network of climate vulnerability 
assessors equipped with early-
warning systems targeting women 
Project 
budget  
 
# of women who use 
early warning 
technologies  
PIU  
Year 1-2 
Gender 
Responsive 
Project Coordination  
Recruitment of a Gender Expert in 
PIU for an effective and efficient 
coordination of the GAP 
 
420,000 
1 
Gender Expert 
recruited  
PIU  
6 Months 
Gender assessment of the project 
to obtain baseline data and inform 
project implementation  
50,000 
1 
Gender assessment 
Report  
 
Updated gender 
Action Plan  
PIU 
Gender Expert  
6 Months 
after 
inception 
Capacity building on Gender 
mainstreaming of key stakeholders 
including on GBV/SEAH 
prevention  
20,000 
500 
# of stakeholders 
trained  
Contractors   
Year 2-7 
Production of Gender Knowledge 
products 
 
Collection of gender 
disaggregated data for Monitoring, 
Evaluation and Learning 
10,000 
3 
# number of reports 
produced  
Gender Expert   
Year 2-7 
Facilitation of gender 
transformative forums for men 
and women: Sub-national Gender 
Action Learning Systems (GALS) 
Approach and methodology 
targeting women/men/traditional 
leaders across all the target 
locations  
100,000 
10 
# of training sessions 
on the GALSs   
approach  
PIU 
Gender Expert  
Year 2-6

=== PAGE 209 ===
TOTAL 
 
 
1,699,299.
4

=== PAGE 210 ===
KENYA 
 
Context 
Kenya is a developing country whose development efforts are increasingly being hampered by the 
adverse impacts of climate change such as droughts and floods, which have increased in both 
frequency and intensity over the past decades. These impacts are felt across all sectors including 
agriculture, health, energy, transport, and water. Kenya’s National Climate Change Action Plan 
(2018-2022) identified major climate hazards in Kenya, including the increasing frequency and 
intensity of extreme climate events, heat waves, droughts, floods, and landslides. The arid and 
semi-arid regions of Kenya have endured three severe droughts in the last decade (2010-2011, 
2016-2017 and 2020-2022). The 2020-2022 drought was reported as the most severe and longest 
with widespread livelihood loses and massive displacement of populations. 
 
In economic terms, each drought reduces the Gross Domestic Product by an average of 3.3 percent 
with the average annual cost of the damage estimated at $ US 1.25 billion for drought alone. This 
has led to loss of lives, diminished livelihoods, reduced crop and livestock production, and 
damaged infrastructure, among other adverse impacts. Over the past 20 years, Kenya's population 
has doubled. Although Kenya has sustained population growth, it has both high birth and infant 
mortality rates. There has been a marked improvement in life expectancy, particularly in recent 
years. This is consistent with Africa overall. The United Nations estimated the Kenyan population 
to be at 54 million (51% women, 49% men) as at July 2022.  Most of the population is mainly 
rural and relies on climate vulnerable nature-based resources. 
 
Gender and Climate Change 
 
Gender, together with other aspects of identity, shapes the lives, opportunities, and experiences of 
people across the globe. It also influences vulnerability to climate impacts. Despite growing 
recognition of the differential vulnerabilities as well as the unique experiences and skills women 
and men bring to development and environmental sustainability efforts, women still have less 
economic, political, and legal capabilities. Consequently, they are more exposed to and less able 
to cope with the adverse effects of climate change. Equally true is the reality of women as powerful 
agents of change, who despite structural and sociocultural barriers are making significant 
contributions to sustainable development. 
 
In Kenya, patriarchal norms that assign gender roles place responsibility for household 
reproduction in women and girls. As primary caregivers they are charged with securing water, 
food, and fuel for cooking and heating while also being responsible for taking care of household 
members including children, the elderly, and disabled. In addition to reproduction activities, 
women also actively engage in livelihood production, undertaking the bulk of agricultural work 
and contributing to productivity for consumption and for sale. Nonetheless, women earn only a 
fraction of the income generated and own a nominal percentage of assets. Barriers to information, 
technologies, and financial services coupled with limits to women’s full participation in household 
decision-making, markets and formal institutions contribute to these unequal outcomes between 
men and women. Despite women’s participation and contribution to the economy, their work is 
under-rated, and women and girls’ work is often unpaid, underpaid, or invisible. The majority of

=== PAGE 211 ===
women work in the informal sector, with only 34 percent working in the formal sector. For those 
that do work in the formal labour market they generally earn less than men; for every KSh100 
earned by a man, a Kenyan women only earns KSh 62.5. This wage gap cumulatively translates to 
different outcomes for both men and women, economically, politically, socially and culturally. 
Poverty is prevalent among low-income earning women, rural communities, and the urban poor, 
concentrated in increasing urban settlements. 30.2 per cent of female headed households are poor 
compared to 26 per cent of their male counterparts. 
 
Women’s dependence on natural resources for both reproductive and productive activities 
underscore their vulnerability in the face of increased climatic uncertainty. Yet, this same 
dependence also makes them critical stakeholders in adaptation and mitigation efforts. Therefore, 
implementation towards Kenya’s NDC as well as efforts towards low carbon and climate resilient 
development requires inclusive and gender responsive approaches that address the factors that 
maintain inequalities, constrain women’s opportunities, and limit their ability to plan and adapt to 
climate change. 
 
Climate change risks lead to the loss of livelihood opportunities and caused considerable stress for 
men and boys. This is because of the socially ascribed role of men as the providers for the 
household. These have led to psycho-social illness and low self-esteem among men, while families 
are dislocated, and new gender roles emerge. Men are more likely than women to be affected by 
parasitic and infectious diseases during droughts and famines because they engage more in outdoor 
activities during severe weather events. However, women are more vulnerable to injury and fatality 
in climate change-induced hazards, such as flooding. This is because women have fewer 
opportunities to learn life skills such as swimming and tree climbing which are required in the 
event of severe flooding. Climate change affects the youth in diverse ways without any notable 
variations. During extreme weather events, youth experience unemployment, and some engage in 
substance abuse, suffer depression, and drop out of school. In addition, some of the female youth 
suffer from unwanted pregnancies and early marriages. In other cases, the youth engage in illegal 
activities such as drug addiction, robbery and join terrorist groups.  
 
A quick overview of the context in the priority sectors of water, agriculture and energy highlights 
the following realities:  
 
Water: Climate change is leading to a reduction in water resources which makes the management 
of this critical resource more difficult, affecting energy production and agricultural systems and 
increasing the likelihood of conflict. Currently, clean water coverage in Kenya stands at 60 percent 
leaving approximately 40 percent of Kenyans without access to clean and safe drinking water. iv 
In times of water scarcity, such as during droughts, it is women and girls who must travel long 
distances in search of water, with the result that they have less time for other activities including 
critical ones such as education and/or paid work. Prolonged drought leads to migration by 
pastoralist communities in search of pasture and water. They sometimes establish new settlements 
near other communities dependent on the same water source, which often lead to tensions and 
violent conflicts with unemployed youth becoming involved in different types of violent behavior, 
including livestock raiding. Additionally, because of strained livelihoods, intra-household 
relationships are strained, leading to tensions and gender-based violence (GBV).

=== PAGE 212 ===
Agriculture: Gender norms that dictate roles in agricultural underpin the disparities that men and 
women face in production systems. Women have less access to the means of production including 
land, finance, inputs, modern technologies, extension services, and marketing facilities while also 
having less say in decision making. Land title deeds are an important form of collateral for 
accessing agricultural credit, and hence the low rates of women’s ownership of land in Kenya 
hampers their ability to obtain loans from financial institutions. These barriers will further 
constrain women’s ability to adapt to climate change, with the result of an increased gender gap in 
agriculture coupled with more threats to families’ food security. More needs to be done to ensure 
women’s ownership of factors of production with land being key.  
 
Energy: In Kenya, the energy sector plays an important role as the infrastructure enabler for 
sustained economic growth, development, and poverty. Access to modern energy is an enabler for 
women’s empowerment as it plays a key role in meeting practical gender needs of women such as 
cooking, food processing and water hauling as well as strategic gender needs like street lighting 
for safety and power for enterprise development. While access to energy services would not 
necessarily guarantee gender equality, it increases efficiencies around household tasks such as 
cooking and allows time for education and other productive activities. Across all sectors, the 
impacts of climate change are often compounded for older women, women with a disability or for 
those with responsibility for other disabled or sick family members. Indigenous minorities lacking 
influence and access to decision-making are highly likely to face barriers to accessing solutions.  
 
Key barriers to integrating gender considerations into climate compatible development include 
existing gender inequalities, patriarchal culture, and asymmetrical power structures. These need to 
be reflected in strategies and interventions. It is important to also underline that gender is not just 
about women and that a narrow focus on women in climate change adaptation results in narrow 
interpretation of complex contexts and this leads to shortsighted policies and interventions. 
 
Policy, Legal and Institutional Framework 
 
The Government of Kenya has recognized the need for equal and full participation of women and 
men at all levels of national development. The Government is committed to empowering women, 
reducing gender inequality, and eliminating all forms of discrimination. The Vision 2030 
highlights progress made on gender equality and the commitments for ensuring compliance with 
international and regional obligations on gender equality and women’s empowerment. The 
National Gender Policy 2011 and the Strategic Plan of the National Gender and Equality 
Commission (2019-2024) were designed to provide a framework for improving gender equality. 
Policies such as the Article 27 (8) of the 2010 constitution of the Republic of Kenya requires 
progressive realisation of the enforcement of the two-thirds gender rule and requires this to be 
implemented during general elections. In addition, Article 27 (6) provides for strong affirmative 
action, aimed at ensuring full realisation of gender equality.  
 
The Government of Kenya has responded to the challenge of climate change by enacting and 
assenting to various policy, legislation, and strategies at the national and international levels. The 
link between gender and climate was first recognized at the global level in 2001 with the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) formally addressing 
representation and participation of women.  At continental level, the African Union (AU) is

=== PAGE 213 ===
committed to addressing climate change issues with a gender perspective. Kenya has sought to 
operationalize AU commitments by integrating a gendered lens in their respective climate change 
policies, strategies and action plans as well as green growth and low carbon strategies. 
 
Kenya’s Climate Change Act of 2016 establishes institutions at national, sectoral and subnational 
levels to address climate change challenges. These include the National Climate Change Council, 
the Climate Change Directorate and the Climate Change Fund. Kenya has had a gender policy 
since the year 2000. It provides a framework for stakeholders to address the gender inequalities in 
a cross-cutting manner. The State Department for Gender in the Ministry of Public Service, Youth 
and Gender Affairs develops relevant policies and coordinates the mainstreaming of gender and 
women’s empowerment in government departments and agencies at national and subnational 
levels. Additionally, the National Gender and Equality Commission (NGEC) coordinates, audits, 
monitors, facilitates and advises both state and non-state actors on gender equality and freedom 
from discrimination. NGEC hosts the secretariat of the African Working Group on Gender and 
Climate Change. The sectoral institutions include the Climate Change Units and Gender Focal 
Points in all Ministries, Departments and Agencies. 
Kenya has done well to ensure robust climate change policies and legislative frameworks; 
however, gender disparities persist largely due to the slow implementation processes. This can be 
attributed to gaps in the laws, delayed enactment of gender-related legislation, ignorance of 
existing legislations, gaps in some of the policies and laws, inadequate accountability by citizens 
and duty bearers.  
 
The Rationale for Gender Activities in BREFOL Kenya Project  
The project will cover the six counties that were part of DRSLP-1 and Garissa county. The Gender 
Report stemming out of DRSLP-1 indicates that means of productions remain dominated by men 
in all six counties covered in the first phase, a situation dictated by patriarchal traditions. Labour, 
land and equipment, were controlled by adult and elderly males. The latter also determined how 
resources were allocated and used at household and communal levels.  
 
The communities are traditionally pastoralist with livestock being the main source of livelihood. 
Livestock production activities (herding, watering, securing livestock, treatment, slaughtering, and 
sale) were dominated by men. In Samburu and Marsabit counties did women and girls participate 
in herding. The seasonal migration of men in search of pasture and water for livestock activities 
and to attend market days meant their reduced availability for farming activities during these 
periods. Women had full control in milking and selling milk as well as in chicken rearing, sale of 
eggs and sale of chicken. Key challenges to livestock production as a livelihood were: lack of 
water; diseases; low levels of value addition; decreasing pasture space; insecurity; limited access 
to credit; infiltration of livestock trade by brokers; and price fluctuations. In Samburu, a man could 
assign some livestock to his wives to sustain their households. However, the wives had no authority 
to dispose of the stock and must consult their husbands before doing so. In Baringo County, there 
were cases of single women and widows owning dairy cattle and married women owning goats 
and sheep but the latter needed to consult their husbands if they wished to dispose of the livestock. 
Although ownership and control of livestock mainly lay with men, all family members benefited 
from and accessed livestock products. However, income from livestock was under men’s 
management.

=== PAGE 214 ===
Though crop farming is new to these communities, it is now the second main source of livelihoods. 
Communities do not have the capacity yet to adopt advanced crop farming technologies. In crop 
farming, land preparation is dominated by men while the sorting of the produce is exclusively done 
by women. Planting, weeding, harvesting, storage and transport of produce to the market was done 
by both men and women and the distribution of labour varied by county and by crop. There was a 
shared control on crops and related income but women largely controlled benefits related to 
subsistence farming activities. In crop farming, key challenges were lack of water, poor access to 
extension services, and low levels of value addition.  
 
Women bore the burden of reproductive activities (fetching water, cooking, fetching firewood, 
cleaning houses, laundry; and care for children, sick and elderly). These activities were conducted 
daily and manually. Most of these activities were done in the domestic sphere and, as a result, 
limited women’s exposure. Men, on the other hand, were in charge of activities viewed as 
technical.  
 
A majority of respondents (85%) across the six counties reported being married. Household data 
confirmed that polygamy was common and in Samburu County practiced almost as much as 
monogamy. In all six counties, the man was the head of the household and the main decision maker 
on family assets and community matters. The wife was the daily manager of food and other family 
resources. In the absence of the man, the first son took over decision making if he had attained 
maturity age. In the case of polygamous relationships, the first wife shared responsibilities with 
her co-wives and alternated in herding, child care and other duties. Her first son was the senior son 
regardless of his chronological age relative to sons of other wives. 
 
In all six counties, there was male dominance in community management activities such as 
gathering intelligence about community security and welfare; dispute resolution (land, domestic 
feuds, resources, theft etc); disciplining young men; carrying out religious activities and 
ceremonies, organising initiation ceremonies; and blessing warriors. Contemporary leadership was 
male-dominated and allowed women representation solely to abide by the constitutional gender 
rule. Only in Samburu and Marsabit counties were things different with female chiefs who were 
given respect due to their positions. 
 
Rites of passage such as circumcision for boys and female genital mutilation (FGM) for girls were 
still practiced in some counties. Circumcision across the other counties was carried out during 
periodic ceremonies associated with good harvests. FGM continues to have disastrous effect on 
girls’ and women’s health. Early marriage was responsible for the high dropout for girls in most 
of the communities.  
 
The issue of land ownership and acquisition remains key to any intervention aimed at building 
resilience. Study findings indicated that individual ownership of land across the six counties was 
common, exception in Samburu County where land was owned through group ranches. Where 
land titling was available, men are the ones registered as land owners. Though land was accessed 
and used by all the community members, women were unable to use such land as collateral for 
development loan. Pasture could be accessed by all but control was exercised by men in the 
community. Similar for water resources which could be accessed by everyone in the community,

=== PAGE 215 ===
but Water Resources Users Associations (WRUAs) were dominated by men. The considerable 
workload of women in both productive and reproductive activities restricted their availability to 
participate and conduct WRUA activities.  
 
Female-headed households faced more constraints than male-headed households. Such constraints 
included: lack of traditional physical protection provided by men; higher levels of poverty; lower 
incomes due to reliance on one breadwinner; inadequate resources due to patriarchal ownership 
and inheritance patterns; and high workload. Fewer children from such households went to school 
and quite a number became labourers to earn a livelihood for the family. One advantage of female-
headed households was cited as more economical use of resources. 
 
Various institutions operate in the counties covered by the DRSLP. They include co-operative 
societies, government institutions, NGOs, faith-based organisations, and community-based 
organisations and self-help groups. Information from the cooperatives indicated low levels of 
attention to gender differentials. This was largely because they were voluntary organisations by 
nature and furthered the interests of their members without necessarily encouraging any particular 
sex to join. Membership is dictated by the ability to fulfil membership conditions such as payment 
of registration fees, regular contribution of shares, involvement in a specific productive activity, 
production capacity and ability to repay loans. Other information indicated that women were 
constrained by lack of capital and ignorance regarding sources of credit due to lower levels of 
education and exposure.  
 
Recommendations 
10) DSRLP project activities that depend on men’s inputs need to be synchronised with seasons 
when they are not migrating. In parallel, the capacity of women to engage in activities 
dominated by men should be built.  
11) Deliberate strategies should be developed to include women in all committees related to 
the project, including community management activities on decision making, conflict 
management and land management. Strong reference should be made to the constitutional 
edict on inclusion through the two-thirds gender rule. Traditional and contemporary leaders 
should be mobilised to facilitate such dialogues and lead the desired changes. Where 
necessary, the project should rely on separate spaces for women to ensure that women 
articulate their views on community management issues.  
12) Livestock investment should be spent on value chains benefitting both men and women 
equitably. Key challenges should be addressed, including: water, pasture, insecurity, 
diseases and marketing. For water, adequacy during the dry season and accessibility 
through shorter distance travelled should be tackled as priorities.  
13) With the growing interest in crop farming as an alternative livelihood, the project should 
support simple crop production technologies that would enhance food production and 
security. More complex technologies should be introduced at a later stage when acceptance 
and capacity of beneficiaries have been secured. Crop farming activities have shown great 
potential in the gender balancing of responsibilities. 
14) Invest in value chains that benefit women. Poultry rearing is the domain of women. 
Commercial poultry rearing should be prioritized as an income generating activity for 
women with safeguards in place to ensure that the trade is not hijacked by men once it

=== PAGE 216 ===
becomes lucrative. Processing of dairy products can also be envisaged as an investment 
that will benefit women.  
15) Move away from the assumption that heads of households are men. With polygamy 
commonly practiced, assuming so would be counter-productive and omit women who are 
de facto heads of their individual households. This would also ensure that households 
headed by widows and single mothers are reached. 
16) Support advocacy work to recognise girls’ and women’s right to inherit family property 
and the succession rights of widows.  
17) Run awareness campaigns on the elimination of FGM, early marriages, discriminatory 
dietary practices that negatively impact the development of girls and initiation practices 
that negatively impact boys’ education.  
18) Maximise the use of all structures created under the project as entry points for advocating 
gender equality and mobilising the community for gender training. For instance, using a 
facility for the distribution of educational and behaviour change materials on gender; to 
campaign against domestic violence and girls’ education; and to dialogue and promote 
women’s and girls’ rights. 
19) The WRUAs should adhere to the two-thirds gender rule in their leadership and include 
women in positions of authority, not just as treasurers. Ideally, equal representation of men 
and women is preferred to ensure that both perspectives are considered, including the 
inputs of women when setting user fees. Ensure the WRUAs are not dominated by men by 
discontinuing the practice of registering men as the household heads and instead registering 
the adult that manages water within the household.  
20) Train field staff on gender mainstreaming in the project cycle. In addition, farmers and 
elders need to receive targeted training on gender issues, the roles they play in preserving 
the status quo, on how to create change as well as on the key constitutional and legal 
provisions on gender equality.

=== PAGE 217 ===
40
BREFOL KENYA GENDER ACTION PLAN/ GENDER ACTIVITIES FOR 
IMPLEMENTATION IN KENYA 
PROJECT TITLE 
Building Climate Resilience for Food and Livelihoods in the Horn of Africa (BREFOL) 
Objective: To contribute to the improvement of living conditions and food and nutrition security in the Horn 
of Africa 
CATEGORY 
(GMS) 
GMS II 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPONENT 
ACTIVITIES 
BUDGET IN 
USD 
 
TARGET 
 
INDICA
TOR 
RESPONSI
BLE (S) 
 
TIME
LINE 
Component 1: 
Strengthening 
Pastoral and 
Agropastoral 
Production 
Systems’ 
Resilience to 
Climate Change 
Ensure a minimum of 1/3 
representation from each gender in 
all committees (community land 
management, conservation, etc.) 
and community consultations  
Project 
(100,000) 
30% 
women, 
50% 
young 
people.  
(no tbc @ 
baseline 
study). 
# of 
women 
# of 
young 
people 
who were 
consulted 
PIU/ 
MoALF&C 
 
 
Year 1 
Leadership training for women 
including public speaking training 
to boost participation in Climate 
Change Adaptation Plans and other 
processes 
10,000 
70% of 
women 
beneficiari
es of the 
project 
# of 
women 
trained in 
leadership 
and 
speaking 
(no tbc @ 
baseline 
study) 
PIU 
/MoALF&C 
Year 
1-2 
Facilitation of gender 
transformative forums for men and 
women - Gender Action Learning 
Systems (GALS) Approach and 
Methodology targeting 
women/men/traditional leaders (5 
per county) across targeted counties 
(these trainings to be facilitated by 
GALS champions trained by 
IGAD)  
50,000 
35 Local 
leaders in 
all 7 
counties 
trained in 
GALs 
#of local 
leaders 
trained 
per 
county, of 
which 
women  
IGAD 
 
Year 
2-4 
Documentation of best practices on 
Gender responsive Land Use 
IGAD 
(part of 
Gender expert 
TORs) 
1 best 
practice on 
gender 
responsive 
land use 
produced 
Existence 
of 
document
ation 
(video or 
print 
medium) 
IGAD 
/Ministry of 
Public 
Service and 
Gender/NGE
C 
Year 
3-5 
Component 2: 
Supporting the 
Development of 
Agribusinesses 
Support Agri-business Officers in 
providing training on business 
development, financial inclusion 
and digital literacy (+ functional 
literacy for women) 
 
10,000 
Training 
of 
trainer(s) 
(14) or 
refresher 
on 
climate-
smart 
business 
developme
nt, 
financial 
inclusion 
& digital 
literacy 
30% 
trainees 
are women 
14 
Ministry 
of 
Agricultur
e officers 
trained to 
be 
trainers or 
refreshed 
in 
agribusine
ss 
PIU/ 
MoALF&C/
Gender 
Officer  
Year 2 
Policy dialogues on land access 
(leasing and ownership for 
sustainability after the project; 
strengthening local districts’ gender 
20,000 
 
1 county 
level 
# of 
policy 
dialogues 
held 
PIU/ 
MoALF&C/
Gender 
Officer + 
Years 
2-4

=== PAGE 218 ===
41
unit and negotiating/lobbying 
traditional leaders depending on 
context) 
policy 
dialogue 
State 
Department 
of Gender + 
NGEC 
Study to improve gender 
responsiveness of poultry and dairy 
value chains where women are 
heavily involved (e.g. 
mechanization; information; 
negotiation skills; business plan; 
how to commercialise)  
10000 
1 study on 
improvem
ent of 
gender 
responsive
ness of 
value 
chains 
Existence 
of a study 
on gender 
responsiv
eness of 
value 
chains 
PIU/ 
MoALF&C/
Gender 
Officer + 
State 
Department 
of Gender 
Years 
2-3 
Partnerships with agronomy, 
engineers, business schools to 
implement best practices.  
10,000 
At least 3 
partnershi
ps 
established  
No. of 
functional 
partnershi
ps 
PIU/ 
MoALF&C/
Gender 
Officer+ Min 
of Education 
Years 
2-6 
Eligibility criteria for agri-business 
start-ups acknowledge differences 
in young men and women’s profiles 
Project 
Budget 
(done by the 
PMU) 
Inclusive 
eligibility 
criteria 
developed 
and 
applied 
Existence 
of 
inclusive 
criteria; 
No. of 
youth and 
women 
owned 
businesse
s 
benefiting 
PIU/ 
MoALF&C/
Gender 
Officer + 
NGEC 
Years 
2-3 
Component 3: 
Strengthening 
Agropastoral 
Communities’ 
Capacity to Adapt 
to Climate Change 
ToT for climate-smart agriculture 
practices and nutrition by/for 
women (30 participants) 
 
10000 
30 trainees 
trained 
# of 
women 
and men 
trained 
PIU/ 
MoALF&C/
Gender 
Officer  
Year 2 
Climate-smart agriculture training 
to women groups of farmers 
throughout the project 
Project 
(done by the 
national 
gender expert) 
30 % 
women 
among the 
beneficiari
es of the 
project (# 
tbc @ 
baseline) 
# of 
women 
groups 
trained 
PIU/ 
MoALF&C/
Gender 
Officer  
Year 
2-3 
Capacity building of beneficiaries 
on local natural resource 
management and sensitization on 
GBV 
40,000 
4 
Communit
y user 
committee
s (land, 
water, 
forest) per 
target 
county 
# of 
persons 
(M/F) and 
stakehold
ers 
trained 
PIU/ 
MoALF&C/
MoI 
Year 
2-4 
Component 4: 
Project 
Coordination and 
Management 
Gender Expert in PIU for an 
effective and efficient coordination 
of the GAP and gender 
mainstreaming in the project 
420,000 
1 gender 
expert 
(local) 
1 gender 
expert 
recruited 
and 
working 
PIU/MoALF 
6 
Month
s 
Gender-sensitive procurement plan 
Project 
(done by the 
national 
gender expert) 
Project 
guidelines 
on gender 
sensitive 
procureme
nt  
Existence 
and 
applicatio
n of 
gender 
sensitive 
project 
procurem
ent 
guidelines 
and  
Gender 
Expert/PIU/
MoALF 
Year 1

=== PAGE 219 ===
42
Capacity building of staff and 
beneficiaries on gender 
mainstreaming and cross-cutting 
issues 
10,000 
100% of 
PIU 
70% of 
beneficiari
es 
# of PIU 
staff, No. 
of 
beneficiar
ies’ 
capacities 
built 
PIU/ 
MoALF&C 
Year 
1-2 
Gender assessment of the project to 
obtain baseline data and inform 
project implementation 
50,000 
1 
assessment 
Gender 
Assessme
nt report; 
Updated 
GAP 
PIU/Gender 
Expert/MoA
LF 
6 
Month
s after 
incepti
on 
Capacity building on Gender 
mainstreaming of key stakeholders 
including on GBV/SEAH 
prevention 
20,000 
At least 1 
training 
every 
quarter 
# of 
stakehold
er trained 
Contractor/G
ender 
Expert/PIU/
MoALF 
Year 
2- 6 
Learning and sharing good 
practices and lessons among the 
countries/in the 
continent/internationally) 
10,000 
2 virtual 
exchange 
workshops 
on gender 
communic
ation  
# of 
exchange 
workshop
s 
Gender 
Expert/Com
munications 
Lead/PIU/M
oALF 
Years 
3 and 
6 
Total 
770,000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SOMALIA 
 
I. Introduction 
 
The project is assigned a Category II on the Bank’s Gender Marker System as the project will improve 
women’s economic empowerment through specific targeting within the project activities. 
Interventions to address GBV will also ensure that prevention measures are in place to support 
community women from any risk associated with project activities. Indicators related to the outputs 
are sex-disaggregated or gender-relevant. 
 
II. 
Gender Analysis 
 
According to the 2019 country gender profile for Somalia by AfDB and UN Women, the Federal 
Government of Somalia has made commitments and efforts in realizing gender rights and inclusion as 
well as empowerment of women through participation in decision making highlighting the roles for 
peace building and rebuilding of Somalia. Information gathered from previous key informant 
interviews with gender and human rights advisor, office of the president in the FGS and reported in 
literature indicates that: three key country frameworks have been drafted that provide strong platforms 
for promoting gender equality and development, with support from international partners. At the state 
level, the Provisional Constitution (2012) has included important new gender provisions and an 
‘ambitious’ articulation and protection of citizen rights. Notably, in 2013, a Draft Constitution 
Technical Review Committee was established, with two lawyers, including one woman. Meanwhile, 
the international community’s Compact for Somalia under the ‘New Deal Framework’ (2013) and the 
New Partnership for Somalia (NPS) have mainstreamed and prioritized gender commitments, with a 
specific focus on addressing gender disparities across sectors. Finally, the National Development Plan 
(NDP) (2017-2019) articulated a national framework for country development, with a notable 
alignment to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and goals to promote gender equality, in 
particular SDG 5: Gender Equality as a ‘platform for all other sustainable development goals.

=== PAGE 220 ===
43
Additionally, government ministries and focal points in gender have also been established and 
appointed respectively, for example, the Ministry for Women and Human Rights Development 
(MWHRD) was established to better support gender and rights development in Somalia. Based on this 
institutional and policy frameworks and leadership from the focal points, ministries have now 
developed (or are developing) their own gender policies and gender budgeting guidelines. The 
development of relevant monitoring frameworks and the tracking of gender budgeting across 
ministries remain key outstanding areas of action for the MWHRD . 
National Gender Policies 
The draft National Gender Policy of 2015    provides an overall assessment and guidance on gender 
sensitive and inclusive programming in the areas of economic empowerment, education, health, 
governance and political participation with various cited ‘indicators’, or gender achievements outlined 
to facilitate the monitoring and evaluation of this policy (MWHRD, 2015). As key national reference 
and guidance platforms for the promotion of gender equality and inclusion, National Gender Policies 
(NGPs) have been formulated in each of the three regions (Somaliland, Puntland, and Somalia), most 
recently at FGS level. These have been well received by civil society and women’s groups. 
Unfortunately, apart from the support of gender activists, public impacts of these gender policies are 
limited, with little knowledge or awareness of their existence among many social groups. The 
implications of such limited public awareness and involvement by the FGS, is that gender rights and 
equality have thus remained critical issues in the uncertain context of Somalia, with low human 
development indicators, instability, and climate change. 
Gender Gaps in Somalia 
The Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) is committed to advance gender equality and women’s 
empowerment. The Provisional Federal Constitution stresses women’s equality with men and 
emphasizes women’s effective participation in all spheres of life, including public offices and in 
decision-making.  In 2016, the FGS adopted a National Gender Policy with the aim to further gender 
mainstreaming in its peace and state-building processes.  
Women in Somalia experience higher unemployment rates than men: 74% for women and 61% for 
men. Despite the Somali private sector being dominated by micro, small and medium enterprises of 
which women are the main drivers, women have limited access to credit, technology, and information. 
Access to services such as health care and education, by women and girls is disproportionately low. 
Somalia’s maternal mortality rate is the highest in the world, at 1,600 per 100,000 live births. Literacy 
levels are low; only 26% of women can read and write compared to 36% for men. Wo 
Somalia remains one of the most unequal countries with the Gender Index standing at 0.776(1 – 
complete inequality) placing Somalia at the fourth-highest position globally. Climate Change has 
exacerbated gender inequality in Somalia, with women and children affected more by climate change 
effects due to lack of access and control of critical resources, biased labour division and absence from 
decision making processes from household to the National level. On the other hand, women and youth 
can act as agents of change and play a key role in supporting the transition towards low emissions and 
climate resilient development in Somalia. There are critical gender issues across sectors and hence the 
promotion of gender equality is critical for effective climate adaptation and mitigation in Somalia.  
Barriers to Achievement of Women’s Empowerment and Gender Equality in Somalia

=== PAGE 221 ===
44
The Somali culture is considered socially conservative for women, with women’s lives historically 
restricted to the private sphere, leading to their constrained role in decision-making, and limited access 
to assets and productive resources in their communities. Yet, women have contributed significantly to 
peace building efforts in recent years, forging new public roles. New trends are also now visible in the 
political, social, and economic domains. 
Women are ‘absent in leadership’, particularly in Somaliland, and a gap does exist in ‘mentors and 
role models’ in (formal) institutions and in society that discourages women to participate in public 
leadership spheres. In all regions, National Gender Policies have not been publicly discussed or 
disseminated. With limited government capacities and allocated budgets, there is also a lack of 
practical action in working towards gender targets with low public awareness and support available 
for women (and minority groups) as there are few national campaigns and limited government 
outreach.   
Social cultural gender norms, traditions and religious interpretation are still highlighted as the major 
barriers in working towards gender equality and rights development. Particularly, religious, and 
traditional clan leaders may challenge the smooth implementation of gender laws and policies in 
fostering conservative narratives. Furthermore, parliament and decision-making institutions within the 
FGS remain male-dominated with gender/women’s oversights in progressive laws and policies.  
Violence against women and girls cuts across all aspects of women’s lives and remains deeply rooted 
in the local culture and traditions according to a report by UNDP 2014. In the transition from a 
predominantly nomadic and pastoralist society, traditional structures and customary laws have been 
strained, with varying effects on women and girls. Gender relations and roles have evolved and shifted, 
particularly with war and displacement over the past three decades resulting in women’s increasing 
household responsibilities as family breadwinners, and large numbers of female-headed households 
living as IDPs (with men killed in conflict, absent, or working as migrants). As highlighted by a Rift 
Valley Institute discussion forum, while Somali women have often suffered disproportionately from 
the civil war and gender-based violence, the conflict has also ushered in new opportunities for them to 
assert themselves socially and politically.  
Traditional Gender Roles and Responsibilities in Somalia 
Somali society is strongly patriarchal, with clearly delineated roles and responsibilities of men, 
women, boys, and girls.  The traditional gender roles and responsibilities of Somali men, women, girls, 
and boys highlight the impact of war and poverty (particularly because of increasing rural livelihood 
pressures). Men are traditionally the protectors of family security, primary breadwinners, and the 
central decision makers in both public and private settings.  Men also control household expenditures, 
and their place is outside the home.  
On the other side, women are homemakers and are responsible for bearing and raising children, food 
production and all domestic tasks.  Women face land pressures – land alienation, degraded resources, 
and vulnerability to drought.  Conditions are even worse for women and girls from female headed 
households who experience heightened challenges due to limited or no access to productive resources 
and assets compared to women in male headed households (Muse and Gardner, 2013). The bias 
manifests itself in terms of family investment in girls’ skills (e.g., education), with a preference for 
boys to be educated; and women’s low access to formal employment, with positions and status 
reserved for men (EU, 2013).

=== PAGE 222 ===
45
III. 
Project Intervention Regions and Constraints resulting from Gender Relations in 
Agro Pastoral Communities 
The project will be implemented in priority locations in six Regional States in Somalia: Somaliland, 
Puntland, Galmudug, Hirshabelle, Southwest, and Jubbaland. The selection of intervention locations 
was based on the following principles: (i) Focusing on agro-pastoral investments, (ii) Promoting 
community-managed infrastructures, (iii) Prioritizing cross border clusters (iv) Continuity of 
intervention districts to facilitate project implementation and supervision (v) Ensuring synergies with 
ongoing interventions in each Region and alignment with the HOAI economic corridors and IGAD 
Cluster Approach, (vi) Alignment with country policies and strategies, and (v) Building on the progress 
made with DRSLP II implementation and leveraging lessons learnt. The project is targeting a total of 
500,000 people out of which 50% of the beneficiaries should be women from male headed and female 
headed households. 
Gender relations among agro pastoral communities are varied.  Review of gender relevant literature 
for Somalia and consultation with the relevant implementing Ministry of Livestock, Forestry and 
Range highlights the important role played by women as small-scale business owners in agro pastoral 
communities and in livelihood diversification as a strategy to cope with ongoing climate change risks 
and shocks.  While men migrate with livestock in search of scarce resources and others leave for the 
bigger cities in search of paid employment, women are left home to attend to the families and 
households, ensure that their household are food and nutrition secure and generate income for varied 
household needs.  It is therefore inevitable for women not to engage in diversified income earning 
activities to support their families.  With these multiple roles at hand, women and girls are constrained 
by high labour intensity burdens on their activity time budgets resulting in time poverty constraints, 
childcare barrier due to the amount of time spent raising babies and small children, harmful social 
cultural practices like gender-based violence, female genital mutilation, and early marriages.  In 
addition, women are also faced with bigger challenges hindering their participation in the economic 
sphere due to limited or no access to and control over productive resources like financial services, land, 
information on entrepreneurial activities, climate smart resilient agricultural practices and technology 
to cope with the recurring climate change risks due to drought. 
IV. 
Program’s Contribution to Gender Equality 
The Program is categorized GEN II according to the Bank’s Gender Marker System where the gender 
assessment has identified four key entry points to enhance livelihood diversification thereby resulting 
in socio-economic benefits for women (in male and female headed households) and youth through: (i) 
design and implementation of gender sensitive infrastructure and services for example installation of 
boreholes and use of solar systems and biodigesters to reduce labour intensity burden on women, child 
care barrier and time poverty constraints;  (ii) development of agribusiness value chains as strategies 
for livelihood diversification targeting both women and youth and access to productive resources like 
financial services, entrepreneurship training, markets and market linkages and climate smart 
agricultural practices through their cooperatives and groups; (iii) transformation of socio cultural 
gender norms through GALS Approach and Methodology to support women’s role in decision making 
and leadership in their agro pastoral communities; and (iv) and recruitment of a Gender Expert in the 
PIU to ensure gender mainstreaming of the GAP activities along the program components and 
strengthening the capacity of key stakeholders in the implementing FGS ministries to  address the 
gender issues during the project implementation, monitoring and evaluation periods. Additionally, the 
gender expert will also build the capacity of PIU and regional implementing staff and focal points on

=== PAGE 223 ===
46
issues around gender mainstreaming to close the gender gaps identified resulting in empowerment of 
women and achievement of gender equality.   By the end of the project , there should be targeted 
achievement of  30% - 50% participation by women depending on the country’s commitment and 
number of women reached in this project with increased income for women and economic 
empowerment due to increase in  per capita income among women compared to men.  There will be 
collection of sex disaggregated data to monitor progress and the logframe has clear gender 
mainstreamed indicators of change related to the above activities to achieve the desired outcomes. The 
Gender Action Plan activities and budget below are designed to address the gender inequalities and 
accelerate opportunities for women and youth in agro pastoral communities in Somalia.  
Identification of specific gender-based possible risks and mitigation measures in Somalia during 
the implementation of the program 
 
• 
Project activities that are dominated by men, for example in design of infrastructure like 
boreholes, roads and rehabilitation of such structures, can tend to limit the participation of women due 
to socio norms.  This will be minimized through training of women in leadership and ensuring that 
30% of representation in these forums are women with again equal representation in leadership 
positions 
• 
Efforts should be made to make sure that women are not underrepresented in all forums across 
the project components (water committees, sustainable management of agro pastoral lands, climate 
smart villages with demonstration sites, access to digital technology on climate resilience practices 
and services etc) with at least 30% representation.  Engaging with norms will involve transforming the 
mindsets of both men and women and their traditional and customary leaders through gender 
transformative activities like community dialogues. To this effect, the GALS Approach and 
methodology should be implemented in all regions covered by the project.  If it is not possible, then 
organized tours to the region where such methodology has been implemented should be arranged for 
other community members to learn.  In cases where norms persist and hinder women’s participation 
in the presence of men, then women cooperatives should be encouraged so that women can share their 
views on their needs, concerns, and interests with respect to implementation and management of the 
project activities so that they are not disadvantaged.  
• 
Markets for agro pastoral value chains especially livestock tend to be dominated by men and 
thus reduce the bargaining power of women with respect to prices of livestock and other agro pastoral 
value chain products. These challenges can be addressed through capacity building in leadership for 
women, having digital platforms packaged and simplified to meet the market needs of women 
especially providing weekly market price targets on agro pastoral value chain products across the 
project regions.  
• 
Other challenges related to this project could arise due to time poverty constraints based on 
women’s heavy workload.  Care should be taken to make sure alternative technologies like renewable 
energy – solar and biodigester systems are available to women to reduce their time poverty constraints 
imposed on them by their productive and reproductive roles. Boreholes should also be located within 
short distances of homesteads and villages so that women spend less time travelling to fetch water. For 
water, adequacy during the dry season and accessibility through shorter distance travelled should be 
tackled as priorities. Women should have quotas (at least 30% participation) in reseeding programs 
and in land rehabilitation programmes.

=== PAGE 224 ===
47
• 
Women have low literacy levels and therefore could face challenges in understanding livestock 
and crop production technologies in agro pastoral value chains.  The project should support simplified 
and packaged crop production technologies and extension service training manuals and modules 
targeting low literacy levels of women to enhance food production and nutrition Such modules and 
technology manuals should be packaged in the local languages to meet the needs of women.  Training 
should be conducted near villages and homesteads where women are comfortable to avoid the fear of 
traveling for long distances away from their homesteads based on socio cultural gender norms which 
limit women’s mobility to faraway places without permission from the male heads of households and 
due to their heavy workload. Training periods of time and dates of training should be agreed upon 
based on consultations between women and education extension service providers. 
• 
Based on intrahousehold control of specific value chains by men and control of income from 
such value chains due to social cultural gender norms based on patrilineal systems in the agro pastoral 
communities, it is advisable to invest in value chains targeting women to make sure that women can 
earn income from value chains that have no value to men based on gender norms and traditions.  Such 
vale chains include poultry, goat and sheep fattening commonly termed as small stock value chains.  
Studies have shown that when a certain value chain becomes profitable, there is the possibility of 
control by men.  Therefore, the project implementers at the community level should put in place 
safeguards to ensure that markets, and market prices and products from women only value chains are 
not taken over by men.  Such safeguards can include women organising into cooperatives for poultry, 
sheep and goat keeping and marketing their products as a group and thereafter sharing the income. 
Processing plants for produce from women only value chains are more secure from male dominance 
if they are operated as women only cooperatives for economic empowerment of women  
• 
There could be gender biased implementation of project components by field staff if they are 
not trained on gender mainstreaming into the project cycle activities.  The gender expert in the PIU 
should build the capacity of field staff and gender focal points at the local level so that gender is 
mainstreamed into the project activities to achieve empowerment for women and girls and to reduce 
or eliminate the challenges identified in agro pastoral communities in relation to food, health and 
nutrition insecurity.

=== PAGE 225 ===
48
GENDER ACTION PLAN (SPECIFIC ACTIVITIES) FOR SOMALIA 
 
PROJECT 
TITLE 
Building Climate Resilience for Food and Livelihoods in the Horn of Africa (BREFOL) 
Objective: To contribute to the improvement of living conditions and food and nutrition security in the Horn 
of Africa 
CATEGORY 
(GMS) 
GMS II 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPONENT 
ACTIVITIES 
BUDGET IN 
USD 
 
TARGET 
 
INDICA
TOR 
RESPONSI
BLE (S) 
 
TIME
LINE 
Component 1: 
Strengthening 
Pastoral and 
Agropastoral 
Production 
Systems’ 
Resilience to 
Climate Change 
Community 
consultations including 
women/men groups during design and 
site identification for infrastructure 
development 
 
Project 
(done by the 
national 
gender expert) 
30% 
women, 
50% 
young 
people.  
(no tbc @ 
baseline 
study). 
# of 
women 
# of 
young 
people 
who were 
consulted 
PIU 
 
 
Year 1 
Participation of youth and women 
groups in the sustainable land 
management practices in agro 
pastoral lands’ (reseeding programs, 
at least 30% women participation in 
water committees and in leadership 
positions) 
10,000 
70% of 
women 
beneficiar
ies of the 
project 
# of 
women 
trained in 
leadershi
p and 
speaking  
PIU 
Year 
1-2 
Component 2: 
Supporting the 
Development of 
Agribusinesses 
Livelihood diversification strategies 
for women and youth using alternative 
energy systems – solar systems and 
biodigesters to reduce labour intensity 
burden 
10,000 
Training 
of 
trainer(s) 
(14) or 
refresher 
on 
climate-
smart 
business 
developm
ent, 
financial 
inclusion 
& digital 
literacy 
30% 
trainees 
are 
women 
14 
Ministry 
of 
Agricultu
re 
officers 
trained to 
be 
trainers 
or 
refreshed 
in 
agribusin
ess 
PIU/ 
Ministry/Ge
nder Officer  
Year 2 
Packaging of training modules (on 
business development services, digital 
and financial literacy) in Somali 
language to meet the low literacy 
levels of women in male and female-
headed households 
 
20,000 
 
1 county 
level 
policy 
dialogue 
# of 
policy 
dialogues 
held 
PIU/ 
Ministry/Ge
nder Officer 
+ State 
Department 
of Gender + 
NGEC 
Years 
2-4 
Support enabling environment and TA 
to accelerate women’s access to 
finance identifying local savings and 
credit 
organizations 
among 
the 
community members (women and 
youth groups) and linking them to 
MFIs. 
 
20,000 
1 study on 
improvem
ent of 
gender 
responsiv
eness of 
value 
chains 
Existence 
of a study 
on 
gender 
responsiv
eness of 
value 
chains 
PIU/ 
Ministry/Ge
nder Officer  
Years 
2-3

=== PAGE 226 ===
49
Gender responsive Digital advisory 
services packaged to meet the needs of 
women low literacy  
 
10000 
At least 3 
partnershi
ps 
establishe
d  
No. of 
functiona
l 
partnersh
ips 
PIU/ 
Ministry/Ge
nder Officer 
Years 
2-6 
Component 3: 
Strengthening 
Agropastoral 
Communities’ 
Capacity to 
Adapt to Climate 
Change 
Training to target women group 
farmers and women cooperatives on 
climate-smart agriculture and nutrition 
 
10000 
30 
trainees 
trained 
# of 
women 
and men 
trained 
PIU/ 
Ministry/Ge
nder Officer 
Year 2 
Capacity building on CSA practices 
and agricultural value chains that can 
withstand adverse climate change 
risks with special seed varieties 
(maize, millet and sorghum): fodder 
and food to women  
 
 
Project 
(40,000) 
30 % 
women 
among the 
beneficiar
ies of the 
project (# 
tbc @ 
baseline) 
# of 
women 
groups 
trained 
PIU/ 
Ministry/Ge
nder Officer 
Year 
2-3 
Network of climate vulnerability 
assessors equipped with early-warning 
systems with simplified manuals to 
target women in male and female 
headed households with low literacy 
levels 
 
40,000 
4 
Communi
ty user 
committee
s (land, 
water, 
forest) per 
target 
county 
# of 
persons 
(M/F) 
and 
stakehold
ers 
trained 
PIU/ 
Ministry/Ge
nder Officer 
Year 
2-4 
Facilitation of gender transformative 
forums for men and women: Sub-
national Gender Action Learning 
Systems 
(GALS) 
Approach 
and 
methodology 
targeting 
women/men/traditional leaders across 
all the target locations (these trainings 
to be facilitated by GALS champions 
trained by IGAD) – For each region 
and woreda, we could have 2 groups at 
minimum, comprised of 30 people (15 
couples – husbands and wives) 
50,000 
35 Local 
leaders in 
all 7 
counties 
trained in 
GALs 
#of local 
leaders 
trained 
per 
county, 
of which 
women  
PIU/ 
Ministry/Ge
nder 
Officer/IGA
D 
 
Year 
2-4 
Component 4: 
Project 
Coordination 
and 
Management 
Gender assessment of the project to 
obtain baseline data and inform 
project implementation 
50,000 
1 
assessmen
t 
Gender 
Assessme
nt report; 
Updated 
GAP 
PIU/ 
Ministry/Ge
nder Officer 
6 
Month
s after 
incepti
on 
Gender Expert in PIU to implement 
and coordinate the GAP and gender 
mainstreaming in the project 
420,000 
1 gender 
expert 
(local) 
1 gender 
expert 
recruited 
and 
working 
PIU 
6 
Month
s 
Capacity building of staff and 
beneficiaries on gender 
mainstreaming and cross-cutting 
issues 
Project 
100% of 
PIU 
70% of 
beneficiar
ies 
# of PIU 
staff, No. 
of 
beneficia
ries’ 
capacities 
built 
PIU 
Year 
1-2 
Capacity building on Gender 
mainstreaming of key stakeholders 
including on GBV/SEAH prevention 
20,000 
At least 1 
training 
every 
quarter 
# of 
stakehold
er trained 
Gender 
Expert/PIU 
Year 
2- 6

=== PAGE 227 ===
50
Learning and sharing good practices 
and lessons among the countries/in 
the continent/internationally) 
10,000 
2 virtual 
exchange 
workshop
s on 
gender 
communic
ation  
# of 
exchange 
workshop
s 
Gender 
Expert/PIU 
Years 
3 and 
6 
Total 
710,000

=== PAGE 228 ===
51

=== PAGE 229 ===
SOUTH SUDAN 
 
PART I: GENDER ANALYSIS/ASSESSMENT 
I. 
Gender Analysis 
South Sudan is committed to supporting gender equality within its development priorities at the 
national and international levels, through its policies such as the National Gender Policy (NGP) 
(2012), South Sudan’s National Women’s Strategy 2016 and the National Development Policy. 
The GoSS through the Ministry of Gender, Child and Social welfare has developed a National 
Gender Policy with the objective to design efficient policy frameworks and mechanisms for 
women economic empowerment and gender responsive agriculture ecosystem. The National 
Gender Policy has identified the following strategies:  
• 
Conduct research into gender dimensions of food security and the food-production sector 
including agriculture, livestock, fisheries, water transport and trade;  
• 
Institutionalize mechanisms to address key barriers that reduce women’s ability to produce 
and preserve sufficient food; and  
• 
Facilitate adequate resource allocation for small-scale agriculture and better access to 
water, energy transport and markets.  
Agriculture: Agriculture is the backbone of South Sudan’s economy. Women in South Sudan turn 
predominantly to agriculture as a necessity to support their families rather than as a business 
opportunity. Evidence shows that the agriculture sector provides livelihoods for over 80% of the 
population living in rural areas. However, much of the rural sector activity is currently focused on 
low-input and low-output subsistence agriculture, instead of farming as business and production 
for markets and export. The vast majority of South Sudanese, especially women and youth, are 
non-waged employees who depend on natural resources, particularly animal husbandry or crop 
farming to survive. Female-headed households are a significant proportion of the rural and urban 
poor and face even greater challenges in securing livelihood. According to Oxfam South Sudan 
gender analysis report (2016)42, women suffer greater food insecurity due to their cultural and 
social roles as caregivers. This care economy/unpaid workload hinders them from involvement in 
productive activities.  
Labour: The gendered division of labour in South Sudan is particularly marked, with women 
having responsibilities for searching for food, firewood and clean water; cooking; domestic chores 
and childcare; as well being responsible for much of the agricultural activities at the household 
and community levels. Similar to other African countries, their productivity is lowered by unequal 
access to land, access to markets, productivity inputs, limited technical and business capacity, and 
the need to balance between business and family/societal responsibilities. This has important 
consequences for women’s opportunities for economic empowerment, the types and nature of 
employment available to them, and their vulnerability to poverty.  
The regions covered by the project have different gender specificities that are analyzed within the 
framework of the project in order to inform adequate measures and ensure equitable participation 
of women and men. In the Eastern Equatoria, there were more issues of displacement, challenges

=== PAGE 230 ===
53
of women’s land rights, cited incidences of challenges of widows and women headed households, 
issues of refugee and returnee rights and sexual and gender-based violence.  
Land tenure: Despite the South-Sudanese Land Act (2009) and the Constitution stating women 
and men’s equal right to property, social and customary norms, however, prioritize male land 
ownership and inheritance. Land owned by a married couple is often registered in the name of the 
male spouse (Deng, 2016). Evidence show significant gender imbalances in land ownership for 
the targeted regions. According to FAO’s gender assessment, land ownership in Central Equatoria 
is 4.8% for women (compared to 90.5% for men), in Eastern Equatoria is 4.6% for women 
(compared to 95.4% for men). Although women constitute 80% of the agricultural workforce, 
ownership and management of larger scale farm tend to be male dominated. Women are under-
represented in the commercial farming and overrepresented at the lower end of the informal market 
system. The project’s targeted crops, maize, sorghum and sesame, demonstrate high potential for 
women empowerment with women being more represented from planting to processing and man 
being in charge of transportation to wholesale. These crops are also drought-resilient with high 
production capacity in selected states. Access to and control of lands has compounded effects on 
poverty alleviation through agricultural production, food security as well as maintaining 
sustainable peace. 
Climate change: South Sudanese women and vulnerable groups such as persons with disabilities 
are also at greater climatic risks given that they are both more likely to be dependent on natural 
resources and have less access to education, decision-making spaces, resources, information, and 
are less likely to own land and face sharper conditions when facing climate-induced displacement. 
In addition, women are responsible for biomass and water collection for their homes and 
deforestation and droughts will increase their time burden and risks of gender-based violence when 
collecting from further water and forest points. Despite this, women remain considerable 
knowledge bearers in agriculture and natural resource management and involving them in climate-
adaptive and climate-smart practices will be key in enhancing community resilience and mitigation 
during climatic events. The UNFCC in fact, recognizes both climate-based gender vulnerabilities 
and the important role of women in climate-dependent sectors and the unique strengths they bring 
to climate change adaptation and mitigation. South Sudan designed a policy, the National 
Adaptation Programme of Actions (NAPA) to Climate Change with gender equality and 
eliminating food insecurity as part of guiding principles for projects.  
The project aims to respond to some of the gender issues in alignment with the GoSS’ continuous 
efforts towards addressing gender issues and improving gender equity. The project is classified as 
Category 2 under the Bank's Gender Marker System (GMS). The project's actions aim at fostering 
livelihood diversification for women and youth through agro pastoral value chains including 
support for alternative renewable energy systems (solar and biodigesters) to reduce their labour 
intensity burden and time related constraints through (i) accelerated access to gender-sensitive 
infrastructure. Community infrastructure will be designed in consultation with women and include 
gender-sensitive constructions (ii) gender-responsive land management with specific leadership 
training for women to participate in land management committees (iii) enhanced access to skills 
for agribusiness development/growth and sustainable income generation and (iv) strengthened 
capacity to adapt to climate change through access to climate-smart agriculture trainings, practices 
and tools.

=== PAGE 231 ===
54
 
 
II. 
Identification of specific gender-based risks and mitigation measures to address 
identified gender gaps, inequalities, or discriminatory practices in the regions 
targeted for program implementation in South Sudan  
 
1. Project activities that are dominated by men for example in design of infrastructure like 
boreholes, roads and rehabilitation of such structures can tend to limit the participation of 
women due to socio norms. This will be minimized through training of women in 
leadership and making sure that 30% of representation in these forums are women with 
again equal representation in leadership positions  
 
2. Efforts should be made to make sure that women are not underrepresented in all forums 
across the project components (water committees, sustainable management of agro pastoral 
lands, climate smart villages with demonstration sites, access to digital technology on 
climate resilience practices and services etc) with at least 30% representation. Also 
engaging with norms will involve transforming the mindsets of both men and women and 
their traditional and customary leaders especially through gender transformative activities 
like community dialogues. In addition, we encourage the GALS Approach and 
methodology to be implemented in all regions covered by the project. If it is not possible, 
then organized tours to the region where such methodology has been implemented should 
be arranged for other community members to learn. In cases where norms persist and 
hinder women’s participation in the presence of men, then women only groups should be 
encouraged so that women can share their views on their needs, concerns, and interests 
with respect to implementation and management of the project activities so that they are 
not disadvantaged.  
 
3. Other challenges related to this project could arise due to time poverty constraints based 
on women’s heavy workload. Care should be taken to make sure alternative technologies 
like renewable energy – solar and biodigester systems are available to women to reduce 
their time poverty constraints imposed on them by their productive and reproductive roles. 
Boreholes should also be located within short distances of homesteads and villages so that 
women spend less time travelling to fetch water. For water, adequacy during the dry season 
and accessibility through shorter distance travelled should be tackled as priorities. Women 
should have quotas (at least 30% participation) in reseeding programs and in land 
rehabilitation programmes. 
 
4. Women have low literacy levels and therefore could face challenges in understanding 
livestock and crop production technologies in agro pastoral value chains. The project 
should support simplified and packaged crop production technologies and extension 
service training manuals and modules targeting low literacy levels of women to enhance 
food production and nutrition Such modules and technology manuals should be packaged 
in the local languages to meet the needs of women. Training should be conducted near 
villages and homesteads where women are comfortable to avoid the fear of traveling for

=== PAGE 232 ===
55
long distances away from their homesteads based on socio cultural gender norms which 
limit women’s mobility to far away places without permission from the male heads of 
households and due to their heavy workload. Training periods of time and dates of training 
should be agreed upon based on consultations between women and education extension 
service providers. 
 
 
5. Based on intrahousehold control of specific value chains by men and control of income 
from such value chains due to social cultural gender norms based on patrilineal systems in 
the agro pastoral communities, it is advisable to invest in women only value chains 
targeting women to make sure that women have the opportunity to earn income from value 
chains that have no value to men based on gender norms and traditions. Such vale chains 
include poultry, goat and sheep fattening commonly termed as small stock value chains. 
Studies have shown that when a certain value chain becomes profitable, there is the 
possibility of control by men. Therefore, the project implementers at the community level 
should put in place safeguards to ensure that markets, and market prices and products from 
women only value chains are not taken over by men. Such safeguards can include women 
organising into cooperatives for poultry, sheep and goat keeping and marketing their 
products as a group and thereafter sharing the income. Processing plants for produce from 
women only value chains are more secure from male dominance if they are operated as 
women only cooperatives for economic empowerment of women. 
 
6. Women are not homogeneous, and care must be taken not to assume that the interests, 
needs and concerns of women are the same. Such an assumption could result in biases in 
identification and participation of women beneficiaries in the project activities. There are 
women from male headed households and female headed households and younger women. 
Women from female headed households like widows and single mothers should be 
involved in all project activities targeting women using a quota system of representation to 
make sure that all groups and categories of women benefit equally from the project 
activities through representation at all planned activities across the project components.  
 
 
7. Harmful traditional and customary practices can result in low participation of women in 
the project. Community mobilization to create awareness against such practices should be 
encouraged through gender transformative action plans for example through community 
wide campaigns against female genital mutilation and early marriages, reproductive health 
awareness and use of capacity building materials simplified and packaged to target 
different local community groups on behaviour change and use of gender sensitive and 
diversified behaviour change communication strategies to promote women and girls 
empowerment.  
 
8. There could be gender biased implementation of project components by field staff if they 
are not trained on gender mainstreaming into the project cycle activities. The gender expert 
in the PIU gender expert and coordinator should build the capacity of field staff and gender 
focal points at the local level so that gender is mainstreamed into the project activities to

=== PAGE 233 ===
56
achieve empowerment for women and close in the gender gaps identified in agro-pastoral 
communities.

=== PAGE 234 ===
57
PROJECT TITLE 
Building Climate Resilience for Food and Livelihoods in the Horn of Africa (BREFOL) 
Objective: To contribute to the improvement of living conditions and food and nutrition security in the Horn of Africa 
CATEGORY (GMS) 
GMS II 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPONENT 
ACTIVITIES 
BUDGET USD 
 
TARGET 
 
INDICATO
R 
RESPONSIBLE (S) 
 
TIMELINE 
Component 1:  
Strengthening Pastoral and 
Agropastoral Production 
Systems’ Resilience to Climate 
Change  
 
Leadership training for women to increase 
participation and decision making in Climate 
Adaptation Planning 
 
15,000 
  
At least 50% 
of women 
beneficiaries 
of the project 
 #of women 
trained in 
leadership 
and public 
speaking 
PIU/MoA 
 
 
Year 1-2 
 
Active participation of women (at least 30%) in 
community consultations in identifying lands to 
rehabilitate constructions in gender-sensitive manner 
(ie. Adequate WASH, street lighting, road safety 
measures etc.) 
 
Project 
(to be done by 
national gender 
expert) 
 # in 
reference to 
baseline of 
Payams 
selected 
(TBC) 
# of women 
# of young 
people who 
were 
consulted 
 
 
PIU/MoA 
 
 
Year 1-6 
Constructions include gender-sensitive infrastructure 
(boreholes), feeder roads connecting markets, and 
irrigation infrastructures. 
 
Project (to be 
done by 
national gender 
expert) 
 
100% 
gender-
sensitive 
infrastructur
e 
Proportion of 
gender-
sensitive 
infrastructur
e 
 
PIU 
 
Year 2-6 
 
Training of 30 persons per targeted Payam (15 
couples and traditional leaders) / twice a year on the 
Gender Action Learning Systems (GALS) 
methodology 
 
50,000 
  
# in 
reference to 
baseline of 
Payams 
selected 
(TBC) 
 # of persons 
trained on 
the GALS 
methodology 
per Payam 
# of 
traditional 
leaders 
trained per 
Payam 
 
 
PIU/MoA/IGAD 
 
Year 1-4 
Ensure a minimum of 1/3 representation from each 
gender in all committees (community land 
management, conservation, etc.) and community 
consultations  
Project (to be 
managed by the 
national gender 
expert) 
# in 
reference to 
baseline of 
Payams 
#of M/F in 
all 
committees 
 
 
PIU/MoA 
Year 1-6

=== PAGE 235 ===
58
selected 
(TBC) 
#of M/F in 
community 
consultations 
Documentation of best practices on Gender 
responsive Land access and use 
10,000 
1 best 
practice on 
gender 
responsive 
land use 
produced 
Existence of 
documentati
on (video or 
print 
medium) 
IGAD 
 
Year 3-5 
Policy dialogues with traditional leaders and local 
government on land access towards development of 
bylaws to extend land ownership of women (towards 
leasing, ownership for sustainability after the project) 
20,000 
 
Three policy 
dialogues 
held and one 
bylaw 
developed. 
 
 
#dialogues 
held  
 
 
 
PIU/ IGAD  
 
Year 2-4 
 Training of communities for social cohesion 
10,000 
Biannual 
trainings 
held for 
social 
cohesion 
#trainings 
held 
PIU 
Years 1-3 
Component 2: Supporting the 
Development of Agribusinesses  
Adapted business trainings (local language and low-
literacy levels in business development, processing, 
cross-border trade) for female-headed households and 
women. 
40,000 
Quarterly 
trainings 
held 
#trainings 
held 
PIU 
Years 2-3 
Gender-sensitive value chain assessment 
10,000 
 
Gender 
assessment 
report 
PIU 
Year 2-3 
Facilitating the organisation of women farmers into 
cooperatives and supporting formalisation to benefit 
from financing and linkages with MFIs 
Project (to be 
managed by the 
national gender 
expert) 
30 % women 
among the 
beneficiaries 
of the project 
(# tbc @ 
baseline) 
# of women 
groups 
formalized 
 
PIU/ MoA/MoF  
Year 2-3 
Component 3: Strengthening 
Agropastoral Communities’ 
Capacity to Adapt to Climate 
Change  
Climate-smart agriculture training to women groups 
of farmers throughout the project 
Project (to be 
managed by the 
national gender 
expert) 
70% of 
women 
among the 
# of women 
groups 
trained 
           PIU/ MoA 
Year 1-4

=== PAGE 236 ===
59
 
beneficiaries 
of the project  
Capacity building of beneficiaries on local natural 
resource management and sensitization on 
GBV/SEAH 
25,000 
4 
Community 
user 
committees 
(land, water, 
forest) per 
target county 
# of persons 
(M/F) and 
stakeholders 
trained 
PIU/ MoA 
Year 2-4 
ToT for climate-smart agriculture practices and 
nutrition by/for women (30 participants) 
 
10,000 
30 trainees 
trained 
# of women 
and men 
trained 
PIU/ MoA  
Year 2 
Capacity building on CSA practices and agricultural 
value chains that can withstand adverse climate 
change risks with special seed varieties 
Project (to be 
managed by the 
national gender 
expert) 
70% of 
women 
among the 
beneficiaries 
of the project 
 
# of women 
and men 
trained 
PIU/ MoA 
Year 1-4 
Component 4: Project 
Coordination and 
Management 
 
Gender assessment of the project to obtain baseline 
data and inform project implementation and gender 
action plan 
50,000 
 
1 assessment 
Gender 
Assessment 
report; 
Updated 
GAP 
PIU/Gender 
Expert/MoA 
6 Months 
after 
inception 
Recruitment of gender and community development 
expert for an effective and efficient coordination of 
the GAP and gender mainstreaming in the project 
420,000 
1 gender 
expert (local) 
1 gender 
expert 
recruited and 
working 
PIU/MoA 
6 Months 
Capacity building of staff and beneficiaries on gender 
mainstreaming and cross-cutting issues 
10,000 
100% of PIU 
70% of 
beneficiaries 
# of PIU 
staff, No. of 
beneficiaries’ 
capacities 
built 
PIU/ MoA 
Year 1-2 
Capacity building on Gender mainstreaming of key 
stakeholders including on GBV/SEAH prevention 
20,000 
At least 1 
training 
every quarter 
# of 
stakeholder 
trained 
Contractor/Gender 
Expert/PIU/MoA 
Year 2- 6 
Collection 
of 
gender 
disaggregated 
data 
for 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning  
Communication on the project gender outcomes 
(Success/impact stories, sharing good practices and 
lessons learned) 
Project 
Gender 
disaggregate
d data in 
every IPR / 
Yearly 
communicati
on on project 
#M/F 
beneficiaries 
in every 
program 
component 
 
PIU 
 
Year 1-6

=== PAGE 237 ===
60
gender 
outcomes 
#gender 
programme 
reports 
TOTAL  
690,000

=== PAGE 238 ===
61
 
 
REGIONAL 
 
Cross Cutting Gender Issues of Concern in the 6 HoA Countries (Sudan, South Sudan, 
Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, and Djibouti) 
 
1. 
Although in country differences may arise among the agro sylvo pastoral communities 
based on ethnicity, religious orientation and other intra country and inter-ethnic specific norms 
and traditions, the key gender inequalities faced by women and girls in agro sylvo pastoral 
communities are generally similar. Limited access to, control over, ownership and decision making 
on productive resources and in community forums are common limiting factors to women’s role 
in productive activities, economic empowerment, and achievement of gender equality. Other 
socio-cultural expectations on women place an extra burden on their activity time budgets for 
example caregiving and childcare, gathering of fuel wood, fodder, grass for house construction 
and overall reduced mobility outside the home into the community sphere.  Other socio economic 
and political factors include low literacy levels leading low skills hence poor salaries and low 
levels of employment in formal jobs, poor maternal and child health care, reduced representation 
in political, legal and policy making institutions. This in turn affects the way women participate in 
livelihood diversification activities across the member states in the HoA. These inequalities have 
their root causes in socio-cultural gender norms, traditional practices and kinship rules and 
patrilineal rules that limit women’s access to, control over and decision making on key productive 
resources and participation in socio economic and political leadership forums in the community, 
subnational and national institutions. 
 
2. 
Access to and Control Over Resources in Agro Sylvo Pastoral Communities: 
 
• Women’s roles within livestock production system and the distribution of ownership of 
livestock is strongly related to social and cultural factors.  
• Often, when the rearing of small animals becomes a more important source of family 
income, ownership management and control are often turned over to the man.  
• Women entrepreneurs, involved in local and border trade have the challenge of limited 
access to marketing networks, credit, and other financial services e.g., bank loans.  
• Women in cross border trade, may have challenges in quickly accessing travel documents 
or gender insensitive trade agreements.  
• Men often own larger animals such as cattle and camels while small animals such as sheep, 
goats, pigs, and chicken that are reared near the house are kept by women.  
• Women in livestock economy are often responsible for livestock management, processing 
and marketing, caregiving, feed gatherers, and milk production, but often lack decision 
making power and capabilities that is important for their social and economic 
empowerment.  
• Despite this involvement, women’s role in livestock production has often been 
underestimated.  
• Women entrepreneurs, involved in local and boarder trade, also have the challenge of 
limited access to marketing networks, credit due to lack of collateral and technical 
knowledge.

=== PAGE 239 ===
62
•  Women in cross border trade, may have challenges quickly accessing travel documents. 
Other factors that have negatively impacted on women cross border trade have been gender 
insensitive trade agreements, such the World Trade organization (WTO). 
 
3. 
While women are faced with such challenges, it is worth noting that access to, control over 
and management of resources including hides, meat, grazing areas and feed resources empower 
women and lead to an overall welfare of the whole household. Furthermore, market access plays 
a significant role in the wellbeing of a household as it allows people to buy and sell goods and 
services, including household essentials; and it contributes to the diversification of livelihoods in 
agro sylvo pastoral communities.  Market inaccessibility is, therefore, an important cause of 
poverty, inequality and in determining where public services are inadequately provided. The target 
regions in each of the 6 countries within the framework of this program are highly dependent on 
pastoral and agro-pastoral economy, and livestock and related products and the major markets 
products.  
 
Gender Roles and Responsibilities 
 
4. 
In these communities, women are responsible for milking, processing, and selling milk 
products, providing feed/fodder and water, caring for new-born lambs/kids and sick animals. 
Young girls are also involved in the grazing of goats and sheep, whereas married and young 
women are responsible for household activities. This means that often, women have access to these 
products and able to improve on the welfare of their families.  
 
5. 
Typically, male tasks include herding, cutting branches for home feeding and administering 
modern medicines. Wool- shearing, giving traditional vaccines against sheep pox, and castration 
are exclusively the domain of men for socio-religious reasons.   Men migrate over long distances 
with the livestock in search of pasture and water, women and girls remain at home with meager 
resources at their disposal and are expected to sustain their families, hence the need for livelihood 
diversification by women and youth in these communities. 
 
Livelihoods Support and the role of Formal and Informal Institutions in Perpetuating Gender 
Inequalities  
 
6. 
Studies show that among most of the communities living in the HoA region, pastoralism 
and agro pastoralism are the main sources of livelihood. A fundamental shift in strategizing 
pastoralist livelihoods, and especially that of women, is to recognize innovation and 
entrepreneurship, and not limiting activities to those of coping. Although gender relations in the 
pastoral communities vary widely among tribes, regions, and countries participating in the 
program, there are some shared realities. Not only are women time-poor with long daily household 
routine duties, from childrearing, preparation of the meals, collection of firewood and water for 
the household to livestock management, but opportunities to economic empowerment and 
contribution to household are not maximised due to low capacity, lack of inputs, tools and credit 
and financial illiteracy. However, gender in equalities are produced and reproduced through intra 
and extra household gender dynamics in policies, institutions (socio, political, economic, 
traditional, religious, and customary), and processes, both formal and informal, to reinforce these 
gender inequalities that are observed today in agri sylvo pastoral communities across the 6

=== PAGE 240 ===
63
countries.  Among most communities living in the HoA region in the identified clusters to be 
covered in this program, pastoralism and agro pastoralism are the main sources of livelihood. Some 
of the key gender issues include:  
• Gender inequalities in relation to livelihood support make women highly vulnerable to 
livelihood insecurity in times of disaster which impacts negatively on the economic and 
social development of the region due to underutilization of available human resources.  
• Men often own and control the assets of production, including the land and the livestock. 
The men, therefore, often determine women’s access to land which forms the basis of their 
livelihood such as rearing small livestock.  
• Limited access to land means little collateral for obtaining credit.  
• Livelihoods programmes in emergency situations can provide important opportunities to 
promote higher standards of gender equality in economic life, by affirming women’s role 
as economic change agents and by promoting equal access to productive resources and to 
decision-making mechanisms.  
• Differential access to and control of livelihood assets also means differential impact of 
livelihood vulnerabilities between men and women as well as on male-headed households 
(MHHs) versus female-headed households (FHHs).  
• Men often own and control the assets of production, including land and livestock. The men, 
therefore, often determine women’s access to land which form the basis of their source of 
livelihood such as rearing small livestock, and limited access to land means little collateral 
for obtaining credit.  
• Ensuring food and feed resources, and livelihood security for poor smallholder livestock 
producers and processors continues to be a challenge.  
 
7. 
The livelihood diversification approach can thus be used as a key tool in promoting early 
recovery as well as greater gender equality in the post crisis social context.  
 
The effects of Disasters: Climate Change Risks, Droughts, Floods, War and Conflicts on Gender 
Dynamics and Women Empowerment 
 
8. 
Previous studies in the HoA have looked at the effects of disasters on men’s and women’s 
lives in agro sylvo pastoral communities and found that: 
• Women are more likely to be disproportionately affected and exposed to risks, increased 
loss of livelihoods, gender-based violence and even lives during and in the aftermath of 
disasters  
• Despite the differences, the potential women have and their knowledge and experiences is 
overlooked and women's leadership in building resilience in communities is overlooked.  
• Pre-existing gender inequalities constrain the influence and control of women and girls 
over decisions governing their lives as well as their access to resources of production such 
as finances, agricultural inputs, land, and property as well as technologies.  
• Women are therefore more likely to be disproportionately affected and exposed to risks, 
increased loss of livelihoods, gender-based violence (GBV) and even loss of life during 
and in the aftermath of disasters.  
• Despite the differences, the potential and leadership skills women have in building 
resilience in communities have been overlooked.

=== PAGE 241 ===
64
• Poverty and inequality shape women’s and men’s vulnerability to disaster and the impacts 
of climate change, and their capacity to cope and recover in the post-disaster period.  
• Since women and men are affected differently by disaster and climate change, their 
different vulnerabilities and capacities must be analysed, and their gender-specific 
concerns and priorities addressed.  
• These gender inequalities make women highly vulnerable to livelihood insecurity in times 
of disaster and have negative impacts on the economic and social development of the 
region due to underutilization of available human resources.  
 
9. 
The program will cover six countries of the HoA namely Djibouti, Ethiopia, Somalia, 
South Sudan, Sudan, and Kenya targeting climate change affected, drought-prone, food and 
nutrition insecure areas and communities where pastoralism and agro-pastoralism are the main 
sources of livelihood.  Out of the targeted beneficiaries, at least 50% should be women in both 
male and female headed households as well as youth. Other direct beneficiaries include the 
Governments of the States of the Region whose capacities will be strengthened to coordinate a 
regional approach to enhance enhancing drought resilience development and regional integration.  
The beneficiaries of the Program are the populations of the six (6) IGAD Member States found in 
agro sylvo pastoral cluster regions and areas. 
 
10. 
The programme is expected to increase the income of agro-pastoralists through the 
improvement of the delivery of climate smart services ensuring food, nutrition, and health security 
through identified interventions along the program components. More importantly, diversification 
of sources of livelihood and the rehabilitation, construction, and mobilization/conservation of 
water resources will reduce the exposure of the population to the climate change shocks and related 
conflicts over natural resources like water and pastureland. Women and youth will particularly 
benefit from the project through targeted interventions (including income generation through 
livelihood diversification activities in establishment, growth, and maintenance of agro pastoral 
value chains, establishment of renewable energy sources like solar systems and biodigesters, 
climate smart agricultural practices, and simplified digital technology designed to target women 
to be able to respond to climate change related shocks on time) to enhance their economic and 
social integration/empowerment. More detailed information is provided in member country gender 
analysis and GAP activities. 
 
11. 
The progress toward achieving this objective will be measured through i) the number of 
water and animal health and marketing related infrastructures developed, ii) number of women 
and men and livestock accessing water within a certain distance; iii) the number and adoption rate 
of alternative livelihoods sources with data stratified and disaggregated by gender, iv) the 
incremental productivity/production of livestock and main crops; v) the area of land rehabilitated 
and, vi) the change in the beneficiary’s incomes (men and women), vii) number of personnel and 
beneficiaries (males and females) benefiting from capacity building programs including the gender 
transformative capacity building of national champions at the regional level through the Gender 
Action Learning Systems (GALS) Approach and Methodology.  This approach and methodology 
as an intervention targets transformation of socio-cultural gender norms, and harmful traditional 
and customary practices with women as main agents of change in their communities and men as 
their allies to reduce gender-based inequalities in the 6 countries.

=== PAGE 242 ===
65
12. 
This program will address gender inequalities in the IGAD region in support of the 
‘political will’, manifested by IGAD country ministers responsible for gender issues, who 
occasionally meet to advocate the engagement of women in all development initiatives in the 
region.  The creation of an IGAD Gender and Resilience Working Group and the Gender Unit will 
work towards planning, coordination, monitoring and evaluation of the regional gender component 
and follow up supervisory roles, monitoring and evaluation in gender and socio norms research, 
documentation of best practices and collection of sex disaggregated data to ensure that gender 
mainstreaming is part of the program design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation in the 6 
member countries. The main goal is to achieve women economic empowerment and gender 
equality and equity within the context of the program components for enhanced climate change 
resilience, food, nutrition, and health security among agro sylvo pastoral communities in the 6 
member countries. 
 
13. 
The economic and financial resources and opportunities provided by the project will be 
measured by sex-disaggregated indicators. In the Bank Gender Marker System (GMS), the project 
is then considered as a GEN II. By the end of the project period, it is expected that there will 
positive outcomes for example increased income for women from agro sylvo pastoral value chains 
with an output indicator in increased annual per capita income among women (in male and female 
headed households) and creation of additional jobs for women and youth.  Furthermore, women 
should have increased access to social services and infrastructure to reduce their labour and time 
poverty constraints, reduce child and care giving barriers and be able to participate more in 
livelihood diversification activities through agribusiness development in agro sylvo pastoral value 
chains.  
 
14. 
Gender analysis for each country, including action plan, has been presented in the 
respective Country Components/Reports. The Regional Gender Action Plan with the 
corresponding budget for the regional gender activities is provided below. 
 
Gender Action Plan Regional Activities and Budget (Regional Gender Activities for 
Implementation by IGAD and its Institutions) 
 
NOTE: Activities Presented here cut across the 4 components of the Project 
 
Gender Activities 
Estimated Cost USD 
Regional Capacity Building for ToT (including Gender and Resilience Working Group 
members) on the Gender Action Learning Systems (GALS) Approach and Methodology 
adopted from OXFAM- Uganda Using GALS Champions from Uganda. ToTs (National 
ToTs) to spearhead implementation of GALS activities in their respective countries 
200,000 
Regional Gender Expert supporting national gender experts; leading regional gender action 
plan and producing knowledge products to capture lessons learnt.  
420,000 
Translation of GALS Tools into local Languages (Amharic, Arabic, French and Somali) 
for regional capacity building 
20,000

=== PAGE 243 ===
66
Gender Activities 
Estimated Cost USD 
Regional mentorship support for National Member Country Gender Action Learning 
Systems ToTs 
48,000 
Regional Capacity Building on Gender Planning and Budgeting (Using GALS) for 
Member country institutions across the project components 
45,000 
Regional Coordination and Supervision of Gender and Social Cultural Norms Research in 
the Agro pastoral communities across the IGAD Region to identify barriers to women 
empowerment and devise appropriate initiatives 
70,000 
Documentation of Gender transformative best practices and knowledge management in 
agro pastoralists communities 
52,000 
Collection of gender disaggregated data with gender mainstreamed indicators of change in 
agro pastoral communities 
60,000 
Regional Cross Country Gender Learning Exchanges to countries where GALS 
methodology has been implemented in the agro pastoral communities 
35,000 
Regional monitoring and evaluation mechanism to ascertain gender compliance of the 
standards and tools 
60,000 
Cross country supervisory role by the Gender Unit including contribution to staff salary 
80,000 
Establishment of a coordination/strengthening of a coordination mechanism (Gender and 
Resilience Working Group) 
30,000 
Grand Total 
1,120,000 
__________
