=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 24.2.20857
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 24.2.20857
creationDate: D:20240624203550+09'00'
modDate: D:20240624203550+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
15 – 18 July 2024 
Songdo, Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional agenda item 10 
GCF/B.39/02/Add.08 
24 June 2024 
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum VIII 
Funding proposal package for FP233 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled "Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ 
(CASP+)"; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.08 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
87 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
88 
Secretariat’s assessment 
92 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
108 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
116 
Gender documentation 
118

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ 
(CASP+) 
Country(ies): 
Tajikistan 
Accredited Entity: 
International Fund for Agriculture Programme (IFAD) 
Date of first submission: 
[2021/12/08]  
Date of current submission  
[2024/04/30]  
Version number 
[V.6.0]

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 0 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 1 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Project 
A.2. Public or 
private sector 
Public 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
 
GCF  
contribution 
Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total 
55 % 
32 % 
☐  Energy generation and access 
0 % 
0 % 
☐  Low-emission transport 
0 % 
0 % 
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances 
0 % 
0 % 
☒  Forestry and land use 
55% 
32 % 
Adaptation total 
45 % 
68 % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities 
25% 
35 % 
☒  Health and well-being, and food and water security 
2% 
2 % 
☒  Infrastructure and built environment 
10% 
1 % 
☒  Ecosystems and ecosystem services 
8% 
30 % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered) 
6,854,822 tonnes of CO2e 
(27 years, 7 years project 
execution and 20 years 
capitalization)2 
A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached) 
650,000 individuals (51,5% women), 
or 100,000 households (20% female 
headed)  
Direct 
beneficiaries: 
650,000 
Indirect 
beneficiaries: 
2,268,426 
7% of total 
population (31% 
of Target area 
population) 
24% of the total 
population 
 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance3)  
79,690,370 USD 
A.9. Project size 
Medium (Upto USD 250 million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
39,000,000 USD 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
 
☒  Grant 
30.000.000 
 
☒  Loan 
9.000.000 
☐  Guarantee 
Enter number 
☐  Equity  
 
    Enter number 
☐  Results-based payment    Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
7 years 
A.12. Total lifespan 
20 years 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
 
Click or tap to enter a date. 
 
A.14. ESS category  B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Yes ☒    No ☐

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 2 
 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
i.      Republic of Tajikistan, acting through (a) Ministry of Finance and (b) Ministry of 
Agriculture (via the State Enterprise Project Management Unit Livestock and Pasture 
Development (PMU))  
ii.      Committee on Environmental Protection (through the Center for Implementation of 
Investment Projects) 
iii.      Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO)  
 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
Climate change problem 
 
(i) 
Tajikistan is one of the most vulnerable countries in Central Asia to climate risks.4 Temperatures are 
increasing across the country and there is a clear shift in precipitation patterns. These changes pose a threat 
to the agricultural cropping calendar as well as to the productivity of pastures. Crop productivity is also 
negatively impacted by the higher temperatures that increase evapotranspiration and have an overall 
negative impact on plant growth. Specialised tools developed to predict the impact of climate change on 
agriculture production, such as the Climate Adaptation in Rural Development (CARD)5 predicts that climate 
change will affect both irrigated and rain-fed production systems - and under the pessimistic risk setting all 
crop yields are projected to decrease moderately in the next five years up to 2025 and more severely by 
2050. Rice production will be most affected, after wheat and sunflower.6 Climate change is also expected to 
impact production of fodder and the carrying capacity of pastures and animal morbidity and mortality which 
can, paradoxically, lead to overstocking as a risk mitigation measure by smallholder farmers trying to sustain 
their vulnerable livelihoods. Climate change can also affect availability of water for livestock, as well as 
animal health, welfare and productivity through emergence of new diseases, and increased temperature on 
animal physiology. The country is also prone to frequent natural disasters including floods, mudflows, 
landslides and droughts. Climate projections predict a worsening of the trends and events, with significant 
impacts on ecosystems, livelihoods and the economy. The country’s geographic characteristics as well as 
its high levels of poverty and dependence on the agriculture sector present significant challenges for future 
adaptation. The climate change vulnerability analyses suggest higher adaptation needs in rural mountainous 
area.  
 
Proposed interventions  
(ii) 
The proposed interventions build on the successful experiences of four IFAD-funded projects 
over the last 15 years in vulnerable mountainous areas of Tajikistan, specifically, on the Livestock and 
Pasture Development Projects (phase I and II) while adding the missing focus on climate resilience and 
reinforcing the demonstrated mechanisms leading to carbon sequestration7 through rangeland rehabilitation, 
improved livestock management and livelihoods diversification (relevant projects referred to in Section B.3 
and results and impact reported in Annex 18, building on lessons learned summarized in Annex 29 and 
Annex 30 explaining the evolution of IFAD country programme and how the latter has evolved into the 
CASP+ with a full fledged climate focus). At the national level the proposed investments will build the 
communities and country’s capacity to plan for climate risks and modify its policy and regulatory framework 
to incentivise production practices that are more resilient to climate change and improve the governance of 
natural resources. At the district, village and community level, the project investments are designed to 
incorporate climate diagnostics in the local level planning frameworks. This will help to identify investments 
that can make the communities, their livelihoods and their ecosystems (rangelands, forests) more climate 
resilient through investments in water and irrigation infrastructure, technologies and farm equipment which 
helps to increase agriculture productivity and protect smallholders from climate change. At the market level, 
the proposed investments will strengthen the links with the private sector by supporting market-driven 
diversification of livelihoods as element of resilience and by building productive alliances in selected value 
chains which are most vulnerable to climate risks such as livestock, dairy, meat, horticulture to increase 
productivity, reduce loss and wastage due to weather conditions and reverting the ecosystem degradation. 
The project has a seven year duration, with GCF financing and multiple co-financiers, as one coordinated 
climate investment. CASP+ will be executed by three executing entities according to respective comparative 
advantages and areas of expertise: (i). Republic of Tajikistan, acting through (a) Ministry of Finance and (b) 
Ministry of Agriculture (via the State Enterprise Project Management Unit Livestock and Pasture 
Development (PMU)); (ii). Committee on Environmental Protection (through the Center for Implementation

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 3 
 
of Investment Projects); and (iii). Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO)  
  
Climate results/benefits  
 
(iii) 
It is expected that the proposed activities can catalyze impact beyond a one-off project investment 
and lead to a paradigm shift in key areas. The project is designed to transform Government of Tajikistan’s 
approach through explicit consideration of climate change risks, vulnerabilities and adaptation 
measures in national policies and programmes and in development planning at the district and village 
levels to assist households diversify their livelihoods. At the local level, the project will develop mechanisms 
to support locally-led adaptation by building capacities of local agencies to assess climate risks and 
identify and implement locally-appropriate solutions that can build a long-term legacy of local capacity 
for climate change adaptation. At the household level, the project will instill a paradigm shift in agriculture 
production practices in the crop and livestock sectors by enhanced awareness and access to climate 
responsive inputs and services. A key paradigm shift that will be facilitated will be reduced reliance on 
low productivity animals through appropriate pasture and herd management practices, refinements 
in relevant regulatory framework and breeding strategy and enhanced capacity of households to 
reduce post-production losses through timely access to markets by working in close collaboration 
with the private sector.  
 
(iv) 
The project is expected to have an impact on both adaptation and mitigation. Specifically, the project 
will contribute to the sequestration of an estimated 6,854,822 tonnes of CO2 equivalent 8  through 
management of degraded forests and pastures, improved agricultural practices, and improved livestock and 
herd management leading to reduction of emission intensities (Annex 23 EX-ACT and GLEAM-I Carbon 
Accounting). The project is expected to reach out 650,000 direct individual beneficiaries or about 100,000 
rural households and 2,268,426 indirect individual beneficiaries across the country, 51.5% women 
(Annex 24: Beneficiary Estimates) in 21 of the most climate vulnerable districts (Annex 2.1, Annex 30). The 
economic analysis of the project indicates an Economic Internal Rate of Return of 23.08% and a Net Present 
Value of USD 178.3 million with significant co-benefits from economic, social and environmental factors 
(Annex 3: Economic and Financial Analysis). 
 
(v) 
The project is aligned with national and international climate change commitments of Tajikistan, in 
particular the National Determined Contributions (NDC, 2021)9 that identify agriculture and forestry among 
the vehicles to ensure a progressive reduction of climate change vulnerability as well as to enhance the 
carbon sequestration potential of the country, and soil protection, grazing management, and tree plantation 
as needed investments for adaptation and disaster risk reduction. References to measures relevant to the 
project are also found in the National Development Strategy, that integrates climate change needs, disaster 
risk reduction, and social inclusiveness, specifically focusing on gender-based development.

=== PAGE 8 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 4 
 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
 
1. 
Climate profile: Tajikistan has been described as one of the most vulnerable countries to climate 
change in the Central Asian region. In 2021, it ranks in this regard on 98th position on the ND-Gain ranking 
whose indicators highlight among others a low capacity to acquire and deploy climate smart agriculture 
technology.10 Its vulnerability is exacerbated due to the country’s terrain, as 93% of its territory is considered 
mountainous and roughly half of all settlements in the country are located above 3000 meters. 11 The 
country’s climate strongly exhibits aridity, high temperatures and significant inter-annual variability in almost 
all the climatic variables (Annex 2 and Annex 6). The local weather station data analyzed shows that 
temperatures are rising across the country, with a sharper increase in the period 1970-2017 (Figure 1).12,13   
 
Figure 1: Average mean temperature in Kulyab and in Tajikistan for the period 1901-2019.14 
 
 
2. 
The trend is higher during winter months, as registered by the local weather station in Fedchenko 
glacier,15 with detected impacts on glacier and snow cover. A significant decrease in the snow extent in 
more than 50% of Tajikistan was observed for the period 2000-2020.16 
 
3. 
At the national level, annual precipitation (rain, sleet, and snow) rose by 15-20% through the 1901-
2018 period. The increase in precipitation is concentrated in the February-May season mostly in Western 
Tajikistan, with positive trend of snow occurrence in high mountains and negative in the plains,17 while the 
June-October season is experiencing a significant decrease of 4 mm/decade at the national level (Figure 
2).18

=== PAGE 9 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 5 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Annual precipitation (1901-2018) (left) and Monthly rainfall and trend (1981-2018) (right) in Tajikistan.19 
 
 
4. 
There is a clear shift in the precipitation pattern, which has a major impact on water availability 
between the end of the wet season in May and the beginning of it in November-December, which, in turn, 
contribute to increasing the vulnerability of the ecosystems (i.e. heavy rainfall events, extreme temperatures, 
droughts) and, therefore, of the population. These changes pose a threat to the agricultural cropping 
calendar as well as to the pasture productivity within the year, changing availability of pastures and 
increasing seasonal forage deficits. In 2010, 11% of the total population was living on degraded land.20 The 
negative trend is more evident in grassland compared to cropland.21 The main differences between the two 
can be attributed to the fact that parts of crops are irrigated and can better withstand changes in precipitation. 
The grassland suffers greatly from climate change and extreme events (see below and Annex 2.1, p. 12), 
exacerbated by poor management practices and limited capacity to adapt to climate risks. Mountainous 
regions are especially vulnerable to climate change, and thus require greater efforts to encourage optimal 
land and water management practices.22,23  A World Bank estimate puts losses dues to forest degradation 
in Tajikistan as annually exceeding $39 million (or 0.6% of GDP).24 Systematic reforestation, improved 
pasture management and increased fodder conservation will be a considerable contribution to the reduction 
of adverse impacts of climate change.25 
 
5. 
Climate projections predict a worsening of the trends and events, with significant impacts on 
ecosystems, livelihoods and the economy.26,27,28 Crops are already experiencing reduction due to climate 
change and extreme weather events. There is an increase of 30 percent in irrigation demand by crops (driven 
by higher temperatures that push up evaporation) combined with increased heat extremes that negatively 
affect crop productivity. The Climate Adaptation in Rural Development (CARD)29 analysis concludes that 
climate change affects both production systems - with and without irrigation - and under the Pessimistic risk 
setting all crop yields are projected to decrease moderately in the next five years up to 2025 and more 
severely by 2050. Rice production will be most affected, after wheat and sunflower.30  Furthermore, under 
the Moderate risk setting, most of the crops’ yields are projected to decrease moderately (under full 
irrigation), decrease on the short term and then increase slightly on the long term (managed grass, no 
irrigation) or stay stable in some cases (no irrigation) or increase (Rice, no irrigation). 
 
6. 
Climate hazards. Climate-induced extreme weather events (such as floods, droughts, heatwaves, 
landslides and avalanches) are already present in the project area. Weather events are expected to increase 
in both frequency and intensity as a result of warming as indicated in Figure 3 below.31 Heavy rainfall events 
(>10mm/day) are becoming more intense at the end of summer, beginning of Fall in Ganjina, Aznob and 
Dushanbe, 32 when soils are drier and with less vegetation cover (i.e. more prone to landslides and 
mudflows). From 1992 to 2016, natural disasters affected 7 million people in Tajikistan (more than 80% of 
the population) and caused economic losses of US$1.8 billion.33 Annual losses from climate change and 
climate-induced extreme weather events are currently estimated at $600 million, or 4.8% of GDP.34 The 
mudflows and floods in 1998, 1999, 2005 and 2010 were the most devastating,35 calling for strengthening

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 6 
 
 
soil and forest protection measures as a high investment priority in Tajikistan’s Third National 
Communication on Climate Change to the UNFCCC.  
 
7. 
The 2000-01 drought damaged Tajikistan economy by an estimated 5% of its GDP, with cereal output 
down by 36 percent compared to the previous five years average. An estimated 172,000 hectares out of 
200,000 hectares of rain-fed land suffered from drought,36 affecting more than 3 million people (or half of 
the countries' population at that time) and high temperature events (2008 and 2013) affected more than 1 
million people.37 Over 1981-2019, droughts have affected large parts of the country, and negative impacts 
on grassland and croplands are visible through the Agricultural Stress Index System.38 The Standardised 
Precipitation-Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI)39  analysis at 18 months shows a significant worsening over 
the period 1980-2019 (Annex 2.1, page 8), attesting to a risk of depletion in water reserves in deep soil 
layers. As the instance and magnitude of these events increases, the impacts of such disasters are also 
expected to increase. Climate related impacts on freshwater systems have also been observed (Annex 2.1). 
 
Figure 3: Multi-hazard zoning in Tajikistan. Source: Climate Resilience Cluster of the EO4SD  
 
 
8. 
Emission trends. Tajikistan is not a major emitter when assessed on emissions per capita. The 
latest Nationally Determined Contribution (2023) reports that after energy (60% of greenhouse gas 
emission), agriculture is a key source of greenhouse gas emissions (35% of greenhouse gases). The Fourth 
National Communication reports enteric fermentation, manure management and nitrogen application as 
main sources. Specifically, methane (CH4) emissions from agriculture comprehend the 91% of all emissions 
of this gas (related to enteric fermentation and manure management).40  Similarly, emissions from Nitrous 
Oxide (N2O) from agriculture sector represent the 94.7% emissions of this gas. Based on FAOSTAT data 
estimates, emissions from the AFOLU sector have increased around 40% in the past ten years.41  Within 
the agriculture sector, 57% of GHG emissions were estimated to be due to enteric fermentation from 
livestock 42, further significant emissions originate mainly from feed production and N deposited during 
grazing.43 Despite being a low emitter, Tajikistan has an important potential to reduce its emissions through 
both traditional methods like improving feeding practices and improved digestibility of diets improved animal 
health and overall animal management; reducing land-use change arising from feed crop cultivation; the 
sequestration of carbon, through reforestation and improving pasture management (Annex 23).  
 
9. 
Climate projections. Projections by the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project, Phase 6 (CMIP6)44 
produced in view of the IPCC's Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) foresees that the mean annual temperatures 
will be warmer by approximately 1.0°C to 1.2°C by 2030 and 1.8°C to 2.4°C by 2050, while frost days (<0°C) 
are projected to decrease by 12 to 16 days by 2030 and by 20 to 28 days by 2050.45 By 2050, the mean 
annual precipitation is projected to remain stable, but the number of consecutive dry days is expected to 
increase by 4 to 11 days, depending on the region and the scenario, contributing to the increasing risk of 
severe droughts.46 The higher temperatures and melting glaciers47 are already contributing to higher risk of 
severe droughts in several areas of the country. 48 Similarly, projected hot day (>35°C) would steadily

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 7 
 
 
increase and projected mean drought index should decrease at national level under both RCP 4.5 and 8.5 
scenario by 2050 as presented in Figure 4. By 2050, the intensity of the wettest precipitation events is 
expected to increase by 4.5 mm to 5.3 mm, increasing the risks of mudflows, landslides, and avalanches. 
 
Figure 4.  Projected hot day (Tmax>35C), and Mean SPEI drought Index until 2100 (Reference period 1995-2014). 
 
Source: The World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal (reported in Annex 2.1) 
 
10. 
Climate vulnerability analysis: A climate vulnerability index analysis49 was carried out for the 
design of CASP+ (Annex 2, Chapter I.IV – summary of results in Figure 5).50 The analysis shows higher 
vulnerability to climate in the Eastern and Centre Khatlon, Western DRS and in the South East of Sughd. 
On the climatic side, these areas are associated with more adverse climate change impacts, on slow onset: 
increasing temperatures – posing higher challenges for animal health and agricultural productivity; changing 
rainfall patterns – modifying the grazing seasons and forcing herders to alternative feeding and water 
sources; as well as on the rapid onset: higher risks of droughts, mudslides, landslides – further reducing the 
productivity of soils and calling for disaster management measures.  
 
Figure 5: Climate Vulnerability analysis (Annex 2.1) 
 
11. 
Indeed, Tajikistan is expected to have very strong hydrological changes and impacts given its snow 
based hydrological systems, and thus, would have serious implications for its future land use (see climate 
data from weather stations of glaciers and snow presence analysis (trend map + chart) presented in 
Annex 2.1). By 2050, the main crops’ yield51 could decrease by between 5% and 35%, and pastures on 
which livestock depend are also expected to see a reduction in quality and quantity due to pressures from 
high temperatures and increased evaporation rates. 52 Temperature increases are also likely to modify 
ecosystems and provide opportunities for pests and diseases to emerge and/or multiply, affecting a wide 
range of agricultural sectors.53,54 In addition, Tajik agriculture is exposed to climate-sensitive diseases for 
livestock55, (including new diseases that could emerge because of climate change and for which animals

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 
have no immunity), and crops56 such as cotton budworm in cotton, potato leafroll virus (spread by aphids) 
and late blight in potato production and locust.57,58  
 
12. 
From a socio-economic perspective, these areas present higher vulnerability of the population,59 
lower quality of life (access to water which will be worsen because of climate change and electricity) and 
income. Khatlon accounts for the highest percentage of extreme poverty at 21% and almost 2/3 of the poor 
are in the regions of Sughd (30.2%) and Khatlon (36.7%). These findings are in line and complement 
relevant WFP 60 and UNDP 61 assessments. The climate change vulnerability analyses suggest higher 
adaptation needs in rural mountainous area, with predominance of agroforestry and livestock related 
livelihoods (requiring optimization of land and water resources).62,63 
 
13. 
Climate change has a direct impact on pasture areas as described in Annex 2.1. The degradation 
of pastures over time is evident in the country and is directly affected by climate change creating more stress 
for the plants (summary of results in Figure 6). The areas that have seen their condition severely degraded 
over time are the ones that are affected by more concentrated rainfall and longer dry periods - heavier daily 
rainfall events and cumulative 5 days rainfall events, less distributed over the year. Furthermore, the 
temperature in spring and summer is on average higher when compared with the less degraded pasture 
areas. As consequences, the drought events were more severe (the drought index SPEI was lower) in these 
severely degraded areas. Due to climate change, the plants are affected by higher maximum temperatures, 
heavier precipitation but fewer and more ad hoc rainfall events, which affect plant growth and health. 
 
14. 
Forage production is also decreasing because of climate trends which are contributing to declining 
soil fertility64 and decreasing area, variable patterns of water availability, and more frequent and severe 
drought episodes. Projections of managed grass yields for median and pessimistic risk settings under 
RCP8.5 show continuous decrease in time (CARD analysis). 65 Farmers have limited knowledge and 
technical support in production and conservation of fodder, which could be an appropriate adaptation 
measure to seasonal feed deficit. Climate Change will have far reaching consequences for dairy, meat and 
wool production mainly arising from its impact on grassland and fodder. 66 While natural pastures and 
hayfields play an important role in protecting soil from erosion and increasing its fertility, their productivity is 
dependent in turn on climate change and its spatial distribution during the vegetation period. For instance, 
rising temperature of 2-4°C in February and March can lead to 20% decrease in winter – spring pasture 
productivity, a decline that is greatly exacerbated during dry spells.  
 
Figure 6: Changes in summer pastures condition over the period 2000-2004 vs. 2016-2020. Source: Climate 
Resilience Cluster of the EO4SD (Annex 16) 
 
 
15. 
Reductions in agriculture and pasture productivity will adversely affect the overall nutritional status 
and health of the population, especially women, children, and elderly. Women and young girls are extremely 
vulnerable to the effects of climate change since they already have poor access to water and sanitation. 
Due to these factors and processes, coordinated action on climate change in Tajikistan is an urgent 
concern.67  In Tajikistan, about 30% of the population is undernourished, half of the children under five suffer 
from iodine deficiency and a quarter from stunting (WFP, 2019). The country’s food insecurity will increase

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 
in the long run because of limited capacity to respond to climate-induced shocks, which would adversely 
affect agricultural production. 68 The poverty headcount ratio is 26.3% at national level (World Bank), 
reaching 36.1% in rural areas. Female Headed Households (FHH) are 9% of total HHs and represent 30% 
of the total poor households. Women face discrimination and inequality in social, economic and political life 
(UN Women). 69 The share of women working in the agriculture sector is higher (75% of all working 
women)70. Yet, gender imbalances in access to and control over productive resources, limited decision-
making, and discrimination are also characteristic of agricultural work.   
 
16. 
The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated the already highly vulnerable conditions, impacting 
severely on food production systems. A recent assessment71 showed high declines in households’ incomes 
for self-employed, migrant labourers and non-registered workers. Lack of savings and the presence of loans 
forced into further indebtedness, with high risks of perpetual indebtedness and poverty intensification. Three 
out of five micro-small and medium enterprises (MSMEs)72 were negatively affected by the pandemic, with 
higher impact in rural areas where access to advisory services and markets is lower. Sales decreased by 
an estimated 85%, pushing MSMEs’ into further indebtedness. Tajikistan is also affected by the economic 
impact of the war in Ukraine. The adverse effects of the pandemics, coupled by the impact of climate change 
are threatening food and nutrition security and economic recovery.  
 
17. 
Geographic focus CASP+ has been designed to liaise with ongoing projects financed by other IFIs 
and development partners, and its geographic targeting ensures complementarity with ongoing projects (see 
also Annex 21, PIM, whereby Section 2.3.c specify that villages with previous/ongoing meaningful 
intervention providing the community with similar community investments are excluded from the targeting). 
CASP+ will build synergies with these projects in identifying the scope of the community action plans and 
assess how to capitalize on these initiatives in building resilience of local communities and infrastructure. 
Within the selected districts, CASP+ has adopted criteria to exclude villages that benefit from previous or 
ongoing interventions of a similar nature (Annex 21, ¶28) 73 . The participatory identification of the 
interventions with Jamoat Administration and local communities will also help to avoid gaps and duplications 
and ensure transparency and equity in selection of villages. Hence, there is expected to be no duplication 
in the investments at the village level or in the nature of the activities financed by World Bank, WFP, ADB, 
EBRD and other donor projects and CASP+. The Government and the EEs have a list of villages in the 21 
districts and the selection is taking place as a preliminary IFAD-financed project activity. Available statistics 
for rural villages comprise demographic variables as well as socio-economic aspects needed to guarantee 
objective selection (the procedure and criteria are described in Annex 21 (Section 2.3, ¶28 and subsequent).  
 
18. 
The geographic targeting was based on climate change vulnerability and the potential of the project 
to enhance climate resilience. The project area is situated in 21 districts, 16 in Khatlon region, 3 in RRS 
region and 2 in the Sughd region (Figure 7). The selection was based on the IFAD developed Vulnerability 
Index (Annex 2.1, Chapter I.IV), encompassing social, environmental and climatic and infrastructure 
parameters.74 The average vulnerability index of the project area is higher than the national average (Figure 
7). The area has suffered repeated long-term droughts75 in recent years (excluding Farkhor and Danghara). 
The selected districts experienced heavy precipitation events, specifically in Sh.Sholin, Khovaling, Baljuvon, 
Gissor and Shakrinav in Khatlon. Most of the project districts are also situated in the area where the average 
maximum temperature is the highest in the country (except high mountain areas). 
 
19. 
After selecting the districts, a water sub-catchments basins approach was used to identify the most 
vulnerable basins within each district. The vulnerability criteria was calculated at sub-catchment level (see 
targeting strategy criteria, Annex 21). The approach will allow to group the most vulnerable villages at water 
sub-catchment basin level to apply a landscape approach (each village will be assigned a vulnerability index 
depending on its localization).  
 
19. 
Synergies with on-going climate finance. TheCEP is leading a broad programme to support the 
enabling environment on climate change, comprising the GCF NAP among others. The interventions 
address climate change across a wide range of sectors including agriculture, water, energy, transport, etc. 
CASP+ specifically tackles the issues in the agriculture sector and natural resource management which are

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 
key for a significant number of rural households complementing existing investment, including GCF-financed 
interventions (World Bank, ADB, EBRD, and WFP). Additional information in Section D.5 and Annex 27. 
 
Figure 7. CASP+ geographic targeting (project districts, maps in Annex 16) 
Region 
District 
Other projects 
Khatlon 
A. Jomi 
Khatlon 
Baljuvon 
ELMARL 76 
Khatlon 
Bokhtar/ Kushoniyon 
Khatlon 
Dangara 
CAMP4ASB, LPDP II76 
Khatlon 
Farkhor 
LPDP II76, ELMARL76 
Khatlon 
Hamadoni 
LPDP II76, ELMARL76 
Khatlon 
J. Balkhi 
Khatlon 
Khovaling 
WFP GCF, ELMARL76 
Khatlon 
Khuroson 
Khatlon 
Kulob 
LPDP II76, ELMARL76 
Khatlon 
Panj 
Khatlon 
Sh. Shohin 
Khatlon 
Temurmalik 
LPDP I 76 
Khatlon 
Vakhsh 
Khatlon 
Vose 
CAMP4ASB, LPDP II76 
Khatlon 
Yovon 
RRS 
Gissor 
RRS 
Rudaki 
RRS 
Shakhrinav 
Sughd 
Mastchoh 
Sughd 
Zafarobod 
 
 
 
20. 
Synergies with community-based ecosystem restoration IFI-funded interventions. Ongoing 
projects relevant to CASP+ scope include: a/ the World Bank-financed Tajikistan Resilient Landscapes 
Restoration Project (RESILAND) which is designed to increase adoption of landscape restoration practices 
by rural communities and includes investment in Joint Forest Management;77 b/ the World Bank financed 
Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Program for the Aral Sea Basin (CAMP4ASB)78 designed to scale up the 
project’s successful regional initiatives and climate investments and to equip and ultimately enable countries 
in Central Asia to address climate challenges through better access to improved climate change knowledge 
services, investments, and capacity-building of key stakeholders; c/ the World Bank is also supporting the 
Tajikistan Strengthening Water and Irrigation Management Project for enhanced climate resilience and 
improved rural livelihoods and food security in Tajikistan. The World Bank funds are expected to be used to 
benefit small-scale irrigation schemes in Upper Vakhsh Basin, prone to floods and mudflow; d/ KfW provided 
support through the  Climate Adaptation through Sustainable Forestry in Important River Catchment Areas 
in Tajikistan, CAFT (2015-2019) that supported piloting Joint Forestry Management and a second phase is 
under consideration; e/ CASP+ will also build on the experience of GIZ in joint forestry management and 
has incorporated many of its lessons in the design. Overall coordination and synergies will be built through 
use of the Coordinating Council on the Green Climate Fund79 and to the Development Coordination Council 
where relevant with other government and donor initiatives.  
 
21. 
Additional synergies with and lessons from IFAD investment. CASP+ builds on the successful 
experience of ongoing and past IFAD-financed and MoA-implemented projects in the country targeting 
vulnerable rural and mountainous communities80. These have been paving the road to define the approach 
of CASP+ which complements such successful investment with interventions to enhance climate resilience 
and carbon sequestration. Besides this, there is expected to be considerable scope of learning and sharing 
with other IFAD operations in the country and in similar fields. This includes a. synergies with the GEF 
programming; b.  Innovations on integrating actions on remittances and migrants’ entrepreneurship; and c. 
forward-looking synergies with IFAD’s methane-emission reduction Eastern Africa climate finance operation. 
First, on GEF: CASP+ will identify synergies with the new GEF 8 programme titled “Tajikistan Ecosystem 
Restoration and Resilient Agriculture” (TERRA) Project. IFAD management is currently coordinating 
between GEF and GCF to identify the steps for further development of the design and finalization.  The 
synergies between CASP+ and the TERRA initiative will be capitalised upon.  Discussions are ongoing to 
consider TERRA as a potential CASP+ co-financing or parallel financing. Second, to boost additional socio-

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 
economic opportunities for resilience building, IFAD will also liaise CASP+ with its EU-funded Action titled 
“Platform for Remittances, Investments and Migrants’ Entrepreneurship in Central Asia” (PRIME). The 
project is designed to promote faster, safer and cheaper transfer of remittances, as well as leveraging these 
flows to advance digital financial inclusion and income-generating activities for sustainable development and 
well-being of migrant workers’ families in Central Asia including in Tajikistan. Third, there is a considerable 
scope of cross-learning and sharing between CASP+ and the ongoing IFAD design of the climate finance 
programme titled “Dairy Interventions for Adaptation and Mitigation” (DAIMA) which seeks to promote Low 
Carbon and Climate Resilient Livestock in East Africa. The project components and activities and the CASP+ 
are well aligned, with due differences depending on contexts, also benefitting of the assessment carried out 
for the design of CASP+. CASP+ and the DAIMA Project can explore opportunities for exchange of 
information and successful approaches, tools, methodologies, policy guidelines, etc. IFAD will facilitate 
exchange of experiences between these projects through exchange visits budget lines embedded in the 
national projects and in DAIMA, and through own resources, including the China-IFAD South-South and 
Triangular Cooperation (SSTC), as well as through documentation and sharing of knowledge and lessons.81 
The projects will capitalize on the collaboration between IFAD and FAO, and leverage technical assistance 
of the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE).82 
 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram) 
22. 
The overall goal of the project is to contribute to the country’s shift towards low emission 
sustainable development pathways and climate-adaptive agricultural production practices. The 
specific objective is to increase public sector coordination and technical capacity for building climate 
resilience at the national level, enhance capacity at the district and village level for climate adaptive planning 
and mitigating the impact of climate change, and building more effective links with the private sector to help 
address climate risks by improving integration with markets.  
 
23. The Theory of Change has been developed to address some of the key barriers in the path to improve 
livelihood resilience and carbon sequestration in rural areas (see Figure 8. Theory of change CASP+, and 
Annex 22). These include:  
[a] Institutional barriers: limited capacity for evidence-based planning, management and evaluation of 
natural resources at national and local levels; translating into fragmented governance of the natural 
resources, at local, as well as national level (e.g., pastures and forests are under different institutions 
regulating the access in different ways. 
[b] Technical barriers: limited understanding of climate change impacts for rural populations; and low 
productivity of agricultural systems, limited capacity at local level and lack of stimuli to revert the trend 
of unproductive livestock population growth, hampering efficient and sustainable rangeland 
management.  
[c] Financial barriers: related to limited public investment, increasing but geographically still scattered 
and not always aligned in methodology to promote integrated ecosystem management; as well as 
inadequate financial system with consequent limited financial options (products, system) in rural 
areas for productive investments in forestry, livestock/rangeland management and income 
diversification.  
[d] Social barriers: such as unequal socio-economic structure, discriminating rural women and 
disadvantaged people, particularly within poor households and especially female headed 
households (representing 9% of the total) (Annex 8).  
[e] remoteness barriers, related to inadequate road network especially in mountainous areas, 
hampering access to markets, financial services and ultimately investment for rural populations.  
 
24. 
The underlying theory of change of the project is that IF coordination and capacity at the national 
level is strengthened and enabling environment for natural resource management is enhanced and 
community is assisted in the formulation of climate sensitive action plans, provision of new technologies,

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 
livestock producers provided a range of services and smallholders form productive alliances with the private 
sector THEN vulnerable communities and households will be able to reduce emissions due to improved 
management of pastures, forests and agriculture land and increase water and food security and improve 
the resilience of vulnerable villages BECAUSE of a supportive policy environment which incentivizes the 
adoption of low emission and climate resilient technologies and practices, local government and 
communities transform planning and production practices to account for climate risks and improve the 
management of natural resources and household assets.  
 
Figure 8. Theory of change CASP+ 
 
 
25. 
One of the key postulates of CASP+ theory of change is premised on the assertion that 
helping to shift the development pathway in a low emission and climate resilient direction requires 
a series of investments in the public sector at the national level to strengthen the governance and 
management regime of the natural resource base. CASP+ aims to bolster institutional mechanisms, 
enhance coordination among stakeholders, and build capacity to govern natural resources effectively. While 
the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan has secured readiness support from GCF83 to develop a 
National Adaptation Plan, further legislative and policy reforms in natural resource management are 
imperative. Also, the implementation mechanisms of the National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 
(NCCAS) require strengthening. Besides reinforcing the enabling environment (component 1), CASP+ 
intends to facilitate community investment (component 2) to enhance resilience of the households in the 
project area, stimulating more sustainable livelihood options. It will also support livelihood diversification for 
vulnerable households and commercialisation and agribusiness development for common interest groups 
(component 3). These investments are expected to generate multiplier affects along the selected value 
chains that will help to further build demand for local enterprises and aid in diversification.  
 
26. 
Strategic investments in regulatory and policy actions have the potential to change 
behaviour in markets and economies beyond one-off investments.  By refining existing laws, 
enhancing technical capacity for climate change adaptation, and providing tools like geo-referencing and

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 
remote sensing, decision-making processes can improve, fostering better management systems and 
resilience. CASP+ targets policy constraints in pasture law, breeding strategy, and capacity development 
for improved public projects and green economy development options.84 
 
27. 
The theory of change of the project is based on the understanding that with facilitation 
support and investments in planning, infrastructure, inputs and equipment, communities can mobilize, 
plan and implement Community Action Plans that address some of the key issues of vulnerability to climate 
risks. CASP+ will support communities to develop and implement climate-sensitive Community Action Plans 
addressing vulnerability to climate risks. In rural mountainous areas, the role of Pasture User Unions (PUUs) 
is pivotal. Adequately supported and accompanied in climate-sensitive community investment, PUUs will be 
enable innovative strategies to improve pasture productivity, reverse pasture degradation, and with the 
appropriate incentives also reduce methane emission intensity. Evidence from previous IFAD investments85 
shows very positive results on pasture productivity (+15% on average), as well as on reverting the pasture 
degradation trend (summarized in Annex 18f).86 In addition, the assessment has also shown that the past 
project investment generated a decrease of livestock units owned by the beneficiaries87. This approach can 
ultimately lead to a reduced methane emission intensity of the economic output and to an overall net 
incremental sequestration thanks to improved rangeland management and forestry.  
 
28. 
By introducing a specialization in the field of climate change in the master's programme in 
leading universities and by further strengthening the capacity to understand and implement the 
principles of agro-ecology in various disciplines such as agriculture, ecology, livestock, etc., there 
can be a significant paradigm shift in how resources are managed and allocated. Annex 688 and  
Annex 25 provide a detailed description on how the project has the potential to adhere to the agro-ecology 
principles. The capacity of the public sector to understand climate change issues and influence their policy 
and allocative decision-making towards more resilient pathways can be facilitated through orientation 
sessions for civil servants at the Academy of Public Administration which has a mandate to upgrade their 
modern theoretical and practical knowledge. 
 
29. 
The project’s theory of change is premised on the evidence the farmers can transform their 
production practices to low emissions pathways and adopt production practices more adaptive to 
climate change and reduction in emissions with guidance and support.  Livestock plays a vital role in 
Tajikistan's agriculture sector but also contributes significantly to greenhouse gas emissions (see details in 
Annex 23, and Annex 28, para 8). Without the project, the upward trend of livestock will continue and the 
trends of the last 5-10 years that show annual growth rates of 2% for cattle and sheep and 1% for goats are 
likely to continue.  There are several methodologies that can be adopted that result in lower emissions and 
at the same time maintains or increases productivity. With the extensive grazing system largely relying on 
pastures vulnerable to temperature increase and shifting rainfall patterns, livestock productivity is very low. 
The damages of climate change to the rural ecosystems (pasture and forests mostly) require communities 
to take adaptation and mitigation measures, including pasture management plans and husbandry 
practices tailored to the carrying capacity, stipulating resting periods and rotational grazing to enable 
regeneration, etc.89 Investments in climate resilient pastures and agroforestry have the potential to 
restore damaged ecosystems, reduce GHG emissions, enhance carbon sequestration, reduce erosion and 
limit risk from mudflows, landslides and soil loss. Specifically, CASP+ will adopt a three-pronged approach 
for livestock investment: improving feed, breeds, health plus pasture management. Besides community 
investment in the CsCAPs in output 2.2, under output 3.1 the project will support improvement of the 
genetic potential of smallholder farmers’ livestock and the adoption of climate resilient innovative 
technologies (introduction of fodder varieties and conservation, manure management, through 
demonstrations and FFS). Genetic improvement is expected to encourage commercial and smallholders to 
switch from low yield animals to higher and more efficient stock. This is also expected to encourage reduction 
in herd size thereby helping to reduce GHG emissions. Climate-sensitive livestock practices promoted by 
CASP+ (comprising improved pasture management, better fodder production including by using climate

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 
resilient varieties, and fodder conservation, silage preparation techniques and better manure management), 
and promotion of livelihoods diversification will ultimately improve animal resilience and contribute reducing 
emissions from livestock practices (better pasture conditions, better productivity, reduction of inventories, 
lower emission intensity). While addressing livelihoods resilience, the project will also address gender-based 
discriminations identified in previous experiences not only through affirmative actions (e.g., by setting quotas 
and targets for women on an equal basis) but having specific gender responsive actions (direct activities 
targeting for women); dedicated resources (dedicated staff) and proper monitoring tools (details are provided 
also in FP Section B3, as an introduction to each component’s investment, in Annex 8, and in Annex 26). 
Responding to the critical gender barriers identified in the gender assessment, CASP+ envisages dedicated 
interventions aimed to: (i) women accessing technologies, knowledge, skills, business development / 
orientation, (ii) improved agriculture practices through FFs, (iii) improved access to market and capital ( e.g. 
grants)  through facilitate market linkages and value chain development initiatives, (iv) increase economic 
opportunities for women through formation of Common Interest Groups (CIGs), and (v) increase decision 
making through enhancing leadership skills (leadership training). 
 
30. 
The average farm size is small with limited household resources to invest in productive 
infrastructure. The physical and productive infrastructure in rural areas which can help enhance the 
resilience of smallholders, is dilapidated and despite a commitment at strategic and policy level,90 the public 
sector is still failing to invest on a substantial scale and depth in them. However, communities have the 
commitment and incentive to organize and form groups and undertake collective action to solve 
issues associated with their productive and common property resources. The experience of previous 
projects financed by IFAD (the Khatlon Livelihoods Support Project, KLSP; Livestock and Pasture 
Development Project, LPDP – Phase I and II) 91 shows that communities have been very effective in 
organizing and preparing collective action plans and implementing a range of sub-projects which can help 
them improve the productivity of their resources and make their livelihoods more climate resilient through 
improved adaptive skills and diversification into off-farm enterprises. The projects had environmental 
objectives linked to the restoration of degraded pastureland through pasture rotation plans implemented by 
the Paster User Unions (PUUs). According to the KLSP evaluation,92 the success of the approach was to 
establish and strengthen village organizations as agents for rural development and governance with the 
capacity to devise and implement innovative strategies for pasture management.  KLSP’s evaluation 
confirmed that the village level institutions are likely to continue playing a key role as rural agents of change. 
Building on these, CASP+ will complement the successes of community mobilization for transformative 
integrated ecosystem restoration (see also Annex 29).  
 
31. 
Forests perform an essential function in regulating the water balance and providing protection 
against natural disasters.  Also, forests play a key role in the lives of Tajikistan’s rural population. Firewood, 
fodder, medicinal plants, fruit and nuts can be sold locally at a profit and represent an important source of 
income diversification. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, large areas were deforested to meet the 
need for fuelwood. This now makes the country more vulnerable to climate hazards and exacerbates climate 
change’s negative impacts. Conflicts over land use between forestry offices and the local population also 
continue to lead to overuse and degradation of forest areas. Rehabilitating and protecting forests is therefore 
of vital importance in the process of adapting to climate change. The involvement of local people in resolving 
land use conflicts and managing the forests sustainably in a few pilot areas has helped to slow the rate of 
forest degradation and promote the rehabilitation of existing forests. Participatory management models 
bring about a paradigm shift in how forests are managed though Joint Forest Management (JFM) 
under which forest land is leased to local communities over the long term.93 Those leasing the lands 
are allocated plots by a community-based committee and use their own labour to plant the trees according 
to management plans which are jointly made with the local Leskhoz, who also organize the other activities 
such as nurseries, fencing, site preparation and irrigation and will share the resulting produce. Biodiversity 
conservation is also contributing to the rehabilitation and long-term stability of forests and 
mitigating the negative impacts of climate change and carbon sequestration. Communities are being

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 
encouraged to work out agreements designed to prevent conflicts of interest between forest and pastureland 
users. This is because forests and pastureland are often in competition with each other. Women can 
supplement their incomes from the processing and marketing of non-wood forest products. While the country 
does not yet have the policy in place to enable carbon trading, through policy dialogue the project presents 
a potential to work with a range of partners94 who can put in place enabling conditions for the development 
of carbon markets for the benefit of smallholders and provide them payments for ecosystem services. IFAD 
is beginning to develop its approach to carbon trading which could provide additional incentives for 
smallholders to drive sustainable change.  
 
32. 
At the household level, livestock is a key component of the mixed farming systems and 
contributes significantly to agriculture GDP, food security, nutrition and household incomes. While 
livestock herd size has grown from 70% to 116% for the different species from 1991 to 201995, 
productivity of the sector is extremely low due to poor feeding, low genetic potential, inadequate 
herd management, poor animal health, etc. The livestock sector in the country also displays poor 
reproductive performance. This has a major direct impact on carrying capacity and over-utilization of 
pastures, on the water footprint and GHG emissions, since around 40% of adult cows utilizing the pasture 
resource base are unproductive (Annex 2). This proportion could be reduced to 20% to 25% with proper 
herd management. There is strong demand and interest from smallholder farmers for techniques that 
contribute to intensifying production systems, such as improved breeding, fodder production and improved 
animal health. Improvements in feed quality, animal health and husbandry, coupled with stimuli to diversify 
livelihoods could lead to increased productivity, along with gradual reduction of the livestock population and 
related emissions. 96 There is a significant opportunity to reduce GHG emissions, particularly methane 
emissions from enteric fermentation. Tajikistan has an important potential to reduce its emissions through 
improving feeding practices and digestibility of diets, improving yields through genetics, feeding practices 
and animal health, and overall animal management. High-quality veterinary services can provide the basis 
for increasing animal productivity, improving the detrimental health impacts of climate change97 and reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions. Incentives to reduce herd growth are critical elements to adaptation and 
typically include investments in more productive animals. Other measures include fodder production 
techniques, Artificial Insemination campaigns with large outreach but limited logistical burden, improving 
skills through Farmer Field Schools as the appropriate tool to enhance climate sensitivity at community 
level and adoption of adaptation techniques including on livestock related issues in the Tajik context.  
 
33. 
Private Sector Engagement: CASP+ envisages a key role for the private sector through helping to 
reduce their transaction costs in dealing with rural communities. IFAD has extensive experience of attracting 
the private sector in its project areas for the benefit of the smallholder by helping to organize communities 
so that their fragmented production is consolidated. The project intends to facilitate business partnerships 
or Productive Alliances between groups of smallholder farmers and private sector actors (e.g. aggregators, 
processors) for a range of value chains. The main rationale for this activity is the need to create incentives 
for more efficient livestock production. CASP+ will facilitate market linkages through ensuring the private 
sector a minimum volume of produce and the specified quality through helping them to build linkages with 
private sector input suppliers and wholesalers and retailers. The TOC is premised on the experience that 
these linkages require initial facilitation for holding consultation meetings with potential Productive Alliance 
partners such as producer groups and business operators.  In addition, some of the producers also require 
technical assistance through a specialized service provider to help in the development of feasibility studies 
and business plans. Once these are established the interaction and linkages between the private sector and 
producer groups become sustainable through formal contracts and mutually beneficial partnerships.  
Discussions with the Private sector during the development of the FP indicated that the private sector is 
interested in building partnerships with CIGs as long as they are assured of good quality produce and 
production at scale.

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 
34. 
Access to Finance: The project will not directly provide credit lines but will facilitate access to 
financial resources for its target beneficiaries through facilitating their links with existing financial services 
providers and with new and emerging opportunities for access to finance. Local currency financing of long-
term maturity is scarce in Tajikistan given that domestic microfinance institutions have been exposed to a 
foreign currency risk as their source of funds were designated in foreign currency. IFAD will also liaise 
CASP+ with its EU-funded “Platform for Remittances, Investments and Migrants’ Entrepreneurship in 
Central Asia” (PRIME, designed to promote faster, safer and cheaper transfer of remittances, as well as 
leveraging these flows to advance digital financial inclusion and income-generating activities). 
 
35. 
Carbon Markets: IFAD is currently also developing its strategy for entering carbon markets which 
can in the future help projects like CASP+ which have a significant potential for carbon-sequestration through 
its forestry and agro-forestry activities. As an organization committed to the alignment of its operations with 
the Paris Agreement and the global efforts to address climate change, IFAD has been focusing increasingly 
on the part it can play in helping smallholders adapt to climate change and reducing Green House Gas 
(GHG) emissions and carbon sequestration. IFAD can increasingly capitalize on the new opportunities which 
have opened up through which it can help translate its efforts in adaptation and mitigation into increased 
productivity, food security, incomes and employment for its primary target group, the small-holders and those 
most vulnerable to climate change. IFAD can learn from the experience of others in this arena who have 
developed successful pathways through, for example, making direct payments to farmers in many projects 
dealing with agroforestry, soil and water conservation, etc. Ensuring fair payment to farmers for payments 
for ecosystem services (PES) and their contribution is a way to ensure IFAD investments will result in 
sustainable change. IFAD can potential introduce some of these measures into CASP+.  
 
36. 
In order to bring about some of these changes, it is critical to enhance the technical capacities of 
national livestock institutions to ensure efficient provision of public animal health and production services 
to smallholder farmers through partnership between public and private institutions. Provision of breeding 
services will play a key role by allowing farmers to improve the productivity and value of animals, which will 
compensate for the reduction of numbers. This will also have a significant impact on emissions from the 
livestock sector.  Dissemination of technical innovations on fodder production and conservation will support 
the shift to reduced dependence on pastures. Further, the project will provide pastoralists with enhanced 
confidence that their livestock capital will not be eroded by excess preventable mortality and that increased 
productivity will more than compensate for a smaller herd. This will be undertaken through the incorporation 
of measures recommended by the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) on veterinary public health, 
animal welfare, separation of powers between public and private veterinarians, creating an appropriate 
business environment for the development of private veterinary services, and controlling the use of 
veterinary drugs and management of biological waste disposal processes.  The experience of other 
countries also shows that livestock productivity and production systems can be transformed by developing 
the institutions responsible for the development of private veterinary services such as the Veterinary 
Associations and the Veterinary Statutory Body. Bringing the curriculum for veterinary education in line with 
international standards and by enhancing the competence of the graduates of the Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine will allow the sustainable development of the veterinary system in general and the provision of 
quality services to the animal owners by graduates.  
 
Key assumptions and risk mitigation strategies  
 
37. 
The theory of change for scaling up the scope and impact of the project in a cost-effective 
and efficient manner is based on several key and well tested assumptions that have proved the test of time 
(see also Table 1 in Annex 28); (i) the focus of the project on institutional strengthening, policy reform and 
capacity building is expected to have impact at the national level and well beyond the selected project 
districts; (ii) the incorporation of climate change in the curricula of the academic and vocational institutions 
will be used for teaching and training to students and professionals on a regular basis for coverage across

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 
a range of sectors; iii) the establishment of a system of private veterinarian service is expected to be 
sustained by the demand for the service due to increased livestock productivity, reduced morbidity and 
mortality; (iv) the institutional strengthening of PUUs and the investments that they make are expected to be 
sustained beyond the project period and lead to scaling up of some of the successful management systems 
by the PUUs with reform in pasture laws which gives strong incentives to communities to manage the 
pastures; (v) the strengthening and diversification of livelihoods will generate multiplier affects that will 
increase incomes and employment in rural areas and the (vi) the engagement with the private sector will 
increase access to market for smallholders and help to forge strong and growing opportunities for both.  
 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization 
 
Outcome number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation and 
access 
MRA 2 
Low-emission 
transport 
 
MRA 3 
Building, cities, 
industries, 
appliances 
MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use 
ARA 1 
Most vulnerable 
people and 
communities 
ARA 2 
Health, well-
being, food and 
water security 
ARA 3   
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment 
ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services 
Outcome 1:  Strengthened 
institutional and regulatory systems 
for climate-responsive planning 
and development 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
Outcome 2:  Increased CO2e 
sequestration through improved 
pasture, forests and livestock 
management 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
Outcome 3: Improved management 
of land or forest areas contributing 
to emissions reductions   
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
Outcome 4:  Strengthened 
communities and individuals’ 
adaptive capacity and reduced 
exposure to climate risks 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
 
Co-benefit number 
Co-benefit 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
Gender 
Adaptation 
Mitigation 
Co-benefit 1: increase in biodiversity in 
pastures and forest area 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
Co-benefit 2:  Enhanced Gender Equity 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Co-benefit 3: Smallholders have increased 
access to financial instruments and markets  
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) 
 
38. 
The Community-Based Agriculture Support Programme Plus (CASP+) builds on the successful 
experience of long IFAD-funded investments in the country, comprising the Khatlon Livelihoods Support 
Project (KLSP, 2008-2015, US$12.3m)98,99; the Livestock and Pasture Development Project100 phase I 
and II (LPDP I, 2011-2018, US$15.8m; LPDP II, 2015-2021, US$24.2m); and the Community-Based 
Agriculture Support Programme101 (CASP, 2017-2024, US$40.6m). A description of IFAD-funded portfolio 
is provided in Annex 29 and a synoptic table of IFAD-funded investment in Tajikistan is presented in Annex 
30 (a simplified one is reported below). The approach on ecosystem restoration and climate resilience 
adopted by CASP+ is building upon the implementation experience of LPDP I and LPDP II. Those 
projects, operating in remote mountainous areas of Khatlon region, were particularly appreciated for their 
high participatory approach and inclusion of local communities (through the use of Community Action Plans) 
as a means to empowering them on the decision-making process on natural resources, and for their positive 
economic results on livelihoods, agriculture productivity and rangeland restoration102. A recent assessment 
(IFAD, 2022) showed also that LPDP II approach103 helped increasing beneficiaries’ income by 15 percent, 
improve conditions of rangeland (through improved infrastructure and rotational grazing), and reduce the 
livestock inventories by 29 percent. CASP+ builds on a number of lessons and evidence from its past 
investment in the country, including on the improved livelihoods and role of women in their communities and 
institutions. Specifically on gender, the LPDP II experience (documented in Annex 18e) reports a significant 
improvement for women headed households’ agricultural income (from crop, milk, and value of livestock

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 
sales). CASP+ has placed significant emphasis on women inclusion, including at community level, to 
improve women empowerment and their participation in institutions decision making processes. The 
proposed investment under CASP+ represent a step up in further building climate resilience with significant 
carbon sequestration potential. CASP+ is expected to add significant value by institutional capacity building 
at the national level for implementation and monitoring, incorporating climate diagnostics in the planning 
framework at the district and village level and making investments that will build the resilience of local 
communities to growing climate risks at the community and household level (Annex 29 and Annex 30 
provide further details on relevant experiences, lessons learned, and IFAD-funded projects in the country. 
A synoptic table is presented below).  
 
Table 1. Simplified information on IFAD-funded investment: targeting and approaches (Annex 30). 
IFAD 
funded 
Project 
names   
KLSP 
LPDP I  
LPDP II 
CASP 
CASP+ 
Khatlon Livelihoods 
Support Project  
Livestock and Pasture 
Development Project 
Livestock and Pasture 
Development Project 
(Phase II)  
Community-based 
Agriculture Support 
Programme – CASP 
Community-based Agriculture 
Support Programme – CASP+ 
Timeframe  
2008-2015 
2011-2018 
2015-2021 
2017-2024 
2021-2030 
Sector 
Rural development 
Livestock  
Livestock  
Agricultural Development  
Climate-sensitive rural 
development  
Project 
focus 
increase incomes and 
improve the lives of 
farmers in 250 villages 
in the project area.  
Increase the nutritional 
status and incomes of 
targeted households by 
sustainably enhancing 
livestock productivity. In 
particular, the project will 
focus on institutional 
development, livestock 
and pasture development 
and income generation 
for women. 
Contribute to the 
reduction of poverty in the 
Khatlon region and to 
increase the nutritional 
status and incomes of 
some 38,000 poor 
households by enhancing 
livestock productivity and 
resilience to climate 
change. 
Improve access of 
communities to productive 
infrastructure and 
services leading to 
sustainable agricultural 
production and equitable 
returns.  
Increase resilience of at least 
80% of the 100,000 target 
households and contribute to the 
sequestration of an estimated 
6.82 m tons of CO2 equivalent 
from improved pasture and 
forest management, 
afforestation and improved herd 
management 
Community Action 
Plans (CAPs) 
Community Action Plans 
(CAPs) and Common 
Interest Groups (CIGs) 
Community Action Plans 
(CAPs) and Common 
Interest Groups (CIGs) 
Community Action Plans 
(CAPs) and Common 
Interest Groups (CIGs) 
Climate-sensitive Community 
Action Plans (CsCAPs)  
Common Interest Groups (CIGs) 
Productive rural alliances  
Farmers Field Schools 
Geographi
cal target 
Two districts in Khatlon 
region (reduced after 
mid-term review): 
Muminobod, Sh. 
Shohin.  
Five districts of the 
Khatlon region: 
Muminabad, Sh. Shohin, 
Temurmalik, Khovaling, 
and Baljuvon 
Five additional districts of 
the Khatlon region: 
Vose, Dangara, 
Hamadoni, Farkhor, and 
Kulob 
Seven districts: Rasht and 
Tojikobod in RRS, Norak, 
Jaihun, and Dusti in 
Khatlon, and Shahriston 
and Devashtich in Sughd.  
Twenty-One climate-vulnerable 
districts in the Khatlon, RRS 
and Sughd regions (see Figure 
7 above and Annex 30). 
All projects had a complementary geographic targeting. When target districts coincided, specific community selection took into account of 
previous/ongoing relevant interventions and excluded villages with similar community investments (see criteria in Annex 21). 
Project 
Cost  
USD 12.3 million 
USD 15.78 million 
USD 24.19 million 
USD 40.64 million 
USD 79.69 million 
IFAD 
financing  
USD 9.65 million 
USD 14.6 million 
USD 22.4 million 
USD 30.66 million 
USD 37.85 million 
 
39. 
CASP+ is expected to increase resilience of at least 80% of the households in the 400 target villages 
and reach 100,000 target households as direct beneficiaries (equivalent to about 650,000 people), and 
indirectly reach 2.27 m individuals (details provided in Annex 24 – Breakdown of Project Beneficiaries). In 
addition, the project will contribute to the sequestration of an estimated 6.82 m tons of CO2 
equivalent from improved pasture and forest management, afforestation and improved herd 
management (Annex 23). Special activities will be undertaken for women and are outlined in detail in the 
Gender Action Plan (Annex 8) given their prominent role in agriculture especially livestock production, the 
high rates of outmigration of men from rural areas and the high proportion of women headed households 
and the lack of gender equity in the country. 
 
40. 
The project has three components which will be implemented at the national level with the public 
sector institutions, at the community level to build community resilience and management of common 
property resources and at the group and household level to strengthen and diversify livelihoods and access 
markets. The three components are: (1) Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative 
climate-resilient management of natural resources; (2) Investments in community capacity for 
adaption and resilience to climate change; and (3) Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience 
through market-based approaches.

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 
41. 
The project embraces various dimensions of climate resilience and decarbonization co-benefits. It 
requires the solid collaboration and partnership between different institutions, all involved in design and in 
implementation as executing entities. The project will be implemented as one climate finance investment 
required to address climate vulnerability of rural mountainous population (ref to B2(a), Annex 2.1, Annex 
16). The approval of IFAD financing allowed the project to enter into effectiveness in April 2023, thus 
benefitting of a preliminary implementation phase co-financed by IFAD and other financiers.104  According 
to the detailed budget and implementation timeframe in Annex 4 and Annex 5 respectively, 105 GCF 
financing will provide the required additional financing to reinforce national investments to address climate 
related challenges and to achieve the relevant climate objectives. For the first two years, IFAD financing will 
therefore serve to ignite preliminary and preparatory activities, expanded and rolled out under GCF 
financing. The specific responsibility of the financiers up to detailed sub-activities is provided in Table 2 
(Section B.4, below), and reflected in detailed in manner in Annex 4 and Annex 21.  
 
Component 1: 
Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient 
management of natural resources 
42. 
Tajikistan has achieved important progress in developing a strategic vision for some of its 
development priorities such as water and disaster management. However, the integration of a climate 
change perspective in the agriculture sector and in the management of natural resources particularly 
pastures, forests and livestock is not very strong. There is limited technical capacity and lack of tools for 
evidence-based planning, management and evaluation of natural resources and the impact of climate 
change. This leads to fragmented governance of natural resources and limits the opportunities and potential 
for sustainable development for rural livelihoods. This component is designed to address some of these 
issues and includes two specific outputs focused on capacity development and improving the policy 
environment.  The two outputs and their associated activities are elaborated below. Additional details of 
financiers of activities and sub-activities are provided in Table 2, Section B4.  
 
Output 1.1:  By year 7, capacities and enhanced coordination among relevant national institutions 
for climate-resilient natural resource management strengthened 
43. 
National capacities to plan, manage and monitor the natural resource base at central and at lower 
administrative tiers will be strengthened with a focus on forests and pastures. The capacity of the State 
Forestry Agency (SFA) will be strengthened. A forestry curriculum recently developed for Tajikistan with the 
assistance of GIZ will be rolled out to the 14 project Leskhoz. Operational capacities of national institutions 
responsible for pasture management (Pasture Meliorative Trust, PMT), livestock (National Veterinary 
Authority, NVA; and State Enterprise for Animal Breeding and Artificial Insemination, SEABAI); as well as 
research and academic institutions (Tajik Agrarian University, Tajik Academy of Agricultural Science and 
the Public Administration Academy) will be strengthened, with the project assisting them in the review of 
existing curricula for training of climate change specialists in key decision making positions in the 
government. The output will also focus on capacities to map and monitor natural resources, to allow proper 
decision making on ecosystem services management. A system that combines remote and participatory 
natural resources monitoring and management will be introduced. In addition, the project will pilot test an 
innovative approach to undertake pasture monitoring using hives on a pilot area of 3,500 ha. To encourage 
the generation of knowledge and the practical application of innovations in the project area, the project will 
encourage research institutions to produce evidence on effective approaches to NRM through a call for 
proposals. The private sector will also be invited to present proposals for the production of technical 
innovations that can help in climate adaptation which can then be disseminated through the private sector 
and facilitate the adoption of climate adaptation technologies and practices.  
44. 
Under this output, GCF proceeds will finance the improvement of the enabling environment for a 
climate sensitive pasture and rangeland management including improved monitoring mechanisms, using 
remote sensing data. GCF funds will also contribute improving the curricula at university to integrate climate 
change issues (also identified as a priority in the NDC), and will enable research institutes and the private 
sector to produce evidence on NRM and Climate Change for climate sensitive technical innovations 
(additional details of financiers of activities and sub-activities are provided in Table 2, Section B4). 
Activity 1.1.1:  Capacity Development of public institutions on climate resilient ecosystem 
management. Develop capacities of public institutions to streamline climate sensitive, 
participatory and gender inclusive ecosystem management approaches such as

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 
landscape approach, integrated watershed management, joint forest management and 
community-based pasture management. This activity is coordinated by CEP and MOA.  
Activity 1.1.2:  Introduce combined remote and participatory Natural Resources monitoring and 
management. Establish remote and participatory management of natural resources as 
basis for climate adaptive development and enable exchange of information between the 
different competent state agencies and communities. This activity builds on the results of 
the FAO readiness activities establishing national MRV capacity, will address the capacity 
building related to conducting land use cover monitoring and will also address ex-post 
evaluation of the mitigation action of the project itself. The activity is executed by CEP. 
Activity 1.1.3:  Enhance technical capacities of national livestock institutions to ensure efficient 
provision of public animal health and production services to smallholder farmers 
through efficient partnership between public and private institutions. Strengthen 
capacities of public agencies in charge of animal health and breeding services to improve 
outreach and quality of their technical assistance (under MOA execution).  
Activity 1.1.4:  Build capacities of research and academia institutions on climate resilient 
ecosystem management. Streamline Climate Change and Ecosystem management 
approaches in the training curricula and research programmes of National and Research 
Institutions and academia (under CEP and FAO execution) 
 
Output 1.2:   By year 7, enabling environment for climate adaptive, inclusive and integrated 
management of pasture, forestry and livestock resources is enhanced 
45. 
CASP+ has chosen strategic areas for policy engagement from the climate perspective and will focus 
animal husbandry and health, pasture management, implications of promoting the Green Economy on the 
existing system of incentives and regulation and lessons learned from the experience of joint forestry 
management and monitoring of pastures. The lead agency CEP has the mandate to enhance the enabling 
environment for addressing climate risks and is already engaged with the preparatory work for National 
Adaptation Plan (NAP) readiness. To facilitate coordination among the main stakeholders, the project will 
organize regular workshops to facilitate interaction and enhance the mainstreaming of climate adaptive 
natural resource management practices, in close coordination with existing thematic platforms such as the 
Pasture Working Group and the National River Basin Organization to better understand the changing trends 
and prepare to deal with growing climate risks. The dialogue will also include the integration in the Pasture 
Law of critical aspects related to control of livestock inventories (currently not included). One of the possible 
entry points to address this issue from a policy and regulatory point of view would be to include in the law, 
provisions to enable PUUs to establish systems (grazing permits, quotas) that ensure that carrying 
capacities are observed and that stock accumulation is discouraged. If these types of measures were framed 
in the Pasture Law and applied by all PUUs, the impact on animal inventories would be expected to be 
substantial. Given the centrality of an integrated ecosystem approach for a transformative and climate 
adaptive livestock sector for rural livelihoods, and the concerns regarding its contribution to ecosystem 
services, the project will also provide assistance in the use of carbon assessment decision tools such as the 
EX-Ante Carbon Balance Tool (EX-ACT), 106 the Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model-
interactive (GLEAM-i), and the Biodiversity Integrated Assessment and Computational Tool (B-Intact),107 
leading to enhanced capacities for national accounting, and will interact (through FAO as co-executing entity) 
with the FAO-implemented GCF Readiness project that includes support to MRV capacities. Under this 
output, GCF proceeds will also finance stock taking of policy development and mainstreaming of gender 
sensitive climate adaptive agricultural practices and support strategic activities relevant to developing 
capacities towards implementing the Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, within the approved Green Economy 
strategy. Through the central role of CEP, synergies will be sought with other interventions in the country to 
support country capacity to access and deploy climate finance.108  
46. 
Social inclusion dimension. Social mobilization and inclusion process promoted by this component 
will focus specifically on youth, as an empowerment measure and to ensure that the policy and regulatory 
framework changes embed youth and gender perspectives. To this end, CASP+ will partner with existing 
youth unions and youth committees (districts and village levels) already formed and receiving public and 
self-sustained support.  
47. 
The output will comprise the following activities:

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 
Activity 1.2.1:  Promote an inclusive and integrated policy dialogue. Enhance the mainstreaming of 
climate adaptive management practices of natural resources in all national institutions 
(including gender and climate change) and verification of the effectiveness of policies on 
the ground. The activity is implemented by CEP and FAO.  
Activity 1.2.2:  Technical assistance for review of livestock related regulatory frameworks. Review 
and update of the Pasture Law and animal health and breeding regulatory and strategic 
framework to ensure compliance with international guidelines and streamline climate 
resilience and environmental protection. The activity is implemented by MOA and FAO.  
Activity 1.2.3:  Support government’s capacity to coordinate and monitor Green investments.109 
This activity will comprise technical assistance to strengthen capacity on the legislation 
and regulatory framework related to the Green Economy, including assessing potential 
for carbon finance, providing complementary support to any readiness or CEP action in 
that regard. The activity is coordinated by CEP, with MOA and FAO support.  
 
Component 2: 
Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate 
change 
48. 
This component will develop and implement 400 Climate Sensitive Community Action Plans 
(CsCAPs.) in the selected districts. The project will encourage a collaborative and a participatory diagnostic 
and implementation process. The community planning will be preceded by a District level Climate Resilience 
Diagnostic (DCRD), defining the main challenges related to climate change and the main avenues for 
investment. CsCAPs will include ecosystem improvement and agricultural resilience investments, including 
improved pasture management, afforestation and forest rehabilitation, climate resilient infrastructures, and 
community agricultural equipment for improved productivity. 
49. 
Social inclusion dimension. Women will represent 50 percent of the overall beneficiaries and youth 
will represent 30 percent of the overall beneficiaries. It is expected that community consultations will include 
at least 30 percent of women and youth as participants. This will ensure that their needs and priorities are 
identified during the community prioritization process for the CsCAPs and selection of CIGs. As part of direct 
targeted interventions, trainings for 2,400 women will be conducted. The objective is preparing women 
members of community organizations to be leaders and change agents in their organizations. They will be 
provided with sensitization on topics including gender relations, self-awareness, leadership and 
accountability, negotiation and conflict management, advocacy, lobbying and effective communication 
(among others). To provide youth with long-term employment opportunities, 15 percent of the joint forest 
management contracts will be provided to youth, swaying them to remain in rural areas and develop 
livelihood opportunities there. Additional details are provided in Table 2, Section B4. 
 
Output 2.1:   By year 3, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) based on 21 district 
level climate diagnostics are developed 
50. 
A diagnostic analysis of community needs will be mapped using an advanced desktop geospatial 
analysis of climate risk and vulnerability. A map-based profile of each district will be created to indicate the 
geographic areas where the effects of climate change pose the greatest threat to the safety and livelihood 
of inhabitants, built assets, agriculture, livestock and natural resources. Given the importance of water 
control, conservation and topography in disaster risk reduction and climate change resilience, each district 
will be divided into planning units based on sub-catchments. This will stimulate a landscape management 
approach. The District level Climate Resilience Diagnostic (DCRD) will be regarded as a discrete 
‘information product’ output of the project and an information campaign will explain the basis of the diagnostic 
to Jamoats in the selected 21 districts, benefitting the entire population of each district, in the frame of 
CASP+ and is expected to also inform future investment decisions. At operational level, the DCRD will 
outline the climate-related changes that can be expected and the best strategies to cope with them including 
adaptation investments and forestry Investments (Output 2.2). 110 The presence and capacity of local 
institutions will be assessed, thus defining actions to strengthen local capacities to plan and monitor climate 
sensitive community action plans (CsCAPs). Based on the evidence and on the needs emerging from 
consultations in the 400 selected villages, the output will support the communities and their groups in 
designing CsCAPs screened against social and environmental safeguards,111 and in establishing Common 
Interest Groups within the selected villages. These will be self-selecting groups of up to 10 households per

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 
village organised into two themes (i) climate resilient food or fodder production and (ii) processing and 
storage which will be financed through a matching grant (see component 3).  
51. 
Under this output, GCF will at first contribute to define the District Climate Resilience Diagnostic 
(DCRD) for 21 districts, which represent the basis for all community planning and for the ecosystem 
improvement investment envisaged in the component. GCF proceeds will also be the financing element to 
ensure strengthening communities capacities to identify climate stressors and prepare relevant climate 
sensitive community action plans (CsCAPs), providing the climate rationale for the climate-sensitive 
investments (additional details are provided in Table 2, Section B4). 
Activity 2.1.1:  District Climate Resilience Diagnostic. Elaborate district diagnostic (by CP) and 
disseminate the results to institutional stakeholders (by MOA and CEP).  
Activity 2.1.2:  Establishing relevant local institutions. Identify institutional and community capacity 
gaps, establish community institutions where needed and strengthen the existing. 
(executed by MOA, with support by CEP on forest-related matters).  
Activity 2.1.3:  CsCAP planning and design. Design of 400 CsCAPs in the targeted communities, 
including all relevant prioritized subprojects (under MOA implementation)  
Activity 2.1.4:  Strengthening local institutions capacity to monitor and evaluate CsCAPs. 
Strengthen local capacity to monitor ecosystem impact of CsCAPs (MOA and CEP) 
 
Output 2.2:   By year 7, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) implemented in 21 
districts with benefits for 100,000 rural households  
52. 
This output will make sure that CsCAPs include a balanced mix of investment activities, and that they 
properly capture the need for specific interventions on climate change adaptation, mitigation and disaster 
risk reduction. The list of options is indicative as they will be identified by the beneficiary households based 
on climate diagnostic analysis and village level priorities. The CsCAPs will include ecosystem resilience 
and adaptation investments, including sub-projects in the following categories:  
• 
Pasture Management investments identified through the forum of PUU (where VOs don’t exist) or PUG 
(where VOs exist). The pasture plans will include pasture rotation and protection, pasture restoration, 
or plantation of forage shrubs and trees, and summer pasture infrastructure such as shepherd cabins, 
night fences and shelters for animals (e.g., cattle crushes for treatments). In some cases, a sub-class 
of cross-village pasture management investments could simultaneously benefit multiple communities, 
for example where plans are made for transhumance routes. Overall, pasture investments will represent 
minimum 20 percent of the total CsCAP Adaptation investment. 
• 
Forestry investment, operated in collaboration with leskhoz (Forest enterprises depending on the State 
Forest Agency), and with the participation of forest users groups, will aim to complement the restoration 
of ecosystems and the protection of areas vulnerable to climate hazards (disaster risk reduction), at the 
same time providing additional sources of income to rural communities. As part of the CsCAPs, Forest 
investment will be part of a broad ecosystem plan, which will be monitored by the communities and 
Leskhoz. Specifically, investments will include: (i) Joint Forest Management (JFM)112 where a contract 
is established between household and Leskhoz for an initial 20 years management of a plot of land 
where the yield from the plot is split between each party to the contract; (ii) Direct Leskhoz Forestry:113 
where forest is re-established on Leskhoz land mobilizing community labour , usually in sites more 
remote from villages and include more typical forest species; and (c) Forestry investments in buffer 
zones of protected areas: applied through Leskhoz in the buffer zone of Protected Area (in CASP+ this 
is limited to Sh. Shohin district). All forestry investment includes concessional project support for site 
works, irrigation, fencing, seedlings, equipment and required climate adaptive forest nursery 
establishment. Training will be provided to participants in tree planting and aftercare, while forest user 
groups and Leskhoz will provide labour.114 As part of the CsCAPs, the forestry investments will include 
a management plan, monitored by the project as well as by Leskhoz and the communities themselves.  
• 
Climate Resilient infrastructure investments, related to addressing water stresses and the need to adapt 
to increasing risks of climate-related hazards. The communities will ensure operation and maintenance, 
including a plan to finance it. Water investments aim to support diversification activities (backyard 
garden, fruticulture, small animal husbandry), alleviate the burden on women and increase water 
availability, and ensure meeting basic livelihood requirements in isolated areas. Soil and water 
conservation structures to prevent soil erosion, mudslides and floods will be considered where

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 
appropriate.115 This could include the plantation of bushes and trees, small hydrological works that slow 
down torrential water flows, where there is potential for aquifer recharge and enhance infiltration, reduce 
impacts of storms and reduce soil erosion, such as roads, protective works and erosion reduction, water 
points and irrigation schemes, etc. The project will ensure that infrastructure is adapted to the increased 
risks caused by more frequent torrential precipitation events.  
• 
Community agriculture equipment for productivity improvement. CsCAPs will include the procurement 
of agricultural equipment such as tractors, bailers, etc., that will contribute to support transformation of 
production systems. The equipment will be owned and managed (including maintenance) by the 
community institutions, and will be rented to individual community members, generating financial income 
for the communities to be earmarked for operation and maintenance of the investments. The focus of 
equipment investment will be on fodder harvesting and conservation material, in order to help farmers 
to cope with feed shortages in summer and winter exacerbated by climate change.116 In addition, other 
category of mechanization equipment that could be considered are those that can be used both for 
hay/fodder and other crops such as: tractors, tillage equipment (plough, harrows, cultivator, etc.), 
trailers, planters, fertilizer spreaders (used with good agricultural practices). Equipment that are only for 
non-fodder crops (e.g., combine harvester) will need to be justified in the CsCAPs according to specific 
climate vulnerability upfront and shall ensure they benefit smallholders. 
53. 
CsCAP Monitoring. The monitoring and evaluation of the CsCAPs will be an intrinsic part of the 
approach under this component. The MOA will recruit a national monitoring consultant and will use ‘Open 
Source’ smartphone tools for project planning, monitoring and control to minimize supervision costs and 
improve the speed and frequency of supervision reports. During implementation of physical infrastructure 
investments, the Engineer recruited by the MOA and technical works Supervisor will be responsible for 
supervision and will support the local communities with monitoring their plans. A bridge will be established 
between the diagnostic maps and citizen reporting to provide a means of tracking the achievement of 
objectives of the plans and the outcomes achieved from CSCAPs implementation. All investments will be 
georeferenced. This will allow communities to better monitor all CsCAP investments using digital tools. 
Innovative methods will be employed to engage and incentivize stakeholders, including youth, to use 
smartphones for field reporting and ground truthing of remote sensing.  
54. 
Under this output, GCF will contribute financing the CsCAPs, specifically for the portion of community 
plans that pertains to the investment with the highest potential for carbon sequestration (namely forest 
restoration, Pasture and rangeland rehabilitation), while IFAD financing will complement on the most climate 
adaptive and resilience building investments (additional details are provided in Table 2, Section B4).  
Activity 2.2.1:  Implement Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans. Implementation of the 
ecosystem resilience and adaptation investments of the CsCAP in the targeted 400 
villages, comprising the multiple dimensions of improved pasture management (including 
cross-village when required), Forestry investments of the CsCAP in the selected villages 
(in the proximity of Leskhoz), climate resilient infrastructures, agricultural productivity 
improvement (implemented by MOA, with CEP responsible for forest investments). 
 
Component 3: 
Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market based 
approaches 
55. 
This component aims to strengthen the capacities of smallholders to identify and invest in climate 
resilient and diversified production systems that link to local and national value chains. The current 
production systems are not adapted to climate change impacts, rely on rainfed agriculture and are not 
integrated with market opportunities. The project will invest in developing linkages between smallholders 
and private sector actors, building smallholders capacities in climate resilient production practices and 
conducting farming as a business.  
56. 
Social inclusion dimension. The whole component is supporting women and youth participation in 
the project’s activities. Women and youth will represent respectively 50 percent and 30 percent of the 
beneficiaries of the component’s activities, including as part of the promotion of climate smart innovations, 
Farmers Field Schools, Common Interest Groups (CIG) for livelihoods diversification (window 1). Women 
and youth will represent 30 percent of the beneficiaries for CIG window 2 (for commercialization and 
agribusiness development). Criteria for selection and prioritization of youth, women, women head of 
households (WHHs) and the most poor and vulnerable (including PWD) are presented in the SECAP

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 
Appendix I. Finally, youth will be trained on artificial insemination and trained and equipped to operate 
private enterprises as private veterinarians to diversify their existing skill set and become involved in 
additional income generating activities. The component is structured in three outputs. Additional details of 
financiers of activities and sub-activities are provided in Table 2, Section B4.  
 
Output 3.1:   By year 7, 105,600117 smallholder livestock farmers receive Artificial Insemination (AI) 
services, animal health or training services to increase productivity of their livestock 
57. 
Livestock productivity is currently low and limited by the poor genetic potential of animals, the poor 
animal health status, and inadequate animal husbandry practices, including in particular the feeding and 
reproduction management. This output will focus on increasing the productivity of livestock production 
systems, which combined with the comprehensive project investments to transform livestock production 
systems (feeding practices, fodder production, improved breeds, access to animal health services and 
supporting policies and strategies), will encourage farmers to engage a path of reduction of herd and flock 
sizes while increasing production and productivity. The combination of provision of breeding services 
through Artificial Insemination (AI) and provision of improved bulls, increased access to animal health 
services and capacity building of farmers on animal husbandry will result in significant improvement in 
livestock productivity.118 In parallel, this output will also support the dissemination of technical innovations 
and their adoption by smallholder farmers through a combination of demonstrations and hands-on training 
activities, including Farmers Field Schools.   
58. 
Under this output, GCF will also finance the interventions most relevant to improve reduction of 
methane emissions including animal health, as well as innovative livestock farmers field schools and 
demonstrations of climate smart innovations (additional details are provided in Table 2, Section B4). 
Activity 3.1.1:  Improving the genetic potential of smallholder farmers’ livestock. Provision of 
breeding services (AI and improved bulls) to farmers in the 400 targeted communities to 
improve productivity of cattle and support transition towards more intensive production 
systems involving a reduced number of animals. The activity is implemented by MOA.  
Activity 3.1.2: Support to delivery of private animal health services. Ensuring population’s access 
to quality veterinary services through training and provision of veterinary instruments, 
motorcycles to private veterinarians and support of institutions responsible for the 
development of a private veterinary service. This activity is under MOA implementation.  
Activity 3.1.3: Support adoption of climate resilient innovative technologies. Support the 
dissemination of technical innovations and their adoption by smallholder farmers through 
a combination of demonstrations (under MOA responsibility) and hands-on training 
activities including Farmers Field Schools (under FAO implementation).  
 
Output 3.2:  By year 4, 9 productive alliances119 between livestock producers’ groups and private 
aggregators established and operational  
59. 
This output will facilitate business partnerships between groups of smallholder farmers and private 
sector actors (e.g. aggregators, processors) on dairy and beef value chains. 120 These partnerships or 
Productive Alliances will be formalized through agreements with selected private sector partners on an 
implementation plan, commitments on prices, delivery and quality requirements. This will enable farmers 
and the private sector farmers to plan their production, processing, procurement, supplies, as well as 
marketing. Benefits for the producers will include secure and predictable market and prices and could also 
include access to services (e.g. production inputs, TA, access to finance) provided by the private sector 
companies to improve the productivity and reduce the seasonality of production. As a general principle, the 
entry point for all business partnerships supported by CASP+ will be climate vulnerability. Supported Value 
Chain and business arrangements will contribute to the economic inclusion of climate vulnerable 
households. Moreover, via support to improved agricultural practices, they will contribute to reduce 
environmental degradation.  
60. 
Under this output, GCF will contribute to developing innovative livelihoods opportunities related to 
private sector and market linkages (details of sub-activities’ financiers are provided in Table 2, Section B4).  
Activity 3.2.1:  Identification of market and business opportunities. Facilitate identification and 
contracting of business partnerships between groups of small holder farmers and 
aggregators, to facilitate access to market and services (all under MOA responsibility).

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 
Activity 3.2.2:  Provision of financing and technical support to the business partnerships for 
selected livestock commodities. Provide financial and technical support to the 
business partnerships for selected livestock commodities (all under MOA responsibility). 
 
Output 3.3:  By year 7, 12,400 121  smallholders have strengthened climate resilient production 
practices and private sector market linkages 
61. 
This output will facilitate two types of Common Interest Groups (CIGs) to access support services to 
identify, analyse and adopt climate resilient production practices.122 The first CIG type (Window 1) will 
comprise of 1,020 CIGs, strengthening capacity to adapt production systems to changing climate conditions 
and identifying opportunities to link to local markets. This support will increase access for CIGs to productive 
assets and services to increase agricultural productivity and diversification. Farmers accessing Window 1 
will match the grant with a 10 percent cash contribution. The second type of market-linked groups (Window 
2) will comprise 110 CIGs, trained in entrepreneurial skills and business plan development, to link to 
profitable agrifood value chains (e.g. small-scale poultry, horticulture, processing, etc.). Window 2 
beneficiaries will match the grant with a 20 percent cash contribution. A Matching Grant Facility (MGF) will 
be established, and support will be provided to ensure CIG members’ readiness to effectively utilize the 
funds. Where needed, follow-up trainings on climate resilient technologies, equipment, productive assets 
and technical assistance will be provided by the service provider hired for the purpose.  
62. 
Under this output, GCF financing will be instrumental in mobilizing resources and expertise to support 
climate-sensitive economic activities that reinforce livelihoods and diversify to more sustainable livelihood 
options. It will also facilitate the establishment of market linkages with private sectors and facilitate linkages 
with existing green credit lines. Additional details of financiers of activities and sub-activities are provided in 
Table 2, Section B4. 
Activity 3.3.1:  Strengthening of CIGs capacity. Facilitate establishment of two types of common 
interest groups (CIGs) to access support services to identify, analyze and adopt climate 
resilient production practices (all under MOA responsibility). 
Activity 3.3.2:  Management of the CIG matching grant program. Establish and manage a Matching 
Grant Facility for the implementation of matching grant program for Window 1 and 
Window 2 (all under MOA responsibility). 
 
 
63. 
Project Management Component (PMC). CASP+ will be jointly executed by three executing entities 
according to respective comparative advantages and areas of expertise: (i). Republic of Tajikistan, acting 
through (a) Ministry of Finance and (b) Ministry of Agriculture (via the State Enterprise Project Management 
Unit Livestock and Pasture Development (PMU)); (ii). Committee on Environmental Protection (through the 
Center for Implementation of Investment Projects); and (iii). Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN 
(FAO).  
 
64. 
The Ministry of Agriculture will serve as Lead Project Agency. 123  The Project Management 
Component will also benefit from dedicated support to facilitate implementation under procurement, financial 
management, planning, monitoring and reporting, safeguard compliance, etc, to increase pace and quality 
of implementation. The PMC will ensure (a) effective and timely coordination of project’s interventions; (b) 
provision of technical assistance and specialist input in implementing project activities; (c) timely financial 
management and procurement for project activities; (d) preparation of AWPB and procurement plan for 
approval of all financing institutions; (e) support in monitoring, submission of reports to GCF, IFAD and 
Government, supervision and impact assessment (full details are outlined in Annex 21, PIM).  
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
65. 
Accredited Entity: The International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) is the Accredited 
Entity for the CASP+ project. IFAD will sign a Funded Activity Agreement (the “FAA”) with the GCF, and 
relevant agreements will be signed between IFAD and the Executing Entities124 which will specify the role 
and responsibility of each and their contribution to the project. All required letters of no objection (Annex 1) 
letters of commitment (Annex 13) and internal approvals (Annex 15) will be obtained as required. IFAD will 
manage the funds from GCF and will disburse the funds quarterly in advance against agreed work plans, to

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 
designated accounts. Regular progress reports will be provided by IFAD to GCF to keep it informed of project 
performance including the physical achievements and financial aspects.  IFAD will undertake regular 
supervision of the project and commission evaluation reports based on the plan indicated (Annex 11). IFAD 
will supervise the execution of CASP+ with regular supervision and implementation support missions. IFAD 
will ensure the quality of the project deliverables, adherence to environmental, climate and social 
safeguards, undertake procurement reviews and ensure fiduciary risk management 125, assess project 
performance and undertake value for money analysis. IFAD will apply its georeferenced protocol to monitor 
investment progress and impact.  
 
66. 
Executing Entities of CASP+ will include: (i) Republic of Tajikistan, acting through the Ministry of 
Finance (MoF) and the  Ministry of Agriculture (MoA via the State Enterprise PMU LPD; (ii) the 
Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) (through the Center for Implementation of Investment 
Projects), and (iii) the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). The Ministry of Agriculture (as Lead 
Project Agency) will hold overall execution responsibility of the project. CASP+ is conceived as one project, 
with all financiers aligned to the project theory of change and contributing to the project objectives solidly 
grounded on climate vulnerability of the target areas/ populations (as also climate scenario, TOC and project 
structure demonstrate). Considering the urgency of action emerging from the NDA (also EE) country 
programme and in the revised NDC (revised in early 2022), the project started as soon as IFAD approved 
the financing (effectiveness in April 2023). This ensures preparing the ground for GCF financing once 
approved. Specifically, such initial IFAD (and other co-financiers)-funded activities are allowing to advance 
on enabling conditions to deploy the community resilience and landscape restoration investments (in 
component 2) and individual resilience and diversification investment (in component 3), required as 
preliminary activities for the full implementation of the project. The implementation of the project with IFAD 
and co-financiers (without GCF proceeds) are preparing the ground and as such ensuring the speeding up 
of GCF disbursement as soon as available. As a result, GCF funds will start being disbursed with an 
increased readiness of MOA, CEP and FAO on project implementation. This would also allow to disburse 
effectively the GCF proceeds in the estimated timeframe (six years for GCF proceeds). The division of 
responsibility is indicated in the Table 2. Execution responsibility and financiers by sub-activity, at the 
end of this section. District Governments and Jamoats at the village level are expected to play an important 
role in coordination and helping to raise awareness about the project among key stakeholders and helping 
to incorporate climate vulnerability assessments in local development planning based on district diagnostics. 
The project will procure the services of local NGOs, service providers and partner agencies in the 
implementation of the project on the ground. The inclusion and engagement of the private sector will be 
encouraged to ensure that the project puts in place market-based solutions and productive alliances that 
can ensure the sustainability of the project investments. 
 
67. 
Executing Entity – Republic of Tajikistan, acting through the Ministry of Finance (MoF) and the 
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) via the State Enterprise “Project Management Unit” Livestock and Pasture 
Development (State Enterprise PMU LPD- in CASP+), under the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA). The State 
Enterprise PMU LPD was established in 2012 to support the implementation of investment projects in the 
agriculture sector. The State Enterprise PMU LPD has been managing IFAD-financed investment projects 
valued at USD 91.6 million.126 The State Enterprise PMU LPD has successfully implemented KLSP and 
LPDP-I and LPDP-II, and is currently implementing CASP. It has solid experience in rural areas where the 
population face challenges similar to those of CASP+ target groups. It has a team of 33 specialists, covering 
a wide range of expertise in project management, financial, procurement functions as well as technical 
expertise in pasture, animal husbandry and health, agriculture, climate change adaptation, community 
mobilization, gender and social inclusion. It has technical experts and civil engineers, business development, 
GIS and M&E specialists. Between its central office in Dushanbe and its regional office in Kulob, the PMU 
will manage the execution of CASP+ interventions in all selected districts. It will also establish a small office 
for the implementation of project activities in Sughd and the RSS. 
 
68. 
Executing Entity – Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) was established in 2008 and 
is responsible for control of the use of natural resources, protection of land, minerals, forests, water and 
other resources, and also coordinates activities on environmental protection among the government 
agencies. In Tajikistan, CEP is the National Designated Authority (NDA) for managing GCF related projects

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 
since 2014. As the NDA, it coordinates project implementation, engages potential and current Accredited 
Entities, provides strategic oversight for GCF supported projects to ensure alignment with national polices, 
convenes various stakeholders (public, private, civil society, etc.). Through its central administration and 
permanent staff in each district as well as at the regional level, CEP will guide the national and decentralized 
dialogues to enhance climate-sensitivity of policy, regulatory and investment frameworks. CEP will also play 
a key coordinating role in providing technical assistance for climate vulnerability diagnostic analysis at the 
district level and in screening community action plans from the climate resilience perspective and guide 
relevant agencies and the district level institutions to assist communities in implementing the plans.     
 
69. 
Executing Entity – Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) has long and extensive experience 
in the country. Cooperation between Tajikistan and FAO has been ongoing since the country joined the 
Organization in 1995. FAO assistance has evolved from providing emergency assistance to deal with locust 
attacks to a more comprehensive approach to build a sustainable and competitive agriculture sector, 
including improved food security and nutrition, and resilience to climate change. Currently FAO is engaged 
with CEP on the Readiness Programme, and contributed to the update of the NDC, along with the 
implementation of other climate change-focused projects. The FAO Regional Office for Central Asia is 
currently supervising and executing a large climate finance portfolio, including GCF-funded projects in 
Kyrgyzstan (“Carbon-sequestration through climate investment in Forests and Rangelands - CS-FOR”, USD 
49.9m) and Armenia (“Forest resilience of Armenia, enhancing adaptation and rural green growth via 
mitigation”, USD 18.7m). FAO’s specific role in the project will be to provide assistance in policy refinement 
and in implementing Farmer Field schools (FFS) based on the methodology it has developed and 
implemented in a large number of countries.   
 
70. 
Contractual arrangements. For the channelling of the GCF proceeds and the implementation of the 
Project, IFAD will enter into the following subsidiary agreements:  
• 
one 
Subsidiary 
Agreement 
with 
the 
Republic 
of 
Tajikistan 
(the 
“RoT” 
or 
the 
“Borrower/Recipient”), as represented by the Ministry of Finance (the “MoF”) for the purposes of the 
signature of the Subsidiary Agreement and the Ministry of Agriculture (the “MoA”) for the execution 
of the Project. This Subsidiary Agreement will (i) define the terms and conditions of the execution of 
the Project by the following two Executing Entities: Republic of Tajikistan, acting through MoF and 
MoA (via State Enterprise PMU LPDP - ‘SEPMU’) and  CEP; and (ii) establish the terms that allow 
MoF to direct IFAD to transfer the GCF Grant to CEP. IFAD ensures that the Republic of Tajikistan 
acting through MoA enters into an agreement with CEP (the “RoT-CEP Agreement”). IFAD will 
include the relevant AMA and FAA provisions into the Subsidiary Agreement with RoT, as was done 
in the past for other projects with the GCF and will ensure that RoT passes down the relevant 
requirement to CEP in the RoT-CEP Agreement so that the relevant AMA and FAA provisions are 
then passed down from RoT to CEP.   
• 
one Subsidiary Agreement with FAO that will define the terms and conditions of the execution of 
the project by FAO as Executing Entity. 
71. 
Funds and fund flow: The IFAD co-financing was approved at the December 2022 IFAD Executive 
Board and the Financing Agreement signed on 09 January 2023, and then IFAD entered into a Financing 
Agreement in April 2023 with the Republic of Tajikistan extending one loan (USD 6,750,000) and two grants 
(USD 6,750,000 and USD 24,349,000) for a project duration of 7 years. As per the above said agreement 
entered into force on the date of the countersignature as above for a duration of 7 years. 
72. 
For the GCF proceeds, IFAD will enter into a Financing Agreement, which will serve as the Subsidiary 
Agreement, with the Republic of Tajikistan, represented by the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of 
Agriculture. In consultation with the MOF, separate designated bank accounts will be opened for the SEPMU 
(under MOA) (one for the loan portion and one for the grant portion) and the CEP (one for the grant portion) 
for them to access the funds directly. Each disbursement request from the national EEs will be confirmed 
by the MOF. The direct fund flow from IFAD to FAO will be arranged subject to the formal confirmation of 
MOF. The fund flow arrangements to three EEs will be described in the Financing Agreement.

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 28 
 
 
73. 
Project Steering Committee (PSC): The PSC will provide overall policy guidance for CASP+ to 
ensure that the Project objectives are achieved, and will maintain oversight of the annual workplan and 
budget of the project. It is co-chaired by MoA and CEP, and is composed of the national institutions relevant 
to the project implementation. It will meet at least on annual basis, to ensure effective decision making on 
project implementation, and to coordination amongst stakeholders as required. IFAD will be consulted by 
the co-chairs to facilitate decisions. Additional members will comprise: the Ministry of Energy and Water 
Resources (MoEWR), the Pasture Meliorative Trust (PMT), the Food Security Committee, the State Forest 
Agency (SFA), the Committee on Land Management and Geodesy (CLMG), the Tajik Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences (TAAS), the Agency for Land Reclamation and Irrigation (ALRI), State Agency for 
Hydrometeorology, State Enterprise for Animal Breeding and Artificial Insemination, Committee on Civil 
Defence and Disaster Risk Reduction and representatives from Civil Society Organizations. Development 
partners committed to climate-adaptive strategies and mitigation will participate as observers. The PSC will 
also ensure institutional coordination with the Coordinating Council on the Green Climate Fund 127 to 
strengthen linkages with and build on the on-going GCF and other climate investments in the country. 
 
Figure 9: CASP+ Implementation arrangements and funds flow 
 
 
74. 
There are several agencies at the national level which are critical in CASP+ institutional environment.  
These agencies will not have discretion in implementing CASP+ activities, and will play a supportive role in 
coordinating project activities and enhancing project impact. These are described in this and the following 
paragraphs. The Hydrometeorological Agency of Tajikistan (Hydromet) reports to CEP and is the lead 
agency for climate change. It is responsible for leading the preparation of national communications to the 
UNFCCC in coordination with key ministries and agencies as well as the preparation of GHG inventories. 
Hydromet is the government agency providing climate and weather information and forecasting to the 
general public in Tajikistan. The Climate Change Center (CCC) within Hydromet is responsible for 
managing climate-related re-search and reporting related to adaptation and mitigation. The CCC is expected 
to support the district level climate vulnerability analysis and support district governments in incorporating 
climate vulnerabilities and risks in local level development planning and resource allocation for enhanced 
adaptation and mitigation. The National Biodiversity and Biosafety Centre is responsible for biological 
diversity and it will be key stakeholder in helping to protect threatened species in pastures and forests. 
 
75. 
Additional institutions with consultative role comprise: a. the Ministry of Economic 
Development and Trade (MEDT), on climate-related governance and is responsible for state investment 
plans and coordination of the National Development Strategy. MEDT as co-executive body for the National

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 29 
 
 
Action Plan for Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation will be involved in the project in policy dialogues 
and identifying entry points for national and subnational planning processes for climate change adaptation 
and mitigation. b. the Committee on Emergency Situations and Civil Defence (COES) with central role 
in early warning, disaster prevention, and recovery, supporting the identification of hotspots of climate 
hazards and related CsCAP investments. c. the Committee on Land Use, Geodesy and Cartography 
(COLUGC), responsible for the formulation and implementation of policy in state land management, land 
cadastre, land surveying, mapping, and state control over land use and conservation.  
 
76. 
Civil society organizations and community-based organizations mobilized by the project will 
play a key role in the mobilization of the communities through the well tested Village organization approach 
and through them identify climate sensitive community action plans. The NGO will mobilise communities 
into Village Organizations, Pasture User Unions, Pasture User Associations, Joint Forest Management 
Groups or Common Interest Groups as required for implementing local plans. Other relevant public 
institutions will be engaged as service providers and at the same time as beneficiaries of CASP+ capacity 
strengthening activities. Private sector players who are engaged in the value chains identified for 
investments will be invited in policy dialogues and specific platforms for their feedback.  
 
77. 
The terms and conditions for the highly concessional loan that IFAD is providing to Tajikistan 
as co-financing to CASP+ are as follows: The loan is free of interest but bear a 1.48% of fixed service 
charge as determined, the service charge rate applicable at the date of approval of the Loan by the Fund’s 
Executive Board, payable semi-annually in the USD. The Loan has a maturity period of forty (40) years, 
including a grace period of ten (10) years. The principal of the Loan will be repaid at four and half per cent 
(4.5%) of the total principal per annum for years eleven (11) to thirty (30), and one per cent (1%) of the total 
principal per annum for years thirty-first (31) to forty (40). Thus, to clarify, IFAD does not charge any interest 
to the loan, but only a service charge, and the 4.5% & 1% percentages are the proportions of the total 
repayments of the loan principle over the years from 11 to 40. 
 
78. 
The proposed terms and conditions for the GCF loan to Tajikistan CASP+ are as follows: The 
proposed loan is free of interest; 0.25% service fee pr annum; 0.5% commitment fee per annum. The Loan 
has a maturity period of forty (40) years, including a grace period of ten (10) years. These terms and 
conditions will be passed down by IFAD to the EEs. 
 
Table 2. Execution responsibility and financiers by sub-activity 
Outputs, Activities, Sub-activities 
EE 
Fin 
Output 1.1. By year 7, capacities of relevant national institutions for climate-resilient natural resources management are strengthened 
Activity 1.1.1: Capacity Development of public institutions on climate resilient ecosystem management 
1.1.1.1. Strengthen capacities of Pasture Meliorative Trust to roll out Pasture Law at community level and provide technical assistance to PUUs, PUAs, PCs 
MOA 128 
IFAD 
1.1.1.2. Rolling out and Strengthen capacities of PMT to roll out Pasture Law at community level and provide technical assistance to PUUs, PUAs and PCs 
MOA128 
GCF 
1.1.1.3. Upgrade the technical skills of the Forestry Department 
CEP 
IFAD 
Activity 1.1.2:  Introduce combined remote and participatory Natural Resources monitoring and management 
1.1.2.1. Kick-off Training on remote and participatory NRM 
CEP 
IFAD 
1.1.2.2. Roll-out Training on remote and participatory NRM 
CEP 
GCF 
1.1.2.3. Kick-off Field testing of NRM approaches 
CEP 
IFAD 
1.1.2.4. Rolling-out Field testing of NRM approaches 
CEP 
GCF 
Activity 1.1.3. Enhance technical capacities of national livestock institutions to ensure efficient provision of public animal health and production services to smallholder 
farmers through efficient partnership between public and private institutions 
1.1.3.1. Step up veterinary public health services of the National Veterinary Authority through provision of technical assistance and equipment 
MOA128 
IFAD 
1.1.3.2. Improve the outreach of breeding services provided by State Enterprise for Animal Breeding and Artificial Insemination to areas and communities 
targeted by the Project 
MOA128 
IFAD 
Activity 1.1.4: Build capacities of research and academia institutions on climate resilient ecosystem management 
1.1.4.1. Integrate climate change issues in university and training institutions curricula 
CEP 
GCF 
1.1.4.2. Promote enrollment of male and female youth in training curricula on climate-resilient natural resources management 
CEP 
GCF 
1.1.4.3. Enable research institutes and the private sector to produce evidence on NRM and Climate Change for policy dialogue and climate sensitive 
technical innovations 
FAO 
GCF 
Output 1.2. By year 7, enabling environment for climate adaptive, inclusive and integrated management of pasture, forestry and livestock resources is enhanced 
Activity 1.2.1: Promote an inclusive and integrated policy dialogue 
1.2.1.1. Stock taking of policy development and mainstreaming of gender sensitive climate adaptive agricultural practices 
FAO 
GCF 
1.2.1.2. Training on the utilization of policy support tools e.g.  SIPT, GLEAM, EXACT, B-INTACT 
FAO 
FAO 
1.2.1.3. Kick-off workshops for institutional networking 
CEP 
IFAD 
1.2.1.4. Kick-off workshops for institutional networking (SFA funded) 
CEP 
SFA 
1.2.1.5. Roll-out workshops for institutional networking 
CEP 
GCF 
Activity 1.2.2: Technical assistance for review of livestock related regulatory frameworks 
1.2.2.1: Improvement of the Pasture Law 
FAO 
GCF 
1.2.2.2: Consultations on the Pasture Law 
MOA128 
GCF 
1.2.2.3. Mobilizing technical assistance of the OIE 
FAO 
GCF 
1.2.2.4. Improvement of veterinary legislation 
MOA128 
IFAD 
1.2.2.5. Review of the national breeding strategy 
FAO 
FAO 
Activity 1.2.3. Support government’s capacity to coordinate and monitor Green investments

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 
1.2.3.1. Support Development of the Green Economy strategy 
FAO 
GCF 
1.2.3.2. Capacity Development of MEDT staff 
CEP 
IFAD 
1.2.3.3. Capacity Development of Ministry of Finance staff 
MOA128 
IFAD 
Output 2.1. By year 3, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) based on 21 District level Climate Resilience Diagnostics are developed 
Activity 2.1.1: District Climate Resilience Diagnostic 
2.1.1.1: Diagnostic - create a District Climate Resilience Diagnostic (DCRD) for each District 
CEP 
IFAD 129 
2.1.1.2: Dissemination of diagnostic  
MOA128 
IFAD 
Activity 2.1.2: Establishing relevant local institutions  
2.1.2.1: Establishment VO's 
MOA128 
IFAD 
2.1.2.2: Strengthening VOs 
MOA128 
GCF 
2.1.2.3: Establishment and strengthening PUU or PUG 
MOA128 
IFAD 
2.1.2.4: Establishment and strengthening of PUAs 
MOA128 
IFAD 
2.1.2.5: Establishment and strengthening of Pasture Commissions 
MOA128 
IFAD 
2.1.2.6: Kick-off of the promotion of JFM and establishment of Forest User Groups 
CEP 
IFAD 
2.1.2.7: Rolling out of the Promotion of FM and establishment of Forest User Groups 
CEP 
GCF 
2.1.2.8: Kick-off the establishment of Common Interest Groups (CIGs) 
MOA128 
IFAD 
2.1.2.9: Roll-out the establishment Common Interest Groups (CIGs) 
MOA128 
GCF 
2.1.2.10: Organize kick-off leadership training for women representatives in PUUs/VOs 
MOA128 
IFAD 
2.1.2.11: Organize roll-out leadership training for women representatives in PUUs/VOs 
MOA128 
GCF 
Activity 2.1.3: CsCAP planning and design 
2.1.3.1: CsCAP planning and design 
MOA128 
IFAD 130 
Activity 2.1.4: Strengthening local institutions capacity to monitor and evaluate CsCAPs 
2.1.4.1: Strengthening local institutions capacity to monitor and evaluate CsCAPs 
MOA128 
GCF 
2.1.4.2: Strengthening and follow-up local institutions capacity to monitor and evaluate CsCAPs 
MOA128 
GCF 
2.1.4.3: Strengthening knowledge and capacities of local administration and institutions 
MOA128 
IFAD 
2.1.4.4: Provision of PMU vehicles for monitoring 
MOA128 
MoA 
2.1.4.5: Kick-off the Implementation of the Community Forest Investments 
CEP 
IFAD 
2.1.4.6: Rolling-out the Implementation of the Community Forest Investments 
CEP 
GCF 
2.1.4.7: Provision of CEP staff and field specialist for project monitoring 
CEP 
CEP 
Output 2.2. By year 7, 400 Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) implemented in 21 districts benefitting at least 100,000 rural HHs 
Activity 2.2.1: Implement Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans 
2.2.1.1. Kick off implementation of the Pasture Restoration Investment 
MOA128 
IFAD 
2.2.1.2. Roll-out of the Implementation of Pasture Restoration Investment 
MOA128 
GCF 
2.2.1.3. Implement cross-village Pasture Management Investments 
MOA128 
IFAD 
2.2.1.4: Kick-off the implementation of Joint Forest Management Investments 
CEP 
IFAD 
2.2.1.5: Roll-out of the Implementation of the Joint Forest Management Investments 
CEP 
GCF 
2.2.1.6: Provision of SFA staff and field specialist for Joint Forest Management implementation  
CEP 
SFA 
2.2.1.7: Kick-off of the implementation of Direct Leskhoz Forestry Investments 
CEP 
IFAD 
2.2.1.8: Roll-out of the Implementation of the Direct Leskhoz Forestry Investments 
CEP 
GCF 
2.2.1.9: Provision of forestry specialists for Leskhoz forestry investment 
CEP 
SFA 
2.2.1.10: Kick-off of the Implementation JFM in Protected Area buffer zones 
CEP 
IFAD 
2.2.1.11: Roll-out of the Implementation JFM in Protected Area buffer zones 
CEP 
GCF 
2.2.1.12. Implement Climate Resilient infrastructure investments  
MOA128 
GCF 
2.2.1.13. Community Agricultural equipment for productivity improvement 
MOA128 
IFAD 
Output 3.1. By end of year 7, 105,600 smallholder livestock farmers receive AI, animal health or training services to increase productivity of their livestock 
Activity 3.1.1. Improving the genetic potential of smallholder farmers’ livestock 
3.1.1.1. Training of youth in Artificial Insemination 
MOA128 
IFAD 
3.1.1.2. Organization of Artificial Insemination Campaigns 
MOA128 
IFAD 
3.1.1.3. Establish Off-Farm Mating stations 
MOA128 
IFAD 
Activity 3.1.2. Support to delivery of private animal health services   
3.1.2.1. Institutional support to Tajik Veterinary Association (TVA) 
MOA128 
GCF 
3.1.2.2. Training of private veterinarians  
MOA128 
GCF 
3.1.2.3. Equipping private veterinarians  
MOA128 
GCF 
3.1.2.4. Mobility of private veterinarians  
MOA128 
GCF 
Activity: 3.1.3: Support adoption of climate resilient innovative technologies 
3.1.3.1. Promotion of technical climate smart innovations through kick-off demonstrations and exchange visits 
MOA128 
IFAD 
3.1.3.2. Promotion of technical climate smart innovations through roll-out demonstrations and exchange visits 
MOA128 
GCF 
3.1.3.3. Organization of Exchange visits to promote the use of technical climate smart innovations 
FAO 
GCF 
3.1.3.4. Development of FFS curricula and training of facilitators 
FAO 
FAO 
3.1.3.5: Roll out of FFS 
FAO 
GCF 
Output 3.2. By end of year 4, 9 productive alliances between livestock producers’ groups and private aggregators established and operational 
Activity 3.2.1 Identification of market and business opportunities 
3.2.1.1. Kick-off of the identification of the market and business opportunities 
MOA128 
IFAD 
3.2.1.2. Rolling-out the Identification of market and business opportunities 
MOA128 
GCF 
3.2.1.3. Feasibility studies of proposed business arrangements including Productive Alliances 
MOA128 
IFAD 
Activity 3.2.2. Provision of financing and technical support to the business partnerships for selected livestock commodities 
3.2.2.1. Financing of business arrangements including Productive Alliances 
MOA128 
IFAD 
3.2.2.2. Technical and business assistance to business arrangements including Productive Alliances 
MOA128 
IFAD 
Output 3.3. By end of year 7, 12,400 smallholders have strengthened climate resilient production practices and private sector market linkages 
Activity 3.3.1. Strengthening of CIGs capacity 
3.3.1.1 Support to production/diversification CIGs 
MOA128 
GCF 
3.3.1.2: Provision of rooms and halls for meetings, trainings 
MOA128 
MoA 
3.3.1.3: Support to market-linked CIGs  
MOA128 
GCF 
3.3.1.4: Capacity building on climate smart resilient technologies for Window 1 and 2 beneficiaries 
MOA128 
GCF 
Activity 3.3.2. Management of the CIG matching grant program 
3.3.2.1: Matching grant manual developed 
MOA128 
IFAD 
3.3.2.2: Involvement of specialists from agricultural departments for matching grants implementation 
MOA128 
MoA 
3.3.2.3: Launch of the MGF  
MOA128 
IFAD 
3.3.2.4: Launch of the MGF (Window 2) 
MOA128 
IFAD 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
79. 
The revised NDC (2021)131 states that Tajikistan’s agriculture is very vulnerable to climate change. 
Without substantial adaptation measures, food and nutrition security, poverty eradication and sustainable 
development may be adversely affected. Adaptation measures are of priority both for crop production

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 31 
 
 
(including cereals and leguminous crops, technical crops, vegetables and horticulture and viticulture) and 
livestock subsectors. Lack of appropriate financing is reducing the potential of the country for effective 
allocation of own as well as donor resources to climate priorities and to achieve the ‘fair and ambitious’ 
objectives set in the NDCs. In addition, the financial system is inadequate to serve the vulnerable agriculture 
sector and market mechanisms to attract carbon finance are missing.  
 
80. 
The CASP+ project requires GCF financing as the Government does not have the resources to make 
investments in many areas that are critical for its long-term development. Tajikistan is the poorest country 
in Central Asia and confirmed as low-income country (World Bank, 2021).132 The COVID-19 pandemic had 
a significant adverse impact on the Tajik economy. Real GDP growth slowed to 4.2 percent in the first nine 
months of 2020, compared to 7.2 percent a year earlier. Restrictions on labour mobility and economic activity 
at home and abroad resulted in lower migrant remittances, weaker consumer demand, and reduced 
investments.  The external current account has faced a deterioration due to weak exports and remittances 
and increased imports and the risk of debt distress for Tajikistan remains high (World Bank/IMF Debt 
Sustainability Analysis).133  A growing share of the population reported reducing their food intake and overall 
consumption to cope with the changed circumstances. To ameliorate the economic fallout, the authorities 
deferred tax collections, boosted health and social spending, and eased monetary policy. In Tajikistan, gross 
financing needs were foreseen to increase from 3.8% of GDP in 2019 to 7.7% by the end of 2020.134 The 
general reduction of the fiscal capacity of the country has put considerable pressure on the Government 
which on the one hand is reluctant to take additional loans and on the other hand, needs additional financial 
support to meet the challenge posed by the pandemic. In this situation, the Government is unable to make 
much needed investments in areas which are being increasingly threatened by a host of challenges including 
climate change. The analysis for the updated NDCs has noted the need for climate finance and investments 
to ensure the transition towards a wide use of sustainable, climate-resilient and low-emission agricultural 
practices.135 
 
81. 
During 2014–2017, public debt nearly doubled as a share of GDP, from 27.7% to 50.3%, while total 
external debt (public and private) jumped from 45.4% of GDP to 72.0%—more than twice the average for 
lower-middle income countries. Bank recapitalization in 2016 and the issuance of a $500 million sovereign 
Eurobond in 2017 to support the Rogun project were the main reasons for the rise in debt ratios. The latest 
debt sustainability analysis (2021 Article IV report) by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) highlights that 
Tajikistan’s debt is currently assessed as sustainable, but there is a high risk of debt distress in the context 
of limited fiscal space. The debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to decline to 40.0 percent by 2026. However, 
under the baseline, the external debt service-to-exports ratio breaches its threshold at Eurobond payment 
due dates (2025-27), contributing to a higher external risk rating. 
 
82. 
Climate change is one of the main challenges to Tajikistan’s agricultural development and food 
security both in the medium and longer term. It is considered one of the key obstacles to achieving the 
country’s strategic objectives as defined in the National Development Strategy for 2016–2030, which 
includes ensuring food security and access to quality nutrition by 2030. Many models, including IFAD’s 
Climate Adaptation in Rural Development (CARD)136 assessment tool shows that climate change affects 
both irrigated and rain-fed systems, and under the pessimistic risk setting shows that all crop yields are 
projected to decrease (Annex 2). Extreme climate events are shown to have negative impacts on managed 
grasslands, in line with what is already seen in certain areas of the country under high temperature and 
drought. IFPRI’s International Model for Policy Analysis of Agricultural Commodities and Trade (IMPACT)137 
show that yields of major crops will decline significantly and projects an overall negative effect of climate 
change on the agriculture sector in the country. The model asserts that climate change will be one of the 
main challenges for food security, leading to increasing risk of hunger, malnourishment, especially among 
children and other vulnerable groups, and insufficient per capita calorie intake. 
 
83. 
The threats posed by climate change also impact the natural resource base, particularly the water 
sector, pastures and forests (Annex 2). Chapter 1). Most of the forest and pasture resources are owned by 
the State. Dekhan farms, agriculture enterprises and state farms and Individuals can obtain use rights 
(including poor vulnerable communities targeted by the project), however, the regulations on the use of 
these public goods provide little incentives for the private sector to invest in them. Community members who

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 32 
 
 
use these resources tend to overuse them because of the current production practices and limited other 
options. This leads to over-grazing and degradation of the pasture resources of the country on which many 
communities rely. Some Conflicts of interest also emerge between forest and pastureland users as the two 
are sometimes in competition with each other. The public sector tries to regulate use rights but does not 
have strong enforcement mechanisms. Markets do not generate an efficient allocation of the forest or 
pasture resources as property rights are not well defined or fully transferable and do not lead to an efficient 
allocation of resources. Thus, the ownership, use and management of these resources represents a 
failure of governance and the failure of markets to make efficient allocative decisions. Given that 
individual household level and private sector financing is unlikely to be available for investments in the 
natural resource sectors, it is the public sector that has to take the lead in making investments to secure the 
natural resource base for sustainable use and protection against climate and other risks. Government 
support to rural households and producer groups is essential to assist them in adapting to the changing 
climate conditions and to guide further climate adaptation investments in rural areas.  
 
84. 
The project envisages the use of both grants and senior loans. The total loan for the project from 
GCF and IFAD is USD 15.75 million, and the grant amount is USD 61.10 million. The loan amount therefore 
represents 20% of the total financing. Alternative funding options are limited due to the high level of debt 
sustainability stress of the country (IMF, 2023). 138 In agreement with the Government, specifically the 
indication of the Ministry of Finance and the technical line ministries (CEP, MOA), the loan and grant portion 
of the external financing from IFAD and GCF are used as follows: (a) grant-financed portion of the project 
is allocated to technical assistance and capacity development, including policy and institutional 
development, helping communities to defray the costs of planning and implementing climate sensitive 
community action plans, as well as to subsidize part of the cost of individual investments at the household 
and group level. These investments are needed to ensure that the community, groups and individuals have 
the capacity to make these investments; (b) the senior loan-financed portion of the project is allocated 
to part of the investments in implementing the community plans in component 2 (both IFAD and GCF loans) 
as well as in investments for livelihood strengthening in component 3 (only IFAD loan). 
 
85. 
GCF funds have been able to leverage third party financing from external and internal sources 
in a ratio of 1:1.04. Complementary in-kind co-financing is envisaged from the Government (from MoA, 
CEP and SFA) and FAO (Annex 13). IFAD will be providing the larger co-financing (an amount of 37.85m 
USD,139 of which 17 percent loan). The Government co-financing (for about 2.68m USD) represents a 
commitment to the project’s objective and is an indicator of national ownership in achieving the desired 
paradigm shift. Similarly, rural communities’ contributions to the project investments will also be a 
demonstration of ownership, commitment and their expectation of the benefits in helping them enhance their 
capacity for adaptation. FAO’s envisaged co-financing (in the amount of 0.16 m USD) will cover 
complementary technical assistance. IFAD co-financing will be managed by the MOA and CEP. The 
envisaged co-financing from Government and FAO will be directly managed by the agencies providing it.  
Overall CASP+ co-financing is 51.1% (with IFAD @ 93.0% of total co-financing coming from total country 
allocations under IFAD11 and IFAD 12 replenishment processes). The design has estimated total project 
needs, developed the proposal, assessing the funds available from IFAD based upon a system called 
performance-based allocation system (PBAS) with allocation at country level approved by IFAD Board every 
three years and the government put together with request for having $39.0m financing from GCF.  
 
86. 
The high level of concessional financing requested to GCF (including a loan of USD 9 million and a 
grant of USD 30 million) is motivated by the difficulty of Tajikistan in maintaining its debt sustainability, 
currently at high distress level (IMF, March 2023)140 under a reasonable threshold. The level of income and 
indebtedness is a key factor in determining the level of concession being requested for the country. Under 
the high risk of debt distress, the major IFIs (World Bank, Asian Development Bank) have been providing 
the country with grant financing (IFAD has also moved to full concessionality since its IFAD 12 financing 
cycle, from 2022). The overall concessionality leverage for the project after taking into account GCF, 
IFAD and FAO resources is low at 25% (GCF at 30%; IFAD funds at 21%).141 The level of concessionality 
in this project has been very carefully balanced in order to allow the project to be affordable to the 
Government of Tajikistan taking into consideration the prevailing socio-economic and climate vulnerability 
levels (annex 2.1, annex 16), and to allow it to introduce innovative investment for climate resilience (at

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 33 
 
 
community level, in component 2, and through market driven approaches in component 3) that incur 
additional costs while ensuring the long-term financial sustainability of the investment. This is the minimum 
level of concessionality required to make the investments feasible as these investments have longer 
repayment period and the recovery period is expected to be much longer than in a business-as usual 
project. The Government does not have the resources to invest in institutional strengthening, capacity 
building and policy reform or provide the funds needed by vulnerable communities and households for 
financing climate resilient action plans, infrastructure, assets, equipment and training to help them deal with 
climate risks.  The primary beneficiaries of the grant-financed part of the cost will be vulnerable communities 
and households impacted by climate change in the selected project districts most vulnerable to climate risks 
(Annex 3) and government institutions striving to assist the country adopt more climate resilient pathways 
towards sustainable development. Financing will be tailored to cover the additional costs of the investment 
necessary to make the project viable.  
 
87. 
The grant elements are being allocated for incremental costs and will not displace any investments 
that would otherwise have occurred. At the level of the households and common interest groups, the grants 
will defray part of the household investment and will cover the risk premium required to make the investment 
viable. More than 70% of the funds mobilized for the project will be passed on to vulnerable 
communities threatened by climate risks and households to diversify their livelihoods. Given the 
nature of community action plans with their public good nature focused on improving management of 
pastures and forests, and the long gestation period that this entail, with low returns to individual households 
spread over a much longer period, these investments would simply not be made without the project. The 
matching grants for investments at the household level in building the individual household assets are a 
necessary incentive because these households do not have the capital to cover the full cost of the 
investments. Moreover, the households do not have access to commercial loan financing because of the 
high cost of borrowing and the collateral and guarantee requirements from the commercial sector or through 
MFIs, and the general lack of adequate financial services for agriculture and in rural areas.   
 
88. 
One of Tajikistan’s biggest challenges in diversifying its economy has been its inability to increase 
private investment levels in the country.142 Domestic credit to the private Sector was reported at 10.6% in 
2022.143 There are no alternative funding options for the activities that the project will implement and 
as such the financing and the concessional level requested are critical to make the investment.   GCF 
financing will provide investment support for the most climate vulnerable communities. The private sector is 
reluctant to invest in the development of pasture or forest resources due to the lack of incentives for them 
and lack of title to them.  GCF additionality is therefore paramount to a successful result while 
alternative sources of funding have been considered and not deemed viable. Private sector 
investments are limited by the remoteness of the areas targeted by the project, as well as by the inadequacy 
of the financial system to support the required climate resilience investments needed by rural mountainous 
communities targeted by the project. Models for public-private producer business plans will be explored to 
finance business plans jointly submitted by private companies and producers' groups in which they propose 
to enter in a partnership agreement where both parties take risks, invest and share the benefits. For these 
Productive Alliances business plans, CASP+ funding will focus on the delivery of public or semi-public goods 
that will not be funded by the private sector company otherwise, and that will be necessary to fill the financing 
gap of viable business plans. GCF and IFAD funding is justified to address a “market failure” where 
the perceived high risks and transaction costs of working with small producers are preventing 
private companies from starting market-based business relationships.  Thus, private sector financing 
will be partially secured for complementary investments in enterprises that can support small-holder 
households and community interest groups aggregate their produce for markets in PP partnerships.  
Investments in productive alliances with the private sector are envisaged under the project. However, these 
partnerships are likely to be limited given the nascent stage of development of the private sector.   
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
89. 
There are several approaches for ensuring the project exit strategy at various levels. These include 
(i) undertaking all investments with a counterpart at the national and local level; (ii) emphasis on capacity 
building of institutions and individuals; (iii) strengthening of policy and regulatory frameworks in a manner 
that adds to sustainability of natural resource through improved management and governance; (iv)

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 
introduction of modern tools and technologies to strengthen institutional capacity; (v) use of participatory 
approaches to ensure beneficiary ownership and (v) a clear plan for operation and maintenance of all 
infrastructure, assets and equipment provided under the project, etc. The approach at the national and local 
level for the improvements to the enabling environment (component 1), climate sensitive community 
investments (component 2), and the focus on strengthening and diversifying livelihoods, focusing on key 
constraints within selected value chains and involving private partners whenever possible aiming at 
increasing the beneficiaries’ return through improved market linkages (component 3).  
 
90. 
At the national level, all the investments are expected to continue beyond the project period because 
of the nature of the investments. The project will invest in very specific areas of institutional strengthening 
for a range of public sector institutions dealing with natural resources such as the Ministry of Economic 
Development and Trade, the State Forestry Agency, the State Enterprise for Animal Breeding and Artificial 
Insemination, the Land and Geodesy Department, the Pasture Meliorative Trust (PMT), several national 
livestock institutions dealing with public animal health and production services. The project is also 
introducing modern and efficient techniques and technologies such as remote sensing and carbon  
accounting tools such as the use of Ex-ACT and GLEAM-i that will enhance the capacity of the institutions 
for managing and monitoring the resources. These institutions are all supported by the public budget and 
care will be taken to invest in only those activities which either have no implications for increase in their 
budgets, and where incremental budget is required, a commitment has been secured to increase the annual 
budget allocations for sustaining the investments beyond the project period. The specific staff members 
trained in the project are long-term public servants and even though they are not expected to be retained in 
their current positions for long, they can be expected to contribute within the institution during their service.   
 
91. 
The expertise for understanding climate risks will be strengthened by supporting research and 
training of public sector decision-makers and developing academic institutions capacity to train professionals 
on the subject. The institutions involved like the Tajik Agrarian University, Tajik Academy of Agricultural 
Science and Forest Research Institute will all be expected to offer upgraded courses as part of their regular 
curricula, and these courses will continue beyond the project period. By supporting private veterinarians as 
well as their associations and the gradual shift towards private service provision, the project will contribute 
to the creation of a sustainable cadre of veterinary services paid for by the private users.  This will promote 
sustainable development of the national veterinary system, ensuring access to adequate services.  
 
92. 
The project will assist with the review of policy in a participatory and inclusive manner and suggest 
refinements with regards to pasture use and rehabilitation, joint forest management and livestock related 
regulatory frameworks. These refinements and regulations will be enacted into the legal framework of the 
country and implemented through the established agencies responsible for their implementation and 
enforcement. The policy measures proposed will be selected based on their potential for enhancing the 
sustainability of the nature resource base. Tajikistan’s national development policy framework and its 
commitments as part of its NDC will further mainstream climate change adaptation into national and sectoral 
development plans. The GCF Readiness for the NAP is expected to lay the foundation on which the current 
project will further consolidate ensuring synergy between the two projects that will add to the overall 
sustainability of investments.  At the district level, the capacity of district and Jamoat governments to better 
appreciate and prepare for climate risk analysis and adaptation in district level planning will be strengthened.  
 
93. 
At the community level, the strengthening of community institutions particularly the use of the broad 
base Village Organizations and within that the formation of Pasture User Unions (PUU) that consist of 
interested households and Joint Forest Management arrangements where required, will enhance the chance 
of sustaining the investments. Many agencies have been investing in these institutions as well as the 
Mohallah Committees. There are also plans to identify policy refinements that can make these local 
institutions more sustainable by providing them powers for generating revenue by collecting user fees 
through changes in the existing regulation and trying to emulate those in other regional countries of the 
region like Kyrgyzstan.  Furthermore, all investments that are included in the climate sensitive action plans 
(CsCAPs) will be identified through participation of the local governments, local stakeholders and community 
members to ensure ownership with a clear plan for operation and maintenance after completion. All 
investment in physical infrastructure and assets will be provided within the capacity of the local government

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 
 
or community to operating and maintaining them after hand-over. The experience with previous IFAD 
projects has shown that communities are generally able to operate and maintain infrastructure investments 
well beyond project completion. The physical investment on the ground at community level in pasture, 
forestry, and agriculture productivity gains will generate capacity for the communities to adapt to climate 
risks and challenges that they currently face and add to the sustainability of their livelihoods. 
 
94. 
For investments at the household level, the project places strong emphasis on making livelihoods 
more sustainable through providing matching grants for investments that will be sustained by the 
households. The environmental sustainability of the investments will be ensured since only green 
investments that enhance climate resilience will be financed. In addition, the project will have a strong private 
sector orientation and will work backwards from the markets in trying to identify opportunities in which the 
private sector is interested. The brokering of productive alliances between the private sector (dairy 
processors, feed lots of operators, poultry processors) and groups of farmers for increased access to 
markets will strengthen their linkages. The underlying mutual interest of the smallholder producers and the 
private sector will ensure the sustainability of the arrangements beyond the project period.

=== PAGE 40 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 36 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + v 
+ vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
39.00 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) Senior loans 
9.00 
40 years 
10 years 
0.00 % 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans 
0 
0 years 
0 years 
0 % 
(iii) Equity 
0 
 
 
0 % equity return 
(iv) Guarantees 
0 
0 years 
 
 
(v) Reimbursable 
grants 
0 
 
 
 
(vi) Grants 
30.00  
 
 
 
(vii) Results-based 
payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
40.690370 
million USD ($) 
Name of 
institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
IFAD 
Grant 
31.099000 
million USD ($)  7 years 
N/A years 
0% 
Options 
IFAD 
Senior 
Loans 
6.750000 
million USD ($)  
40 years and 10 
years.  
Loan principle 
repayment: (i) 
4.5%from years 11 to 
30; and ii)1% from 
years 31 to 40 
Fixed service 
charge 1.48%  
senior 
MoA 
In kind 
0.901370 
million USD ($)  7 years 
N/A years 
0% 
Options 
CEP 
In kind 
0.890000 
million USD ($)  7 years 
N/A years 
0% 
Options 
SFA 
In kind 
0.890000 
million USD ($)  7 years 
N/A years 
0% 
Options 
FAO 
In kind 
0.160000 
million USD ($)  7 years 
N/A years 
0% 
Options 
(c) Total 
financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
 
79.690370 
 
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 
words, 
approximately 
0.5 page) 
IFAD is the Accredited Entity and the main co-financing partner. The Government will be providing 
in-kind incremental contributions (including dedicated staff, the use of its premises, facilities and 
equipment), financed by own resources. This will include financing from the Ministry of Agriculture 
(MoA), the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP), and the State Forest Agency (SFA). 
FAO will provide additional co-financing (a dedicated Technical Cooperation Project, TCP) to 
complement with technical assistance according to its comparative advantages.  
 
Project beneficiaries and private sector partners will contribute with parallel financing to activities in 
which they participate, for an estimated amount of USD 4.6 million. Their contribution is expected 
to be as follows: (a) Output 2.2: targeted communities will contribute with 5% of all CsCAPs 
investments, 10% for agricultural equipment investment; (b) Output 3.2: Smallholders producers 
members of the Productive Alliances will be complemented with 10% of the financing by 
beneficiaries and 10% by private sector partners; (c) Output 3.3: the members of the Common 
Interest Groups (CiGs) will provide a contribution of 10% of all matching grants financing under 
Window 1, and 20% for the matching grants under window 2.

=== PAGE 41 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 37 
 
 
 
 
According to the Financing Agreement signed between IFAD and the Government of Tajikistan on 
CASP+, the Government will provide counterpart financing in the form of exemption of value added 
taxes and custom duties related to civil works, goods, equipment and services, 144 , 145 for an 
estimated amount of about USD 15.18 million146. 
C.2. Financing by component  
 
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
million USD 
($) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
million USD 
($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
million USD 
($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name of 
Institution
s 
Component 1: 
Strengthening 
public sector 
capacity for 
transformative 
climate-resilient 
management of 
natural 
resources 
Output 1.1. By year 7, capacities of 
relevant national institutions for 
climate-resilient natural resources 
management are strengthened 
2.074596 
1.373850 
Grants 
0.700746 
Grants 
IFAD 
Output 1.2. By year 7, enabling 
environment for climate adaptive, 
inclusive and integrated 
management of pasture, forestry and 
livestock resources is enhanced 
0.409600 
0.136600 
Grants 
0.139000 
Grants 
IFAD 
0.083600 
Grants 
FAO 
0.050400 
In-kind 
SFA 
Component 2:  
Investments in 
community 
capacity for 
adaption and 
resilience to 
climate change 
Output 2.1. By year 3, 400 Climate-
sensitive Community Action Plans 
(CsCAP) based on 21 District level 
Climate Resilience Diagnostics are 
developed 
8.053046 
1.095475 
Grants 
5.581171 
Grants 
IFAD 
0.372000  In-kind 
MoA 
0.610000  In-kind 
CEP 
0.394400  In-kind 
SFA 
Output 2.2. By year 7, 400 Climate-
sensitive Community Action Plans 
(CsCAP) implemented in 21 districts 
benefitting at least 100,000 rural 
households 
46.616093 
24.536414 
Grants 
12.109479 
Grants 
IFAD 
9.000000 
Senior loans 
0.525000 
Senior 
loans 
IFAD 
0.445200 
In-kind 
SFA 
Component 3:  
Strengthening 
livelihoods for 
enhanced 
resilience 
through market-
based 
approaches 
Output 3.1. By end of year 7, 
105,600 smallholder livestock 
farmers receive AI, animal health or 
training services to increase 
productivity of their livestock 
5.424928 
1.723508 
Grants 
3.625020 
Grants 
IFAD 
0.076400 
Grants 
FAO 
Output 3.2. By end of year 4, 9 
productive alliances between 
livestock producers’ groups and 
private aggregators established and 
operational 
0.664100 
0.090300 
Grants 
0.573800 
Grants 
IFAD 
Output 3.3. By end of year 7, 12,400 
smallholders have strengthened 
climate resilient production practices 
and private sector market linkages 
12.684840 
0.406300 
Grants 
5.824700 
Grants 
IFAD 
6.225000 
Senior 
Loans  
IFAD 
0.228840 
In-kind 
MoA 
Project 
Management 
Component  
Project Management 
3.763167 
0.637553 
Grants 
2.545084 
Grants 
IFAD 
0.280000 
In-kind 
CEP 
0.300530 
In-kind 
MoA 
Indicative total cost (USD) 
79.690370 
39.000000 
40.690370 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
95. 
It is expected that USD 61.5 million of project cost from all sources will be used for capacity building 
and technology transfer under the CASP+ activities. The total GCF funding amount requested for capacity-
building and technology transfers is estimated to be USD 3.3 million and USD 34.2 million, respectively, 
which is USD 37.5 million or 95% of GCF financing. The capacity building activities include institutional 
capacity-building; the enhancement of an enabling environment for natural resources; technical knowledge

=== PAGE 42 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 38 
 
 
 
 
transfer; capacity-building for the implementation of adaptation, resilience-building and mitigation measures; 
research and education, training and public awareness, provision of scholarships, study tours. 
 
96. 
The type of climate technology proposed includes field equipment for adapting to climate risks such 
as farming machinery, equipping of veterinarians with tool kits, demonstrating new climate adaptive crop 
varieties, technology for more efficient manure and fodder management, improved production techniques 
and water efficient techniques and equipment. Table 3 below identifies the volume of financing in each 
component that is allocated for capacity building and technology transfer from the GCF funding.  
 
Table 3.  Financing for Capacity Building and Technology Transfer from the GCF funding 
GCF financing 
Total 
Amount 
(USD) 
Capacity Building 
USD) 
% 
Technology Transfer 
(USD) 
% 
Component 1 
$ 1,510,450 
$ 1,116,450 
73.9 
$ 250,500 
16.6 
Component 2 
$ 34,631,889 
$ 788,625 
2.2 
$ 33,271,414 
96.0 
Component 3 
$ 2,220,108 
$ 1,422,908 
64.1 
 $ 681,000  
30.6 
PMC 
$ 637,553 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Total 
$ 39,000,000 
$ 3,327,983 
8.5 
$ 34,202,914 
87.7 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
97. 
The project is expected to have an impact on both mitigation and adaptation and lead to reduced 
emissions and increased resilience. With respect to mitigation, the project is expected to help in a shift to 
low emission sustainable development pathways. The project will lead to reduced net emissions from land 
use, reforestation, reduced deforestation, and through sustainable management, conservation and 
enhancement of forest carbon stocks or Core Indicator 1 [CI1]: GHG emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered according to the new Integrated Results Management Framework.  Overall results 
show a positive environmental impact due to the implementation of the project’s activities, quantified at a 
total carbon balance of -6,854,822 tCO2-eq over 27 years,147 or -253,882 tCO2-eq per year (Annex 23 – 
which presents also a disaggregation of greenhouse net incremental sequestration and emission reduction, 
including for methane148). The average GHG sequestration cost is about US$11.68 per tonne of CO2e (or 
US$5.79 when considering GCF financing). The net incremental contribution to carbon sequestration has 
been estimated by use of Ex-ACT and GLEAM - i,149 two FAO-designed carbon accounting tools adapted to 
land use, land use change and forestry and livestock production systems. The outcome associated with this 
impact in the GCF Results Management Framework “Improved management of land or forest areas 
contributing to emissions reductions.” The outcome will be measured through tracking the hectares of land 
or forests under improved and effective management that contributes to CO2 emission reductions. 
Specifically, the project will improve the status of 3,650 ha of forests, 6,190 ha under perennial crops and 
180,000 ha of improved pasture. The result will be monitored via the georeferenced remote sensing plus 
ground truthing system developed by the project. Training on the use of carbon accounting tools will be 
provided to the institutions involved in NRM, to encourage the tracking of the CO2-eq reduction. 
 
98. 
The project will have an overall outreach to 2,918,426 individuals including both direct and indirect 
beneficiaries at the national level, i.e. Core Indicator 2 in the newly approved Integrated Results 
Management Framework (IRMF).150 The project also contributes to Core Indicator 3: Value of improved 
physical assets made more adaptable to the effects of climate change and/or able to reduce GHG emissions, 
and Core Indicator 4: Hectares of natural resource areas brought under improved low-emission and/or 
climate-resilient management practices. 151  The project is expected to reach an estimated 650,000 
individuals or about 100,000 rural households in 21 climate vulnerable districts of the country. The numbers 
have been calculated to avoid double counting from the direct beneficiaries. It is expected that women will

=== PAGE 43 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 39 
 
 
 
 
constitute 51.5% of the total beneficiaries. The proportion of direct households reached corresponds to 7% 
of the total population of the country and the indirect beneficiaries expected to be reached is 24% of the 
country population. Specifically, investments at the national, community and household level will help to 
make the targeted areas much more resilient to climate risks. At the national level, the project will strengthen 
institutional capacity in order to diversify and support livelihoods. At the community level, the project will 
invest in a range of infrastructure, assets and equipment that will assist communities in reducing climate 
risks and increasing their resilience. At the household level, the project will help to diversify livelihoods, 
remove value chain constraints and build sustainable market linkages in collaboration with the private sector. 
The increased resilience and reduced vulnerability will be assessed via specific household surveys carried 
out at project inception, mid-term and project completion.152  
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
99. 
The proposed activities planned under the project are expected to lead to a paradigm shift in 
important policy areas, implementation mechanisms and in household-based production decisions. CASP+ 
is focused on interventions that focus on pastures, livestock, livelihood diversification and the increased role 
for the private sector. Farm modelling has shown that improving pasture quality and livestock efficiency can 
improve productivity and lower emission intensity per unit of product.153  The evaluation reports of previous 
IFAD investments show that livestock farmers in the treatment group are more likely to use pastures to feed 
their livestock especially PUU managed pastures compared to the control group and are more  likely to follow 
rotational plans.154 Furthermore, breeding for improved feed conversion efficiency (lower net feed intake) is 
likely to reduce methane emissions and the greenhouse gas intensity of animal products. Reducing the 
number of unproductive animals on a farm can potentially improve profitability and reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions. If productivity increases through nutritional and breeding strategies, the number of livestock can 
be reduced without losing the quantity of meat that is currently produced. With more efficient strategies for 
raising beef cattle, slaughter weights can be reached at a younger age, with reduced lifetime emissions per 
animal and proportionately fewer animals producing methane.155  
 
100. 
Experience from previous IFAD projects has demonstrated the transformational nature of some of 
the proposed activities in Tajikistan such as the LPDP-II.  Focus on improved animal health and productivity 
led to increased weight of animals (30%), increased milk productivity (120%) and yet it led to a reduction in 
the size of their herds by 29%. The impact assessment shows an increase in livestock income associated 
with rise in the productivity of cattle among LPDP II beneficiaries.156  This was attributed to meat and milk 
production. Notably, the average weight of cattle per animal in the treatment group increased by 30 per cent 
compared to the control group, which is equivalent to around 44 kg per animal. Similarly, cattle kept by 
households in the treatment group had more total milk production and productivity than households in the 
control group.157  The results of the impact assessment also suggest that the project succeeded in enhancing 
livestock productivity and livestock income partly through increased access to preventive treatment, feeding, 
housing, and water points. These were all activities promoted by both phases of the project.158  The current 
project is also expected to achieve increase in productivity and reduction in livestock herds with significant 
impact on reduction in GHG emissions. The results of the Gleam-i analysis undertaken for CASP+ shows 
that emissions intensity of all systems are likely to reduce by 12% in the With Project (WP) scenario compared 
to the Without Project (WOP) scenario and the baseline.159 This reduction is likely even if the reduction in 
herd size in evidence in LPDP-II is not realized. 
 
101. 
CASP+ is expected to assist in diversifying rural livelihoods which is a slow process given that 
Tajikistan’s transition from a centrally planned to a market economy after the dissolution of the Soviet Union 
in 1991 has been one of the slowest among the Commonwealth of Independent States countries. Private 
investment was estimated at 5% of GDP in 2013, one of the lowest levels in the world that limits economic 
growth and job creation.160 Family incomes today are strongly dependent on a single source, with 50–70% 
deriving from agriculture. The risks associated with this income strategy can be reduced through 
diversification of income sources, which requires strengthening nonfarm occupations, wage employment, 
and entrepreneurial activities.161 CASP+ is expected to diversify rural livelihoods through its provision of 
matching grants, establishment of CIGs and building links with the private sector along key value chains.

=== PAGE 44 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 40 
 
 
 
 
The project will strengthen links with the private sector engaged in the food production system especially 
those enterprises which are involved in dairy and meat production.   
 
102. 
The recent analysis of the agriculture sector for the update of the NDCs noted that adaptation and 
mitigation were not currently explicitly integrated into agriculture sector planning in Tajikistan.162 The project 
is designed to integrate climate change risks, vulnerabilities and adaptation measures in state policies and 
programmes at the national and local level to target resources to regions and production systems where 
they are most relevant.  At the national level, the project will assist investment plans adopt a green economy 
orientation in close collaboration with MEDT, CEP, MoA, SFA and other national level institutions. At the 
district level, the project will help in the incorporation of climate vulnerabilities in development planning by 
promoting an approach that focus on catchments and protecting downstream areas through a range of green 
investments such as shelterbelt plantations, riverbank protection, use of protective gabions, improved 
pasture governance, increasing bio-diversity and plantation of forest trees and orchards and more efficient 
use of technologies, etc.  Some of the more important investments that are expected to lead to a paradigm 
shift have been identified below.  Each of these is expected to make an Overall contribution to the climate-
resilient development pathways which are consistent with the national climate change adaptation strategies 
and plans being developed by the Government.  
 
103. 
Some of the key measures for improving the country capacity for transformative in adaptation include 
the following: (i) introducing climate risk awareness and analysis as a part of the curriculum of academic and 
public administration agencies that will lead to long-term expertise and facilitate the incorporation of climate 
risk assessment in allocative, design and planning decisions in key sectors by experts and in the public 
sector; (ii) introducing a green economy orientation, including potential to introduce carbon markets, in 
investment planning through technical capacity building of MEDT and other national level institutions; (iii) 
improve institutional collaboration and facilitate interaction and decision making between the agencies 
through policy and knowledge sharing platforms; (iv) use of improved technology for decision-making such 
as surveillance and remote sensing of pastures and forest management; (v) shift livestock production to 
more productive pathways and encourage reduction in low productivity animals and retain only more efficient 
livestock and to help farmers embark on a low emissions trajectory; (vi) strengthen the provision of private 
veterinary services to assist smallholders enhance access to services to reduce livestock morbidity and 
mortality; (vii) establish and strengthen pasture user unions for improved pasture governance  and 
introduction of  more sustainable patterns of management through levying user fees, rotational grazing and 
closures, etc.; (viii) applying participatory management models of joint forest management that entail leasing 
forest land to slow down the rate of forest degradation and promote the rehabilitation of existing forests;163 
(ix ) shift away from the centralized system of resource allocation and scale up the participatory community 
approach which entails mobilization of local communities and identification by them of their priority needs 
with respect to climate sensitive actions to build resilience and ensuring ownership; (x) linking private sector 
with financial instruments suitable to finance the required climate-sensitive equipment, technologies and 
innovations.   
 
104. 
At the household level, the project will also instil a paradigm shift in agriculture production practices 
by assisting with investments in improving irrigation practices; water efficient irrigation technologies; planting 
high yielding and drought and pest resilient plant varieties; promoting suitable crop rotations and 
intercropping; soil management measures (e.g., cover crops); promoting agroforestry in croplands and 
pastures, use of shelterbelts and river bank protection. For livestock production, the priority measures that 
will be encouraged will include improved pasture management, improving animal health breeds and feeding 
of dairy cattle, and improved market linkages. The project will focus on strengthening links with the private 
sector.  Typically, farmers tend to first produce and then look for markets which is not an effective or efficient 
strategy particularly for small vulnerable households dealing with the added pressures of climate change 
which adds another dimension of risk to their livelihoods.  A key paradigm shift that will be facilitated will be 
to work backwards from the market by forming productive alliances with the private sector and understanding 
the market demand and to make production decisions based on the volumes and specifications of the 
produce demanded.

=== PAGE 45 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 41 
 
 
 
 
105. 
The current project will have the potential for scalability, replicability and generating co-benefits 
through the combined impact of its investments at the national, district and household level and through 
facilitating interaction and alliances with the private sector which will sustain beyond the project period. The 
centrality of the District Climate Diagnostics to define priority interventions with the communities represents 
a change in paradigm for the planning at district and river basin level, and with the growing importance given 
by the Government to watershed management it has a potential repercussion also for planning at watershed 
level. The analyses carried out at design stage assessed that the project will have a medium to high impact 
on the degree to which it can influence replication, scaling up and generating co-benefits and the participation 
of women.  The proposal provides for assessments of the extent to which the project could lead towards the 
paradigm shift and sustainable development potential. This assessment will be undertaken twice during its 
lifespan by applying the three assessment dimensions of scalability, replicability, and co-benefits. 
 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
106. While the main justification for the investments selected under the project is on the basis of their 
potential for mitigation and adaptation to climate change, the investments are expected to contribute to 
several Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) namely SDG 1 (no poverty), SDG 2 (zero hunger), SDG 5 
(gender equality), SDG 8 (economic growth), SDG 13 (Climate action), SDG 15 (life on land) and SDG 17 
(partnerships). An estimation of the impact in terms of environmental, social and economic co-benefits and 
gender sensitive development impact of the project is outlined below;  
 
107. 
Environmental co-benefits. The main environmental benefit of the project is expected to be from 
carbon sequestration as a result of the project investments on rangelands and forestry and reduced CO2 
emissions due to improved animal husbandry practices that help to improve animal diets and digestibility and 
increase their productivity. Also, Improved animal health service provision will lead to improved resilience to 
climate shocks and improved animal health and diets will in turn reduce GHG emissions from enteric 
fermentation (FAO, 2022). 164 However, additional environmental co-benefits are expected in terms of 
increase in biodiversity in pastures and forest areas. The degradation of pastures is threatening biodiversity 
of adjacent ecosystems. The project will help to strengthen pasture management through working closely 
with Village Organizations and Pasture User Unions which are expected to prepare pasture management 
plans, joint forest management plans and direct forest plantations and orchards, shelterbelts, etc. The 
temporary closure of pastures is expected to lead to their regeneration and increase plant diversity and foster 
nectar for pollinators and beneficial insects.165 The National Biodiversity and Biosafety Centre (NBBC) in 
Tajikistan is responsible for biological diversity in the country and it will be a key stakeholder in helping to 
protect threatened species in the pastures and forests. Joint Forest management also performs an essential 
function in regulating the water balance, improving slope stability and providing protection against soil 
erosion. At the farm level, the project will introduce crop and livestock production practices through farmer 
field schools that result in additional co-benefits such as improving soil fertility, increase in water retention, 
improved pollination potential, and landscape restoration, etc. 
 
108. 
CASP+ is piloting the new biodiversity assessment tool developed by FAO called B-INTACT166. A 
preliminary analysis based on a number of assumptions has been undertaken on four watersheds in Rudaki, 
Mastchoh, Sh. Shohin and Dangara to assess the impact the project interventions will have on biodiversity. 
As information on specific land use changes resulting from project interventions become available, the 
analysis will be updated and refined. During project implementation, B-INTACT can be used as a 
participatory decision-making tool to identify areas where the positive impact on biodiversity would be 
greatest. Overall, the preliminary analysis has shown that the impact on biodiversity in the four watersheds 
identified is positive with the level of biodiversity intactness increasing in all case studies. Detailed results 
are presented in the Annex 16. 
 
109. 
Social co-benefits: There are several social co-benefits expected from the project as a result of the 
participatory village based approach that will be adopted and the strengthening of Pasture User Unions and 
joint forest management committees. The facilitation of local people in resolving land use conflicts and 
managing the pastures and forests sustainably in pilot districts where this approach has been implemented 
by GIZ earlier has shown that it has helped to slow the rate of forest degradation and promote the

=== PAGE 46 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 42 
 
 
 
 
rehabilitation of existing forests. Communities were also encouraged to work out agreements designed to 
prevent conflicts of interest between forest and pastureland users.167  Another social benefit that the project 
may generate on account of enhanced climate resilience is reduction in migration. A study in the project area 
in the country found that international migration was the most common strategy adopted by households to 
cope with shocks and climate risks. Remittances account for 43% of Tajikistan’s GDP. Half of households 
who experienced a wage reduction or job loss resorted to migration as a coping strategy. Migration was also 
most frequent in response to economic shocks and loss of assets through livestock disease. More than a 
third of drought events triggered migration by at least one household member in the project area.168 While 
migration has many positive economic impacts some of its negative impacts include difficulties for women 
in managing the household work and in child rearing in the absence of fathers and the impact on children’s 
education and the negative effects of labour migration on expanding child labour in the Tajik society, 
particularly in early ages and, negative psychological effects of labour migration on migrants’ wives. 169  Thus, 
a positive social co-benefit of investments that make livelihoods more sustainable and resilient would be the 
avoidance of the negative effects of labour migration on family cohesion and psych-sociological well-being 
and the reduction of burden it places on women and its positive impact on education and child labour.  
 
110. 
Economic-Co-benefits: While the project will generate direct economic benefits from many of the 
activities that it will finance in order to enhance the resilience of communities and households to climate 
risks, it is also expected to generate economic co-benefits as a result of many of its activities in the 
implementation of Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAPs) and the support that will be provided 
to farming households in making the farming practices more resilient through FFS, provision of modern 
technology, assets and the links with the private sector. There are several ways in which the project is 
expected to generate economic co-benefits through the multiplier affects it will generate. With the twofold 
approach envisaged in component 3 of strengthening the link between rural producers form the project area 
(organized in CIGs) and private entrepreneurs and linking the latter with existing supply of financial 
instruments 170 the project will also contribute to increase financial inclusion as well as the enabling 
environment.171 In addition, the infrastructure investments and the mechanization will lead to use of these 
services for a range of productive purposes. The construction of the schemes and the operation and 
maintenance the equipment provided will generate jobs for the young people.  It is estimated that the labour 
generated from infrastructure investments will lead to an increase in over 2,100 full-time equivalent jobs172 
and that the forest plantations will lead to an additional 2,280 jobs (Annex 2).  The management and 
protection of forests is likely to increase access to a range of timber products and non-timber products such 
as fodder, tree seedlings, medicinal plants, fruit and nuts which can be sold locally and may also open up 
opportunities for eco-tourism. The approach of the project to enhance links with the private sector in the 
provision of inputs and technologies for building climate adaptive practices and for increased off-take of farm 
produce will lead to strengthening the overall farm orientation for commercial production. It will build 
productive alliances with the private sector and contribute to reduction in wastage especially of perishable 
produce particularly dairy and fruits and vegetables that is likely to extend beyond the value chains that the 
project will be directly engaged in.  
 
111. 
Gender Sensitive Development Impact: CASP+ builds on a number of lessons and evidence 
accrued in the various IFAD-financed projects in the country, including on the improved livelihoods and role 
of women in their communities and institutions. Similar approaches in the country (Annex 18e) have shown 
significant improvements for women headed households’ agricultural income (from crop, milk, value of 
livestock sales). Overall, CASP+ includes several provisions to address the relevant gender-based barriers 
detected in the gender assessment (Annex 8), such as insufficient leadership/ participation in policy, access 
to resources, to financial / non-financial services and economic opportunities. Indicators at output level for 
each component measure access to products and services with disaggregation by sex and respective 
targets. Project’s outcome surveys will measure behavioural changes at higher result level. Specifically, 
CASP+ has placed significant emphasis on women inclusion, including at community level, to improve 
women empowerment and their participation in institutions decision making processes. The activities 
supported under the project will address the needs of women to correct prevailing inequalities in climate 
change vulnerability and risks. One of the key challenges that women face is because migration has become 
an adaptation strategy for many, as 30 to 40 percent of households in Tajikistan have at least one member 
working abroad.173 This leaves women facing additional challenges, including dealing with a disproportionate

=== PAGE 47 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 43 
 
 
 
 
burden of the adverse impacts of disasters such as increasing drought and floods on their households and 
communities. In order to redress this, the project will prioritize technical support to women by developing 
gender-sensitive training and extension services which would better prepare their households to manage 
risks from drought, floods and other hazards. Women’s participation in the dialogues to identify the priorities 
of the CsCAPs and the joint forest management plans will be ensured. The project will encourage the access 
for women to improved natural resources (forests and rangelands) to ensure equitable distribution of benefits 
such as processing and marketing of non-wood forest products. Special quotas will be fixed for women and 
youth for their inclusion in project activities. Assessment of impact of similar IFAD’s projects in the country174 
confirms that woman and women headed households can benefit from community action plans investment 
(grounding the CsCAPs), in terms of livestock-related income as well as participation in the decision-making 
process at village and Pasture User Union Level. CASP+ target for women inclusion is not only limited to 
the women share of beneficiaries target (40%) but also on the governance of the CsCAPs. Moreover, 
quantitative and qualitative analysis of past IFAD experience showed also positive results of Community 
Action Plan’s on children school attendance.175 In project implementation, particular attention will be paid to 
promote women and youth engagement in business opportunities in the project supported value chains 
(Annex 8). 
 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
112. 
Tajikistan is a transition country with a per-capita gross national income oscillating between low-
income and lower-middle-income. It is one of the poorest countries in Central Asia (confirmed for the recent 
years as low-middle income country – WB, 2021) and one of the highest ranked among the countries of 
Europe and Central Asia in terms of the of vulnerability to climate change, being a particularly sensitive 
country due to its low adaptive capacity.176 Climate-induced extreme weather events recurrently destroy 
land, crops, infrastructures, and livelihoods. Agriculture is the second largest sector of the economy, 
accounting for 19% of the country’s GDP and 51% of its employment in 2018.177 Of the permanent cropland, 
only 68% is irrigated which makes Tajikistan the Central Asian country with the lowest irrigated land to 
population ratio.178 Cotton, the country’s most important cash crop, as well as other primary agricultural 
products such as fruits and vegetables are all water-intensive crops. This situation partially accounts for 
Tajikistan’s high susceptibility to the effects of climate change. This vulnerability is further enhanced as 
remittances, primarily from migrants working in Russia, accounted for approximately 31% of Tajikistan’s 
GDP in 2018.179 These remittances make Tajikistan one of the countries most economically dependent 
on external factors and vulnerable to global market fluctuations. Another factor which makes Tajikistan 
vulnerable is its dependence on hydropower for energy generation which is also vulnerable to climatic 
and hydrologic variability and the effects of climate change. Extreme weather and climate risks in Tajikistan 
have led to frequent damages to houses, roads, bridges, riverbank enforcement structures, and other 
infrastructure such as irrigation channels and electric lines. A study from 2019 identified mudflows, droughts, 
high temperatures, and strong winds as main climate-related risks that cause damages and losses to many 
types of infrastructure.180 It is estimated that the cost of environmental degradation and climate change 
will reduce the GDP per capita by up to 15% by 2100.181  
 
113. 
Tajikistan is the poorest countries in Central Asia, and has a low private sector presence. According 
to World Bank and Asian Development Bank analyses, public investment has been the principal form of 
capital formation, as the share of private investment has been extremely low. Private investment is estimated 
to have averaged only about 4% of GDP since 2000, well below the 21% of GDP average for the 
Commonwealth of Independent States during this period. This partly reflects the private sector’s small share 
of economic activity as state-owned enterprises, accounting for about 17% of GDP and employing about 
24% of the labour force as of 2018, dominate many economic sectors (IMF, 2021)182. The presence of a 
formal private sector is limited in the remote mountainous areas targeted by the project, while private and 
community institutions are active. The entry point of the project are Village Organizations and other member 
based organizations such as Pasture Users Unions that pre-exist and facilitate the outreach to reach climate 
vulnerable population with appropriate instruments. The financial system has a limited penetration in the 
project areas. Active IFIs such as ADB have recently integrated in the country strategy the need to enhance 
financial system in the country183, and to bring a wide set of reforms to “enhance resource allocation and 
mobilization, improving labour productivity through human capital development, and fostering better

=== PAGE 48 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 44 
 
 
 
 
livelihoods by investing in the land-linked economy”.184  In order to strengthen the link between project 
stakeholders and financial service providers, the project will work through common interest groups, 
facilitating liaisons with existing climate-sensitive credit lines. This represents a promising innovation to 
ensure the progressive commercialization of on- and off-farm rural economic activities in the target areas.   
 
114. 
Tajikistan’s relatively low level of socio-economic development, its inadequate infrastructure, as 
well as its high dependency on climate-sensitive sectors make the country extremely vulnerable to the 
risks associated with climate change and related climate-induced extreme weather events. Climate 
change, environment shocks and stressors affect the agriculture sector and the rural poor who have limited 
resources and capacities to adapt. It is estimated that by 2050, the population living in climatically vulnerable 
areas will increase by 77%, and that some parts of Tajikistan may experience a fall in agricultural yields by 
30% by the end of this century185 (Annex 2.1). The Climate Adaptation in Rural Development (CARD)186 
tool predicts that without irrigation, yields are more volatile and rely entirely on climatic variability and 
hazards. Climate change affects both systems - with and without irrigation - and under the pessimistic risk 
setting all crops’ yield are projected to decrease. The main factors for decreasing yields are expected to 
include reduced runoff during the critical growing season and heat stress negatively impacting yields of key 
crops like wheat. There is an accelerated rate of soil erosion caused by extreme weather events, 
deteriorating water availability and quality due to increasing glacial melt and the loss of biodiversity, 
among other factors. The increasing frequency and intensity of extreme weather events, as well as the 
change in the hydrological cycle, is leading to land degradation, erosion of fertile top soil and reducing 
agro-pastoral productivity which impacts the food and nutrition security187 and contributes to biodiversity 
loss.   
 
115. 
The climate change vulnerability analyses suggest higher adaptation needs in rural mountainous 
area, with predominance of agroforestry and livestock related livelihoods.188,189 Livestock is being impacted, 
through increasing pressure on pastures which are already subject to overgrazing and degradation as well 
as by effects on animal productivity from higher temperatures and increased livestock morbidity and 
mortality.  Rather than reduce herd size, farmers tend to increase herd size of low quality animals in order 
to diversify their risk.  In order to adapt to the increasing challenges, rural communities require support for a 
more sustainable use of their pasture and forests on which there is significant reliance.  The higher 
temperatures combined with higher levels of flood-related water contamination are projected to also 
impact human health and increase the incidence of infectious disease outbreaks and increase the risks 
of water and foodborne diseases such as gastrointestinal infections. At the same time, the country’s 
health care infrastructure is in a precarious state and unable to deal with these growing threats. 
 
116. 
The ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine is expected to have consequences on Tajik 
economy, especially for the poorest segments of the rural and urban populations. This impact is even 
stronger as compounding to the recessional effects of the covid-19 pandemic. The restricted access to grain 
(wheat in particular) and fertilizers is expected to have a negative impact on the indebted economy of 
Tajikistan190, 191. In such context, CASP+ approach will not have the potential to restore the economic 
disruption nor the negative impact on purchasing power over food. Nonetheless, through its investment, it 
has a significant potential to absorb major negative impacts due to its investment in rural livelihoods, 
especially agriculture ones, and with smallholder farmers. The highest share of project investment is directed 
to support climate resilience in remote rural communities targeted by the project. These areas have been 
often origin of migration (especially male and youth). Such investments will allow to enhance the economic 
activities and absorb the expected increased labour supply deriving from the return if migrant workers. 
Specific interventions such as the support to Common Interest Groups (CIGs) is expected to generate a 
positive spin to the economy.   
 
117. 
Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population. Over the 
past decade, Tajikistan has made steady progress in reducing poverty and growing its economy. Between 
2000 and 2022, the poverty rate fell from 83 percent of the population to 22.5 percent (World Bank), while 
the economy grew at an average rate of 7 percent per year. There is substantial spatial and seasonal 
variation in poverty. Most rural areas are poorer than urban ones, and poverty and income insecurity are 
higher during winter and spring.192 The poor are concentrated in rural areas (81%) with some areas showing

=== PAGE 49 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 45 
 
 
 
 
much higher rates than others. Non-monetary poverty indicators in rural areas remain high, and, only 36 
percent of the population in rural regions has access to safe drinking water.193  While the official literacy 
rate in Tajikistan is 98%, the poor quality of education since 1991 has reduced the skill level of younger 
people. Although education is compulsory, many children fail to attend because of economic needs and 
security concerns in some regions. Even those who have graduated find it difficult to secure employment. 
The rate of job creation has not kept pace with the growing population. A large number of people have to 
seek employment outside the country, leaving the economy vulnerable to external shocks. The private 
sector’s role in the economy remains limited, contributing to only 13 percent of formal employment and 15 
percent of total investments.  
 
118. 
Absence of alternative sources of financing. The Government does not have the resources to 
make investments in many areas that are critical for its long-term development. In addition, the fiscal space 
of the country is limited, and IFIs already investing in rural areas are addressing rural development and 
related infrastructure, but none is addressing the climate vulnerability of mountainous rural population. GCF 
financing represents a unique opportunity to complement to any other external (or domestic) financing to 
address climate-vulnerable rural communities in mountainous areas. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a 
significant adverse impact on the Tajik economy. Real GDP growth slowed to 4.2 percent in the first nine 
months of 2020, compared to 7.2 percent a year earlier. The external current account has faced a 
deterioration due to weak exports and remittances and increased imports and the risk of debt distress for 
Tajikistan remains high.194  A growing share of the population reported reducing their food intake and overall 
consumption in order to cope with the changed circumstances. In an effort to ameliorate the economic fallout, 
the authorities deferred tax collections, boosted health and social spending, and eased monetary policy. In 
Tajikistan, gross financing needs are expected to increase from 3.8% of GDP in 2019 to 7.7% by the end of 
2020.195 The general reduction of the fiscal capacity of the country has put considerable pressure on the 
Government which is, on the one hand, reluctant to take additional loans and on the other hand, needs 
additional financial support to meet the challenge posed by the pandemic. In this situation, the Government 
is unable to make much needed investments in areas which are being increasingly threatened by a host of 
challenges including climate change. In addition, the major IFIs (and since 2022 also IFAD) are providing 
the country with grant financing only, including ADB and the World Bank (the latter financing the RESILAND 
project which targets rural population with similar profile to CASP+). 
 
119. 
The public debt nearly doubled as a share of GDP, from 27.7% to 50.3%, while total external debt 
(public and private) jumped from 45.4% of GDP to 72.0%—more than twice the average for lower-middle 
income countries. Bank recapitalization in 2016 and the issuance of a $500 million sovereign Eurobond in 
2017 to support the Rogun project were the main reasons for the rise in debt ratios. The latest debt 
sustainability analysis (2023 Article IV report) by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) highlights that 
Tajikistan’s debt is currently assessed as sustainable, but there is a high risk of debt distress in the context 
of limited fiscal space. The debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to decline to 40.0 percent by 2026. However, 
under the baseline, the external debt service-to-exports ratio breaches its threshold at Eurobond payment 
due dates (2025-27), contributing to a higher external risk rating. This highlights also the reason for a higher 
grant over loan financing, to face debt distress risks as well as to ensure feasibility of the required investment, 
typically long payback periods.  
 
120. 
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity. Tajikistan still lacks an 
efficient climate-related policy and a legal framework that could incentivise authorities to pursue climate 
adaptation-related initiatives. In addition, as part of the development of the National Climate Change 
Adaptation Strategy, a capacity assessment was conducted, which identified the following challenges: i) 
limited awareness of adaptation benefits among the public and experts; ii) insufficient institutional flexibility 
and technical capacity of sector experts to implement innovative adaptation projects and programmes; iii) 
limited sectoral access and institutional capacity to collect, process and disseminate hydrological and 
meteorological data and information; iv) limited knowledge and skills of government employees who work 
on climate change issues; and v) limited national funding to implement and monitor adaptation projects and 
programmes.196 The GoT has received assistance from UNDP and has developed an initial roadmap of the 
NAP process which is being supported by a GCF Readiness grant. This project is helping to strengthen 
some of the institutions at the national level for enhanced coordination for the management of natural

=== PAGE 50 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 46 
 
 
 
 
resources. In addition, the current CASP+ is also designed to further strengthen the coordination among 
institutions at the national and district level as well as identify areas for policy refinement and build the 
technical capacity for understanding and planning for adaptation to climate risks and implementing mitigation 
measures and green economy initiatives. There is also a need to strengthen the capacity of district and 
Jamoat governments to better integrate climate vulnerability into their development planning.  
 
121. 
The above elements require a steady process of inclusive involvement, engagement, monitoring and 
learning that reaches its highest potential with a continuous and long lasting accompaniment. In addition, 
some of the project specific investment, e.g., joint forest management as element to involve private sector 
on mechanisms that restore ecosystem resilience to climate change, require time and have a typical long-
term path to unfold their full potential (see Annex 5 and Annex 21).  
 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Existing national climate strategy 
 
122. 
Tajikistan has been active in submitting in submitting its Intended National Determined Contributions 
(INDC), following the 2015 Paris Agreement,197 and has submitted in 2021 the updated NDC. The country 
has submitted three National Communications under the UNFCCC in 2002, 2008 and in 2014. The fourth 
National Communication is under development. The preparatory documents include inventories of 
greenhouse gas emissions and sinks, a vulnerability analysis of ecosystems and the economy, preliminary 
adaptation recommendations, and mitigation analysis. The National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 
(NCCAS),198 which was approved in October 2019 by Tajikistan’s cabinet, articulates the country’s vision 
over the next decade for adaptation and developing projects that address the country’s adaptation needs. 
Tajikistan’s NCCAS highlight’s agriculture, water, energy, and transport as priority areas for implementing 
adaptation practices in light of climate change. The Government of the Republic of Tajikistan is also finalising 
an update of its 2010 National Strategy on Disaster Risk Management (NDSRR). This document voices the 
government’s need to align climate change adaptation with its disaster risk reduction and management 
policies. The government is in the process of developing a National Adaptation Plan (NAP) with UNDP 
assistance with GCF readiness support to complete the NAP.  
 
Ongoing and upcoming Climate Finance projects in the country (including GCF, GEF, IFIs) 
123. 
CASP+ presents a number of synergies with existing climate finance portfolio in the country. in this 
context, CASP+ addresses a specific segment of climate vulnerability, notably rural mountainous 
communities (as shown in Annex 2.1 and Annex 16, both on climate scenarios), largely suffering from lack 
of funding by major donors and by the government. Here below a summary of the major relevant 
interventions, while detailed information is provided in Annex 27 (Synergies with Climate Finance in 
Tajikistan).  
 
124. 
Synergies with GCF portfolio. There are currently five approved GCF funded projects under 
implementation in Tajikistan as well as three relevant readiness grants approved – including one for 
strengthening the NDA, one for developing a NAP and a recently approved on to support the country capacity 
to access and deploy climate finance - and several international Accredited Entities active in the country. 
CASP+ has been designed in close coordination with all institutions implementing the GCF-funded projects. 
Detailed information on CASP+ complements to these interventions is provided in Annex 27. Synergies with 
Climate Finance in Tajikistan. Here below a short summary of all relevant ongoing investment. 
o FP014, “Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Program For the Aral Sea Basin (CAMP4ASB)” a 
World Bank Group programme active in Uzbekistan and Tajikistan, targeting the poorest and 
most climate-vulnerable rural communities. 
o FP025, “GCF-EBRD Sustainable Energy and Climate Resilience Financing Facility (SEFF)”, a 
cross-cutting multi-country program providing credit lines to local Partner Financial Institutions 
(PFIs) in 13 countries across Southern and Eastern Europe, the Middle East and North Africa, 
Western Asia, and Central Asia. This programme will support MSMEs investment, with special 
focus on companies and households’ energy efficiency and renewable energy.

=== PAGE 51 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 47 
 
 
 
 
o FP040, titled “Scaling Up Hydropower Sector Climate Resilience”, is an EBRD adaptation 
project supporting to cope with new climate conditions, including increased severe floodings.  
o FP067, titled “Building climate resilience of vulnerable and food insecure communities through 
capacity strengthening and livelihood diversification in mountainous regions of Tajikistan” is an 
adaptation project focused on food insecurity run by WFP. The project will focus on the most 
vulnerable and food insecure communities in the Rasht valley, Khatlon and Gorno-Badakhshan 
Autonomous Region (GBAO) regions.  
o FP075, titled “Institutional Development of the State Agency for Hydrometeorology of 
Tajikistan”, a programme implemented by ADB to support capacity building and development 
of hydrological and meteorological data and information in Tajikistan.  
 
125. 
Synergies with GEF portfolio. Key asset for CASP+ is the pivotal role played by the CEP as NDA 
as well as Executing Entity. CEP is currently supervising and implementing projects co-financed by GEF, 
including: a. under GEF 7 regional “Integrated natural resources management in drought-prone and salt-
affected agricultural production landscapes in Central Asia and Turkey (CACILM-II)” (the central role of CEP 
and FAO in this project (both CASP+ EE) is an asset to generate synergies and build on CACILM-II results 
in Tajikistan), and b. under GEF 8 allocation, IFAD is currently developing the “Tajikistan Ecosystem 
Restoration and Resilient Agriculture (TERRA)”, expected to contribute to the NDCs in line with the ones of 
CASP+, specifically on climate resilience diagnostics (CASP+ output 2.1), and the community climate 
resilience investment (output 2.2). Detailed information on CASP+ complements to these interventions is 
provided in Annex 27. 
 
126. 
Synergies with other IFIs’ portfolios. The World Bank and ADB are implementing and planning 
additional climate finance projects (additional details in Annex 27). These include: ADB’s “Resilient 
Livelihoods and Empowerment of Rural Women Project” 199, aiming to increase resilience and improve 
livelihoods of rural women in the Khatlon province; “Enhancing climate resilience in the Pyanj River Basin”, 
aimed to support job creation and entrepreneurship for women in the agriculture sector. Coordination will be 
ensured to avoid overlapping at village level, and to create synergies with similar activities envisaged in 
CASP+ component 3. the World Bank’s Resilient Landscape Restoration Project –RESILAND (2022-2027, 
US$ 45.0m), aiming to sustainable landscape management, and “Tajikistan Strengthening Water and 
Irrigation Management” (2022-2027, US$ US$ 47.3m), on water resources planning and irrigation 
management . In addition to the above, IFAD-funded projects such as “Livestock and Pasture Development 
Programme – phase II” in particular (2017-2024, US$40.6m), showed how community investment and 
improvement in livestock breeds, feed and husbandry practices jointly with pasture improvement can lead 
to increased income (+15 percent), improved rangeland (through improved infrastructure and rotational 
grazing), and reduced the livestock inventories (-29 percent).200 
 
127. 
For all climate finance interventions, the coordination at country level through the NDA and the 
other CASP+ executing entities will ensure synergies and complementarities. Moreover, the village selection 
criteria of CASP+ (detailed in Annex 21, CASP+ Project implementation manual) include complementarity 
with other financed interventions, and this principle applies also to ADB and World Bank, as well as other 
development partners.  
 
Alignment with existing policies such as NDCs, NAMAs, and NAPs 
128. 
The current project is aligned with the existing policies and priorities of the country given that the 
GoT prioritises of reducing the country’s vulnerability to climate change via adaptation and increased 
resilience. The NDC (2021)201 identifies agriculture and forestry among the vehicles to ensure a progressive 
reduction of climate change vulnerability as well as to enhance the carbon sequestration potential of the 
country, and soil protection, grazing management, and tree plantation as needed investments for adaptation 
and disaster risk reduction. Tajikistan has developed a National Development Strategy, which defines socio-
economic development priorities for the country until 2030. This strategy integrates climate change needs, 
disaster risk reduction, and social inclusiveness, specifically focusing on gender-based development. CEP 
has also prepared a Country Programme for the GCF (2019 – 2021)202 in order to define short-term and 
long-term investment priorities for the GCF in Tajikistan. There are five Strategic Pillars defined by the 
Country Programme where GCF investments are needed: I) Agriculture and Forests; II) Transport; III)

=== PAGE 52 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 48 
 
 
 
 
Energy; IV) Water resources; V) Cross-sectoral areas of activity (Education, Public Health Services, and 
Migration). CASP+ focuses on the first pillar and indirectly on the water resources.  The project will focus on 
the pasture and forestry sectors where development has lagged behind. While the country has a pasture 
law, it needs assistance in building technical capacity at the national level for green investments, enhanced 
adaptation policy and planning, improved capacity for disaster risk reduction and improved pasture and 
forestry development and management. The Government is committed to forest renewal, conservation and 
sustainable management, contributing to climate change mitigation. However, while there is an up-to-date 
forestry legislation it is not being implemented because of lack of capacity and financial resources. Its other 
objectives are to maintain biodiversity, improve the livelihoods of local people and leverage public and 
private finance. 
 
129. 
CASP+ investments provide incentives for the government to take action and implement a range of 
policies and strategies designed to reform and strengthen natural resource management. Responding to 
country and stakeholders needs, CASP+ builds on successful ongoing and past practices and is 
designed to mobilize climate finance (GCF and IFAD) to address the national climate change adaptation 
and mitigation goals in line with the national commitments and strategic framework on climate change, 
natural resources management, disaster risk reduction and SDGs. 203 Besides supporting the Intended 
Nationally Determined Contribution,204 the National Disaster Risk Reduction Strategy (2019-2030), 
and the National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 2030, the project will contribute to operationalize 
and strengthen the execution of key government priorities outlined below.   
• 
The National Development Strategy 2015-2030, in its efforts jointly with the Mid-Term 
Development Programme (2016-2020) to promote increased access to resources and ensuring 
rational and sustainable use of agricultural land and water. With technical support from FAO, MoA 
has recently formulated the National Agricultural Investment Plan (NIP) for Sustainable 
Agriculture Development and Food Security 2021-2030. The NIP defines investment priorities 
for public and development partners, as well as measures to unlock private sector investments 
for food and nutrition security and sustainable agriculture. These include investments in forestry, 
pasture, livestock intensification.  
• 
The Water Sector Reform Programme (2016-2025). Building on the ongoing efforts of the 
relevant national, basin and sub-basin level institutions,205 CASP+ will support the adoption of 
the principles of Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM),206 which take into account 
social, economic and environmental interests through sustainable and balanced management 
and development of water resources.  
• 
The Strategy for the Development of the Forestry Sector (2016-2030), currently under final 
revision, outlines efforts for sustainable forest management and integrated development of the 
forest sector via afforestation and reforestation,207 together with measures to limit pressures 
associated with unsustainable livestock grazing. CASP+ will provide support in enhancing natural 
forest regeneration potential.  
• 
The Comprehensive Program for the Development of the Livestock Sector (2018-2022), in 
its efforts to promote pasture improvement, productivity enhancement and rational use of 
pastures as key factors identified for improving the livestock sector,208 and essential to contribute 
to the country’s food security due to the importance of pasture for livestock feeding. In the same 
domain, CASP+ is also relevant to the Pasture Development Programme (2016-2020 –
ongoing). This Programme aims at supporting the rolling out of the institutional mechanisms of 
the Pasture Law regarding the Pasture User Unions (PUUs), Pasture Commissions and Pasture 
Management Plans.  
 
Capacity of Accredited Entities or Executing Entities to deliver 
130. 
IFAD, the AE for the project has global experience in designing and supervising rural development 
investments and is mainstreaming climate change throughout its portfolio. IFAD has considerable 
experience in Tajikistan in designing and supervising investments in rural areas. The Fund has invested in 
four projects in the country valued at USD 180 million.  These include the Khatlon Livelihoods Support 
Project (KLSP, USD 12.3m), the Livestock and Pasture Development Project (LPDP -I, USD 15.8m, LPDP-
II, USD 24.2m) and the Community-Based Agriculture Support Programme (CASP, USD 39.3m). IFAD has

=== PAGE 53 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 49 
 
 
 
 
been entrusted to manage the climate funds of a large number of agencies such as the Adaptation for 
Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP), the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) and GCF. ASAP is 
the largest global climate adaptation programme for smallholder farmers. Through this mechanisms, IFAD 
channels climate and environmental finance to smallholder farmers, helping them to reduce poverty, 
enhance biodiversity, increase yields and lower greenhouse gas emissions. IFAD and GCF signed an 
Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) in September 2018 (renewed in October 2023). Since then IFAD 
has successfully submitted the following proposals: (i) FP101, Belize: Resilient Rural Belize (Feb 2019); (ii) 
SAP012, Niger: Inclusive Green Financing for Climate Resilient and Low Emission Smallholder Agriculture 
(Nov 2020); (iii) FP143, Brazil: Planting Climate Resilience in Rural Communities of the Northeast (Nov 
2020); (iv) FP162, West Africa: The Africa Integrated Climate Risk Management Programme: Building 
resilience of smallholder farmers to climate change impacts in 7 Sahelian Great Green Wall Countries (Mar 
2021); (v) FP183, West Africa: Inclusive Green Financing Initiative, IGREENFIN (March 2022); and (vi) 
FP220, East Africa: Africa Rural Climate Adaptation Finance Mechanism, ARCAFIM (Oct 2023). 
 
131. 
CEP is the NDA and an Executing Entity for the project. Its Center for Implementation of Investment 
Projects (CEP-CIIP) is currently the executing entity for the implementation of the GCF-funded Climate 
Adaptation and Mitigation Program for the Aral Sea Basin (CAMP4ASB).209 CEP also coordinates with WFP 
for the GCF-funded “Building climate resilience of vulnerable and food insecure communities” 
(USD10.0 m). 210 With ADB it is implementing the “Institutional Development of the State Agency for 
Hydrometeorology” (USD10.0m),211 and has close collaboration with UNDP and FAO on the GCF Readiness 
projects as well as with all relevant development partners engaged in climate finance. CEP is also the 
implementing agency for all forestry management projects of UNDP, WB, and WFP. CEP is a key executing 
entity for CASP+ and will coordinate the implementation of the project at the national level and will provide 
its technical expertise for identifying priority villages based on climate vulnerability analysis. CEP has district 
units with permanent staff in each district of Tajikistan. CEP also has departments at the provincial level. 
The total staffing levels at CEP are approximately 400, with approximately 40 people working at the central 
office in Dushanbe. At the provincial and district level the departments conduct monitoring and oversight 
of the policies adopted at the central level while coordinating with authorities at the province, district, and 
sub-district levels. At the sub-district level regulate and monitor environmentally damaging activities with 
the approval of the national CEP office in Dushanbe.  
 
132. 
The PMU was established within the MoA in 2012 to support the implementation of investment 
projects in the agriculture sector. PMU has been managing IFAD-financed investment projects valued at 
USD 91.6 million. The PMU has successfully implemented LPDP-I and KLSP, and is implementing LPDP-II 
and CASP. It has solid experience in rural areas where the population face challenges similar to those of 
CASP+ target groups. It has a team of 33 specialists, covering a wide range of expertise in project 
management, financial, procurement functions as well as technical expertise in pasture, animal husbandry 
and health, agriculture, climate change adaptation, community mobilization, gender and social inclusion. It 
has technical experts and civil engineers, business development, GIS and M&E specialists. Its capacity will 
be further strengthened for the implementation of CASP+.  
 
133. 
FAO has a solid record of technical assistance in the country on climate change, including on policy 
support as well as mitigation and adaptation interventions. Its assistance has evolved from providing 
emergency assistance to deal with locust attacks to a more comprehensive approach to build a sustainable 
and competitive agriculture sector, including improved food security and nutrition, and resilience to climate 
change. Currently, FAO is engaged with CEP on the Readiness Programme, including the update of the 
NDC and other climate change focused projects. FAO is currently supervising and executing a large climate 
finance portfolio, including GCF-funded FP 116, Kyrgyzstan: Carbon-sequestration through climate 
investment in Forests and Rangelands (USD 49.9 m) and SAP 014, Armenia: Forest resilience of Armenia, 
enhancing adaptation and rural green growth via mitigation (USD 18.7m). 
 
Role of National Designated Authority 
134. 
In 2014, the GoT appointed CEP as the NDA for issues related to the GCF. In its capacity as the 
NDA, CEP has demonstrated good capacity to lead the climate investment programming in the country. It

=== PAGE 54 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 50 
 
 
 
 
has coordinated the policy and investment framework on climate investments. CEP was established in 2008 
as a specialized agency overseeing the use of natural resources and environmental protection and serves 
as the central government authority responsible for implementation of public policy in the area of 
environmental conservation, hydrometeorology, and rational use of natural resources. The NAP support 
project is further strengthening the capacity of CEP.  
 
Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders, including indigenous 
peoples, women and other vulnerable groups  
135. 
Civil society in Tajikistan represents a wide spectrum of organizations, ranging from communal and 
neighbourhood councils to more formal, officially registered public associations. Civil society organizations 
(CSOs) in Tajikistan are engaged in a wide range of activities. The impact of civil society on Tajikistan has 
increased as the number, scope and reach of CSOs has grown steadily. The Government also recognizes 
the role of these organizations in mobilizing communities. Civil society has become a crucial bridge between 
the people and the public sector in many initiatives.212 According to the Ministry of Justice (MoJ), as of 
January 2015, there were 2,685 public associations registered in the country. There were also 1,400 legally 
registered Village Organizations (VOs), some of which have formed higher level organization such as Social 
Unions for the Development of VOs (SUDVOs). In addition, there are also very specific purpose 
organizations made up of community members with roles and responsibilities specified by legislation which 
include over seventy Water Users Associations (WUAs) 213  and around 54 PUUs. The civil society 
organizations and community-based organizations will play a key role in the mobilization of the communities 
through the well tested Village organization approach and through them identify climate sensitive community 
action plans. The inclusion of women in the current project will be facilitated through an approach that will 
both mainstream women and youth as well as through project staff and specialist agencies such as the 
Committee for Women’s and Family Affairs. The project will also be aligned with the National Strategy for 
Enhancing the Role of women in the Republic and the Law on the State Guarantees of Equal Rights and 
Opportunities for Men and Women.  Section G.2 below outlines the gender strategy of the project and Annex 
8 outlines a more detailed Gender Action Plan.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
136. 
The financial structure of the project has been designed to ensure that the proposal’s objectives are 
achieved and that the key constraints at the national community and household level are addressed in a 
manner which reduces CO2 equivalent emissions and assists in climate risk adaptation in an effective 
manner. The level of income and indebtedness is a key factor in determining the level of concession being 
requested for the country (Section B.5). GCF funds have been able to leverage third party financing from 
external and internal sources in a ratio of 1:1.04214. The grant elements are being allocated for incremental 
costs and will not displace any investments that would otherwise have occurred. At the level of the 
households and common interest groups, the grants will defray part of the household investment and will 
cover the risk premium required to make the investment viable. Due to the common property nature of the 
resources that are being developed (pastures, forests, agricultural land), and ecosystem services (bio-
diversity, CO2e sequestration) there is market failure and limited incentive for the private sector to work with 
smallholders to help them enhance their adaptive capacity due to the high risks and transaction costs of 
working with small producers. The investments are designed to bridge these constraints.  
 
137. 
An analysis of the Value for Money Metrics of the Project shows that the project investment is highly 
justified based on both financial and economic analysis (Annex 3). CASP+ builds on a broader portfolio of 
IFAD-funded projects in the country (as referred to in Section B3, para 38), and by using the district climate 
resilience diagnostics as entry point to define investment priorities, the project is expected to complement 
efficiency and effectiveness under intermediate and worst-case climate scenarios (RCP 8.5).  A financial 
analysis was carried out to present the with- and without-project intervention scenarios using the indicative 
investment models that would be most likely supported by the project (see Annex 3) – using both RCP 8.5 
as basis and RCP 4.5 to test sensitivity. The key-indicators to assess the performance of the project include 
the net present values (NPVs) discounted at 11.0%215, financial and economic internal rate of return (FIRR 
– EIRR), benefit-cost ratio (B/C) and return to family labour. All models demonstrate a financial viability 
(results presented in Table 4 and Table 5, below) and compared to a scenario without concessional 
financing (using own resources for Component 2 investments and accessing loans for Component 3

=== PAGE 55 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 51 
 
 
 
 
investments). In addition, the project shows overall efficiency in the achievement of its mitigation targets, 
with a cost of about 11.68 USD/tCO2e in line with similar operations in the country216.  
 
138. 
Economic analysis. The illustrative models used in the financial analysis were used for the 
calculation of the overall benefit stream, on the basis of economic prices applying conversion factors and 
removing taxes and subsidies. The overall benefit stream has been generated based on the phasing of 
CsCAPs implementation in 400 villages over the 7-year project period and provision of grants aimed at 
strengthening livelihoods and enhanced resilience through market-based approaches (1020 grants through 
Window 1 and 110 grants through Window 2); and promotion of Productive Alliances (support of 9 models). 
The economic costs extracted from COSTAB application were used for the analysis. The economic analysis 
resulted in ENPV of US$178.3 million (discounted at 6%) and EIRR of 23.08%. Economic returns were 
tested against changes in benefits and costs, different adoption and discount rates scenarios, and for various 
lags in the realization of benefits. In relative terms, the EIRR is equally sensitive to changes in costs and in 
benefits. The results are presented in Table 6. 
 
139. 
Additional sensitivity analysis. The sensitivity of project investment was also tested against 
different levels of concessionality and in a more moderate climate scenario (RCP 4.5). As a result, the 
concessionality of project funded investment for communities and groups was set to the minimum level to 
a. help beneficiaries to overcome the lack of adapted and accessible financial products; b. help them in 
carrying out the required resilience investments; c. ensure that beneficiaries can afford the required 
investment (provided in-kind, as labour or local material), as well as d. maximize their ownership on 
community investment217. The project models were also tested also under an intermediate climate scenario 
(RCP 4.5), which presented more solid results, showing adequacy of the project to strengthen resilience 
even under a worst-case scenario, which was used as basis (Annex 3).  
 
Table 4.  Component 2. Financial Analysis Summary. 
 
 
Table 5.  Component 3. Financial Analysis Summary. 
 
 
CASP+
Beneficiary 
Contrib.
Total
Without 
Project
W. Project -
Full Dvt
Incremental
1. CsCAP adaptation investments (typical village) *
78,495
8,722
87,216
60,371
91,679
31,308
0.4
63.75%
147,540
2.29
10.93
11.9
18.81%
66,470
1.58
14.93
2. Riparian forest plantation (1ha JFM model)
1,427
75
1,502
0
235
235
0.16
29.70%
850
1.67
9.0
2.1
8.70%
(412)
0.93
20.0
3. Riparian forest plantation (1ha LH model)
1,465
77
1,542
0
238
238
0.15
13.46%
290
1.18
20.0
0.0
-0.51%
(1,418)
(0.61)
20.0
4. Fruit and nut plantation (1ha JFM model)
764
40
804
0
680
680
0.85
43.11%
3,903
5.63
6.5
15.9
25.12%
3,225
3.57
9.6
5. Fruit and nut plantation (1ha LH model)
1,926
101
2,027
0
456
456
0.22
38.12%
2,421
2.36
6.7
0.0
11.86%
631
2.15
11.1
6. Pistachio plantation (1ha JFM model)
1,086
57
1,143
0
179
179
0.16
37.47%
1,274
2.15
5.7
25.7
10.95%
261
1.24
17.8
7. Pistachio plantation (1ha LH model)
1,048
55
1,103
0
156
156
0.14
35.03%
1,070
2.01
5.9
0.0
9.79%
94
1.09
18.6
8. Juniper forest plantation (1ha JFM model)
755
40
795
0
71
71
0.09
19.51%
315
1.35
9.2
27.6
3.73%
(397)
0.56
16.5
9. Juniper forest plantation (1ha LH model)
755
40
795
0
74
74
0.09
14.98%
230
1.26
9.9
0.0
3.02%
(482)
0.46
17.6
10. Juniper nat. reg-n plantation (1ha JFM model)
607
32
639
0
26
26
0.04
24.15%
705
1.89
8.0
5.5
9.69%
129
1.16
12.0
11. Juniper nat. reg-n plantation (1ha LH model)
607
32
639
0
30
30
0.05
24.98%
729
1.92
7.9
0.0
9.96%
154
1.19
11.9
12. Saxaul plantation (1ha JFM model)
1,859
98
1,957
0
236
236
0.12
24.51%
322
1.17
5.7
44.3
-0.09%
(1,422)
0.25
9.0
13. Saxaul plantation (1ha LH model)
1,859
98
1,957
0
239
239
0.12
25.63%
347
1.18
5.6
0.0
0.11%
(1,397)
0.26
19.8
14. Agroforestry model (1ha JFM model)
1,589
98
1,686
0
249
249
0.15
32.19%
1,285
1.91
7.9
4.4
10.17%
(184)
0.87
20.0
15. Agroforestry model (1ha LH model)
1,465
77
1,542
0
252
252
0.16
32.87%
1,307
1.91
7.8
0.0
10.70%
(58)
0.96
20.0
NPV (US$)
Payback 
period 
(years)
Benefit-to-
cost ratio
CATEGORY
F
I
N
A
N
C
I
A
L
 
A
N
A
L
Y
S
I
S
Estimated Investment Costs (US$)
With grants (consessional financing)
Annual Inc. net 
benefits per 
1US$ of Inv.
IRR (%)
NPV (US$) Benefit-to-
cost ratio
Payback 
period 
(years)
Return to 
family labour 
(US$/day)
Annual Net Benefits (US$)
Summary table. Component 2 financial models
Without grants (no consessional financing)
CsCAP adaptation investments (typical village)
CsCAP forestry investments (1ha models)
IRR (%)
CASP+
Beneficiary 
Contrib.
Total
Without 
Project
W. Project -
Full Dvt
Incremental
16. Bee-keeping model
7,151
795
7,945
0
1,083
1,083
0.14
14.90%
2,064
1.26
7.21
26.7
11.80%
389
1.05
10.23
17. Greenhouse model
7,771
863
8,635
0
1,403
1,403
0.16
18.46%
3,331
1.39
6.01
9.4
14.92%
1,751
1.20
8.27
18. Drip irrigation model
7,799
867
8,666
22,589
25,551
2,962
0.34
11.89%
1,419
1.07
2.51
151.5
9.63%
-1,562
0.93
5.73
19. Cold storage model
40,137
10,034
50,172
0
16,261
16,261
0.32
44.48%
81,682
2.15
2.18
0.0
43.14%
71,820
2.01
9.87
20. Vacuum dryer model
31,839
7,960
39,798
0
10,916
10,916
0.27
52.33%
64,685
2.44
3.17
0.0
55.15%
57,000
2.27
8.33
21. Milk processing model
26,625
6,656
33,282
0
13,415
13,415
0.40
42.42%
70,012
2.30
1.65
0.0
41.45%
65,085
2.21
6.69
22. Milk collection center model **
45,046
11,261
56,307
0
18,640
18,640
0.33
60.94%
111,005
2.45
2.93
0.0
58.60%
104,551
2.37
7.07
CATEGORY
Estimated Investment Costs (US$)
With grants (consessional financing)
With commercial loan (no grant)
FIRR (%)
FNPV 
(US$)
Benefit-to-
cost ratio
Payback 
period 
(years)
F
I
N
A
N
C
I
A
L
 
A
N
A
L
Y
S
I
S
Summary table. Component 3 financial models
Window 1 indicative grant models (max. grant @$8,000)
Window 2 indicative grant models (max. grant @$30,000)
Productive Alliances (max. grant @$50,000)
Annual Net Benefits (US$)
Annual Inc. net 
benefits per 
1US$ of Inv.
FIRR (%)
FNPV 
(US$)
Benefit-to-
cost ratio
Payback 
period 
(years)
Return to 
family labour 
(US$/day)

=== PAGE 56 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 52 
 
 
 
 
Table 6. Sensitivity Analysis 
 
Sensitivity Analysis
EIRR
NPV @6%
(million US$)
NPV @4%
(million US$)
NPV @8%
(million 
US$)
23.08%
178.3
            
255.4
            
124.7
           
21.36%
154.1
            
223.1
            
106.4
           
19.53%
130.0
            
190.7
            
88.1
             
7.39%
9.5
                
29.2
              
3.4
-               
21.52%
172.0
            
248.6
            
118.9
           
20.15%
165.7
            
241.8
            
113.0
           
11.39%
51.9
              
90.3
              
26.1
             
10.53%
42.0
              
76.7
              
18.8
             
20.08%
159.7
            
234.5
            
108.2
           
17.81%
141.8
            
213.9
            
92.8
             
14.94%
90.9
              
141.7
            
56.3
             
13.58%
76.4
              
122.8
            
44.9
             
Climate Shock every 3 yr
22.83%
170.4
            
244.7
            
119.0
           
Climate Shock every 5 yr
23.09%
167.6
            
240.0
            
117.3
           
10%
-10%
19.87%
147.9
            
216.3
            
100.6
           
10%
-20%
18.11%
123.8
            
184.0
            
82.3
             
20%
-20%
16.87%
117.5
            
177.2
            
76.4
             
20%
-30%
16.23%
99.7
              
151.6
            
64.0
             
20%
-10%
18.56%
141.6
            
209.5
            
94.7
             
∆%
Risk
Base scenario
Benefits 
-10%
Combined risks on sale prices, yields, climate 
effect (droughts, floods, etc.)
-20%
-70%
Severe climate risks
Costs
10%
Increase in expenses, input prices and unit costs
20%
Delay 1yr in Benefits
Delays
Delay 2yr in Benefits
Adoption rates
-10%
-20%
Decrease in adoption rate from 80% to 70% and 
60%, respectively
Carbon price (US$5/tCO2)
Decrease in shadow price of carbon from 
US$40/tCO2 to US$10/tCO2 and US$5/tCO2, 
respectively
Carbon price (US$10/tCO2)
20% Benefits
Repeating climate shocks
20% Benefits
Mixed Scenarios
Costs
Benefits

=== PAGE 57 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 53 
 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
 
E.1. Project/Programme Focus 
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
  
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/programme will contribute 
(Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Scale 
The country lacks a supportive policy and 
regulatory framework and technical capacity 
to integrate climate risks in its planning at 
the national, district and village level. 
Households have limited capacity, resources 
and organizational ability for investing in 
measures that can mitigate climate change 
and enable adaptation to climate risks.  
Low 
The paradigm shift would be scaled up through a 
supportive policy environment that encourages improved 
management of pastures by PUUs and protection of 
forests through community participation. The project will 
transform local government and community capacity for 
climate resilient planning and implementation which will be 
scaled up in additional villages through systemic changes 
in the planning process. While building on the successful 
experience of previous IFAD-funded projects in the country 
(Section B3, Annex 29), its scope was substantially 
refocused on climate adaptation and mitigation potential.  
The policy instruments and enhanced technical capacity of 
public sector institutions will generate changes at scale for 
the country as a whole. The project will implement village 
level CsCAPs in 400 villages which local government 
agencies will emulate in other areas. The successful 
experiences of engaging communities accrued within other 
IFAD-funded and other donors projects are scaled up by 
CASP+ with a climate-sensitive angle, and complemented by 
additional features. The private sector is expected to scale 
up successful experiences from its productive alliances to 
include other value chains and include additional producers.  
Replicability 
The CASP+ approach and the paradigm 
shift that it promotes is based on the 
experience of several of previous projects 
(above all the Livestock and Pasture 
Development Project LPDP Phase I and II). 
Key elements of the approach have been 
replicated in other vulnerable pastures by 
PUUs and by households that rely primarily 
on livestock. The village level planning 
approach has not been widely replicated yet 
as due to lack of its proper integration in 
local development systems.  
Low 
The paradigm shift in village level planning and 
management is expected to be replicated through support 
of agencies at the Governorate level based on the positive 
experience in the selected villages but will require 
advocacy and dissemination of positive experiences. The 
approaches regarding pasture management and forest 
protection are expected to be replicated by the PUUs in 
other parts of the country, as done in the past following the 
leading example of LPDP I and II. The private sector is 
expected to take the lead in replicating the productive 
alliance approaches as confirmed in consultations with 
enterprises operating in the agrifood sector and as there is 
substantial demand for domestic agrifood products.   
The project will contribute to replicating systemic change in 
other areas of the country through the supportive policy on 
pastures, the improved technical capacity of institutions 
dealing with making livestock production practices more 
climate resilient, the work of the private sector veterinarians 
and through the demonstration of the behaviour change of 
smallholder livestock producers and the PUUs in pasture 
management. The private sector is expected to introduce 
successful experience and systems gleaned from the 
productive alliances to other Governorates.  
Sustainability 
There is evidence that some of the 
investments made through earlier IFAD 
projects in livestock and pasture 
management have sustained beyond the 
project period such as the PUUs established 
for pasture use and rehabilitation, the joint 
forest management groups introduced by 
GIZ and that the livestock production 
practices introduced previously have 
sustained beyond the project period.  
Medium 
The paradigm shift promises to sustain beyond the project 
period as it will introduce systemic changes in institutional 
arrangements, build capacity at the national and 
community level and introduce production practices that 
reduce production costs and losses, increase productivity 
and incomes thereby providing strong incentives to 
continue the use of the new practices.   
The strengthening of policy frameworks, stimulating women’s 
leadership in the local institutions and int eh policy dialogue, 
develop institutional capacity at various tiers including 
community to manage common property natural resources is 
expected to sustain the paradigm shifts that the project is 
expected to encourage in terms of the management of 
natural resources, use of common property resources and 
effective, equitable and sustainable management of 
productive household assets, production practices and 
virtuous market inclusion dynamics.

=== PAGE 58 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 54 
 
 
 
 
 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
 
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final218 
MRA4 Forestry and land 
use 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Georeferenced Carbon 
accounting (Ex-ACT and 
GLEAM-i) based on mid-term 
and completion surveys 
0 t CO2e 
- 939,984 
tonnes CO2e 
(ex-ACT and 
GLEAM-i)  
- 6,854,822 tonnes 
CO2e (ex-ACT and 
GLEAM-i) over 27 
years219 
Communities and farmers adopt 
the practices that are expected to 
lead to the reduction or 
sequestration of emissions. 
ARA1 Most vulnerable 
people and communities 
Core 2: Direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached 
Project M&E system at CEP 
and PMU as well as mid-term 
and end line surveys 
Direct: 
Men: 0 
Women: 0 
 
 
Indirect: 
Men: 0 
Women: 0 
 
Direct:  
Men: 157,625  
Women: 
167,375  
 
Indirect:  
Men: 570,058 
Women: 
605,319  
Direct:  
Men: 315,250  
Women: 334,750  
 
Indirect:  
Men: 1,100,187 
Women: 1,168,239  
The covid-19 pandemic has eased 
and allows field activities.   
Timely approval of project and 
adherence to implementation plan. 
The detailed set of assumptions 
regarding HH size, participants, 
adoption rates are given in Annex 
24.220  
ARA1 Most vulnerable 
people and communities 
Supplementary 2.1: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) 
adopting improved and/or new 
climate-resilient livelihood 
options 
Project M&E system at CEP 
and PMU as well as mid-term 
and end line surveys 
Men: 0 
Women: 0 
Men: 157,625  
Women: 
167,375  
Men: 315,250 
Women: 334,750221  
Timely approval of project and 
adherence to implementation plan. 
ARA2 Health, well-being, 
food and water security 
Supplementary indicator 2.2: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) 
with improved food security  
 
Project M&E system at CEP 
and PMU as well as mid-term 
and end line surveys 
Men: 0 
Women: 0 
Men: 22,698 
Women 
24,102. 
Men: 45,396 
Women 48,204  
Improved infrastructure for 
enhanced food production through 
FFS, grants and infrastructure and 
improved mechanization. Annex 
24 
ARA2 Health, well-being, 
food and water security 
Supplementary 2.5: 
Beneficiaries (female/male) 
adopting innovations that 
stregthen climate change 
resilience  
Project M&E system at CEP 
and PMU as well as mid-term 
and end line surveys 
Men: 0 
Women: 0 
Men: 24,968 
Women: 
26,512 
Men:166,452  
Women: 176,748 
The beneficiaries include those 
reached by dissemination of 
technical packages, breeding 
strategy, infrastructure, field days 
and FFS. (Annex 24) 
ARA3 Intrastructure and 
built environment 
Core 3: Value of physical 
assets made more resilient to 
the effects of climate change 
and/or more able to reduce 
GHG emissions 
Baseline, Mid-Term and End 
line surveys 
 
 
 
USD  
194,591,000 
(Annex 24, Sheet 
CR.3) 
 
The covid-19 pandemic has eased 
and allows field activities.   
Timely approval of project and 
adherence to implementation plan. 
ARA4 Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services 
Core 4: Hectares of natural 
resources brought under 
improved low-emission and/or 
climate-resilient management 
practice 
Project M&E system at CEP 
and PMU as well as mid-term 
and end line surveys. 
Pasture: 0 ha 
 
Forests: 0 ha 
 
Cropland: 0 ha 
Pasture: 
50,000 ha 
Forests: 
1,500ha 
Cropland: 500 
ha 
Pasture: 180,000 ha 
Forests: 8,641ha 
Cropland: 1,416.5 ha  
The farming communities are given 
access and use rights to manage 
these resources and they see a 
long term interest in doing so.

=== PAGE 59 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 55 
 
 
 
 
 
ARA4 Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services 
Supplementary 4.1: Hectares 
of terrestrial forest, terrestrial 
non-forest, freshwater and 
coastal marine areas brought 
under resoration and/or 
improved ecosystems 
Project M&E system at CEP 
and PMU as well as mid-term 
and end line surveys.  
Pasture: 0 ha 
 
Forests: 0 ha 
 
Cropland: 0 ha 
Forests:  
1500 ha 
Forests:  
8641 hectare 
There are sufficient incentives for 
local communities to engage in 
Joint Forest Management and they 
are willing to undertake the 
responsibilities of the associated 
contracts. 
ARA4 Ecosystems and 
ecosystem services 
Supplementary 4.2: Number of 
livestock brought under 
sustainable management 
practices 
Project M&E system at CEP 
and PMU as well as mid-term 
and end line surveys. 
0 small and large 
ruminants 
300,000 small 
and large 
ruminants 
604,800 small and 
large ruminants  
Farmers adopt the practices that 
are expected to lead to reduced 
emissions. 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
 
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for 
current state 
(baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will contribute 
Coverage 
Core Indicator 5: Degree to 
which GCF investments 
contribute to strengthening 
institutional and regulatory 
frameworks for low emission 
climate-resilient development 
pathways in a country-driven 
manner 
There is lack of coordination 
among key sector institutions 
and gaps in the policy 
regarding the management of 
common pastures and forests 
which does not encourage 
mitigation or adaptation to 
climate change.  
low 
Well-coordinated mechanisms with 
a supportive policy environment 
that incentivizes behavior to 
mitigate climate change, 
empowers women, ensures their 
participation, and encourages the 
adoption of adaptive practices and 
technologies.  
Improve the coordination among 
sector institutions and bring about 
policy change in the management of 
pastures and production practices for 
livestock in a manger which mitigates 
climate change, includes women and 
increases overall productivity and 
resilience. 
National level (one country) 
Core Indicator 6: Degree to 
which GCF investments 
contribute to technology 
deployment, dissemination, 
development or transfer and 
innovation 
There is limited awareness 
and understanding about 
climate risks and how to build 
resilience in the face of 
droughts, temperature 
increase and variability 
through use of technology 
transfer and innovation. 
low 
Increased mainstreaming of 
climate risks in local level planning 
and allocation of funds. Strong 
PUUs which promote the more 
efficient system of pasture 
management. 
A strong team of private 
veterinarians at the village level 
who introduce new feeding, 
breeding and more efficient 
livestock management practices. 
Stronger links with the private 
sector in the introduction of new 
innovations and technologies.  
A new mechanism for planning 
through CsCAPs which integrates 
climate risks in the allocation of funds 
and village level plans and pasture 
management.  Introduction of transfer 
of technology and innovation through 
establishing cadre of village level 
veterinarians and links with the 
private sector for scaling up of 
technologies available in the market 
and Support adoption of climate 
resilient innovative technologies. 
 
National level (one country) 
Core indicator 7: Degree to 
which GCF Investments 
contribute to market 
development/transformation at 
the sectoral, local, or national 
level 
 Weak links with the private 
sector and the weak presence 
of private sector in rural areas 
low 
A growing and active role by the 
private sector in helping women 
and men smallholders’ access the 
inputs that builds their resilience to 
climate risks and presence of 
markets that promote efficient use 
of resources thereby helping to 
avoid loss and waste of scarce 
resources.  
The project is helping to forger 
productive alliance in selected value 
chains. 
CASP+ will facilitate identification and 
contracting of business partnerships 
between groups of small holder 
farmers and aggregators, to facilitate 
access to market and services, 
including for vulnerable women. 
Provision of matching grants to CIGs.  
Multiple sub-national areas 
within a country

=== PAGE 60 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 56 
 
 
 
 
 
Core indicator 8: Degree to 
which GCF investments 
contribute to effective 
knowledge generation and 
learning processes, and use of 
good practices, methodologies 
and standards 
Climate change risks have not 
been fully integrated into local 
planning systems and farmers 
who rely on natural resources 
are not fully aware of the 
detrimental impact of practices 
that increase GHGs.  
low 
Integration of climate risks in local 
planning and allocation of 
resources at village level and 
ensure women and men headed 
households’ understanding and 
adoption of practices to mitigate 
climate change impacts and adapt 
to climate risks. 
The project will train local authorities 
at the Jamoat level in understanding 
and integrating climate risks in local 
level planning, strengthen VOs/PUUs, 
including women’s role in their 
governance, forest management 
committees and individual women 
and men producers in better 
understanding climate risks and 
modifying their production practices. 
Multiple sub-national areas 
within a country 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
 
Project/programme 
specific Indicator 
 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
Outcome 1 (Component 1): 
Strengthened institutional 
and regulatory systems for 
climate-responsive planning 
and development  
Number of national policies 
integrating  climate-
responsive planning and 
development 
Technical reports by the project 
– mid-term and final surveys 
0 
3 
4:  (1) Pasture law; 
(2) breeding 
strategy; (3) policy 
on private 
veterinary services 
and (4) Green 
Economy Concept 
Ministries and institutions 
maintain interest in climate-
resilient and evidence based 
policy making.  
Competent Agencies collaborate 
on exchanging information and 
making it available to the project 
No of Agencies 
collaborating for an active 
exchange of data and 
information related to 
remote and participatory 
NRM 
MoUs signed. Data made 
available by the different 
institutions to the project 
0 
2 
6 
MoU signed between Agency for 
Land Management and CEP in 
the first year of the project. 
Further competent institutions 
(e.g. MoA) are willing to join data 
exchange platforms 
No of  Academic and 
training institutions 
integrate climate change in 
curricula 
Review of course curricula and 
promotional material publicizing 
the course content in 
publications and websites by the 
selected institutions.  
0 
2 
4 
No of Academic and training 
institutions integrate climate 
change in curricula 
 
Output 1.1: By year 7, 
Capacities of relevant 
national institutions for 
climate-resilient natural 
resources management are 
strengthened. 
 
Number of staff trained  in 
climate change 
management   planning 
Attendances sheets of training 
activities and records of PIU. 
0 
Men = 100 
Women = 50 
Men = 195 
Women = 95 
The staff see sufficient value in 
the training to make themselves 
available for capacity training 
activities. 
No of hectares of pastures 
monitored with the use of 
the integrated, holistic and 
participatory management 
approach 
Technical reports by the project 
Photographic and remote 
sensing documentation 
0 
1,400 
3,500 
 
Local communities are 
interested in the project and in 
sharing information 
No. of participants of the 
course for foresters.   
Attendances sheets of training 
activities and records of PIU and 
0 
Men = 21 
Women = 9  
Men = 49 
Women = 21  
There is sufficient interest and 
demand for the training.

=== PAGE 61 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 57 
 
 
 
 
 
the Leskhoz and the Adult 
Education Center.  
No of youth from the project 
districts and number of 
public servants attending 
the climate courses.   
Records of participating 
institutions.  
0 
Men = 10 
Women = 10  
Men = 24  
Women = 26  
Universities have the capacity to 
modify the course content and 
are interested in offering the 
courses and students interested 
in participation. 
Output 1.2: By year 7, the  
enabling environment for 
climate adaptive, inclusive 
and integrated management 
of pasture, forestry and 
livestock resources is 
enhanced 
No state agencies 
influenced by CASP+ 
insights and knowledge 
products  
Interviews with key stakeholders 
from participating agencies 
0 
3 
9 
No rapid turn-over of personnel 
in the participating agencies. 
No of sectoral regulatory 
frameworks reviewed  
The revised frameworks and 
policy pronouncements. 
0 
1 
4 
Strong commitment for reform. 
Strengthened capacity of 
MEDT to facilitate 
development of Green 
Economy plans.  
 MEDT 
0 
1 
1 
Strong MEDT commitment to 
prepare the concept note and 
action plan.  
Outcome 2 (Component 2):  
Increased CO2e 
sequestration through 
improved pasture, forests 
and livestock management  
N/A222 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Outcome 3 (Component 2):  
Improved management of 
land or forest areas 
contributing to emissions 
reductions 
Hectares of land or forests 
under improved and 
effective management that 
contributes to CO2 
emission reductions 
(pasture, forests, and 
cropland)  
Baseline/MTR/Completion 
surveys (including Ex-ACT 
analyses) 
Pasture: 0 ha 
 
Forests: 0 ha 
 
Cropland: 0 ha 
Pasture: 180,000 
ha 
 
Forests: 8,641ha 
 
Cropland: 1,416.5 
ha  
Pasture: 180,000 
ha 
 
Forests: 8,641ha 
 
Cropland: 1,416.5 
ha  
Availability and interest of local 
communities and commitment 
to the investments in improved 
NR; climate sensitive planning 
and local level partnerships 
created will continues after 
project closure. 
Willingness of rural 
communities, availability of 
suitable service providers and 
commitment of local institutions 
to support rural communities’ 
investment and planning even 
beyond project end.  
Number of Households 
reporting adoption of 
environmentally sustainable 
and climate-resilient 
technologies and practices 
Baseline/MTR/Completion 
surveys 
0 Households 
40,000 households 
100,000 
households 
 
Output 2.1: By year 3, 400 
Climate-sensitive Community 
Action Plans (CsCAP) based 
on 21 district level climate 
diagnostics are developed 
District Climate Resilience 
Diagnostic (DCRD) 
prepared 
CEP monitoring reports  
0 
21 
21 
The diagnostic is able to 
present good analysis of climate 
trends and risks and adaptation 
measures. 
Women representatives 
trained in leadership skills 
Interviews with women 
representatives 
 
1200 
2400 
The women courses are 
designed and delivered in a 
manner which encourages 
women participation in these 
forums.

=== PAGE 62 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 58 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of VO’s 
established 
Report from community 
facilitator based on municipal 
records 
TBD 
400 
400 
Jamoat support 
Number of operational PUU 
or PUG in the project area 
Report from community 
facilitator. Reports from PMT 
TBD 
400 
400 
Community facilitators recruited 
in Y1 
Number of PUA in the 
project area 
Reports from PMT 
TBD 
15 
21 
PUU willing to establish PUAs 
Number of Forest User 
Groups in the project area 
Report from community 
facilitator. 
0 
200 
200 
JFM participants willing to form 
FUG 
Number of Common 
Interest Groups in the 
project area 
Report from community 
facilitator. 
0 
400 
1020 
Demand for two CIGs per 
village 
Number of CsCAPs 
approved  
Report from community 
facilitator. 
0 
400 
400 
Approval process does not 
suffer delays 
Output 2.2: By year 7, 400 
CsCAPs are implemented in 
21 districts by local 
institutions in timely and 
effective manner 
Area of pasture under 
Pasture Management Plan 
Pasture Management Plans. 
Reports from PMT 
 
100,000 
180,000 
The project will be able to 
secure pasture use rights for 
PUUs.  
Number of hectares of land 
under JFM contracts 
Evidence of contracts signed 
from PMT. 
0 
1794 
7073 
JFM participation, Leskhoz land 
rights can be established 
Number of hectares of land 
reforested directly (in 
Leskhoz or other lands) 
Reports from Project Forestry 
Specialists 
0 
405 
1350 
Leskhoz have timely access to 
materials, labour and equipment 
Number of hectares 
reforested in buffer zones  
Evidence of JFM contracts in 
buffer zone signed with PMT. 
0 
50 
218 
There is sufficient interest 
based on the rights assigned for 
JFM.  
Component 3 - Outcome 4:   
Strengthened communities 
and individuals adaptive 
capacity and reduced 
exposure to climate risks 
Rural producers accessing 
production inputs and/or 
technological packages 
Annual outcome surveys, 
Baseline/MTR/Completion 
surveys (including Ex-ACT 
analyses) 
Women: 0 
Men: 0 
Young:0 
Women: 12,880 
Men: 12,880 
Young:7,728 
Women: 32,200  
Men: 32,200 
Young: 19,320 
Agribusiness enterprises willing 
to engage with smallholders in 
the project area  
The technologies are affordable 
and disseminated for wider use 
and replication. 
Number of farmers 
accessing market and 
services through productive 
alliances facilitated by the 
project 
Project reports / annual 
outcome surveys 
Reports from Productive 
Alliance facilitator 
0 
1 200 
4 000 
Persons trained in income-
generating activities or 
business management 
Annual outcome surveys, 
Baseline/MTR/Completion 
surveys (including Ex-ACT 
analyses) 
Women: 0 
Men: 0 
Young: 0 
Women: 2,880 
Men: 2,880 
Young: 1,728 
Women: 7,200 
Men: 7,200 
Young: 4,320 
Output 3.1: by year 7, 
105,600223 smallholder 
livestock farmers receive AI, 
animal health or training 
services to increase 
productivity of their livestock.  
Number of Artificial 
Inseminations conducted in 
the project area 
Reports from SE for Breeding 
and AI Project reports 
0 
63 360 
105 600 
MoU with SE for breeding and 
AI signed in Y1 
 
Capacities of  SE for breeding 
and AI for implementation are 
adequate

=== PAGE 63 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 59 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of farmers 
accessing demonstration 
plots on climate resilient 
technologies 
Reports from SE for Capacity 
Development 
Project reports 
0 
16 000 
40 000 
MoU with SE for Capacity 
Development signed in Y1. 
Capacities of SE Capacity 
Development implementation 
are adequate. 
Farmers, including women, are 
willing to attend FFS classes 
Number of private vets 
(trained and equipped) 
involved in project activities.  
Reports from TVA 
Project reports 
0 
264 
396224 
MoU with TVA signed in Y1.  
Number of private vets are 
increased 
Number of farmers enrolled 
in FFS 
Reports from SE for Capacity 
Development 
Project reports 
0 
2000 
2000 
Availability and interest of local 
communities and commitment 
to the investments in production 
practices 
Output 3.2: By the end of 
year 4, 9 productive alliances 
between livestock producers’ 
groups and private 
aggregators established and 
operational 
Number of active and 
operational productive 
alliances for marketing of 
livestock commodities 
Reports from PA facilitator 
Project reports 
0 
3 (3 on dairy) 
9 (8 on dairy, 1 on 
beef) 
Private sector actors are willing 
to enter and invest in productive 
alliances arrangements. 
Market demand for livestock 
commodities keeps increasing 
at the same pace 
Output 3.3: by year 7, 
12,400225 smallholders have 
strengthened climate resilient 
production practices and 
private sector market 
linkages. 
Number of Common 
Interest groups' (Window 1) 
proposals approved (% 
women led groups proposal 
approved and youth - led 
approved) 
Reports from service providers 
 
Reports from district officers 
 
Report from Grant manager 
Project reports 
0 
350 CIG groups 
under Window 1 
1020 CIG groups 
under Window 1 
Market linkages established, 
primary production increased 
using climate resilient 
technologies quality improved, 
value addition, climate resilient 
technologies scaled-up 
 
Women/youth increase their 
incomes from diversified 
agriculture activities 
 
Number of Common 
Interest groups' (Window 2) 
proposals approved (% 
women led groups proposal 
approved and youth - led 
approved 
 
50 CIG groups 
under Window 2 
110 CIG groups 
under Window 2 
E.5 Project/programme co-benefit indicators 
Co-benefit 1: increase in 
biodiversity in pastures and 
forest area  
Type and quantity of the 
species in the pastures and 
forest areas.  
Through Third party surveys 
and indexing of the inventories. 
tbd 
tbd 
tbd 
No major natural or climate 
change induced disaster occurs 
in the project target area. 
Co-Benefit 2: Enhanced 
Gender Equity 
Percent of women 
beneficiaries reporting 
increased participation in 
decision-making and 
increased access to 
productive assets.  
Perception Survey – Annual 
outcome surveys – MTR and 
Completion surveys 
0 
+5% 
+20% 
The overall Tajik economy 
remains stable or recover from 
the compounded impact of 
Covid and of the disruption of 
international trade caused by 
the Russia-Ukraine conflict. 
Co-benefit 3:  Smallholders 
have increased access to 
financial services and markets  
Percentage of increased 
volume of agricultural 
products from the target 
districts on the total 
agricultural products in the 
domestic market 
National statistics  
0 
+2.5 
+10% 
Local markets develop and  
transport and logistics 
infrastructure is maintained 
The trainers/facilitators are 
skilled in stimulating interests

=== PAGE 64 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 60 
 
 
 
 
 
Increased volume of 
financial products to the 
project areas.  
National Commercial Banks 
annual reports 
tbd 
tbd 
tbd 
and guiding the beneficiaries 
over time. 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources. 
Activity 1.1.1: Capacity 
Development of public institutions 
on climate resilient ecosystem 
management 
Develop capacities of public 
institutions to streamline climate 
sensitive, participatory and gender 
inclusive ecosystem management 
approaches such as landscape 
approach, integrated watershed 
management, joint forest 
management, community-based 
pasture management 
1.1.1.1. Strengthen capacities of Pasture Meliorative 
Trust to roll out Pasture Law at community 
level and provide technical assistance to 
PUUs, PUAs and PCs 
- 
Regional PMT Office in Kulob refurbished and equipped. 
- 
Recruitment of Pasture specialists seconded to PMT. 
- 
2 vehicles for field missions delivered to PMT 
1.1.1.2. Rolling out and Strengthen capacities of 
Pasture Meliorative Trust to roll out Pasture 
Law at community level and provide technical 
assistance to PUUs, PUAs and PCs 
- 
2 Pasture specialists seconded to PMT 
1.1.1.3. Upgrade the technical skills of the Forestry 
Department 
- 
1 curriculum for foresters carried out in each of the 14 
project leskhoz and service provider for training 
Activity 1.1.2:  Introduce combined 
remote and participatory Natural 
Resources monitoring and 
management 
 
Establish remote and participatory 
management of natural resources as 
the basis for climate adaptive 
development and enable exchange of 
information between the different 
competent state agencies and 
communities 
1.1.2.1. Kick-off Training on remote and participatory 
NRM 
- 
Recruitment of International GIS expert (travel included)  
- 
Recruitment of International Expert for participatory NRM 
planning 
1.1.2.2. Roll-out Training on remote and participatory 
NRM 
- 
Follow up support of technical assistance: International 
Expert for Participatory NRM planning and  International 
Expert for participatory NRM planning 
1.1.2.3. Kick-off Field testing of NRM approaches 
- 
Recruitment of National Botany Expert and National GIS 
specialist 
- 
Purchase of computer plotter and server (to store data) 
- 
Recruitment of M&E consultant for CEP (including social 
fund and travels) 
- 
Kick-off annual outcome survey 
1.1.2.4. Rolling-out Field testing of NRM approaches 
- 
Follow up TA: National Botany Expert, National GIS 
specialist, NRM monitoring with bees, M&E consultant  
- 
Purchase of satellite images  
- 
Roll-out of annual outcome survey 
Activity 1.1.3. Enhance technical 
capacities of national livestock 
institutions to ensure efficient 
provision of public animal health 
and production services to 
smallholder farmers through 
efficient partnership between 
public and private institutions. 
Strengthen capacities of public 
agencies under the MoA and FSC in 
charge of animal health and breeding 
services to improve the outreach of 
their activities through provision of 
logistical support and technical 
assistance 
1.1.3.1. Step up veterinary public health services of 
the National Veterinary Authority through 
provision of technical assistance and 
equipment.  
- 
The organizational structure of the state veterinary 
management has been developed in line with OIE’s 
recommendations 
- 
Veterinary surveillance system based on One Health 
approach has been established 
- 
A mini truck-refrigerator as well as a disinfection 
machine delivered to FSC 
- 
Interpreter/translator available  
1.1.3.2. Improve the outreach of breeding services 
provided by State Enterprise for Animal 
- 
Kulob regional Center for AI and breeding refurbished 
and equipped (semen processing equipment, liquid 
nitrogen machine).

=== PAGE 65 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 61 
 
 
 
 
 
Breeding and Artificial Insemination to areas 
and communities targeted by the Project 
Activity 1.1.4: Build capacities of 
research and academia institutions 
on climate resilient ecosystem 
management.  
Streamline Climate Change and 
Ecosystem management approaches 
in the training curricula and research 
programmes of National and Research 
Institutions and academia  
1.1.4.1.  Integrate climate change issues in university 
and training institutions curricula: 
- 
1 new curriculum on CC developed and rolled out at 
TAU and TAAS 
- 
1 CC module developed & include in curricula of 
agronomists, agricultural engineers, foresters, 
zootechnicians and veterinarians of TAU and TAAS, as 
well as in the training curriculum of public administrators 
at PAA 
- 
Training of diploma level trainers on CC 
1.1.4.2. Promote enrollment of male and female youth 
in training curricula on climate-resilient natural 
resources management 
- 
118 students from project area enrolled in newly 
developed curriculum on CC during project 
implementation 
1.1.4.3.Enable research institutes and the private 
sector to produce evidence on NRM and 
Climate Change for policy dialogue and 
climate sensitive technical innovations 
- 
2 research projects on climate sensitive innovations 
supported every 2 years (6 in total) 
1.1.4.3. Enable research institutes and the private 
sector to produce evidence on NRM and 
Climate Change for policy dialogue and 
climate sensitive technical innovations 
- 
Provision of batches of grants for research projects 
Activity 1.2.1: Promote an 
inclusive and integrated policy 
dialogue 
Enhance the mainstreaming of climate 
adaptive management practices of 
natural resources in all national 
institutions and verification of the 
effectiveness of policies on the ground 
1.2.1.1. Stock taking of policy development and 
mainstreaming of gender sensitive climate 
adaptive agricultural practices. 
- 
7 policy briefs elaborated and disseminated among 
institutional stakeholders  
- 
7 reports on the effectiveness of national adaptation 
policies verified on the ground  
1.2.1.2. Training on the utilization of policy support 
tools e.g.  SIPT, GLEAM, EXACT, B-INTACT. 
- 
45 representatives of governmental agencies trained on 
policy tools in the frame of 3 trainings 
1.2.1.3. Kick-off workshops for institutional networking 
- 
One workshop promoting policy dialogue implemented.  
- 
Purchase communication material 
- 
Conduct two workshops on gender and CC 
1.2.1.4. Kick-off workshops for institutional networking 
(in-kind) 
- 
SFA staff time to be involved in policy dialogues (in-kind) 
1.2.1.5. Roll-out workshops for institutional networking  
- 
Roll-out workshops on policy dialogue, and gender and 
CC (one per year) 
- 
Purchase communication material for the annual 
workshops 
Activity 1.2.2: Technical 
assistance for review of livestock 
related regulatory frameworks. 
Review and update of animal health 
and breeding regulatory and strategic 
framework to ensure compliance with 
international guidelines and ensure 
streamlining of measures supporting 
climate resilience and environmental 
protection 
1.2.2.1. Improvement of the Pasture Law 
- 
Refined Pasture Law.  
1.2.2.2. Improvement of the Pasture Law 
- 
Two consultative workshops on the refined pasture Law.  
1.2.2.3. Mobilizing technical assistance of the OIE 
- 
OIE Mission on veterinary legislation has been 
conducted 
- 
An analysis of the legislation was carried out, gaps were 
identified 
1.2.2.4. Improvement of veterinary legislation 
- 
Veterinary legislation improved in line with OIE 
recommendations (workshops, round tables, 
conferences, and TA) 
1.2.2.5. Review of the national breeding strategy 
- 
Breeding strategy revised

=== PAGE 66 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 62 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 1.2.3. Support 
government’s capacity to 
coordinate and 
monitor Green investments 
 
Review of the legislation and 
regulatory framework related the 
Green Economy for MoDT and provide 
training to government officials, and 
strengthen MoF to monitor projects 
and resource mobilization 
1.2.3.1.  Support Development of the Green Economy 
strategy 
- 
1 draft of the sectoral strategy elaborated. 
- 
1 consultation workshop 
- 
1 validation workshop 
1.2.3.2.   Capacity Development of MEDT staff 
- 
1 training for MEDT staff 
- 
1 Training of Trainer module developed for training 
MEDT staff at subnational level 
- 
1 study tour (TBD) 
1.2.3.3. Capacity Development of Ministry of Finance 
staff 
- 
1 software for Monitoring and Analysis of Public 
Investment Projects 
- 
10 participants in one study tour for selected MEDT 
officials. 
Component 2:  Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change 
Activity 2.1.1: Diagnostic of 
Community needs 
Elaboration of  district diagnostic;  
dissemination of the  diagnostic results 
to institutional stakeholders and 
schools; collection of qualitative village 
indicators by NGO Facilitators; 
selection of beneficiary villages and 
communication of outcome to districts. 
2.1.1.1: Diagnostic - create a District Climate 
Resilience Diagnostic (DCRD) for each District 
- 
21 district diagnostics elaborated. 
- 
21 communications packages for the diagnostic 
2.1.1.2: Dissemination of diagnostic  
- 
132 community meetings at Jamoat level to discuss 
diagnostic. 
2.1.1.3:  Village selection226 
- 
400 beneficiary villages selected. 
 
Activity 2.1.2: Establishing relevant 
local institutions 
Institutional and community capacity 
gaps identified by NGO facilitator 
during village selection will be 
addressed by establishing or 
strengthening needed institutions. 
2.1.2.1: Establishment VO's 
- 
Equipment of VO or PUU or PUG 
- 
Recruit a local NGO to set baseline socio-economic 
status. 
- 
Training of VO executives by community facilitator 
- 
Recruitment of Community facilitator to establish VO 
2.1.2.2: Strengthening VO's  
- 
400 Village Organizations established or strengthened  
- 
Recruitment of National Pasture Specialist (PMU)  
2.1.2.3: Establishment and strengthening PUU or PUG 
- 
400 PUUs (or PUGs under VOs) established or 
strengthened  
- 
PUUS are registered. 
- 
75% of PUUs/PUGs have registered pasture access 
rights 
2.1.2.4: Establishment and strengthening of PUA's 
- 
21 PUAs established or strengthened  
2.1.3.5: Establishment and strengthening of Pasture 
Commissions. 
- 
21 PCs established or strengthened  
2.1.2.6: Kick-off of the promotion of JFM and 
establishment of Forest User Groups  
- 
Kick-off activities to establish Forest User groups (FUG) 
2.1.2.7: Rolling out of the Promotion of FM and 
establishment of Forest User Groups 
- 
200 JFM FUG’s established  
- 
1500 JFM contracts signed for JFM areas 
- 
200 JFM contracts signed for Direct afforestation sites 
2.1.2.8: Kick-off the establishment of Common Interest 
Groups (CIGs) 
- 
Training of CIGs by community facilitator  
2.1.2.9: Roll-out the establishment Common Interest 
Groups (CIGs) 
- 
1,120 Common Interest Groups established and trained

=== PAGE 67 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 63 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1.2.10: Organize kick-off leadership training for 
women representatives in PUUs/VOs 
- 
Kick-off leadership training for Women representatives   
2.1.2.11: Organize roll-out leadership training for 
women representatives in PUUs/VOs  
- 
Trainings organized in 400 villages 
Activity 2.1.3: CsCAP planning 
and design 
Local authorities and community 
members will jointly assess their 
climate risks and make plans for 
pasture management, joint forest 
management and other key village 
level priorities.  
2.1.3.1: CsCAP planning and design 
- 
400 PMPs developed  
- 
400 PMPs approved by Local authorities  
- 
200 JFM designs completed, and contracts signed  
- 
400 infrastructure plans captured in CsCAP 
Activity 2.1.4: Strengthening local 
institutions capacity to monitor and 
evaluate CsCAPs (400 villages) 
The capacity of the organizations at 
the village level such as PMPs will be 
strengthened for monitoring the 
implemented activities.   
2.1.4.1: Strengthening local institutions capacity to 
monitor and evaluate CsCAPs (400 villages) 
- 
100 Workshops on participatory and remote monitoring 
of CsCAP implementation   
- 
Purchase of Vehicles for monitoring 
2.1.4.2: Strengthening and follow-up local institutions 
capacity to monitor and evaluate CsCAPs 
- 
Regular monitoring carried out in the 400 target villages, 
recruitment of gender and youth specialist 
2.1.4.3: Strengthening knowledge and capacities of 
local administration and institutions  
- 
Baseline survey  
- 
Conduct mid-term survey and project final survey by a 
local NGO 
- 
Recruitment of TA (engineers, agronomist, community 
development specialist, M&E, etc.) 
2.1.4.4: Provision of PMU vehicles for monitoring  
- 
Provision of PMU vehicles for the Project implementation  
2.1.4.5: Kick-off the Implementation of the Community 
Forest Investments 
- 
Kick-off recruitment of project forestry specialist 
- 
Purchase of vehicles  
2.1.4.6: Rolling-out the Implementation of the 
Community Forest Investments 
- 
5 Project forestry specialists for forestry investment and 
travels 
2.1.4.7: Provision of CEP staff and field specialist for 
project monitoring  
- 
CEP staff and field specialist for project monitoring 
Activity 2.2.1: Implement Climate-
sensitive Community Action Plans 
(CsCAPs) 
The actual implementation through 
designing, procuring and execution on 
the ground of the restoration activities 
on forests, forests, infrastructure and 
provision of equipment. 
2.2.1.1. Kick off implementation of the Pasture 
Restoration Investment 
- 
Kick off activities for the Implementation of Pasture 
Management Plan  
2.2.1.2. Roll-out of the Implementation of Pasture 
Restoration Investment  
- 
400  PMPs implemented  
- 
400 PUUs receive technical backstopping for the 
implementation of their PMPs  
2.2.1.3. Implement cross-village Pasture Management 
Investments  
- 
21 District level pasture management investments 
implemented  
2.2.1.4: Kick-off the implementation of Joint Forest 
Management Investments  
- 
Equipment package for forest establishment 
- 
Kick-off training for JFM beneficiaries  
2.2.1.5: Roll-out of the Implementation of the Joint 
Forest Management Investments  
- 
5801 Hectares JFM 
- 
200 Villages with JFM received training in planting and 
aftercare 
- 
Recruitment of Communication specialist 
2.2.1.6: Provision of SFA staff and field specialist for 
Joint Forest management implementation" 
(CEP implemented and SFA financed) 
- 
CEP forestry specialists for JFM implementation 
2.2.1.7: Kick-off of the implementation of Direct 
Leskhoz Forestry Investments 
- 
Kick off equipment package for forest establishment,

=== PAGE 68 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 64 
 
 
 
 
 
2.2.1.8: Roll-out of the Implementation of the Direct 
Leskhoz Forestry Investments 
- 
1350 Hectares Direct Afforestation 
- 
Roll-out equipment for forest establishment  
2.2.1.9: Provision of forestry specialists for Leskhoz 
forestry investment 
- 
CEP forestry specialists for leskhoz forestry 
implementation 
2.2.1.10: Kick-off of the Implementation JFM in 
Protected Area buffer zones 
- 
JFM Investment: Protected Area Buffer Zones 
2.2.1.11: Roll-out of the Implementation JFM in 
Protected Area buffer zones 
- 
179 hectares of land n buffer zones protected 
2.2.1.12. Implement Climate Resilient infrastructure 
investments 
- 
Implement Climate Resilient infrastructure investments 
2.2.1.13. Community Agricultural equipment for 
productivity improvement 
- 
400 villages with improved access to agricultural 
equipment  
- 
Purchase of community-shared equipment 
Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market based approaches 
Activity 3.1.1. Improving the 
genetic potential of smallholder 
farmers’ livestock. 
Provision of breeding services (AI and 
improved bulls) to farmers in the 400 
targeted communities to improve 
productivity of cattle and support 
transition towards more intensive 
production systems involving a 
reduced number of animals 
3.1.1.1. Training of youth in Artificial Insemination 
- 
50 youth from the beneficiary communities trained as AI 
technicians 
3.1.1.2. Organization of Artificial Insemination 
Campaigns 
- 
100,000 AI performed (20,000 per year) 
- 
Purchase of equipment and software 
- 
Refurbishment of office spaces   
3.1.1.3. Establish Off-Farm Mating stations 
- 
300 off-farm mating stations with improved bulls 
established  
Activity 3.1.2. Support to delivery 
of private animal health services   
Ensuring population’s access to quality 
veterinary services through training 
and provision of veterinary 
instruments, motorcycles to private 
veterinarians and support of 
institutions responsible for the 
development of a private veterinary 
service 
3.1.2.1. Institutional support to Tajik Veterinary 
Association (TVA) 
- 
TVA’s office and training rooms refurbished and 
equipped (office equipment, furniture, a car). 
- 
National Specialist on Continuous Veterinary Education 
recruited  
3.1.2.2. Training of private veterinarians  
- 
1,988 private vets have been trained (total project  
duration) 
3.1.2.3. Equipping private veterinarians  
- 
284 private vets have been provided with veterinary 
packages according to their needs 
3.1.2.4. Mobility of private veterinarians  
- 
284 private vets have been provided with motorbikes  
Activity: 3.1.3: Support adoption of 
climate resilient innovative 
technologies  
The project will support the 
dissemination of these technical 
innovations and their adoption by 
smallholder farmers through a 
combination of demonstrations and 
hands on training activities. 
3.1.3.1. Promotion of technical climate smart 
innovations through kick-off demonstrations 
and exchange visits 
- 
11 demo plots of climate resilient agricultural practices 
(with focus on fodder cultivation) established  
- 
200 fields days (gathering each participant from 2 
villages) organized every year on demo plots 
3.1.3.2. Promotion of technical climate smart 
innovations through roll-out demonstrations 
and exchange visits  
- 
Roll-out for the establishment of demo plots (1 demo plot 
by district) 21 demo-plots climate resilient agricultural 
practices  
3.1.3.3. Organization of Exchange visits to promote 
the use of technical climate smart innovations 
- 
Exchange visits (1 visit per district per year) 
3.1.3.4. Development of FFS curricula and training of 
facilitators 
- 
3 master trainers trained. 
- 
40 FFS facilitator trained. 
- 
FFS training curriculum developed 
3.1.3.5: Roll out of FFS 
- 
80 FFS established

=== PAGE 69 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 65 
 
 
 
 
 
- 
2000 farmers trained  
Activity 3.2.1 Identification of 
market and business opportunities 
Facilitate identification and contracting 
of business partnerships between 
groups of small holder farmers and 
aggregators, to facilitate access to 
market and services 
3.2.1.1. Kick-off of the identification of the market and 
business opportunities 
- 
9 value chains (8 for dairy,1 for beef) stakeholder 
consultation meetings organized  
3.2.1.2.  Rolling-out the Identification of market and 
business opportunities 
- 
14 feasibility/business plans for productive alliances in 
livestock value chains conducted 
3.2.1.3. Feasibility studies of proposed business 
arrangements including Productive Alliances 
- 
Conduct of feasibility study (addressing technical, 
economic and market aspects)  
Activity 3.2.2. Provision of 
financing and technical support to 
the business partnerships for 
selected livestock commodities.  
The provision of grants and technical 
assistance to the productive alliances 
established with the private sector and 
local entrepreneurs.  
3.2.2.1. Financing of business arrangements including 
Productive Alliances. 
- 
Productive alliances formed. 
3.2.2.2. Technical and business assistance to 
business arrangements including Productive 
Alliances. 
- 
Strengthened productive alliance exist on the ground. 
Activity 3.3.1. Strengthening of 
CIGs capacity 
The Project will facilitate establishment 
of two types of common interest 
groups (CIGs) to access support 
services to identify, analyse and adopt 
climate resilient production practices. 
3.3.1.1: Support to production/diversification CIGs 
- 
Identification and capacity building of 1020 CIGs in 400 
villages  
3.3.1.2:  Provision of rooms and halls for meetings, 
trainings 
- 
Provision of MoA space for meetings, trainings  
Sub activity 3.3.1.3: Support to market-linked CIGs 
- 
Service Provider identifies 110 groups  
- 
110 groups in villages will be served trainings by service 
provider on business plan writing, business planning, 
and proposal writing and looking at farm as a business. 
3.3.1.4: Capacity building on climate smart resilient 
technologies for Window 1 and 2 beneficiaries. 
- 
CIGs receive capacity building support. 
Activity 3.3.2. Management of the 
CIG matching grant program 
Matching grant facility will be 
established for implementation of 
matching grant program for Window 1 
and Window 2 
3.3.2.1:  Matching grant manual developed 
- 
Grant manual developed  
- 
Internal Review committee established  
3.3.2.2: Involvement of specialists from agricultural 
departments for matching grants 
implementation 
- 
MOA extension agents and specialists available   
3.3.2.3: Launch of the MGF 
- 
Communication campaign to be organized (distribution 
of leaflets, informing communities via radio and other 
media channels) in 21 districts. 
3.3.2.4: Launch of the MGF (Window 2) 
- 
Provision of goods/equipment/inputs to grant 
beneficiaries under Window 2

=== PAGE 70 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 66 
 
 
 
 
 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
140. 
M&E Structure: A monitoring and evaluation system will be established for the CASP+ project in 
keeping with the guidelines of GCF to report on the integrated Results Management Framework (IRMF).227 
The logframe indicators will be monitored and coordinated by the MoA (via PMU) as lead implementing 
agency responsible for the major share of the work.  Three M&E Units will be established, one in the PMU, 
one in CEP-CIIP, and one in FAO. M&E Specialists will be recruited to oversee the monitoring of all key 
components. FAO and CEP-CIIP will be responsible for monitoring and reporting on the sub-activities 
directly under their respective responsibilities (summarized in Table 2, above, and Annex 4). They will submit 
regular reports to the PMU which will consolidate these and send them on to IFAD and GCF for their review.  
As the AE of the GCF for the current project, IFAD will oversee the process and submit the reports to GCF.  
 
141. 
 Key M&E Responsibilities: All executing agencies will be responsible for ensuring that the 
agencies working under their supervision provide them quarterly progress reports. These reports will be 
consolidated into annual progress reports and sent by CEP and FAO to MoA (via PMU) who will submit an 
Annual Performance Report to IFAD and GCF. The responsibility for reporting on the progress under each 
component will be assumed by the agency responsible for ensuring its implementation in the field directly or 
through supervision by another implementing partner. All contracts or MOUs with implementing partners will 
specify their responsibility with respect to sex-disaggregated data collection and reporting. The implementing 
partners will submit reports to SEPMU, CEP or FAO depending upon which agency is overall responsible 
for overseeing the specific aspect on the ground.  Specific implementation arrangements of all activities and 
sub-activities are described in the Project Implementation Manual, section 4 (Annex 21).  
 
142. 
Types of Reports: CEP, MoA (via PMU) and FAO will formulate an Annual Work Plan & Budget 
based on the annual physical targets based on the implementation plan (Annex 5) which will be approved 
by the PSC and approved by both IFAD and GCF. Consistent with the AWP&B, reporting formats will be 
developed for each of the reports namely the monthly statistical reports, the quarterly statistical and narrative 
reports and the Annual Performance Reports (APRs) by the M&E staff of each of the executing agencies 
and coordinated at the level of the MoA (via PMU) into one consolidated report. The Annual Performance 
Reports (APRs) will document the progress towards achieving the indicators (both cumulative and annual 
progress, respectively) in GCF’s Performance Managed Framework and any additional project level 
indicators. APRs will also contain a narrative with updates on the progress of each output and outcome 
envisaged at the project level. The Logical Framework is composed of a combination of GCF-specific 
indicators and IFAD corporate core indicators. The two sets of indicators have been synergized as much as 
possible, when different, both reporting formats (i.e., GCF’s and IFAD’s Operational Results Management 
System - ORMS) will be respected and reported upon. The contracts with each implementing agency will 
specify their reporting responsibilities, the frequency of the reports to be produced and provide them with 
the formats to be used. All partners will be required to review the Gender Action Plan which is an integral 
part of the proposal and report on the implementation and indicators of specific aspects related to gender. 
All data will be disaggregated by sex to enable an assessment of the progress in inclusion of women in the 
project. 
 
143. 
The key reports that will be submitted have been identified in the M&E Reporting Matrix given below 
together with their timelines and reporting responsibility. More details are provided in Annex 11 and Annex 
21 (Table 12, Types of report, timeline and responsibility). MoA (via PMU), CEP and FAO as the main 
implementing partners will be responsible for maintaining records on all project activities on standard 
reporting formats. All implementing partners will be required to provide information on the core indicators, 
impact, outcome and output level indicators specified in the PMF. The APRs will include the status of each 
funded activity throughout the relevant reporting period, including a narrative report on implementation 
progress based on the logical framework attached to this Funding Proposal.  The APR will be submitted to 
IFAD and the GCF Secretariat on an annual basis for the period ending on 31 December within sixty (60) 
days after the end of the relevant annual period, with the first APR required to be submitted following the 
end of the calendar year after the Parties have entered into the relevant FAA, and the last APR required to 
be submitted within six (6) months of the end of the relevant Reporting Period.

=== PAGE 71 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 67 
 
 
 
 
144. 
MIS System: An MIS system will be developed for the project to record key information of all 
beneficiary households. The M&E Unit in PMU will coordinate and produce a consolidated MIS report for 
the project as a whole.  Within the first quarter of the second year, when activities have been initiated and 
sufficient outreach has been achieved and the M&E data base begins to get populated, thematic maps will 
be generated by the project and will be monitored through consolidated remote sensing practices or 
geospatial analysis. This is expected to yield a better understanding of trends and patterns and make the 
analysis more meaningful in understanding the relationship between climate parameters and the pattern of 
adoption and participation in project activities. The MIS system will geo-reference all activities using FAO’s 
Remote Sensing application- Earth Map. The MIS system will also record beneficiary phone numbers for 
feedback from participants. The MIS system will also be used for tracking beneficiaries over time and 
assessing impact. 
 
145. 
CsCAP Monitoring: innovative methods will be employed to engage and incentivise stakeholders, 
including youth, to use smartphones for field reporting and ground truthing of remote sensing. A bridge will 
be established between the diagnostic output and citizen reporting to provide a means of tracking the 
realisation of predictions made, and the effects of CsCAP implementation. The approach will be integrated 
into updated formats of the annual reports submitted by these bodies. These will also appear as geotagged 
report points on the mapping portal produced under Component 1, alongside the layers that report on the 
status of NRM. The project will also introduce and pilot test some innovative approaches to assessing bio-
diversity in pastures by using apiculture techniques (see component 1).  
 
146. 
Survey Methods:  The project will commission a Baseline Survey by a third party in year one against 
which subsequent changes and impact will be measured. To measure attributable changes, the evaluations 
will draw on mixed-methods, using qualitative methods (e.g. participatory rural appraisal, focus group 
discussions, key informant interviews, etc.,) in combination with counterfactual analysis (e.g. quasi-
experimental methods, depending on the existence of reliable control group data from the project’s baseline 
and completion surveys, which will be confirmed during project inception). All surveys and impact 
assessments will be sex-disaggregated and key gender-sensitive indicators both quantitative and qualitative 
outlined in the Gender Action Plan will be captured in the initial and subsequent surveys and findings.  In 
addition, all impact evaluations will be conducted by external parties to ensure independence.   
 
147. 
Interim and final evaluations. IFAD has a well-structured system for undertaking annual 
supervision missions, a mid-term review and a project completion report.  The project will undertake surveys 
at mid-term and at completion to assess the performance of the project, draw important lessons and 
incorporate beneficiary feedback. The evaluator will assess the paradigm shift potential and sustainable 
development potential via a three-point scale scorecard that is being developed by the GCF Secretariat. The 
external surveys will feed into these review reports. The interim or mid-term survey will incorporate key 
aspects of impact on the targeted households up to that period and will be incorporated in IFAD’s Mid-Term 
Review Report. At project completion, a final impact assessment will be undertaken to assess the overall 
impact of the project on the beneficiaries.  The mid-term and final impact will compare project results with 
the expected outreach, adoption of climate adaptation practices and assess the overall impact on the 
paradigm shifts outlined in the project log-frame and the indicators of resilience outlined at the impact level.  
The project completion review will also assess the extent to which the intervention has contributed to the 
Fund’s higher-level goal of achieving a paradigm shift in adaptation to climate change at the national level 
and in the selected project districts in Tajikistan. The AE will also hold participatory workshops at the interim 
and final evaluation stages as necessary.  
 
148. 
Quality control and quality assurance measures: Each agency will establish a system for a 
periodic audit of the quality of its reports by fact checking 5% to 10% of the reports submitted by its staff. In 
addition, the M&E Units of PMU and CEP will also depute its staff in the field to fact check and verify 5% to 
10% of the reports submitted by the implementing agencies or its own staff. Regular field visits will be 
undertaken for the verification with a well specified approach to engaging the beneficiary group 
representatives in the process and recording how the process and consultations were conducted. 
 
149. 
Beneficiary Feedback: Each partner will also establish a mechanism for beneficiary feedback and 
demonstrate how they have incorporated the feedback in improving their implementation approach. A 
beneficiaryfeedback will also be prepared by each implementing partner on an annual basis and will form

=== PAGE 72 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 68 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
Selected Risk Factor 1 
Lack of institutional Coordination and Capacity 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
High 
Medium 
Description 
Lack of Institutional Coordination and Capacity: There is limited capacity and coordination at the 
inter-ministerial level between MOA, CEP, SFA, MEDT, MoEWR, Committee of Emergency 
situations and Civil defense (CES) and other relevant institutions in the country. There is also 
limited expertise in understanding and awareness about climate change and climate risks as well 
as how to bets plan and allocate resources for investment in the green economy at the national 
level. There is also limited coordination between institutions at the central level and those at lower 
tiers.  Although there is widespread understanding at the upper levels of the national government 
as to the seriousness of the challenges associated with climate change there is no consensus on 
how to address these challenges.  Capacity gaps and lack of institutional arrangements have 
hindered CEP’s ability to fulfil its role. Currently, there are no procedures for ensuring that climate 
change adaptation and planning and implementation are inclusive processes that encourage 
active involvement of NGOs, private sector and result in adaptation measures that respond to the 
needs of the most vulnerable. Inability to integrate climate change adaptation considerations into 
the national development planning processes or in local level planning hinder the process of 
adaptation. There is also lack of coordination and synergy between disaster risk reduction and 
climate change adaptation. Ineffective coordination and knowledge sharing decreases 
effectiveness and impact of NAP process.228 CEP staff at local levels in general have limited 
knowledge of climate change and adaptation aspects, and they have no guidance or procedures 
on how to advise or monitor adaptation activities that take place at subnational levels, either on 
the part of NGOs, local governments, or individuals. 
part of the Annual Performance Report (APR). The implementing agency will ensure that the beneficiary 
feedback is organized so that the reports provide sex-disaggregated perspectives. The MoA (via PMU) and 
CEP-CIIP will also establish a grievance redress system which will be communicated by each implementing 
agency to the participants to enable them to directly access the system in a manner which guarantees their 
confidentiality. IFAD and GCF’s procedures for complaints related to the Environmental and Social 
Standards will be adopted. 
 
150. 
 Learning and knowledge management:  KM is a key element of the project, as such the Project 
is endowed with a dedicated communication/KMofficer (in CEP). The project will synthesize the lessons 
learned, including on innovations and mainstreaming gender.  These lessons will be shared with the NDA 
and the NCCC to enable them to incorporate them in the strategies and plans being developed by the 
country in its NAP and other key strategy documents.  TAs working on specific topics and policy briefs will 
be required to develop these products. IFAD and FAO will also capitalize on their in-house experience to 
undertake the development of knowledge products for wider dissemination.. All innovations, approaches 
and processes will be documented, to generate lessons learned and policy briefs, including on fodder. This 
will ultimately enable policy makers to incorporate in national policies and strategies, as integral part of the 
paradigm shift.  
 
151. 
Communication: All the interventions, data and results generated by the project will be effectively 
communicated and disseminated to the different stakeholders and beneficiaries at the national and district 
level (in Russian and English as required). Specialized services will be contracted to implement gender-
sensitive communications campaigns which will include the use of knowledge-sharing platforms and social-
media networks to promote participation, awareness raising and to strengthen project´s partnerships.

=== PAGE 73 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 69 
 
 
 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
There are several GCF supported readiness grants and projects for strengthening the capacity of 
CEP and the overall institutional coordination in the country.  One main result of the first GCF 
Readiness grant was the formulation of a draft decree to establish a Coordinating Council on the 
Green Climate Fund under the GoT. The decree has been submitted to the government for 
approval. The focus of this decree is to coordinate activities, interventions, and projects that are 
currently being funded by the GCF or will be funded in the future. However, the specific roles of 
the NDA and the Coordination Council are not clarified in the draft decree. The current NAP 
Readiness proposal is expected to address this issue. The NAP project also has a major capacity 
building component aimed at strengthening human resources in the CEP and priority sector 
agencies. These capacity building activities have been designed to respond to specific gaps and 
weaknesses. The NAP project is designed to focus on clearly delineating institutional relationships 
related to climate change adaptation to improve vertical and horizontal coordination, facilitate the 
integration of climate change adaptation into national development planning activities, and 
strengthen data and information capabilities, which support evidence-based policy-making and 
project design and strength the capacity for inclusion of green economy investments. The current 
CASP+ project will further strengthen the coordination and institutional capacity of some of the 
key agencies dealing with mitigation and adaptation measures. Further, CASP+ is designed to 
integrate climate adaptation and green economy initiatives into planning at the local level by 
initiating a participatory process which will involve all key agencies at the district level. This 
approach is expected to enhance coordination among the key agencies dealing with various key 
sectors most impacted by climate change such as water and agriculture and adopt a more 
inclusive approach involving women, youth, women headed households and integrate disaster 
risk reduction into the planning process. 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
Delay in project approval  
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
High 
Medium 
Description 
Delay in project approval: Overall, there have been significant delays in the approval of projects 
in Tajikistan including GCF proposals in the past. IFAD has also experienced delays in the 
approval of its projects in the country. The delay can be attributed to both the processes instituted 
by the financiers as well as the Government. The delays are further exacerbated during 
implementation as implementing agencies establish their implementation arrangements and then 
initiate procurement of goods and services.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
IFAD and FAO have undertaken the design process for CASP+ in close coordination with key 
Government agencies particularly with Ministry of Finance, CEP, Ministry of Agriculture and key 
committees and agencies that are involved in the implementation of the project. The purpose of 
the close interaction was to ensure a high degree of ownership and commitment of the 
Government and ensure the approval of the project in a timely manner. IFAD’s has a close working 
relationship with key Government agencies and has a rich history of implementation of projects in 
the country. The current project is patterned on an on-going project which is well regarded by the 
Government, and this will help expedite approval by Government. Implementation of the current 
project on the ground will be expedited given that the project will use the existing implementation 
arrangements of the on-going CASP project for which a Project Management Unit is already in 
place and will be strengthened.  
Selected Risk Factor 3 
Financial management and fiduciary risks 
Category 
Probability 
Impact

=== PAGE 74 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 70 
 
 
 
 
Governance 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Financial aspects are another factor which pose a risk and contribute to persistent delays in 
projects. Lack of strong procurement capacity is a key challenge as procurement plans are not 
developed in a timely manner and procedures are not always strictly followed. The lead time 
required for procurement is seldom predicted with accuracy. The inordinate delay has an impact 
on project allocation and efficiency due to the inflationary impact of the delay on market prices.  
The inexperience of implementing partners with the procurement processes of the financing 
agencies can often cause further delay as some of the procurement has to be retendered.  The 
Government does not have strong systems for financial management and there is no well- defined 
system for internal or external audits. The country is assigned a score of high at the country level 
for financial risk.229 Tajikistan ranks 162 out of 180 countries according to the Transparency 
International’s Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) for 2023 with a score of 20/100. Tajikistan’s 
score is one of the three scores that are at the bottom of the Eastern Europe and Central Asia 
region with an average score of 35 for the region. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
At CEP, a dedicated CIIP has been established for implementation based on the successful 
experience of CEP implementing a large range of GCF proposals and its strengthening due to the 
UNDP readiness support as part of the NAP preparation process. Both CEP and MoA have 
strengthened their procurement experience because of their implementation of donor projects. In 
addition, strong procurement and financial management arrangements will be put in place with a 
detailed procurement plan for the seven-year project with an annual review and refinement of the 
overall plan.  Since the effectiveness of IFAD-funded portion of CASP+ (April 2023), IFAD has 
started reinforcing the financial management system of CASP+ by hiring dedicated and qualified 
financial management and procurement staff for both CEP and MoA. The project will use a 
standardized accounting software and proper internal control measures including flow of funds 
and reporting channels for implementing partners. IFAD procurement rules will be adopted with 
strong implementation support provided by the Financial Management Services Division (FMD) 
within IFAD. A strong system of financial reporting has been put in place and all partners will be 
expected to adopt the reporting requirements that are clearly specified in the GCF and IFAD AMA. 
Selected Risk Factor 4 Limited engagement of the private sector 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Limited engagement of the private sector: Engaging the private sector in adaptation in 
Tajikistan is an on-going challenge. The private sector is small with limited capacity working in a 
relatively small market dependent on agriculture and government spending. In its Country 
Programme for Tajikistan, the NDA has limited ideas or proposals related to the private sector.230 
When looking at the project priority ideas in its country program, they focus on public provision of 
irrigation, energy, capacity building, or transport. Without private sector engagement, it will be 
difficult to establish sustainable climate resilient inputs and technologies provision.  Lack of 
collection, transport, storage, and processing facilities infrastructure discourages productive 
partnerships between smallholders and the private sector. Lack of private sector involvement also 
limits the potential for innovation and technology transfer, a constraint noted by other GCF funded 
projects in Tajikistan as well.231  There is a risk that the private sector may not fully participate due 
to the fragmented nature of production, i.e., many smallholders, who cannot guarantee production 
quality or quantity. The current CASP+ project will facilitate the participation of the private sector 
where possible. 
Mitigation Measure(s)

=== PAGE 75 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 71 
 
 
 
 
Part of the NDA’s NAP and readiness plan is to support the private sector by identifying potential 
partners.  There are a few projects (Section D.5) that currently involve the private sector such as 
FP025 which is private sector focused and is already working in the country to engage local 
financial institutions. FP075 also intends to develop a fee-based service to provide Hydromet data 
and information to customers in the private sector. One of the key outcomes expected from the 
NAP readiness project is a suite of activities designed to foster robust private sector engagement 
and participation in advancing climate change adaptation in Tajikistan. The CASP+ includes 
several activities designed to engage the private sector in direct partnerships with small producers 
in the dairy, poultry and crop sector to help in removing constraints along the value chain.  A 
strategy for building productive alliances is being relied upon to encourage the private sector to 
play a more active role and reduce losses, enhance efficiency and productivity and add value. 
The private sector will be encouraged through improved infrastructure, equipment and 
arrangements for storage, transport, processing and trade and providing grants to smallholders 
which will enable them to increase the quality and quantity of their produce for the market. 
Selected Risk Factor 5  COVID-19 pandemics and emerging influx of refugees   
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
High 
Medium 
Description 
COVID-19 pandemics and the influx of Afghan refugees into Tajikistan affects the 
operations: The COVID-19 pandemic has had a severe impact on the physical and psychological 
and economic well- being of people. Trade and transportation disruptions have led to a sharp drop 
in remittances and government revenues and created urgent balance of payments issues and 
fiscal financing needs. The authorities are concerned about debt sustainability and are preparing 
consolidation measures that can be implemented over the medium term. While the development 
of how the pandemic will continue to affect rural areas is unknown, the impact on rural economies 
has been significant and required substantial changes in the field-level operations. Tajikistan 
continues to maintain measures imposed to combat the spread of COVID-19, as of mid-April 2021. 
The world is currently seeing a third wave of the pandemic and it is not possible to predict at the 
moment how long the restrictions will continue and how they will impact project implementation. 
The influx of Afghan refugees that began in the immediate aftermath of the US troop withdrawal 
and the Taliban take over in Afghanistan is expected to exert additional pressure on the natural 
resources and public sector infrastructure in the country. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The overall implementation will factor-in procedures and protocols to proactively ensure high 
standards of minimization of health risks related to the on-going pandemic. Specifically, this will 
entail reducing movements in-country and keeping international travel to a minimum, ensuring 
social distancing measures are in place during any interaction among people during the process 
of community mobilization, trainings, implementation of physical activities and monitoring. The 
project will encourage the adoption and use of SOPS and turn to virtual and e-communications 
as far as possible. The design mission and the consultations for the current proposal were 
organized mostly virtually with some meetings physically where appropriate. The influx of Afghan 
refugees was reportedly lower than initial expectations. In case of emerging influx of refugees in 
the project target areas, the project will inform via Project Steering Committee the relevant 
authorities at regional and national level.  
Selected Risk Factor 6  Lack of policy engagement of Government on reduction of livestock inventories 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Medium 
Medium 
Description

=== PAGE 76 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 72 
 
 
 
 
CASP+ will provide positive incentives to targeted communities to reduce the size of their herds 
and flocks, through support to intensification (breeding, animal health and capacity building on 
feeding and milk hygiene), in the targeted communities. It will also ensure that governance 
mechanisms for sustainable use of pasture are in place, through PUUs, PUAs, PCs and PMPs. 
However, these measures will be fully efficient and will result in affective reduction of herd size, 
only if they are associated with regulatory measures that create disincentives for stock 
accumulation. These measures such as progressive pro-poor quotas and taxes, grazing permits 
related to carrying capacity of pasture, need to be framed in national laws and regulations to 
enable local governments and PUUs to enforce them. It is expected that the adoption and 
enforcement of such measures will not be welcomed by the larger livestock owners, who have 
good lobbying capacities and may prevent the policy process to go through. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
This risk will be mitigated by involving a large variety of stakeholders in the consultation process 
that will be facilitated by the project for the review of the pasture law, under which these measures 
should be mainstreamed. PUUs and PUAs should play an active role in these consultations, but 
also academia and environmental organizations. This will allow building a position which is both 
evidence-based and pro-poor, and will counter negative lobbying of opponents of these reforms. 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
152. 
The project is categorized as a Category B based on an evaluation procedure and a standardized 
questionnaire that assessed the likelihood, frequency, intensity, manageability, duration and reversibility of 
a range of risks and the significance of potential impacts were low (or medium in few cases). An ESMP is 
given in Annex 6 and a detailed Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP)232 
review note showing the output from the environmental and social analysis is presented in Annex 2. The 
screening of the CASP+ was conducted on a preliminary basis at the project concept stage for consideration 
at the Operational Strategy and Policy Guidance Committee (OSC) review stage, and then finalized in 
advance of the quality enhancement review. The consultations that took place as part of the design process 
confirmed the initial screening. The assessment process involves a review and approval of project 
documentation by IFAD’s Executive Board, the MOA (via PMU) and the CEP as part of the project cycle 
approval process. In all the steps, a number of internal and external evaluators provided inputs and peer 
review of the process.  
 
153. 
CASP+ is designed to introduce a series of measures that will strengthen the development and 
governance of natural resource management. Pasture management and joint forestry management plans 
are expected to promote the restoration of degraded pastures through rotation and fencing, and 
improvement of vegetation cover and the reforestation of upstream degraded areas.  The project will 
introduce remote and participatory monitoring to improve natural resource management.  The project will 
enhance technical capacities of national livestock institutions to ensure efficient provision of public animal 
health and production services to smallholder farmers through efficient partnership between public and 
private institutions. The project will build capacities of research and academia institutions on climate resilient 
ecosystem management. 
 
154. 
The design team carried out extensive stakeholder consultations- not only to assess the ESS risks 
and design mitigation measures to ensure compliance with GCF’s ESS and IFAD’s SECAP standards- but 
also to maximise the potential of environmental and social benefits. As outlined in Annex 7, the design team 
met with institutions such as CEP, NBBC, CAREC, Little Earth, WWF and Zan va Zamin to better understand 
environmental and social risks in the target areas and related to the planned activities. Focus group 
discussions with women have been held to better understand specific challenges facing women, girls and 
children. The project does not envisage any adverse social impact. Prior to implementation, a qualitative 
assessment of the aspirations of women and men of various age groups, especially the most vulnerable

=== PAGE 77 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 73 
 
 
 
 
(female head of households, youth- especially young girls), through focus group discussions, will take place 
to solicit feedback on the challenges being faced by them, their views on solutions and coping mechanisms, 
as well as feedback on the training programs and how they can be improved during all programme stage.  
 
155. 
During the mobilisation process, the project will conduct public consultations at different levels on the 
programme objectives, eligibility criteria and selection process for specific activities directed to specific social 
categories, and available grievance redress mechanisms. This will be done in partnership with community 
leaders and will be executed by an independent Technical Assistance Agency. A complete set of activities, 
including a free and prior informed consultation (FPIC) plan and community participatory methods have been 
developed (Annex 6). Direct selection of beneficiaries will take place using pre-established guidelines and 
targeting criteria reflecting that they are among the most climate vulnerable in Tajikistan (Annex 21).  This 
will ensure community’s participation in project development and prevent any potential conflict during 
implementation. A well-functioning M&E system will allow to detect deviations from beneficiary satisfaction 
or potential discrimination (e.g. elite capture). Gender mainstreaming actions will be developed as part of a 
Gender Development Plan (GDP) to sensitize the IP, engage with a variety of stakeholders (political, cultural 
or religious leaders, health teams, local councils, social workers, women’s organizations and groups), to 
have specific procedures for SEA/SH and to develop an agreed Code of Conduct to address behaviour and 
undertake regular M&E of progress on SEA/SH prevention and response activities. 
 
156. 
Grievance and Redress Mechanism (GRM): IFAD's GRM policies will be implemented and can be 
accessed by beneficiaries, if necessary, to manage project-related grievances that cannot be resolved by 
the project’s Executing Entity. The outline for GRM procedures and guidelines have been developed based 
on IFAD's corporate complaints procedure to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and complaints 
with respect to alleged noncompliance of its environmental and social policies and mandatory aspects of its 
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures.  During implementation they will be further fine- 
tuned and implemented accordingly. The complainants should first bring the matter to the attention of the 
government or executing entity. However, if the complainants feel they might be subject to retaliation, they 
may bring the matter straight to IFAD. Explanation of the GRM process will be included in the capacity-
building program and the project will organize consultations to determine the most suitable channel for 
beneficiaries and stakeholders to communicate their concerns and ideas (see Annex 7). As part of the 
safeguard’s performance monitoring, the project will also be responsible for documenting and reporting any 
grievances received and how they were addressed. The GCF independent Redress Mechanism will be 
available for assistance at any stage, including before a claim has been made. 
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
157. 
Women suffer disproportionately from the insecurity caused by climate change because they are the 
ones predominantly responsible for securing food and income from agriculture plots and providing for their 
families. Women, especially women-headed-households, are among the most vulnerable and account for 
40% of those registered as extremely poor.233 Women have limited access to decision making, productive 
assets, productive opportunities and services. According to the Labour Market Analysis (Tajstat, 2016) 46% 
of the total population is engaged in the agriculture sector, with women being 61% of the total. Despite the 
high proportion of women in the sector, they lack access to key resources and are under-represented in 
decision-making bodies: (i) only 52% of women headed HHs compared to 86% men headed HHs own land 
and they own small and less productive plots; 234 (ii) Women-headed dekhan farms account for 13% 
compared to 87% for men235 and (iv) women face greater difficulties accessing knowledge, services and 
capital. According to FAO, 31% of women hold management position in Pastoral Users Unions (PUUs) but 
they are absent from Forest Management Committees. However, they have a critical role to play as 
practitioners, and agents of change in climate resilience and biodiversity conservation as reflected in key 
documents such as: (i) the National Strategy for Enhancing the Role of Women in the Republic of Tajikistan 
(2010); (ii) the National Development Strategy of the Republic of Tajikistan 2030; (iii) the Sixth National 
Report on the convention of Biological Diversity (2019).

=== PAGE 78 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 74 
 
 
 
 
158. 
In line with GCF’s Gender policy, the project design is based on the understanding that gender 
relations, roles and responsibilities exercise important influences on women’s and men’s access to and 
control over decisions, assets and resources, information, and knowledge. This in turn influences their 
resilience and capacity to adapt to climate change risks.  This was confirmed by the stakeholder consultation 
held in the project area. Physical and virtual dialogues were held with both women and men from the project 
districts. The design team also met remotely with staff from some of the key Ministries, agencies and civil 
society organizations working on gender issues such as the Committees for Women Affairs and the Ministry 
of Ministry of Health and Social Protection in Tajikistan.  
 
159. 
Gender aspects are mainstreamed in each of the three main components of the project as well as 
the project management arrangements. In Component 1, the GAP ensures that (i) the gender dimension is 
included in evidence based studies and visibility of women’s role, needs and priorities in CC adaptation is 
integrated into policy development (i.e. forest, pasture). In Component 2, the GAP ensures that women are 
involved as decision-makers in relevant committees; (ii) their view is captured in development of CsCAPs 
(iii) they are equipped with the knowledge, skills and resources they need to play that role. In Component 3, 
women will benefit equally from (i) training on climate smart agricultural practices (FFs) (iii) formation of 
Common Interest groups (CIG) and trainings on marketing and business skills (iii) financing of small 
investment projects aimed at strengthening household’s resilience. Women and Women Headed 
Households will be given priority.   
 
160. 
A Gender Assessment and a Gender Action Plan (GAP) has been developed for the project and is 
elaborated in Annex 8. The Gender Action Plan of the project aims to have a transformative impact on 
women’s role in climate change through their engagement in climate smart agriculture practices and 
leadership in natural resource management. The GAP ensures that 50% of all direct and indirect 
beneficiaries of the project will be women and that they will hold at least 30% of all leadership positions. The 
GAP focusses on ensuring (i) strengthening the visibility of women’s role, needs and priorities in climate 
change adaptation as part of the policy development process (ii) increasing women’s voice and 
representation in local development planning process and decision making bodies (iii) increasing women’s 
opportunities to adopt climate adaptive practices to reduce their vulnerability.  
 
161. 
The responsibility for mainstreaming gender will be included in the ToR of the PMU Gender Expert. 
Data collected on project indicators will be sex and age-disaggregated and project reports will include sex-
disaggregated findings, analysis and recommendations. 
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
162. 
Financial Management: IFAD will be responsible for the overall financial management of GCF 
funds. IFAD has a well-established system in place and has very well defined financial management and 
procurement procedures and guidelines which will be adopted. Disbursement, administration and 
processing of GCF proceeds by IFAD shall be in accordance with IFAD rules, policies and procedures 
applicable to the extent and scope of its Accreditation with GCF, in order to allow it to comply with its 
obligations under this Agreement. All financial management and procurement arrangements and 
responsibilities, including financial accounting, disbursement methods and auditing will be specified under 
the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) and will be aligned with the process and method agreed in the 
Accreditation Master agreement (AMA) between GCF and IFAD. IFAD will ensure that a financial 
management system is maintained, with separate statements, accounts and records of its own and GCF 
proceeds in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards. The financial information will be 
audited annually by independent external auditors selected in accordance with IFAD’s policies and furnished 
to the Fund.  
 
163. 
IFAD will provide to GCF the following financial information in the agreed form and means: 
i. on a semi-annual basis within ninety (90) days after 30 June and 31 December of each year (or such 
other frequency agreed in the FAA): (i) the dates and amounts disbursed for Funded Activities, for 
the period reported and cumulative amounts up to the period, broken down by each Funded Activity, 
and compliance with financial covenants; (ii) the actual expenses for the Funded Activities for the

=== PAGE 79 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 75 
 
 
 
 
period reported and cumulative amounts up to the period, broken down by each Funded Activity; (iii) 
(A) the date on which any Funded Activity is financially closed, (B) the final amount disbursed for such 
Funded Activity, (C) the amount of any unused funds from such Funded Activity, and (D) the amount 
of such unused funds paid to the Fund, for the period reported, broken down by each such Funded 
Activity; the dates and amounts of any Reflowed Funds received by the Accredited Entity from Funded 
Activities, as well as the amount of such Reflowed Funds paid to the Fund, for the period reported 
and cumulative amounts up to the period, broken down by each Funded Activity; and (v) a statement 
of Investment Income earned on GCF Proceeds, as well as the amount of such Investment Income 
paid to the Fund; 
ii. within four (4) months after the end of the GCF Fiscal Year, an unaudited annual financial statement 
for each of the Funded Activities and the GCF Account containing the information required under 
Clauses 17.02(a)(i), 17.02(a)(ii) and 17.02(a)(v) with specific Funded Activities listed in a separate 
annex, and within six (6) months after the end of the GCF Fiscal Year, an audited annual financial 
statement for each of the Funded Activities and the GCF Account containing the same information; 
iii. within three (3) months after expiration or termination of this Agreement, an unaudited final financial 
statement for the GCF Account, and within six (6) months after expiration or termination, and an 
audited final financial statement for the GCF Account, in each case regarding the period since the 
last period covered by the statements referred to in Clause 17.02(b) above; and (d) such other reports 
related to funds disbursed by the Fund to the Accredited Entity, as may reasonably be requested by 
the Fund from time to time. 
 
164. 
Procurement: As part of the detailed design for the CASP+, mission assessed the public 
procurement systems and procuring institutions that would handle procurement under CASP+. 236 The 
Government of Tajikistan is currently in the process of strengthening its procurement regulations. However, 
the Public Procurement Law does not fully meet international standards. According to the World Bank and 
ADB’s Country Procurement Status Review, the EBRD’s procurement assessment, as well as the Public 
Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment, found weaknesses in Tajikistan’s public procurement 
system, which have critical gaps in compatibility with IFAD’s applicable Procurement Guidelines and 
procedures. Despite significant progress, there is lack of a clear strategy and sufficient technical skills to 
design and implement an e-procurement system or a broader public sector modernization agenda. 
Externally financed projects undertake their work based on their own procurement rules and guidelines. In 
view of the above, the procurement of Goods and Services for Funded Activities, by the Executing Entities 
or by a third party, shall be done in accordance with the rules, policies and procedures of IFAD to the extent 
and scope of its Accreditation and FAO where relevant.  IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines, its Procurement 
Handbooks and provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement/Letter to the Borrower will be followed.  
 
165. 
FAO will use its own procurement rules for those activities under its responsibility regardless of the 
source of financing. The procurement of goods, works and services to be financed from the proceeds of 
IFAD’s financing which FAO receives would be in accordance with the FAO Procurement procedures and 
guidelines. This implementation arrangement is based on an assessment done by IFAD of the FAO 
Procurement system. During implementation, FAO shall observe the following specific principles: (a) 
procurement would be carried out in accordance with the Financing Agreement and any duly agreed 
amendments thereto; (b) it would be conducted within the project implementation period, except as provided 
in the financing agreement; (c) the cost of the procurement is not to exceed the availability of duly allocated 
funds as per financing agreement, and (d) the Revised IFAD Policy on Preventing Frauds and Corruption in 
its Activities and Operations are to be respected. 
 
166. 
In order to mitigate any procurement risks, the project will undertake the following tasks: (1) Develop 
a PIM and PPM to mitigate the inconsistency with a national procurement manual; (2) Use and follow IFAD 
Procurement Guidelines and Procurement Handbook; (3) Build the capacity of the PIU Procurement 
consultant to fill any competency, skills and knowledge on IFAD procurement procedures; (4) Recruit 
additionally procurement consultant/assistance for both PMU and CEP-CIIP; (5) The PMU and PIU should 
apply the IFAD Guidelines in their activities and adopt procurement documentation in line with the standard 
forms agreed with IFAD.

=== PAGE 80 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 76 
 
 
 
 
167. 
Project start-up activities will include the following: (1) Development of a PIM; (2) Prepare and publish 
the General Procurement Notice on the UNDB website; (3) Build the capacity of the PIU Procurement 
consultant to fill any competency and knowledge on IFAD procurement procedures; (4) Recruit additionally 
procurement consultant/assistance for both PMU and PIU; (5) Make amendments to PPM, adapt to CASP+ 
and submit to IFAD; (6) Finalization of the Procurement Plan for the first 18 months.  
 
168. 
An procurement plan (Annex 10) has been provided based on the project budget (Annex 4) and the 
expected timelines (Annex 5) using the IFAD procurement methods to be used, prior review thresholds and 
pre-qualification requirements for both goods and services. The MoA (via PMU), CEP-CIIP and FAO will 
prepare annual procurement plans and submit for IFAD’s approval. The Letter to the Borrower (LTB) from 
IFAD to the GoT will specify the thresholds and Prior/Post review conditions. GCF will transfer funds to IFAD 
on the basis of an annual workplan from which an annual procurement and disbursement schedule will be 
developed by the three executing entities which will be responsible for procuring the goods and services 
needed to fulfil their area of responsibility. IFAD will ensure that all implementing agencies maintain 
documents adequately to record the progress of individual funded activities including records evidencing 
use of GCF Proceeds under each Funding Activity Agreement (FAA) are retained until at least five (5) years 
after the relevant Reporting Period.  
 
169. 
All contracts executed by CEP-CIIP, MoA (via PMU) and FAO will be maintained in IFAD’s Contract 
Register template. IFAD will undertake annual supervision missions that will review the tender process and 
related documents for all contracts executed by CEP-CIIP, MoA (via PMU) and FAO. An annual procurement 
review will be prepared and submitted to IFAD and GCF management. IFAD will stipulate that the executing 
entities will ensure that the representatives of the Fund are able to examine all records and are provided all 
such information concerning such records as they may from time-to-time reasonably request; and the 
information relating to Funded Activities required to be disclosed by the Accredited Entity pursuant to the 
Information Disclosure Policy is made publicly available in a timely fashion pursuant thereto. 
 
170. 
Audit: There will be a system of regular internal and external audit in place. The internal audit system 
will be established as an integral part of the financial management system.  An annual external audit will be 
undertaken by hiring an internal auditor consultant who reviews the controls for the operational and 
community activities. 
 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
. 
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
• 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
• 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 81 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 77 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☒ Others (please specify): Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☐ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☐ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☒ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☐ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 18 
Completion Report and Impact Assessment of previous IFAD Projects 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☒ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22  
Theory of Change 
☒ 
Annex 23  
Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting237 
☒ 
Annex 24  
Beneficiaries Estimates 
☒ 
Annex 25  
Matrix on integrating agro-ecology into CASP+ investment 
☒ 
Annex 26  
Detailed project structure and component description (complementary to Section B.3) 
☒ 
Annex 27  
Synergies of CASP+ with Climate Finance in Tajikistan 
☒ 
Annex 28  
Detailed description of CASP+ Theory of Change 
☒ 
Annex 29  
Evolution of IFAD portfolio in Tajikistan and lessons learned 
☒ 
Annex 30  
Synoptic Table of IFAD-funded interventions in Tajikistan

=== PAGE 82 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 78 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF 
financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or programme described in the funding proposal. 
2 The target reported here in revised v5 reflects the increased capitalization period. The updated carbon accounting update is provided in Annex 23.  
3 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF. 
4 ND-GAIN, 2018: https://gain.nd.edu/our-work/country-index/rankings/  
5 An assessment tool that enables easy access to modelling results for crop yields under various climate change scenarios. Developed by the West and Central 
Africa Division of the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) with funding from Phase II of the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture 
Programme (ASAP2). 
6 https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/41085512/Card_usermanual_W.pdf/e867a16c-e581-8038-aa6f-1767a10629a3 
7 Reference to Annex 23 and IFAD, 2022. Management of Livestock Using Rotational Grazing. A critical intervention to promote food security and 
environmental sustainability in Rural Tajikistan (link here: https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/46450319/management-livestock-using-rotational-
grazing.pdf/19aae904-771c-f261-e187-4c87d808e839?t=1666781751627).  
8 The target reported here in revised v4 does not reflect the increased capitalization period; carbon accounting update is ongoing.  
9 The 2021 updated NDC covers the agriculture, energy, forestry and biodiversity, industry and construction, and transport and infrastructure sectors, as well as 
adaptation. 
10 ND-GAIN, 2018:  https://gain.nd.edu/our-work/country-index/rankings/  
11 Aalto, J., Kämäräinen, M., Shodmonov, M., Rajabov, N. & Venäläinen, A. Features of Tajikistan’s past and future climate. Int. J. Climatol. (2017).   
12 The Third National Communication of the Republic of Tajikistan under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, Dushanbe, 2014. 
13 Annex 16: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis – Historical and current climate, Precipitation. 
14 Source: Local weather station data from Pogodaiklimat & global data from Climatic Research Unit – University of East Anglia (CRU) 
15 Annex 16: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis – Historical and current climate, Precipitation, local weather stations analysis 
16 Annex 16: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis – Historical and current climate, Precipitation  
17 Annex 16: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis – Impacts of historical climate change, Snow Extent and water availability 
18 The Centre and North West of the country have an average of 700-900 mm per year compare to the North of the Sughd Region, the East of Gorno-
Badakhshan Autonomous Region and the South of the Khatlon Region which receive around 100-300 mm per year for the 1981-2018 period. 
19 Source: Climatic Research Unit – University of East Anglia (CRU) and Climate Hazards Group InfraRed Precipitation with Station data (CHIRPS), 
respectively. 
20 UNDP. 2013. Human development report 2013. The rise of the South: human progress in a diverse world. 
21 Annex 16: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis – Historical and current climate - Vegetation and cropland: The combination of indexes to 
build the ASI is showing a negative trend for both grassland and cropland with variations geographically, in time and in intensity. 
22 Greˆt-Regamey A, Brunner SH, Kienast F. 2012. Mountain ecosystem services: Who cares? Mountain Research and Development 32(1):23–34.  
23 Ariza C, Maselli D, Kohler T. 2013. Mountains: Our Life, Our Future. Progress and Perspectives on Sustainable Mountain Development from Rio 1992 to Rio 
2012 and Beyond. Bern, Switzerland: SDC [Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation], CDE [Centre for Development and Environment] 
24 Costs of Environmental Degradation in the Mountains of the Republic of Tajikistan Report, World Bank, 2020. 
25 Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) towards the achievement of the global goal of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) by the Republic of Tajikistan, 2017. 
26 Climate risks and food security in Tajikistan. A Review of Evidence and Priorities for Adaptation Strategies. April 2017. WFP (RCP4.5 & RCP8.5). 
27 Tajikistan: Country situation assessment Working paper, 2015. CARECECO, PRISE (RCP8.5). 
28 The Climate Change Knowledge Portal: https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/  (RCP2.6, .RCP4.5, RCP6.0 & RCP8.5) 
29 An assessment tool that enables easy access to modelling results for crop yields under various climate change scenarios. Developed by the West and 
Central Africa Division of the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) with funding from Phase II of the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture 
Programme (ASAP2). 
30 https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/41085512/Card_usermanual_W.pdf/e867a16c-e581-8038-aa6f-1767a10629a3. 
31 Christensen, J. H. et al. Climate phenomena and their relevance for future regional climate change. in Climate Change 2013 the Physical Science Basis: 
Working Group I Contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2013).  
32 Annex 16: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis – Historical and current climate, Precipitation, local weather stations analysis. 
33 World Bank. REDUCING MULTI-HAZARD RISKS ACROSS TAJIKISTAN Protecting Communities Through Quality Infrastructure. (2017).   
34 Readiness Proposal. GCF. United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) for Republic of Tajikistan 18 May 2020 | Adaptation Planning. 
35 Climate risks and food security in Tajikistan. A Review of Evidence and Priorities for Adaptation Strategies. April 2017. WFP. 
36 SPECIAL REPORT, FAO/WFP CROP AND FOOD SUPPLY ASSESSMENT MISSION TO TAJIKISTAN, 7 August 2001. 
37 Annex 16: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis - Impacts of historical climate change, Impacts of Natural hazards 
38 Annex 16: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis - Impacts of historical climate change, Vegetation and cropland 
39 SPEI is a multi-scalar drought index based on climatic data (precipitation, evapotranspiration) allowing to account for the effect of temperature on drought 
development through a basic water balance calculation. SPEI has an intensity scale in which both positive and negative values (-5,5) are calculated, 
identifying wet and dry events. It can be calculated for time steps of as little as 1 month up to 48 months or more, with longer period deeper layer of soil can 
be analysed. Source: Copernicus Climate Change Service ERA5 reanalysis. 
40 Fourth National Communication of the Republic of Tajikistan under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. Dushanbe, 2022.  
41 Share of Agriculture Emission (AR5) – 2021 data, Source: FAOstat, consulted in March 2024.  
42 USAID. Tajikistan Factsheet, 2019. 
43 There are no specific estimates for this estimated for Tajikistan but globally these are estimated to be 24%. https://www.fao.org/3/i3461e/i3461e.pdf 
44 The climate science community sources a suite of global climate models to help decision makers understand the projections of future climate change and 
related impacts, among the most widely used are the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project, Phase 6 (CMIP6) models produced in view of the IPCC's Sixth 
Assessment Report (AR6), defined by a set of climate model experiments. The analysis presents the CIMP6 ensemble modeling of 11 models, under two 
scenarios (RCP4.5, the intermediate emission scenario; and RCP8.5, the worse-case emission scenario). The exact values of change can be different between 
future climate models as they exhibit different sensitivities to the climate forcings. These differences between models are presented in the shaded ranges of 
figures in the Annex 2, SECAP. 
45 The Climate Change Knowledge Portal: https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/  (RCP4.5, RCP8.5) 
46 Ibid  
47 Less water available at the end of summer, beginning of autumn: Tajikistan’s Third National Communication on Climate Change to the UNFCCC, 2014.  
48 Annex 16: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis - Impacts of historical climate change, Droughts.  
49 This is a climate change vulnerability index: including risks from increased climate variability (higher variance in values of climate variables) and also from 
changes in the mean values of climate variables. 
50 Annex 16: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis - Climate Vulnerability analysis in Tajikistan for geographic targeting 
51 Groundnuts, Maize, Managed grass. Rapeseed, Rice, Sorghum, Sunflower, Wheat, Potato.  
52Annex 16: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis - Climate Change’s impacts on agricultural systems using CARD 
53 IPCC, AR5, 2014. 
54 L. Lipper, N. McCarthy, D. Zilberman, S. Asfaw, G. Branca. 2018. Climate Smart Agriculture, Natural Resource Management and Policy 52, FAO 
55 See Annex 2 – Feasibility Study – Chapter III. Pasture management and animal husbandry. 
56 Abdela, N.; Jilo, K. Impact of climate change on livestock health: A review. Global Vet. 2016, 16, 419–424 
57 R. Hijmans. The effect of climate change on global potato production, July 2003. American Journal of Potato Research 80(4) Follow journal. DOI: 
10.1007/BF02855363 
58 Tajikistan’s Third National Communication on Climate Change to the UNFCCC, 2014. 
59 See Annex 16: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis - Climate Vulnerability analysis in Tajikistan for geographic targeting

=== PAGE 83 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 79 
 
 
 
 
 
60 Climate risks and food security in Tajikistan. A Review of Evidence and Priorities for Adaptation Strategies. April 2017. WFP. 
61 United Nations Development Program (UNDP). 2012. Capacity for climate resiliency in Tajikistan: Stocktaking and Institutional Assessment. 
62 Greˆt-Regamey A, Brunner SH, Kienast F. 2012. Mountain ecosystem services: Who cares? Mountain Research and Development 32(1):23–34.  
63 Ariza C, Maselli D, Kohler T. 2013. Mountains: Our Life, Our Future. Progress and Perspectives on Sustainable Mountain Development from Rio 1992 to Rio 
2012 and Beyond. Bern, Switzerland: SDC [Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation], CDE [Centre for Development and Environment] 
64 Disparity of precipitation, higher temperature and more frequent extreme weather events is increasing erosion and disturbing soil structure – See Annex 2: 
Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis – Historical and current climate, Precipitation,    
65 Except for medium risk setting with no irrigation, see details in Annex 16: Climate change impacts, climate vulnerability analysis - Climate Change’s impacts 
on agricultural systems using CARD 
66 See Annex 2. Calvosa et al., 2009. 
67 Readiness Proposal. GCF. United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) for Republic of Tajikistan 18 May 2020 | Adaptation Planning 
68 ADB, Country Partnership Strategy – Tajikistan 2016-2020. https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/190300/cps-taj-2016-2020.pdf.  
69 https://eca.unwomen.org/en/where-we-are/tajikistan  
70 M. Abdulloev. 2013. Gender Aspects of Agriculture. Dushanbe: State Statistics Agency. 
71 UNDP, socio-economic impact of COVID-19 on lives, livelihoods and micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) in Tajikistan.  HYPERLINK 
"https://www.tj.undp.org/content/tajikistan/en/home/library/impact-of-covid-19-on-lives--livelihoods-and-micro--small-and-me.html" 
https://www.tj.undp.org/content/tajikistan/en/home/library/impact-of-covid-19-on-lives--livelihoods-and-micro--small-and-me.html  
72UNDP, socio-economic impact of COVID-19 on lives, livelihoods and micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) in Tajikistan.  HYPERLINK 
"https://www.tj.undp.org/content/tajikistan/en/home/library/impact-of-covid-19-on-lives--livelihoods-and-micro--small-and-me.html" 
https://www.tj.undp.org/content/tajikistan/en/home/library/impact-of-covid-19-on-lives--livelihoods-and-micro--small-and-me.html 
73 Within the selected districts (as specified in Annex 21, PIM, section 2.3, para 28-onwards):  the necessary criteria for Village eligibility and ranking include: a/ 
Exclusion of villages with less than 80HH and no more than 700 HH; b/ Exclusion of villages with previous/ongoing meaningful intervention providing 
the community with similar community investments; c/ Exclusion of villages with less than 1,000 Sheep Units (SU). 1 sheep/goat = 1 Sheep Unit; 1 cow = 
0.2 Sheep Unit); d/ Exclusion of villages with less than 100ha pasture for their livelihoods; and Ranking criteria to select 400 villages will depend on Sub-
catchments vulnerability, based on Climate Vulnerability Index for sub-catchments mapped at design stage. 
 Climate vulnerability index of Tajikistan, IFAD 2021. 
 Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI) on 18 months. Climate vulnerability index of Tajikistan, IFAD 2021. 
76 This project is closed, mentioned as its experience is relevant. No village targeted by this project will be targeted by CASP+.  
77 The project builds on government experience including the Environmental Land Management and Rural Livelihoods (ELMARL) Project and CAMP4ASB and 
other World Bank- and donor-funded projects on agriculture, forestry, pasture, and protected areas in the country. Lessons from ELMARL including that that 
communities recognized the value of environmental protection for their livelihoods, which served as a motivation to adopt and maintain sustainable land 
management practices that are now viewed as a viable alternative to ‘business-as-usual’ agricultural practices.  
78  https://projects.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/project-detail/P151363 Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Program for Aral Sea Basin (CAMP4ASB). 
79 To the extent that the Coordinating Council on the Green Climate Fund is functioning. 
80 LPDP I and II, KLSP and CASP, referred to later in the Concept Note. Impact assessment Report on the Livestock and Pasture Development Programme 
LPDP, 2018. https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/41114919/TJ_LPDP_IA+report.pdf/46a3c493-b024-e1b2-3f3a-786255cdc035.  
81 DAIMA project under preparation (GCF financing), will cover 4 countries in East Africa (Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda). It will be mutually co-financing 
and implemented in parallel with IFAD funded national projects in Rwanda, Uganda and Tanzania. The project is cross referred in ¶21 of the FP due to the 
potential synergies in  cross learning and lessons sharing with CASP+. CASP+ and DAIMA have several commonalities, including objectives of 
transformation/intensification of production systems, environmental protection and GHG reduction, market access, and policy strengthening. Lessons from the 
dairy value chains in the IFAD-funded projects in Rwanda, Uganda and Tanzania have been useful for CASP+, as the dairy sectors in the EA region are well 
structured (referred to in Annex 29). These lessons include in particular those on the cooperative led Milk Collecting Center Model, which is a key element of 
the value chain structure, on productive alliances between cooperatives and milk aggregators, on FFS for innovation adoption, on energy efficiency along milk 
value chain, among others. On the other hand, lessons from Tajikistan on community based pasture management will be extremely useful in East Africa where 
rangeland degradation has reached a critical point. 
82 Formerly Office International des Epizooties 
83 GCF. Readiness Support with United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) for Republic of Tajikistan. 18 May 2020 | Adaptation Planning. 
84 The Ministry of Economic Development and Trade (MEDT) and the Ministry of Finance (MoF) have specifically requested IFAD to provide technical 
assistance for the development of the Green economy strategy and building capacity for improving public projects and their green dimension. 
85 IFAD, 2022. LPDP II Impact assessment. https://www.ifad.org/ifad-impact-assessment-report-
2021/assets/pdf/impact/Tajikistan/BAR_TAJIKISTAN_RI_REPORT.pdf  
86 CASP+ Annex 18f. Rapid assessment of pasture conditions in IFAD-funded project in Khatlon region, showing a/ generalized lower degradation patterns; b/ 
no change or slight degradation on autumn pastures; and c/ Isolated cases of degradation in spring pasture.   
87 “Declined by 29 per cent as a result of participation in LPDP II for beneficiaries compared to the comparison group.” (ibid) 
88 SECAP’s Appendix 6: Integrating Agro-Ecological Principles in CASP+.  
89 Strategy to Adapt and Mitigate Potential Impacts of Climate Change on Livestock Production Systems in Tajikistan. MSU and Tajik Academy of Agriculture 
Sciences. 2011  
90 Ibid. 
91 IFAD’s Independent Office of Evaluation has conducted an evaluation of KLSP, published in 2021 – available here  
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714182/42864434/tajikistan_1100001408_ppe.pdf/ec8d562b-9646-a384-00c7-bb3d2429c649?t=1623402705705. Annex 18 
includes also the Project Completion Report of the LPDP, and the evaluation of LPDP II.   
92 IFAD, 2021 - " https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714182/42864434/tajikistan_1100001408_ppe.pdf/ec8d562b-9646-a384-00c7-
bb3d2429c649?t=1623402705705, reported in Annex 18. 
93 GIZ, 2020. Adaptation to climate change through sustainable forest management 
94 Public institutions targeted by the project activities (including on monitoring NR, GHG accounting, and related fields), academia, as well as private financial 
institutions involved in green economy development (these include Eskhata Bank, Arvand bank, Humo and Imon International are providing credit lines 
sensitive to GHG reduction activities).  
95 Agency on Statistics under the President of Tajikistan. “Agriculture of Tajikistan”. 2020 & Tajikistan in figures. 2020 
96 Gerber, P.J., Steinfeld, H., Henderson, B., Mottet, A., Opio, C., Dijkman, J., Falcucci, A. & Tempio, G. 2013. Tackling climate change through livestock – A 
global assessment of emissions and mitigation opportunities, FAO, Rome. 
97 Climate change and animal health Juan Lubroth Animal Health Service, FAO, Rome 
98 The KLSP was the first IFAD-funded project in the country, and promoted an innovative, community-driven approach to poverty reduction.  
99 IFAD’s Independent Office of Evaluation has conducted an evaluation of KLSP, published in 2021 – available here  
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714182/42864434/tajikistan_1100001408_ppe.pdf/ec8d562b-9646-a384-00c7-bb3d2429c649?t=1623402705705. Annex 18 
includes also the Project Completion Report of the LPDP, and the evaluation of LPDP II.   
100 LPDP is an IFAD-funded project whose rangeland improvement efforts in Tajikistan focused on improved grazing management for 130,000 ha of rangeland 
in order to increase sustainable livestock production, using rotational grazing as the principal tool. 
101 Compared to other IFAD portfolio, the CASP 2017-2024 has a higher emphasis on crop-related livelihoods, aiming to stimulate inclusive economic growth 
and poverty reduction in poor rural communities by improving access to productive infrastructure and services. 
102 Documented in the recently issued “Management of Livestock using rotational grazing. A Critical Intervention to Promote Food Security and Environmental 
Sustainability in Rural Tajikistan. Brien Norton, IFAD, 2022. Available at: https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/46450319/management-livestock-using-
rotational-grazing.pdf/19aae904-771c-f261-e187-4c87d808e839?t=1666781751627.

=== PAGE 84 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 80 
 
 
 
 
 
103 In 2013, during LPDP implementation, the country approved the Pasture Law that decentralized rangeland and livestock management. It authorized the 
creation of Pasture Users’ Unions (PUUs) with an elected Board, giving them authority to manage common rangeland and to exercise fiscal responsibility for 
improvement of rangeland pastures and fodder crop production. LPDP supported the PUUs’ purchase of agricultural equipment and the cost of local 
infrastructure development efforts. 
104 IFAD executive board has approved CASP+ financing in December 2022, ensuring project effectiveness in April 2023. CASP+ activities have started, with 
IFAD and other co-financiers frontloading their financing. GCF proceeds will complement activities will provide the required additionality to address climate 
related challenges and to achieve the relevant climate objectives.  
105 CASP+ disbursement of GCF proceeds is estimated to start in Year 3 (Annex 4).  
106 for the Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU) sector 
107 which uses geo-referenced maps and tools to increase accuracy and account for the ecological value and biodiversity sensitivity of project sites 
108 https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/strengthening-tajikistans-capacity-access-and-deploy-climate-finance. Activity 1.2.3 will build in particular on the 
recent FAO-implemented Readiness project, as well as on the recent ADB’s “Tajikistan: Monitoring, Reporting and Verification System Framework and Design 
(Feb 2024).   
109 Activity 1.2.3 is focusing on support to government’s capacity to stimulate Green economy investments. 
110 The village ranking criteria will include village population, climate vulnerability, district poverty ranking and Earth Observation indicators (erosion potential, 
vegetation indices, etc.). 
111 CsCAPs will be thoroughly screened against social and environmental safeguards and an environmental and social impact assessment will be carried out. 
112 In JFM, all materials and labour are paid for by the project although labour may be cheaper if provided as part of in-kind contribution by beneficiaries. 
Typically a large plot is created and fenced with the sub-divisions inside being assigned to different contracts and a lot of emphasis is put on fruit and nut 
species that will quickly yield benefits for the participants. 
113 Direct forestry works are usually about 10-20% of the scale of the JFM works in a given Leskhoz. The project will only support direct leskhoz forestry in 
areas suitable for JFM. 
114 Incremental net benefits of the JFM business model is shown in the economic and financial analysis.  
115 Several mechanisms have been set up to avoid any type of maladaptation: Each CsCAP will be developed based on the district level diagnostic. The 
activities will be pre-selected in line with the climate change impacts in the area as measures to adapt to it and increase the resilience of the ecosystem and the 
population. Furthermore, as a second mechanism to avoid maladaptation, ESMPs (and ESIAs when required) will be developed at the level of the CsCAP to 
ensure the adequacy of the activities and to include risk mitigation measures where needed. Finally, CASP+ district officers will be trained in the development of 
ESMPs and ESIAs and in their implementation and monitoring throughout the project. 
116 The list of community equipment eligible under this window would include:  Mowers, Hay rakes, Balers, Forager / Silage machine, Silage/haylage wrappers, 
Manure spreader (not only for fodder but contributes to improve soil fertility), Hay trailers (flatbed). 
117 105,600 unique AH beneficiaries (264 private vets x 400 Hhs), beneficiaries receive (i) AI services (20,000 once per year for 5 years, (ii) bull mating services 
(20,000 once per year for 5 years) and training via FFS (4000). 
118 One important lesson from LPDP II mid-term review is that genetic improvement through crossbreeding or distribution of improved stock has proven to 
trigger a transformation from a traditional subsistence production systems into semi intensive, market oriented, sometimes zero grazing or partially, and more 
integrated with crops.  
119 8 for dairy, 1 for beef  
120 Limited to large ruminants as CASP+ aims to valorize the effects of AI as well (ie, not only for dairy, but also as farmers will produce better quality carcasses, 
and need a good market to sell them).  
121 1020 production and diversification CIGs of 10 members and 110 market-led CIGs of 20 people  
122 These practices span agriculture, horticulture, and other agrifood subsectors that have proven to be adapted to the climate conditions and challenges in the 
areas, as well as suitable for markets. During project design, a rapid analysis of the growth potential and climate risks was undertaken, and assumptions on 
potential horticulture and agriculture sub-sectors was discussed with private sector actors. Based on the issues raised during the stakeholder meetings in 
relation with prevailing agriculture practices and climate related concerns, a selection of models and investment options was proposed for the CIGs (Window 1 
and window 2). A summary is described in the PIM and in the Feasibility Study. CIG members will receive capacity development on farming as a business, 
entrepreneurial skills and business plan development, so they can link to profitable value chains (e.g., small-scale poultry, horticulture, beekeeping, processing, 
etc.). 
123 The term is defined in IFAD’s General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing 
124 The definition of executing entities in this FP is consistent with the one provided in the GCF programming manual.  
125 Through its central and decentralized offices, IFAD has a mechanism in place to ensure mitigating fiduciary risks throughout its projects. At design, IFAD 
assess the financial management (FM) risk and identify mitigations actions. Some of the mitigation actions are included in the agreement with the Executing 
Entities as conditions precedent to the first disbursement to ensure that project starts its implementation at lowest FM risk possible. CASP+ inherent FM risk 
was assessed as “Moderate” at design, whereas the residual FM was assessed to be low after implementing mitigation actions. Specifically in Tajikistan, all 
recent IFAD-financed projects implemented by the PMU were systematically rated at least satisfactory in financial management and procurement. The current 
PMU has been working on IFAD projects since 2008 and has invested a lot in establishing robust financial management system. 
126 IFAD provided financing worth US$77.3 million to a total of four loan-financed projects/programmes with an overall cost of US$91.6 million. SEPMU has 
been implementing all IFAD  funded projects in Tajikistan as a centralized management unit for years. It has remained adequately staffed and managed pro-
actively with excellent track record in terms of administrative and financial management in addition to sound project implementation 
(https://webapps.ifad.org/members/ec/118/docs/EC-2022-118-W-P-5-Add-1.pdf, and https://ioe.ifad.org/it/web/knowledge/-/publication/investing-in-rural-people-
in-tajikistan?p_l_back_url=%2Fit%2Fweb%2Fknowledge%2Fpublications%3Fdelta%3D4%26start%3D143).  
127 To the extent that the Coordinating Council on the Green Climate Fund is functioning. 
128 Via the State Enterprise Project Management Unit (SEPMU, or PMU).  
129 With part of CEP financing under CEP management.  
130 With part of MoA financing under PMU management.  
131 NDC, October 2021. https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-06/NDC_TAJIKISTAN_ENG.pdf  
132 For the current 2021 fiscal year, low-income economies are defined as those with a GNI per capita, calculated using the World Bank Atlas method, of $1,035 
or less in 2019. World Bank 2021. 
133 IMF, Staff Report for the 2022 Article IV Consultation, Debt Sustainability Analysis (2022).  
134 Tajikistan and the Kyrgyz Republic Post-COVID-19: Debt Sustainability, Financing Needs, and Resilience to Shocks E. Vinokurov, N. Lavrova and V. 
Petrenko. Eurasian Development Bank. June 2020. 
135 Analysis of the agricultural sector for the NDC revision in Tajikistan. Draft Report. GIZ.UNIQUE forestry and land use GmbH. February, 2021 
136 https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/41085512/Card_usermanual_W.pdf/e867a16c-e581-8038-aa6f-1767a10629a3 
137  https://www.ifpri.org/publication/climate-change-effects-agriculture-and-food-security-tajikistan International Food Policy Research Institute, 2020. 
138 According to the IMF Country Staff Report (September 2021), Tajikistan’s risk of debt distress is foreseen to remain high with public and publicly guaranteed 
debt on an unsustainable path under current policies. This was confirmed in IMF, March 2023.  
139 Approved at IFAD executive board in December 2022.  
140 Since 2020, the joint World Bank/ IMF Debt Sustainability Analysis reports that Tajikistan’s overall risk of debt distress remains high (IMF, March 2023). The 
estimated public debt was above 50 percent of GDP in 2020 in reaction to the outbreak of the COVID19 pandemic. 
141 Concessionality Leverage = Non-grant element / Grant element based on GCF guidelines. https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/gcf-
b19-12-rev01.pdf - Concessionality: potential approaches for further guidance. February, 2018. 
142  https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/linked-documents/45229-001-taj-oth-03.pdf  Private Sector Development Road Map. 2019. Asian Development Bank. 
143 World Bank 2022. 
144 The VAT in 2021 was 18%, while custom duties range was 15-20% depending on product. 
145 Only the Social security for consultancies and technical assistance is covered by the project.  
146 Reported in IFAD COSTAB (December 2021).  
147 The target reported here in revised v4 does not reflect the increased capitalization period; carbon accounting update is ongoing.  
148 Specific assessment of methane is in Annex 23 -  reference

=== PAGE 85 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 81 
 
 
 
 
 
149EX-Ante Carbon balance Tool (http://www.fao.org/tc/exact/ex-act-home/en/) and Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model 
(http://www.fao.org/gleam/resources/en/).  
150 The current proposal reports on both the indicators in the old RMF and the new IRMF for ease of reference until GCF transitions to the new system. 
151 As indicated for indicator M9.1: 3,650ha of forests, 6,190ha under perennial crops and 180,000 ha of improved pasture 
152The FAO developed Resilience index measurement approach (RIMA-II), represents a possible option to measure climate change resilience 
(http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5665e.pdf).  
153 Reducing livestock greenhouse gas emissions. Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development. October 2021 
154 Cavatassi, S. Gemessa. 2022. Impact Assessment Report. Livestock and Pasture Development Project II (LPDP II). Pages. Rome: IFAD 
155 Reducing livestock greenhouse gas emissions. Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development. October 2021 
156 Cavatassi, S. Gemessa. 2022. Impact Assessment Report. Livestock and Pasture Development Project II (LPDP II). Rome: IFAD. 
157 Cavatassi, S. Gemessa. 2022. Impact Assessment Report. Livestock and Pasture Development Project II (LPDP II). Rome: IFAD. 
158 Cavatassi, S. Gemessa. 2022. Impact Assessment Report. Livestock and Pasture Development Project II (LPDP II). Rome: IFAD. 
159 Cavatassi, S. Gemessa. 2022. Impact Assessment Report. Livestock and Pasture Development Project II (LPDP II). Rome: IFAD. 
160 Country Partnership Strategy: Tajikistan, 2016–2020 
161 Zvi Lerman. Rural Livelihoods in Tajikistan: What Factors and Policies Influence the Income and Well-Being of Rural Families? June 2012 
162 Analysis of the agricultural sector for the NDC revision in Tajikistan. Draft Report. GIZ.UNIQUE forestry and land use GmbH. February, 2021. 
163 GIZ, 2020. 
164 FAO, 2022. The role of animal health in national climate commitments. Reference, among others to Figure 4 (https://www.fao.org/3/cc0431en/cc0431en.pdf).  
165  https://www.landuse-ca.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/4.-191208-Pasture-in-TJK-EN.pdf  Pasture Management in Tajikistan for Integrative Land Use 
Management Approaches. GIZ. 2019. 
166 http://www.fao.org/policy-support/tools-and-publications/resources-details/en/c/1305482/  
167  https://www.giz.de/en/worldwide/29916.html GIZ, 2020. 
168  https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/20038/855970WP00P1450385264B00PUBLIC00ACS.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y   
Autonomous adaptation to climate change: economic opportunities and institutional constraints for farming households. World Bank. Report No. 85597-TJ. May 
2014. 
169 Social and economic impacts of labor migration on migrants’ households in Tajikistan: working out policy recommendations to address its negative effects ” 
Gulchekhra Khuseynova University of Massachusetts - Amherst. 2013 
170 Currently Financial institutions such as Eskhata Bank, Arvand bank, Humo and Imon International are providing credit lines sensitive to GHG reduction 
activities. Reference to lines under https://ebrdgeff.com/tajikistan-agri/ 
171 This will include collaboration with the regional ADB-funded project on improved financial system (https://www.adb.org/projects/56136-001/main).  
172 Estimated based on 30% of the cost of civil works will be for labour employed at an annual wage rate of TJS 140,000 leading to 2160 full time jobs for 12 
months.   
173 Dependent on Remittances, Tajikistan’s Long-Term Prospects for Economic Growth and Poverty Reduction Remain Dim. Edward Lemon. November, 2019. 
174 Reference to LPDP Impact brief, IFAD, 2017(link).  
175 Ibid. “(the project) freed children’s time on water harvesting and livestock management and increased families’ income enough to allow them to send their 
children to school. Quantitative and qualitative analysis showed that children in beneficiary households were 6 per cent more likely to attend school compared 
to children in non-beneficiary households.”  
176 Proposal to GCF. Building climate resilience of vulnerable and food insecure communities through capacity strengthening and livelihood diversification in 
mountainous regions of Tajikistan. World Food Programme. World Food Programme. March 2018. 
177 World Bank. (2019). Open Data Platform. Tajikistan Data Set. Retrieved from: https://data.worldbank.org/country/tajikistan. 
178 USAID (2016). Tajikistan-Property Rights and Resource Governance Profile. Retrieved from: https://www.land-links.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/09/USAID_Land_Tenure_Tajikistan_Profile.pdf 
179 World Bank (2019). Migration and Remittances: Recent Developments and Outlook. Retrieved from: https://www.knomad.org/publication/migration-and-
development-brief-31 
180 Abdurasulova, G.; Demenge J.; Mohidinov, N.; Renner, K.; Yodalieva, M.; Zebisch, M. (2019). Climate Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (CRVA) in Jabbor 
Rasulov district, Tajikistan a pilot study. Retrieved from: https://www.unique-landuse.de/en/publications/climate/735-climate-risk-and-vulnerability-assessment-
crva-in-jabbor-rasulov-district,- tajikistan-a-pilot-study 
181 Burke, Marshall & Hsiang, Solomon (2015). Global non-linear effect of temperature on economic production. Retrieved from:  HYPERLINK 
"https://www.nature.com/articles/nature15725" https://www.nature.com/articles/nature15725  
182 IMF, 2021. Republic of Tajikistan, Selected Issues. https://www.elibrary.imf.org/downloadpdf/journals/002/2021/201/article-A001-en.xml 
183 https://www.adb.org/news/50-million-adb-grant-strengthen-finance-sector-and-fiscal-management-tajikistan 
184 ADB’s 2021–2025 country partnership strategy for Tajikistan. https://www.adb.org/documents/tajikistan-country-partnership-strategy-2021-2025  
185 Tajikistan’s 2019 National Strategy of Adaptation to Climate Change of the Republic of Tajikistan for the Period Until 2030 
186  https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/41085512/Card_usermanual_W.pdf/e867a16c-e581-8038-aa6f-1767a10629a3  
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38714170/41085512/Card_usermanual_W.pdf/e867a16c-e581-8038-aa6f-1767a10629a3 
187 WHO (2009). Protecting health from climate change – Tajikistan. Retrieved from: 
http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/132951/Protecting_health_TJK.pdf 
188 Greˆt-Regamey A, Brunner SH, Kienast F. 2012. Mountain ecosystem services: Who cares? Mountain Research and Development 32(1):23–34.  
189 Ariza C, Maselli D, Kohler T. 2013. Mountains: Our Life, Our Future. Progress and Perspectives on Sustainable Mountain Development from Rio 1992 to Rio 
2012 and Beyond. Bern, Switzerland: SDC [Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation], CDE [Centre for Development and Environment] 
190 Special report: 2020 FAP/WFP Crop and Food Security Assessment Mission (CFSAM) to the Republic of Tajikistan, https://doi.org/10.4060/cb3847en 
191 Tajik domestic wheat production covers about half of the local demand of bread and the rest is imported mainly from Kazakhstan (which is also restricted, 
currently). Kazakhstan imposed restriction of wheat and wheat flour in April 2022, which might be extended to September 2022, 
https://www.gov.kz/memleket/entities/moa/press/news/details/359468?lang=ru. 
192 TajStat 2015 
193  HYPERLINK "https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/tajikistan/overview" World Bank. 2021 
194 IMF, March 2023. 
195 Tajikistan and the Kyrgyz Republic Post-COVID-19: Debt Sustainability, Financing Needs, and Resilience to Shocks E. Vinokurov, N. Lavrova and V. 
Petrenko. Eurasian Development Bank. June 2020. 
196 National Adaptation Plans in focus: Lessons from Tajikistan.  
197  https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Tajikistan%20First/INDC-TJK%20final%20ENG.pdf  f 
198 https://leap.unep.org/countries/tj/national-legislation/national-strategy-adaptation-climate-change-republic-tajikistan#:~:text=Policy. 
199 Project reference (54111-008): https://www.adb.org/projects/54111-008/main  
200 IFAD, 2022. LPDP II Impact assessment. https://www.ifad.org/ifad-impact-assessment-report-
2021/assets/pdf/impact/Tajikistan/BAR_TAJIKISTAN_RI_REPORT.pdf.  
201 Updated Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) towards the achievement of the global goal of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) by the Republic of Tajikistan, 2021.  
202 Tajikistan Country Program for Green Climate Fund – (GCF) 2019-2021. June 2019.  
203 SDG 1, SDG 2, SDG 5, SDG 12, SDG 13, SDG 15 
204 Being updated during the Concept Note design.  
205 Government of the Republic of Tajikistan. 2015. Water Sector Reforms Programme of the Republic of Tajikistan for 2016-2025.

=== PAGE 86 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.6.0 | PAGE 82 
 
 
 
 
 
206 IWRM aims at promoting coordinated development and management of water, land, and related resources in order to maximize the resultant economic and 
social welfare in an equitable manner without compromising the sustainability of vital eco-systems. It is flexible, meaning its application can and must adapt 
to the local conditions, and it is dynamic, meaning that it is intended to evolve with time rather than being a one shot approach. 
207 FAO and UNECE. 2019. Overview of the State of Forests and Forest Management in Tajikistan. 
208 Government of the Republic of Tajikistan Resolution dated March 27, 2018, No. 160 On the Comprehensive Program for the Development of the Livestock 
Industry in the Republic of Tajikistan for 2018-2022. 
209 FP014 - https://www.greenclimate.fund/project/fp014  
210 Building climate resilience of vulnerable and food insecure communities through capacity strengthening and livelihood diversification in mountainous regions 
of Tajikistan, FP067 - https://www.greenclimate.fund/project/fp067  
211 Institutional Development of the State Agency for Hydrometeorology in Tajikistan, FP075 - https://www.greenclimate.fund/project/fp075  
212 https://www.saferworld.org.uk/resources/news-and-analysis/post/861-the-evolving-role-of-civil-society-in-peace-and-
security-in-tajikistan-challenges-and-opportunities 
213 Affinity Group of National Associations (AGNA). Civics. June 2015.  
214 US$ 45.33 (co-financing) / US$ 39.45 (GCF financing).  
215 Re-financing rate in Tajikistan as of April 2023. National Bank of Tajikistan, https://www.nbt.tj/en/  
216 For example, the World Bank-funded RESILAND project presents similar results (with an estimated cost of 9.1USD/tCO2e), but a larger coverage in forestry. 
In its portfolio of investment in support of vulnerable population, CASP+ places a stronger emphasis on resilience investment, with higher cost per tonne of 
CO2e sequestered.  
217 The concessionality levels selected for the project represent the usual practice for IFAD- as well as World Bank- funded operations in similar contexts of 
Tajikistan (eg, WB RESILAND project). 
218 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please 
also provide the target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the 
investment are expected to be effective. 
219 The figure presented in the logframe refers to result at the end of the increased capitalization period (i.e. 27 years), consistent with Annex 23.  
220 It is assumed that 80% of the households in the 400 targeted villages will benefit from pasture management plans, forest plans and the common interest 
groups. It t is assumed that 60% of the people in the 21 districts will benefit through the diagnostic on climate vulnerability through increased awareness and 
improved planned at district level. 
221 It is assumed that 80% of the households in the 400 targeted villages will benefit from pasture management plans, forest plans and the common interest 
groups. It t is assumed that 60% of the people in the 21 districts will benefit through the diagnostic on climate vulnerability through increased awareness and 
improved planned at district level. All assumptions indicated in Annex 24. t is assumed that an average grant of USD 8,000 (per hh 800) would be given to 
1,020 groups each of which have a membership of 10 households. A matching grant of an average of USD 30,000 will be given to 110 Market linked CIGs with 
minimum membership of 20 individual entrepreneurs 
222 This outcome is measured by the core indicator 1 “GHG emissions reduced, avoided or removed/sequestered” reported to in Section E.3, above.  
223 105,600 unique AH beneficiaries (264 vets x 400 HHs ), same beneficiaries receive (i) AI services (20,000 once per year for 5 years, (ii) bull mating services 
(20,000 once per year for 5 years) and training via FFS (4000) 
224 Private veterinarians will be encouraged to come into the field by the TVA as a result of project support thereby increasing the number by another 50% by 
the end of the project. 
225 1020 production and diversification CIGs of 10 members and 110 market-led CIGs of 20 people  
226 No budget because a part of PMU operations 
227 Integrated Results Management Framework.  GCF/B.29/12 .25 June 2021 
228 Readiness Proposal. GCF. United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) for Republic of Tajikistan 18 May 2020 | Adaptation Planning 
229 IFAD, financial management Issue Summary for CASP+, October 2020.  
230 Independent Evaluation of the GCF’s Adaptation Portfolio. Virtual Country Mission to Tajikistan. Independent Evaluation Unit (IEU) of the Green Climate 
Fund (GCF) in association with Steward Redqueen. October 2020. 
231 Independent Evaluation of the GCF’s Adaptation Portfolio. Virtual Country Mission to Tajikistan. In association with Steward Redqueen. October 2020. 
232 The Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) is IFAD’s main safeguard instrument to enhance the sustainability of results-
based country strategic opportunities programmes, country strategy notes, programmes and projects. The risk assessment process recognizes the 
heterogeneity of responses, given the widely different country and community circumstances. All IFAD projects are required to perform a SECAP. 
233 Mapping registered extreme poverty in rural Tajikistan (UNDP, 2015) 
234 National Gender Profile of agriculture and Rural Livelihood Tajikistan (FAO, 2016). 
235 State Statistics Agency. Gender Statistics Database (TajStat, 2013). 
236 The public procurement law of the Republic of Tajikistan (RT) and procurement through the government electronic are still in draft form and not yet ready for 
implementation. 
237 Mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects.

=== PAGE 87 ===
n
KYMI4TAH
HA344>S.KyMATH
[{Y}/D(VPI4I4 T OW4Ifl4C T OH
734003, maxpu,{yman6e, x.gqar IIIaucfr 5/l
Ten./$arc: (992 37) 864A-59, 236-13-53
Be6-cafi.r: www.tainature.tj
Ilovrau enerrpor*; info@tajn a[re. ti
KOMI4TET
o)GAHbr OKPyXATOTqETZ cPEAbr
IIPH IIPABUTEJIbCTBE
PECITYE IIIil<U TAI}O4KI4C TAH
734$03,ropoa pyruarrGe, yrllqa IIIar,rcE 5/l
Ten./rf axc: (992 37) 864A-59. 236-13-53
Be6-cafi.r: www.tainature.ti
3nexrpormar "*.@t.tj
COMMITTEE OF EI{\{IRONMENTAL PiOTNCTION
UNDER THE GOVERNMENT OF'THE REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN
5/l Shamsi str'' 734003' Dushanbe city,tsl./fax: (g92 37)236-40-59,236-13-53 web-site: wwrr.tajnature.d, e-mail: info@tajnature.tj
ffi
ft3 (
*//t/- // - lt6 * u-&t, lL 
"onn2oz4
com2024
To: The Green Climate Fund ["GCF"J
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by the International Fund for Agriculture Development
regarding the "community-based Agriculture support proiect'plus," (cASp+)
Dear Madam, Sir,
We refer to the project titled "Community-based Agriculture Support Project'plus"' ICASp+) in the
Republic of Tajikistan as included in the funding proposal submitted by the International Fund for
Agriculture Development to us on f anuary 6, Z0ZZ.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Committee for Environmental Protection
under the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan, the National Designated Authority of the
Republic of Taj ikistan.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.0B/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed, we
hereby communicate our no-objection to the project as included in the f,-aing proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
[a) 
The Government of the Republic of Tajikistan has no-objection to the project as
included in the funding proposal;
[b) The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Republic of Tajikistan
national priorities, strategies and plans;
[c) 
In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the project as
included in the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and
regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the project as included
in the funding proposal has been duly followed.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website,
Kind regards,
Mr. Bahodur Sheralizoda
Chairman,
National Designated Authority t
the Green Climate Fund
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 88 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ 
(CASP+)   
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
Republic of Tajikistan – The districts of Sh. Shohin; Kulob; 
Khovaling; Baljuvon; Khuroson; Shakhrinav; Temurmalik; 
A. Jomi; Yovon; Rudaki; Gissor; Dangara; Vose; Mastchoh; J. 
Balkhi; Hamadoni; Farkhor; Kushoniyon; Panj; Vakhsh; and 
Zafarobod. 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Tuesday, June 11, 2024 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Tajik 
Explanation on language 
Tajik is the official language of Tajikistan. 
Link to disclosure 
English: https://www.ifad.org/documents/d/guest/secap-
esia-casp_eng   
 
Tajik: https://www.ifad.org/documents/d/guest/secap-
esia-casp_tajik  
Other link(s) 
Committee for Environmental Protection under the 
Government of the Republic of Tajikistan (CEP): 
http://tajnature.tj/articles/ozmunho/?ELEMENT_ID=6619  
 
Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Tajikistan: 
https://moa.tj/news/292-loiai-dastgirii-soai-kishovarz-
dar-zaminai-omea-pljus-zamimai-6-arzebii-muiti-itimo-va-
ilim-amii.html  
 
State Enterprise “Project Management Unit” Livestock and 
Pasture Development Project (SEPMU LPDP): 
https://rural.tj/cdn/documents/e944539c-1c44-4ec1-
957c-c5ce3a796ee2.pdf  
 
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Social Environment and Climate 
Assessment - SECAP”. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Tuesday, June 11, 2024 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Tajik  
Explanation on language 
Tajik is the official language of Tajikistan.  
Link to disclosure 
English: https://www.ifad.org/documents/d/guest/secap-
esia-casp_eng

=== PAGE 89 ===
Tajik: https://www.ifad.org/documents/d/guest/secap-
esia-casp_tajik  
Other link(s) 
Committee for Environmental Protection under the 
Government of the Republic of Tajikistan (CEP): 
http://tajnature.tj/articles/ozmunho/?ELEMENT_ID=6619  
 
Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Tajikistan: 
https://moa.tj/news/292-loiai-dastgirii-soai-kishovarz-
dar-zaminai-omea-pljus-zamimai-6-arzebii-muiti-itimo-va-
ilim-amii.html  
 
State Enterprise “Project Management Unit” Livestock and 
Pasture Development Project (SEPMU LPDP): 
https://rural.tj/cdn/documents/e944539c-1c44-4ec1-
957c-c5ce3a796ee2.pdf  
 
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Social Environment and Climate 
Assessment - SECAP”. 
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Tuesday, June 11, 2024 
Place 
Name and locations of the 21 District Offices 
 
23, I. Somoni street, Abdurrahmani Jami town, A. Jomi 
district, Khatlon region, Republic of Tajikistan 
 
Baljuvon village, Baljuvon district, Khatlon region, Republic 
of Tajikistan 
 
92, A. Sino street, Ismoili Somoni town, Kushoniyon 
district, Khatlon region, Republic of Tajikistan

=== PAGE 90 ===
56, Centralniy street, Dangara town, Dangara district, 
Khatlon region, Republic of Tajikistan 
 
1, S. Safarov street, Farkhor town, Farkhor district, Khatlon 
region, Republic of Tajikistan 
 
18, I. Somoni street, Moskovsky town, Hamadoni district, 
Khatlon region, Republic of Tajikistan 
 
6, Kugaling street, Balkh town, J. Balkhi district, Khatlon 
region, Republic of Tajikistan 
 
2, I. Somoni street, Khovaling village, Khovaling district, 
Khatlon region, Republic of Tajikistan 
 
I. Somoni street, Obikiik town, Khuroson district, Khatlon 
region, Republic of Tajikistan 
 
36, I. Somoni street, Kulob city, Kulob district, Khatlon 
region, Republic of Tajikistan 
 
A. Rudaki street, Panj town, Panj district, Khatlon region, 
Republic of Tajikistan 
 
1, I. Somoni street, Shuroabod town, Sh. Shohin district, 
Khatlon region, Republic of Tajikistan 
 
Bahmanrud town, Temurmalik district, Khatlon region, 
Republic of Tajikistan 
 
63, I. Somoni street, Vakhsh village, Vakhsh district, 
Khatlon region, Republic of Tajikistan 
Hulbuk town, Vose district, Khatlon region, Republic of 
Tajikistan 
 
1, M. Tursunzode street, Yovon town, Yovon district, 
Khatlon region, Republic of Tajikistan 
 
23, S. Sharapov street, Buston village, Mastchoh district, 
Sugd region, Republic of Tajikistan 
 
2, I. Somoni street, Zafarobod town, Zafarobod district, 
Sugd region, Republic of Tajikistan 
 
53, I. Somoni street, Gissor city, Gissor district, RRS region, 
Republic of Tajikistan 
 
16, I. Somoni street, Somoniyon town, Rudaki district, RRS 
region, Republic of Tajikistan 
 
Bakaev street, Shakhrinav village, Shakhrinav district, RRS 
region, Republic of Tajikistan

=== PAGE 91 ===
CEP CIIP office 5/1 Shamsi str., Dushanbe, Tajikistan  
SEPMU office -  3rd floor, 21 Tehron str., Dushanbe, Tajikistan 
SE PMU office (temporary located at 41 Ayni str., Dushanbe) 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
N/A 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting 
Monday, July 15, 2024 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 08 
Page 92 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP233 
Proposal name: 
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ 
(CASP+) 
Accredited entity: 
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)  
Country: 
Tajikistan 
Project/programme size:  
Medium 
I. 
Overall assessment of the Secretariat 
1. 
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks: 
Strengths 
Points of caution 
Locally led adaptation: CASP+ supports 
locally led adaptation by building capacities 
of local agencies to assess climate risks and 
implement locally appropriate solutions, 
thereby building a long-term legacy of local 
capacity for climate change adaptation. 
 
Gender: The recent livestock project 
undertaken by IFAD had scope to make 
greater efforts in relation to gender. CASP+ 
incorporates this lesson learned from the 
IFAD project by implementing various 
measures, including more and diverse 
gender-sensitization activities and gender-
specific results targets. Nevertheless, regular 
supervision of the project’s progress in 
gender is required.   
Enabling environment for green economic 
development and national capacity for 
emissions accounting: CASP+ will support 
refining existing laws, enhancing technical 
capacity for climate change adaptation, and 
providing policy monitoring tools like 
georeferencing and remote sensing to 
facilitate evidence-based decision-making, 
and natural resources and agriculture 
management. 
 
In addition, the project will enhance 
capacities for national emissions accounting 
by providing support for the adoption of 
carbon accounting tools such as those 
developed by the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) – 
EX-Ante Carbon Balance Tool (EX-ACT), the 
Global Livestock Environmental Assessment 
Fiduciary capacity: The fiduciary risk rating 
of Tajikistan was upgraded to high in 2023. 
In response, CASP+ now considers a number 
of risk mitigation measures, including 
adoption of a unified financial accounting 
system, capacity-building of the fiduciary 
team of the State Enterprise Project 
Management Unit prior to the project starting 
and significant handholding from the 
Financial Management Division of IFAD 
during project implementation. Nevertheless, 
regular monitoring of fiduciary compliance 
and re-assessment of risk with adequate 
mitigation measures are critical.

=== PAGE 93 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 08 
Page 93 
 
 
Model – interactive (GLEAM-i) and the 
Biodiversity Integrated Assessment and 
Computational Tool (B-INTACT). It will also 
pilot B-INTACT.  
Innovation: CASP+ promotes the adoption of 
innovative technologies and solutions 
(digital, technical, technological and policy) 
to manage natural resources and livestock at 
both policy and user levels. It also supports 
research institutions to generate and 
disseminate knowledge. 
 
Cross-learning and knowledge exchange: 
CASP+ has a provision to support cross-
learning with another IFAD-led project 
named “Dairy Interventions for Adaptation 
and Mitigation” that promotes low-carbon 
and climate-resilient livestock in East Africa 
through exchange visits, including through 
China–IFAD South–South and triangular 
cooperation. 
 
Green credit line: CASP+ does not consider 
the provision of credit lines to beneficiaries. 
However, it will facilitate access to existing 
credit lines that support green investments. 
 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal in accordance with the 
term sheet agreed between the Secretariat and the accredited entity, and, if considered 
appropriate, subject to the conditions set out in Annex II of document GCF/B.39/02. 
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment 
2.1 
Project background  
3. 
Tajikistan faces increasing climate risks, including rising temperatures, shifting 
precipitation patterns and frequent natural disasters, particularly in rural mountainous areas, 
posing threats to agriculture, pasture productivity and livelihoods. To address these challenges, 
the interventions proposed by the project aim to enhance climate resilience by leveraging 
successful projects and focusing on carbon sequestration, improved livestock management and 
diversification of livelihoods.  
4. 
Building upon the lessons learned from the Community-based Agriculture Support 
Programme initiative in Tajikistan, the proposed project, Community-based Agriculture Support 
Programme ‘plus’ (CASP+), intends to catalyse a transformative shift towards climate-adaptive, 
inclusive and integrated agriculture and forestry management in 21 vulnerable districts. The 
project is incorporated into both the country programme of Tajikistan and the entity work 
programme of IFAD.  
5. 
The project’s goals will be achieved through three main components:

=== PAGE 94 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 08 
Page 94 
 
 
(a) 
Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient management of 
natural resources;  
(b) 
Investing in community capacity for adaptation and resilience to climate change; and  
(c) 
Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches. 
6. 
Financing for the project amounts to USD 79,690,370 (of which USD 39,000,000 will be 
from GCF and multiple co-financiers) over seven years. The project aims to prompt a paradigm 
shift in the Tajik Government’s national approach to climate change, bolster local capacity for 
climate adaptation and improve agriculture production practices at the household level.  
7. 
CASP+ also envisions a pivotal role for the private sector, reducing its transaction costs 
in rural community engagement, possibly through carbon markets which the project intends to 
explore during project implementation. Rather than directly providing credit lines, the project 
will facilitate access to financial resources for targeted beneficiaries by linking them with 
existing financial services providers and emerging finance opportunities.  
8. 
The project is projected to have significant impacts on both adaptation and mitigation, 
with an estimated total mitigation impact of 253,882 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2 
eq) per year and 6,854,822 t CO2 eq over 27 years. 
9. 
The project is expected to benefit 650,000 people and indirectly reach over 2.9 million 
people, encompassing 24 per cent of the country’s total population in vulnerable areas. 
Furthermore, the project will improve 3,650 hectares (ha) of forests, 6,190 ha of arable lands 
under perennial crops and 180,000 ha of pasturelands. 
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis 
Component 1: Strengthening public sector capacity for transformative climate-resilient 
management of natural resources (total cost: USD 2.5 million; GCF cost: USD 1.5 million) 
10. 
Component 1 focuses on bolstering the public sector’s ability to manage natural 
resources in the face of climate change. Despite advancements in water and disaster 
management strategies, the country lacks integration of climate perspectives in agriculture and 
natural resource governance, thereby hindering sustainable development. This component 
addresses these gaps through two main objectives: capacity-building and policy enhancement. 
11. 
Output 1.1 concentrates on strengthening national institutions’ capacity to oversee 
climate-resilient resource management. Efforts include empowering agencies such as the State 
Forestry Agency and improving coordination among stakeholders. In addition, innovative 
methods such as using beehives for pasture monitoring will be introduced. Financing from GCF 
will support activities that will enhance monitoring mechanisms and upgrade university 
curricula in relation to climate-resilient resource management. 
12. 
Output 1.2 focuses on creating an environment conducive to climate-adaptive 
management of natural resources. Policy engagement will prioritize areas such as animal 
husbandry and the green economy. Regular workshops will facilitate stakeholder coordination, 
while efforts to integrate critical aspects into pasture laws will be undertaken. GCF funding will 
support activities related to policy development, gender-sensitive practices and green 
investment coordination. 
13. 
To address existing challenges owing to limited integration of measures to combat 
climate change, lack of technical capacity and tools, and fragmented governance of natural 
resources, component 1 will strengthen social inclusion, particularly involving women and 
youth in decision-making processes. Activities under output 1.2 will promote inclusive policy 
dialogues and provide technical assistance for reviewing livestock-related regulations. 
Additionally, support will be provided to enhance the government’s capacity to coordinate and

=== PAGE 95 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 08 
Page 95 
 
 
monitor the implementation of the country’s green economy strategy. Through these efforts, 
component 1 aims to bolster Tajikistan’s capacity for mainstreaming climate resilience in the 
management of natural resources and sustainable development. 
Component 2: Investments in community capacity for adaptation and resilience to climate change 
(total cost: USD 55 million; GCF cost: USD 35 million) 
14. 
Component 2 focuses on building community capacity for adaptation and resilience to 
climate change through the development and implementation of 400 climate-sensitive 
community action plans (CSCAPs) in selected districts. These plans aim to address the 
challenges related to climate change through investment in ecosystem improvements and 
agricultural system and infrastructure resilience, including improved pasture management, 
afforestation and climate-resilient infrastructure. Additionally, social inclusion measures ensure 
the active participation of women and youth in the planning and implementation process, with 
targeted training and employment opportunities provided to enhance their involvement and 
leadership roles. 
15. 
Output 2.1 will support the development of CSCAPs based on district-level climate 
diagnostics, ensuring a comprehensive understanding of climate risks and vulnerabilities. This 
includes mapping community needs through geospatial analysis and creating a profile for each 
district to guide investment strategies. Activities under this output include conducting 
diagnostic analyses, establishing relevant local institutions, designing CSCAPs, and 
strengthening local capacities for monitoring and evaluation. 
16. 
Output 2.2 will implement the CSCAPs in the selected districts, benefiting 100,000 rural 
households. These plans include a range of investment activities, such as pasture management, 
forestry, climate-resilient infrastructure, and agricultural productivity improvement. 
Monitoring and evaluation are integral components of this output, utilizing smartphone tools 
and citizen reporting to track progress and outcomes. Funding for CSCAPs comes from GCF and 
IFAD, targeting investments with high potential for carbon sequestration and climate 
adaptation and resilience-building. 
17. 
The CSCAPs will feature ecosystem-based solutions and a balanced investment mix, 
covering adaptation, mitigation, and disaster risk reduction, bolstering rural community 
resilience. However, capacity gaps, including technical skills and infrastructure maintenance 
challenges, pose significant weaknesses. To address these, targeted capacity-building, technical 
assistance, partnership strengthening, community engagement, and innovative monitoring are 
proposed to be further strengthened as remedial measures, aiming to enhance project success 
and sustainability. 
Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches 
(total cost: USD 19 million; GCF cost: USD 2 million) 
18. 
Component 3 aims to empower smallholders to invest in climate-resilient and 
diversified production systems connected to local and national value chains. It will address the 
current limitations of production systems, which are not adapted to climate change impacts and 
lack integration with market opportunities. Through three key outputs, the project promotes 
social inclusion by actively involving women and youth.  
19. 
Output 3.1 focuses on enhancing livestock productivity through artificial insemination 
services, animal health interventions and training, aiming to improve breeding practices and 
dissemination of technical innovations. Output 3.2 facilitates business partnerships between 
smallholder farmers and private sector actors in dairy and beef value chains, promoting secure 
market access and reduced environmental degradation. Output 3.3 supports the establishment 
of common interest groups to strengthen climate-resilient production practices and market 
linkages, with a focus on capacity-building and financial support.

=== PAGE 96 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 08 
Page 96 
 
 
20. 
To address challenges such as capacity gaps, infrastructure maintenance issues and 
coordination challenges among stakeholders, component 3 will foster economic inclusion, 
reduce environmental impact and enhance resilience through market-based approaches. The 
targeted capacity-building, technical assistance, partnership strengthening, community 
engagement and innovative monitoring tools will be improved with a view to enhancing project 
effectiveness and sustainability. 
III. 
Assessment against investment criteria  
3.1 
Impact potential                                                                          Scale: High 
21. 
The project holds significant potential for both mitigation and adaptation efforts, aiming 
to shift towards low-emission sustainable development pathways while increasing resilience to 
climate change. Through sustainable land-use management, reforestation and conservation 
efforts, it is anticipated to result in a reduction of net emissions from land use, contributing to a 
positive environmental impact.  
22. 
The estimated carbon balance suggests a net reduction of 6,854,822 t CO2 eq over 27 
years, indicating a substantial decrease in emissions. This impact will be tracked through 
improved land and forest management practices, covering 3,650 hectares of forests, 6,190 
hectares of perennial crops and 180,000 hectares of improved pasture, monitored using remote 
sensing and by comparing remote sensing images with the reality on the ground through 
ground truthing methods.  
23. 
Additionally, the project aims to reach over 2.9 million individuals, both direct and 
indirect beneficiaries (see the table below), with a focus on enhancing the adaptability of 
physical assets to climate change effects and promoting climate-resilient management practices 
in natural resource areas. At the national, community and household levels, investments will 
bolster resilience and livelihood diversification, with targeted interventions aimed at reducing 
vulnerability to climate risks. Through household surveys conducted at various project stages, 
the project’s impact on increased resilience and reduced vulnerability will be assessed, ensuring 
effective outcomes.  
Number of beneficiaries of the Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ 
(CASP+) International Fund for Agricultural Development Tajikistan project proposal 
 
Women 
Men 
Total 
Percentage of total 
population 
Direct 
beneficiaries 
334,750 
315,250 
650,000 
7%  
(31% of the target area 
population)  
Indirect 
beneficiaries 
1,168,239 
1,100,186 
2,268,426 
24% 
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential  
 
 
 
 
Scale: High 
24. 
The proposed activities outlined in the project have a high potential to catalyse a 
significant paradigm shift across various policy areas, implementation mechanisms and 
household-based production decisions in Tajikistan. With a focus on pastures, livestock and 
livelihood diversification, coupled with increased private sector involvement, the project aims 
to enhance productivity and reduce emissions per unit of product. Previous experience, such as 
that from the Livestock and Pasture Development II project, has demonstrated the 
transformative impact of similar interventions, showcasing increased livestock productivity and

=== PAGE 97 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 08 
Page 97 
 
 
income alongside reductions in herd sizes and emissions. By leveraging improved animal health, 
breeding strategies and private sector partnerships, the project seeks to foster sustainable 
agricultural practices and market-oriented production decisions. 
25. 
Moreover, the project is expected to address the slow pace of rural livelihood 
diversification in Tajikistan by providing matching grants, establishing common interest groups 
and fostering links with the private sector along key value chains. This shift is crucial 
considering the heavy reliance of family incomes on agriculture, which exposes households to 
significant risks. By encouraging income diversification and strengthening non-farm 
occupations, the project aims to enhance resilience and reduce vulnerability among rural 
households. Furthermore, the project’s integration of climate change risks and adaptation 
measures into national and local policies signifies a fundamental shift towards climate-resilient 
development pathways, supported by improved institutional capacity and collaboration. 
26. 
At the household level, the project will promote sustainable agriculture practices, 
including water-efficient irrigation, resilient crop varieties and improved livestock 
management, while emphasizing market-driven production decisions. By instilling a paradigm 
shift towards proactive market engagement and sustainable production practices, the project 
presents huge potential to enhance scalability, replicability and co-benefits beyond its lifespan. 
Through ongoing assessments and engagements with stakeholders, the project will ensure the 
fostering of sustainable development pathways that align with national climate change 
adaptation strategies and contribute to long-term resilience and prosperity in Tajikistan. 
3.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
Scale: High 
27. 
The project aims to address climate change challenges while contributing to key 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), namely SDG 1 (No poverty), SDG 2 (Zero hunger), SDG 5 
(Gender equality), SDG 8 (Decent work and economic growth), SDG 13 (Climate action), SDG 15 
(Life on land), and SDG 17 (Partnerships for the goals).  
28. 
It anticipates a number of environmental, social and economic co-benefits. The 
environmental co-benefits include substantial carbon sequestration and biodiversity 
enhancement in pastures and forests. It also seeks to resolve land-use conflicts, reduce 
migration, and empower women and youth through inclusive decision-making and business 
opportunities to bring about social co-benefits. Economically, the project anticipates job 
creation, enhanced market access and increased productivity in agriculture and livestock 
practices, fostering sustainable economic growth and resilience. Additionally, it places 
significant emphasis on the inclusion of women, including at the community level, to improve 
the empowerment of women and their participation in the decision-making processes of 
institutions. 
29. 
Overall, it presents extensive sustainable development impact by conserving the 
environment, promoting social inclusion, empowering communities and advancing gender 
equality in Tajikistan. 
3.4 
Needs of the recipient                                                  Scale: Medium to high 
30. 
Tajikistan, a country vulnerable to climate change, faces significant socioeconomic 
challenges, including poverty, limited private sector presence and inadequate infrastructure. 
The country’s heavy reliance on agriculture, coupled with water-intensive crops and limited 
irrigation, exacerbates its vulnerability to climate impacts.  
31. 
Additionally, reliance on remittances and external factors such as an influx of refugees 
from Afghanistan and pandemics further strain its economy. To address these challenges, 
Tajikistan requires investments in climate-resilient infrastructure and sustainable agriculture,

=== PAGE 98 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 08 
Page 98 
 
 
but its fiscal space is limited. International financing, particularly from organizations like GCF, is 
crucial to address climate vulnerabilities and promote sustainable development. Strengthening 
institutions and building implementation capacity are also essential for effective climate 
adaptation and long-term resilience in Tajikistan. 
3.5 
Country ownership                                                                Scale: High 
32. 
Tajikistan has actively engaged in climate action by submitting intended national 
determined contributions and national communications under the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, with ongoing efforts to update strategies and plans. The national 
climate change adaptation strategy and forthcoming national adaptation plan highlight priority 
areas such as agriculture and water. The current project has been considered as responding to 
priorities, and it is solidly placed in Tajikistan’s country programme, which is in the final stages 
of formulation (i.e. at the review phase by the Secretariat). In terms of design, it carries a strong 
potential for replication in the Eastern Europe Central Asia region, and, specifically, in the 
Central Asia subregion. 
33. 
Several climate finance projects, including those funded by GCF and the Global 
Environment Facility, complement Tajikistan’s climate efforts, focusing on areas such as 
sustainable energy, hydropower and community resilience. These projects align with 
Tajikistan’s existing policies, including its national development strategy and sectoral strategies 
for agriculture, water and forestry.  
34. 
The CASP+ project also creates synergies with existing climate initiatives in Tajikistan 
by coordinating with institutions implementing GCF-funded projects, leveraging the expertise 
and ongoing efforts of the Global Environment Facility, the Asian Development Bank and World 
Bank projects, and ensuring complementarity to maximize the impact of climate finance 
interventions. In addition, civil society organizations, including women’s groups and 
community-based organizations, will play a crucial role in mobilizing communities and ensuring 
inclusive participation in climate initiatives.  
35. 
To strengthen further national preparedness for key GCF investments, the Government 
of Tajikistan nominated the Center for Implementation of Investment Projects (CIIP) to pursue 
the institutional accreditation track for direct access entity status within the small-scope project 
category and increase direct access entity programming via GCF climate investments in the 
future. Currently, The CIIP is the only nominated national entity from Tajikistan. 
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness                                       Scale: Medium to high 
36. 
The overall assessment of this project’s efficiency and effectiveness is medium to high. 
The accredited entity (AE) developed a detailed and robust economic and financial analysis with 
clear and well-referenced assumptions as well as a clear definition of the scope and 
counterfactual scenarios. Limited public investment and financial options in rural areas are 
identified by the AE as financial barriers to forestry, livestock and rangeland management. In 
2021, 8.5 per cent of firms in Tajikistan were using banks to finance the purchase of fixed 
assets.1 The project includes activities which will focus specifically on access to finance and the 
private sector market, including through matching grant windows. By addressing market failure 
and incentivizing private sector engagement with smallholders, the project fosters productive 
alliances to overcome constraints. Value-for-money metrics analysis demonstrates the project’s 
 
1 World Bank Global Financial Development Database. Available at: 
www.worldbank.org/en/publication/gfdr/data/global-financial-development-database.

=== PAGE 99 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 08 
Page 99 
 
 
justification financially and economically, with favourable indicators like net present values, 
internal rates of return, and benefit–cost ratios.  
37. 
The financial analysis shows profitability results for adaptation interventions with and 
without the project. For all the interventions, including forest plantation, agroforestry and 
various activities under the matching grant windows, the without-the-project cases generate 
returns above the financial discount rate (11 per cent), justifying the financial viability of the 
project. The financial model was also used to conduct scenario analysis with a commercial loan 
with a 25 per cent interest rate and three years of tenor. The analysis shows mixed results in 
which some cases generate a positive internal rate of return and net present values, while 
others, such as drip irrigation, bear negative results. Nonetheless, the payback period goes 
beyond the project implementation period of seven years, and it is not feasible for beneficiaries 
to pay back during the project. Therefore, request for concessional finance from GCF is justified. 
The financial analysis did not specifically model the GCF high concessional loan, given that it is a 
sovereign loan to be used by the government for financing the participatory management plan 
across 400 villages, and will not be passed down to beneficiaries for repayment. 
38. 
Economic analysis confirms the project’s viability and sensitivity to different scenarios, 
with robust returns even under moderate and worst-case climate scenarios. The economic 
returns of the project are around 22 per cent, significantly above the 6 per cent discount rate 
used in the economic analysis. Sensitivity analysis further supports the project’s resilience-
building potential, ensuring affordability and ownership among beneficiaries while maximizing 
community investment. 
39. 
The project’s adaptation cost is USD 27/direct beneficiary and its mitigation cost is USD 
3.31/t CO2 eq. Both costs are on the lower range of the GCF portfolio for climate resilience in 
agriculture and forestry. The co-financing ratio is 1:0.4. Through the matching grant windows, 
there is the potential to leverage further parallel financing which is confirmed in the funding 
proposal, with an estimated amount of USD 4.6 million. 
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
40. 
Programme brief. The programme intends to strengthen the public sector capacity for 
transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources, provide investments in 
community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change, and strengthen livelihoods 
for enhanced resilience through market-based approaches. Among the environmental and social 
co-benefits include improved biodiversity in pastures and forest areas given that the 
programme will support the strengthening of pasture and forest management in the target 
areas. The programme is also expected to improve slope stability, minimize soil erosion, 
improve soil quality, and increase water retention, among others. Social co-benefits include 
more sustainable and resilient households able to better manage effects of labor migration on 
family cohesion and their psychosocial well-being.  
41. 
Environmental and social (E&S) risk category and safeguards instrument. The AE has 
categorized the programme as Category B based on a comprehensive screening questionnaire. 
The programme’s activities on the ground include land use changes, agricultural production, 
construction and operation of support infrastructure, and processing facilities, which are small 
scale and scattered over a wide geographic area. These activities are expected to only have 
localized environmental and social risks and/or impacts which are reversible and can be 
managed through standard mitigation measures. The Secretariat confirms the categorization 
and is within the AE’s E&S risk accreditation level. Since the types, scale, locations, and host 
communities and the specific interventions will only be identified and developed with the

=== PAGE 100 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 08 
Page 100 
 
 
beneficiary communities during the programme implementation phase, a framework 
instrument titled “Social Environment and Climate Assessment (SECAP) was prepared for this 
programme.  
42. 
Compliance with GCF’s Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS) standards. The 
following paragraphs describe the programme’s compliance with GCF’s interim ESS standards.  
43. 
ESS1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and 
Impacts. The SECAP described and analyzed the programme activities in terms of their 
potential E&S risks and/or impacts. It described the baseline information on the environmental 
and social conditions of the programme areas and the key regulatory frameworks in the 
country. The instrument also provided procedures for the screening, assessment and 
management of E&S impacts and risks of the subprojects. The SECAP also provided an 
environmental and social management plan (ESMP) matrix which discusses the features of the 
programme which could have potential risks and impacts and their recommended mitigation 
measures. A Terms of Reference for the conduct of an Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA) and the development of an ESMP is also provided.  
44. 
ESS2: Labor and Working Conditions. The labor code of the country regulates the 
labor and other relations directly aimed at workers, providing protection for their rights and 
freedoms including securing guarantees on these rights, among others. The SECAP indicated 
that the programme works will neither entail temporary and/or permanent resident workers 
nor require migrant workforce or seasonal workers. The AE and EE, however, should ensure 
that if there is a need for workers in the implementation of the activities of the programme, 
labor and working condition aspects including occupational health and safety issues should be 
fully addressed and adequately mitigated.  
45. 
ESS3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention. Based on the description of the 
programme activities, subprojects to be supported may include small-scale infrastructure 
(roads, water harvesting, small irrigation systems), livestock production and veterinary 
services, and agricultural production, and small-scale processing facility which may entail 
release of small amounts of wastes. Road and irrigation construction may cause temporary 
sedimentation of rivers and streams. Landslides and erosions may occur due to the 
mountainous terrain requiring appropriate engineering design measures. Livestock and 
agricultural production may entail generation of waste and release of agrochemicals into the 
environment which may contaminate surface water, soil, and groundwater. Veterinary services 
may involve health care waste that needs to be addressed. The SECAP discusses management 
measures such as manure management, water management, and composting, remote sensing on 
erosion and pollution monitoring, and avoidance of use of agrochemicals in forest plantations. 
More detailed assessment and management of potential impacts or risks on pollution, water 
use, and waste generation will be undertaken at subproject identification during 
implementation.  
46. 
ESS4: Community Health, Safety and Security. Community health and safety issues for 
this programme will be mainly on the hazards related to infrastructure such as on road safety, 
agricultural and livestock production, health care waste hazards for veterinary services, forest 
and rangeland rehabilitation, and small-scale processing. The SECAP indicated the conduct of 
road safety assessment to be done for each of these activities and will monitor incidents and 
accidents related to such and implement measures to address them. Measures such as ensuring 
national standard design speed for rural roads are complied with and providing speed bumps 
(with accompanying warning signs) in highly populated areas such as villages, schools, markets 
and other centers will be implemented. Food hygiene and quality and food safety management 
will also be part of the capacity building intervention under the programme.   
47. 
ESS5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement. The SECAP indicated that “No 
physical resettlement or economic displacement will be expected.” As far as road rehabilitation

=== PAGE 101 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 08 
Page 101 
 
 
is concerned, the programme foresees a “consultative design of road sites using local 
knowledge, and safety measures will be included in the design of road rehabilitation activities 
according to national law.” While it recognizes that if road alignments are not carefully planned, 
the activity may lead to economic displacement or physical resettlement or potential loss of 
agricultural land, the SECAP indicates it will consider alternatives with “least direct and indirect 
negative impacts” and employ “participatory approach” in this undertaking.  
48. 
ESS6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources. The activities under the programme are expected to positively contribute to 
biodiversity conservation and sustainable pasture and agroforestry management. It is expected 
that the pasture plans will support practices such as: increasing capacities for rangeland 
rehabilitation and management including the management of water points; rehabilitation of 
degraded rangelands with native and local grasses, shrubs and trees through assisted natural 
regeneration; maintaining sustainable grazelands by avoiding overcrowding and keeping 
adequate stock density; and increasing water availability through rainwater harvesting and 
other soil water storage techniques, among others.  The programme will also promote 
participatory biodiversity monitoring by the Pasture Users Unions and build community 
capacities in the protection of forests from illegal activities. Nevertheless, subprojects will be 
further subjected to identification and assessment of potential direct and indirect impacts and 
ensure that biodiversity issues are adequately managed. 
49. 
GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS7 (Indigenous Peoples). The AE confirmed 
that there are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area, and no Indigenous Peoples will be 
affected by the project’s activities. 
50. 
ESS8: Cultural heritage. The Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment 
Procedures indicates that the programme activities will not lead to the conversion and/or loss 
of physical cultural resources.  
51. 
Sexual exploitation, sexual abuse and sexual harassment (SEAH). The SEAH 
safeguarding approach proposed by the AE is considered by the Secretariat to be compliant with 
the SEAH provisions pursuant to the GCF Environmental and Social Policy. The project includes 
specific measures to prevent, mitigate and address potential SEAH risks and impacts as part of 
the SECAP. The AE has identified the project’s potential SEAH risks with regards to the 
increasing mobilization of women to participate in the project activities. The AE has 
incorporated SEAH risk mitigation measures into the Environment and Social Management Plan 
matrix and the code of conduct to be followed by the project staff and contractors to ensure 
compliance with SEAH-related policies and regulations. The AE will conduct regular monitoring 
and evaluation on the progress regarding SEAH prevention and response activities. It will also 
reassess SEAH risks during project implementation as appropriate. The AE and the executing 
entities (EEs) will work collaboratively and with local authorities to provide SEAH-related 
training and sensitization campaigns to ensure that the project stakeholders and communities 
are informed about the project’s SEAH safeguarding measures and the SEAH grievance redress 
procedures. In the case of SEAH complaints, the project team will follow the AE’s institutional 
policy on SEAH prevention and response to ensure that grievances related to SEAH and gender-
based violence will be addressed in an inclusive, survivor-centred and gender-responsive 
manner. 
52. 
Implementation arrangements. A project steering committee will be constituted at the 
national level with the AE having the supervisory function and undertaking regular supervision 
and implementation support missions. There will be three EEs: the State Enterprise “Project 
Management Unit” Livestock and Pasture Development (SEPMU) which will have overall 
responsibility for implementation, coordination, oversight and reporting to IFAD and the 
government including liaising closely with the other EEs and parties; the Committee on 
Environment Protection (CEP), which will have technical support from its Project 
Implementation Group and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO),

=== PAGE 102 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 08 
Page 102 
 
 
which will provide specific technical support and execution of their defined activities. The 
SEPMU, which will engage environmental and social inclusion experts, will have responsibility 
for overseeing the development, implementation, enforcement, monitoring and reporting of 
environmental and social management measures and performance of the subprojects. It will 
also be responsible for building capacity in terms of safeguards, setting up the grievance redress 
mechanism (GRM) and implementing the stakeholder engagement plan for the project. 
53. 
Stakeholder engagement and GRM. The project went through extensive consultations 
with stakeholders during the conceptualization and proposal preparation. The results of these 
consultations were incorporated in the project design. A stakeholder engagement plan has been 
prepared, which includes mapping of the project’s stakeholders based on their interests and 
roles in the various components. SEPMU has identified key programme stakeholders at the 
national, district and village levels. Stakeholder groups include government agencies, water 
users’ associations, forest enterprises, River Basins Councils, local administrations, and 
vulnerable sector groups. SEPMU will also be responsible for a plan for ongoing stakeholder 
engagement throughout the project implementation phase. The GRM is described in the SECAP, 
which reflects a three-tiered approach whereby communities submit their grievance at the 
project level, following the AE’s complaints procedure, which is designed to receive and 
facilitate resolution of concerns and complaints in relation to non-compliance with its 
environmental and social policies. Grievances can be lodged and resolved at the field level, 
which can be further escalated to the EE (e.g. SEPMU and/or CEP). If resolution is not achieved 
at the EE level, the grievance can be formally submitted to IFAD. The findings of the grievance 
redress process will be disseminated in the implementation of the project’s capacity-building 
initiatives. The GCF Independent Redress Mechanism will also be available for assistance at any 
stage of the programme cycle. 
4.2 
Gender policy  
54. 
The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan therefore complies 
with the requirements of the gender policy of the fund. 
55. 
The gender assessment indicates the need for the project to address various aspects of 
gender inequalities in Tajikistan. It also acknowledges and demonstrates the role of women as 
agents of change. With a view to addressing gender inequality, and in alignment with the 
priorities for the country and for women, the assessment explored the multiple dimensions of 
inequality in relation to the climate change impacts policy, institutional 
arrangements/representation and implementation, and at the community level.  
56. 
The barriers to equality are embedded in prohibitive sociocultural norms, unequal 
reproductive responsibilities and pay gaps between women and men. Access to land is a 
significant challenge to women despite their role and contribution. Even when women have 
access to land, it is mostly infertile, with limited access to inputs and far away from their homes. 
The disadvantaged position of youth and women-headed households is also noted, with 
targeted interventions and actions to address this problem. The gender assessment has also 
identified the additional disadvantages faced by women-headed households and youth, but also 
recognizes their role as agents of change. 
57. 
The project’s interventions will address the underlying causes of the gender inequality 
experienced by women, women-headed households, youth and people with disabilities through 
awareness-raising and sensitization activities. It will address barriers that prevent women 
taking part in decision-making and will also respond to their practical needs by providing access 
to necessary inputs and resources. The interventions proposed are targeted towards the 
agriculture sector and natural resource management, with the aim of increasing women’s 
participation in and access to benefits from improved homestead and backyard livestock related 
interventions as well as their engagement in forestry, biodiversity and natural resource

=== PAGE 103 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 08 
Page 103 
 
 
management. Skills gaps among women will be addressed to increase their employability, 
enhance their technical capacity, and increase their decision-making capacity and roles. 
Intervention will also focus on increasing women’s access to resources such as grants, finance, 
inputs and the market while consistently raising awareness of the reality of women’s 
unrecognized but significant roles and contribution in these sectors. The gender action plan 
includes budgets for the various interventions, as well as for coordination with the committee of 
women and family affairs, and those responsible for youth. It has designated a gender specialist 
to ensure the mainstreaming of gender and implementation of the gender action plan, 
monitoring targets and achieving improvements in the lives of women, youth, women-headed 
households and people with disabilities engagement. 
4.3 
Risks  
4.3.1. 
Overall project assessment (medium risk)  
58. 
This funding proposal is a cross-cutting project (57 per cent adaptation and 43 per cent 
mitigation) to strengthen the capacity of the public sector for the climate-resilient management 
of natural resources, investment in communities for resilience to climate change, and enhancing 
the climate resilience of livelihoods using a market-based approach. GCF is requested to provide 
a senior loan of USD 9.0 million and a grant of USD 30.0 million. Co-financing is expected from 
IFAD of USD 31.01 million as a grant and USD 6.75 million as a senior loan, and there will also be 
USD 2.84 million of in-kind contribution from the Tajik Government and from United Nations 
agencies. The co-financing ratio is at 1:1.04, which accounts for 51 per cent of total financing. 
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current project 
(medium risk) 
59. 
IFAD is an international AE with a mission to improve global agriculture and food 
security. To date, IFAD has provided over USD 23 billion in grants and low interest rate loans to 
fund livelihoods in fragile and developing countries. Since its accreditation in 2016, IFAD has 
had a total of eight funding proposals approved by the Board with a value of close to USD 400 
million. Furthermore, IFAD has designed and implemented several agricultural projects in 
Tajikistan, including a USD 39.3 million CASP investment. In addition, FAO as one of the EEs is a 
known international organization which has been an AE of GCF since 2016. Since accreditation, 
FAO has had 20 funding proposals approved by the Board worth over USD 600 million. 
60. 
The other project EEs are SEPMU, under the country’s Ministry of Agriculture, CEP–CIIP 
(also referred to as CEP) and FAO. Both SEPMU and CEP have project implementation 
experience with GCF and other development financial institutions. CEP partnered with GCF for 
the “Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Program for the Aral Sea Basin” project in Tajikistan and 
Uzbekistan, and worked with other development institutions such as the World Food 
Programme, Asian Development Bank and the United Nations Development Programme on 
their forest management projects. As a unit of the Ministry of Agriculture, SEPMU has been 
supporting the implementation of agriculture investment projects since 2012 and has staffing 
expertise for agricultural subsectors and community engagement. While both government 
agencies have years of project implementation experience, there is concern with the general 
lack of coordination and capacity among institutions in the country. 
4.3.3. 
Project-specific execution risks (medium risk) 
61. 
The funding proposal shows high credit risk given the B-country rating of Tajikistan. 
The low country rating is due to challenges related to its low per capita income, narrowly 
diversified economy, weak institutions and governance, and exposure to foreign currency risk.

=== PAGE 104 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 08 
Page 104 
 
 
Even with a considerably young population profile, the lack of employment opportunities and 
low wages have contributed to the economy’s reliance on overseas remittances. Tajikistan also 
ranks low according to the worldwide governance indicators on government effectiveness, rule 
of law and control of corruption. Debt burden is moderate for Tajikistan but is being weighed 
down by contingent liability from state-owned enterprises. To help manage credit risk resulting 
from the low country rating, the funding proposal’s loan portion is being made with highly 
concessional loan terms of a 40-year maturity period, 10-year grace period and 0 per cent 
interest rate.  
62. 
The weak institutions and governance in Tajikistan also lead to a risk of poor 
institutional coordination and capacity. Among different ministries and institutions in the 
country, there is limited coordination and understanding about climate change and climate risk. 
Even at the national government level, a consensus on how to address the challenges of climate 
change is lacking. As such, the project risks experiencing delays in approval and 
implementation. To help mitigate the country’s weak institutions and governance, GCF has 
provided several grants under the Readiness and Preparatory Support Programme and 
implemented projects that focus on coordination and intervention. The government will also 
benefit from a national adaptation plan which is being developed with the assistance of the 
United Nations Development Programme. 
4.3.4. 
Project viability and concessionality  
63. 
The CASP+ plans to work through national institutions and at the community level. At 
the national level, it intends to strengthen capacity for natural resources management and to 
enhance climate adaptive and integrated management of agri/forestry resources. The project 
team will contact 21 districts to consult on the development and implementation of community 
action plans and strengthen livelihoods through a market-based approach. All these initiatives 
are within the expertise of the AE given its track record in this space, and project viability is 
expected to be manageable.  
64. 
The requested participation from GCF will represent approximately 49 per cent of the 
total project size in a project funded partly by loan and partly by grant. The level of 
concessionality in terms of funding share between GCF and the AE is evenly distributed. 
Funding terms are concessional given the large portion of grant and a lesser amount of loan on 
highly concessional terms. The concessional funding is justified by the weak country rating and 
low per-capita income of Tajikistan. Government and private sector funding tends to be limited 
and the concessional terms will help achieve climate impact without affecting the country’s high 
risk of debt distress. 
4.3.5. 
Compliance risk (medium risk)   
65. 
The compliance risk assessment reveals a medium level of risk associated with the 
project. Key processes such as an anti-money-laundering and countering the financing of 
terrorism programme, sanctions compliance and counterparty due diligence are in place, 
reflecting adherence to international standards.  
66. 
However, it is important to note potential vulnerabilities, such as the project’s reliance 
on automated screening and ongoing monitoring for identifying entities subject to integrity due 
diligence. While these automated processes offer efficiency, there is a risk that they may not 
capture nuanced or emerging risks that require human judgment or deeper investigation. 
Ensuring a balance between automated processes and human oversight, along with periodic 
reviews, could fortify the project’s resilience against compliance vulnerabilities. 
67. 
Additionally, while the project has outlined robust internal controls and grievance 
redress mechanisms, ensuring their effective implementation will be critical in mitigating any

=== PAGE 105 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 08 
Page 105 
 
 
potential compliance challenges. Overall, continued vigilance and proactive measures will be 
essential to maintain compliance throughout the project life cycle. 
68. 
In summary, the Secretariat has conducted a review of the proposal in accordance with 
relevant Board-approved policies and does not find any material issue or deviation with respect 
to compliance issues. Based on available information for this funding proposal, the Secretariat 
has determined a risk rating of medium and has no objection to this proposal proceeding. 
4.3.6. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)   
69. 
In case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of results area and single proposal is not material.  
4.3.7. 
Recommendation 
70. 
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.  
Summary risk assessment 
Overall programme 
Medium 
Accredited entity (AE)/executing entity (EE) capability 
Medium 
Project-specific execution 
Medium 
GCF portfolio concentration  
Low 
Compliance 
Medium 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
71. 
As the AE, IFAD will oversee CASP+, managing agreements with GCF and the EEs. 
Responsibilities, including fund management and quarterly disbursements, are delineated, with 
IFAD ensuring project quality, adherence to safeguards and evaluation. CASP+ execution 
involves the CEP, PMU and FAO, aligned with the project’s theory of change and addressing 
climate vulnerability. 
72. 
Financial management, governed by the established procedures of IFAD, includes 
disbursement, administration and auditing of GCF funds. Alignment with GCF agreements and 
adherence to financial standards ensures transparency and compliance. IFAD monitors and 
disburses GCF funds to implementing entities through the PMU and CEP. All financial 
management arrangements are specified under the funded activity agreement aligning with the 
accreditation master agreement (AMA) between GCF and IFAD. 
73. 
The robust financial management system of IFAD maintains separate statements, 
accounts and records for IFAD and GCF proceeds, adhering to international financial reporting 
standards. Annual audits by independent external auditors further ensure financial 
transparency and accountability. 
74. 
Internal and external audits strengthen financial oversight and control. Regular progress 
reports by IFAD to GCF track project performance, including physical achievements and 
financial aspects. District governments and jamoats (administrative divisions) play a vital role 
in coordinating local engagement and raising awareness about the project among stakeholders. 
75. 
The project procures services from local non-governmental organizations, service 
providers and partner agencies for on-the-ground implementation. Encouraging private sector 
engagement ensures market-based solutions and sustainable project investments. Overall,

=== PAGE 106 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 08 
Page 106 
 
 
leadership by IFAD and collaboration with various stakeholders will ensure effective project 
execution and impactful climate adaptation outcomes. 
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
76. 
The funding proposal is for a cross-cutting project focusing on five results areas – four 
adaptation results areas and one mitigation results area of the Integrated Results Management 
Framework: (i) Most vulnerable people and communities; (ii) Health and well-being, and food 
and water security; (iii) Infrastructure and built environment; (iv) Ecosystems and ecosystem 
services; and (v) Forest and land use. The project aims to benefit a total of over 2.9 million 
beneficiaries with 0.65 million direct and 2.27 million indirect beneficiaries and deliver 6.85 Mt 
CO2 eq of emission reductions over its lifetime.  
77. 
The funding proposal uses the templates and provide contents in line with the 
requirements of the Integrated Results Management Framework. The sections on theory of 
change and logical framework (logframe) have been aligned with the suggested structure and 
format.  
78. 
The proposal also contains all the elements of the logframe in terms of identification of 
results areas, indicators, means of verification, targets, assumptions, etc. These are adequate 
and are expected to allow smooth monitoring and reporting of project results. The information 
provided in different sections of the logframe is clearly stated, and the proper implementation 
of the logframe will help the communities concerned adopt the adaptation and mitigation 
mechanisms to deliver climate impact on the ground. 
79. 
The assessment of adaptation benefits and beneficiaries as well as the mitigation impact 
is a strength of the funding proposal. Following the Secretariat’s guidance, separate annexes on 
the methodologies for estimating the adaptation impacts and beneficiaries and the mitigation 
impact have been prepared. The adaptation impact estimation methodology provides a 
description of the vulnerability context, and identification of adaptation benefits and related 
beneficiaries. Similarly, the annex on mitigation impact provides assumptions and 
methodological approaches used for estimating the emission reduction. These methodologies 
have allowed a systematic estimation of expected adaptation and mitigation impact which will 
help in devising approaches to achieve them during implementation, as well as monitoring and 
reporting. 
80. 
Implementation timetable: The implementation timetable has been provided in the 
required structure and format. The milestones and deliverables at different stages of project 
implementation are identified. Adherence to the implementation timetable will facilitate the 
smooth implementation of the project as well as the timely delivery of the results at planned 
intervals. 
4.6 
Legal assessment 
81. 
The Accreditation Master Agreement was signed with the Accredited Entity on 24 
September 2018 (the “AMA”), and it became effective on 9 November 2018. The Accredited 
Entity’s five-year accreditation term lapsed on 8 November 2023 but was extended by Decision 
B.37/18, paragraph (q) until the earlier of three years from the date of lapse of the five-year 
accreditation term or the date on which a revised accreditation framework is adopted by the 
Board. The Board approved the re-accreditation of the Accredited Entity pursuant to Decision 
B.37/18, and negotiation of the Amended and Restated Accreditation Master Agreement is 
ongoing.

=== PAGE 107 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add. 08 
Page 107 
 
 
82. 
The Accredited Entity has not provided a legal opinion or certificate confirming that it 
has obtained all internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the 
project.  
83. 
The proposed project will be implemented in the Republic of Tajikistan, a country in 
which GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, amongst other 
things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need 
to be further assessed. The GCF Secretariat delivered a hard copy of the draft agreement on 
privileges and immunities to the Minister of Finance of Tajikistan on 31 March 2016. The latest 
communication was sent by the GCF Secretariat to the National Designated Authority of 
Tajikistan on 20 May 2024. Negotiations on the agreement are ongoing.   
84. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) and Independent Integrity 
Unit (IIU) have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress 
activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with 
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the 
GCF are made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the country, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities. 
85. 
The Accredited Entity has proposed that it will enter into a Subsidiary Agreement with 
the Republic of Tajikistan (“RoT”), acting through its Ministry of Finance (“MoF”) and Ministry 
of Agriculture (“MoA”). The RoT acting through the MoA subsequently enters into an agreement 
with the Committee for Environmental Protection (“CEP”). Although it has been agreed that the 
RoT and CEP are Executing Entities for this project, under the Accredited Entity’s proposed 
contractual structure, the Accredited Entity will not have a direct contractual relationship with 
CEP which is responsible for project implementation. For the Accredited Entity to pass down 
and enforce the relevant requirements of the AMA and funded activity agreement (“FAA”) on 
CEP, the Accredited Entity has agreed in the term sheet that it will ensure that RoT passes down, 
monitors, supervises and enforces such requirements against CEP in a manner that allows the 
Accredited Entity to comply with the AMA and FAA requirements as if it had a direct contractual 
relationship with CEP.   
86. 
 To address the matters raised in this section, it is recommended that any approval by 
the Board is made subject to the following conditions:  
(i) 
Submission by the Accredited Entity to the Fund of a certificate or legal opinion, 
in form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, within 120 days after 
Board approval, confirming that the Accredited Entity has obtained all final 
internal approvals needed by it and has the capacity and authority to implement 
the proposed project; 
(ii) 
Signature of the FAA in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat 
within 180 days from the date of Board approval, or the date the Accredited 
Entity has provided a certificate or legal opinion confirming that it has obtained 
all final internal approvals, whichever is later; and  
(iii) 
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 108 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.08 
Page 108 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP233 
Proposal name: 
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ 
(CASP+) 
Accredited entity: 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
Country: 
Tajikistan 
Project/programme size: 
Medium 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Overview 
1. 
The funding proposal is for an investment in adaptation (57 per cent) and mitigation (43 
per cent) targeting the public sector in support of its capacity needs to strengthen climate 
resilience management of natural resources, investment in communities to strengthen 
resilience to climate change and enhancing the climate resilience of livelihoods using a market-
based approach.  
2. 
The geographic selection approach starts from the identification of water sub catchment 
basins to identify the most vulnerable villages. This approach facilitates the grouping of villages 
into clusters within each basin. Following the identification of sub-catchment basins, district 
and village selection is based on the Climate Vulnerability Index (at the district and village level) 
that rely on multivariable data sets, including as variables, inter alia, a simple formula for 
measuring vulnerability (vulnerability = exposure + sensitivity – adaptive capacity), considering 
the climate vulnerability index with socioeconomic variables such as poverty incidence. 
Moreover, the selection takes into consideration the presence of natural resources such as 
rangelands and forests, the proximity of urban markets for agrifood value chain activities and 
the adjacency of selected districts so as to facilitate project implementation. The selection of 
villages is defined at the implementation stage,1 and will ensure that no village with other 
relevant interventions is selected by the Community-based Agriculture Support Programme 
‘plus’ (CASP+). While professing to be objective and fair, using the Climate Vulnerability Index 
for village selection might also obscure the actual criteria, for example, the adjacency and/or 
presence of other projects, used for selection or deselection. 
1.2 
Impact potential  
 
 
                       Scale: Medium to high 
3. 
The project estimates reaching 2.8 million beneficiaries, with 0.650 million direct 
(approximately 7 per cent of the total population, or 31 per cent of the project area population) 
and 2.3 million indirect beneficiaries (approximately 24 per cent of the total population).2 Over 
7 million smallholder livestock farmers are targeted to receive artificial insemination, animal 
health or training services to increase the productivity of their livestock.3 
 
1 See funding proposal annex 21, para. 28, page 13. 
2 See funding proposal annex 24 on breakdown of project beneficiaries. 
3 See funding proposal on output 3.1 by end of year 7.

=== PAGE 109 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.08 
Page 109 
 
 
4. 
The total lifespan of the project is 20 years, in which a total of 6,854,822 tonnes of 
carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) (annual average of 340,000 t CO2 eq) will be mitigated 
from pasture and forest management, afforestation and improved herd management across 
3,650 ha forests, 6,190 ha perennial crops and 180,000 ha improved pasture. Mitigation 
components will also arise along the agricultural production and business value chains, 
including the use of energy saving and easy maintenance and replication (i.e. the thermo-
isolation of shelters and stabling structures using straw, which was successfully tested in 
previous projects, use of solar and energy efficiencies in the drip irrigation and drying systems 
or reduced use of fertilizers). 
5. 
Impact on the fiscal resilience of the Tajikistan Government. Another potential 
climate impact of the project is the increased fiscal resilience of local governments or agencies. 
The introduction of district climate resilience diagnostics (DCRD) should lead to the integration 
of climate measures in the local development and investment plans of the government and the 
private sector; essentially, fiscal resilience of the Tajikistan Government could be achieved 
through efficient and effective planning and budgeting of expenditures based on priority 
climate-informed development plans, as well as the reduction of unplanned social and 
rehabilitation expenditures due to impacts of climate change in the project areas. This will 
potentially alleviate fiscal pressures on the Tajikistan Government. 
6. 
Risks to potential climate impact. Effecting behavioural change among the targeted 
livestock farmers will be a challenge. It may be difficult to convince the targeted farmer 
beneficiaries to switch from the traditional practice of livestock herd management (e.g. 
increasing herd and flock size, pasture grazing, buying good-quality bulls) to the new methods 
of artificial insemination and improved animal care and feeding; the farmers’ traditional ways of 
livestock farming have enabled them to survive through the years, and letting this go overnight 
to a new scheme will demand a lot of trust and confidence in the new system. Thus, the need for 
increased awareness and understanding of the new approaches to herd management will be 
crucial. Moreover, consideration of the level of risk to which farmers are exposed, and possible 
compensation for farmers who do not become better off, is recommended. 
7. 
Genetic improvement4 is expected to encourage commercial farmers and smallholders 
to switch from low-yielding animals to higher-yielding and more efficient stock, thereby 
encouraging a reduction in herd size and helping to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. 
Indeed, the funding proposal states that livestock productivity is currently low and limited by 
the poor genetic potential of animals.5 However, the risks or potential adverse effects from 
changing the genetic pool also need to be discussed. Similarly, risks and knock-on effects of a 
transition from natural pastures to fodder feeding would also need to be critically examined. 
8. 
The monitoring and reporting of GHG emissions post project implementation needs to 
be assured. Such monitoring and reporting are clear during project implementation but not 
assured during the lifespan of the project where the bulk of the GHG emissions will occur. 
9. 
The funding proposal’s impact potential is assessed as medium to high. 
1.3 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
              Scale: Medium to high 
10. 
The funding proposal’s multi-pronged approach to mainstreaming climate is laudable as 
this is likely to trigger the potential paradigm shift. 
11. 
Mainstreaming in higher education. The funding proposal will streamline climate 
change and ecosystem management approaches in the training curricula and research 
 
4 See funding proposal para. 29. 
5 See funding proposal para. 57.

=== PAGE 110 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.08 
Page 110 
 
 
programmes of national  research institutions and academia.6 The integration of climate change 
issues into the curricula of universities and training institutions will establish best practice for 
potential scaling up and replication across educational institutions in the country, targeting 
agronomists, agricultural engineers, foresters, zootechnicians and veterinarians of Tajik 
Agrarian University and Tajik Academy of Agricultural Sciences. Climate change will also be 
mainstreamed in the training curriculum of public administrators at the Academy for Public 
Administration. These students, especially public administrators, will eventually work for, or 
with, the government planners and decision makers, and influence government programmes, 
projects and other activities with respect to integrating climate change mitigation and/or 
adaptation elements.  
12. 
The enabling of research institutes and the private sector to produce evidence on 
natural resource management and climate change for policy dialogue and climate-sensitive 
technical innovations7 will also contribute to a new body of knowledge that can be used by 
planners and decision makers in pursuit of local development and investment opportunities 
along a low-carbon and climate-resilient pathway. 
13. 
Mainstreaming in government institutions. There are many interwoven activities in 
this area that contribute to potential paradigm shift. These include enhancing the 
mainstreaming of climate adaptive management practices of natural resources in all national 
institutions and verification of the effectiveness of policies on the ground;8 review of the 
legislation and regulatory framework related to the Strategy for the Development of the Green 
Economy for 2023–2037 of the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade; provision of 
training to government officials and strengthening of the Ministry of Finance to enable it to 
monitor projects and resource mobilization;9 stocktaking of policy development and 
mainstreaming of gender-sensitive climate adaptive agricultural practices; training on the 
utilization of policy support tools such as  Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model, 
Ex-Ante Carbon balance Tool,  and Biodiversity Integrated Assessment and Computation Tool, 
which directly capacitates the government decision makers and planners;10 and the 
development of the above-mentioned Green Economy Strategy as well as the capacity-building 
of the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade and the Ministry of Finance.11 These 
activities will equip and guide the institutions, especially the Ministry of Economic Development 
and Trade and Ministry of Finance staff, on how to potentially integrate climate change into the 
performance of public financial management duties as the need arises. 
14. 
Mainstreaming in policy. The funding proposal indicates that the animal health and 
breeding regulatory and strategic framework is to be reviewed and updated to ensure 
compliance with international guidelines and enable streamlining of measures supporting 
climate resilience and environmental protection. A learning by doing approach would ensure 
that climate is enshrined, fully or partially, as a policy, regulation or framework in the animal 
husbandry and livestock management subsector. This initiative can potentially lead to either 
voluntary or regulatory compliance by the farmer stakeholders concerned. This intervention 
has a huge potential for replication across other agriculture subsectors in interventions that will 
eventually lead to mainstreaming climate in public finance management (i.e. planning, 
budgeting, expenditures). 
15. 
The very ambitious component on strengthening public sector capacity for 
transformative climate-resilient management of natural resources12 is reinforced by the 
proposed project’s choice to work principally through the Ministry of Agriculture and the Center 
 
6 See funding proposal activity 1.1.4. 
7 See funding proposal activity 1.1.4.3. 
8 See funding proposal activity 1.2.1. 
9 See funding proposal activity 1.2.3.   
10 See funding proposal activity 1.2.1. 
11 See funding proposal activity 1.2.3.  
12 See funding proposal component 1.

=== PAGE 111 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.08 
Page 111 
 
 
for Implementation of Investment Projects of the Committee for Environmental Protection 
under the Government of Tajikistan. This is also important in ensuring that the strengthened 
capacity and climate-resilient management remains after the project implementation period.   
16. 
Mainstreaming in community-level planning.13 DCRD, based on the risks and 
opportunities emerging in each district, will provide the basis for the subsequent community 
planning in 400 CASP+ target villages. Ultimately, it will form the basis for defining the climate-
sensitive community action plans and the potential adaptation investments for (i) pasture 
improvement/restoration (pasture management plans); (ii) climate-resilient infrastructures 
strengthening/rehabilitation; (iii) procurement of agricultural machinery; and (iv) forestry 
investments.  
17. 
Partnerships or productive alliances. The intervention on setting up nine productive 
alliances between livestock producers groups and private aggregators14 is akin to introducing 
localized public–private partnership models, distinct from the typical national flagship public–
private partnership modalities. The business partnership formed between the private sector 
and farmers, funded by the government via grants facilities from windows 1 and 2 with some 
co-financing (in kind or productive agriculture asset) by the private sector is a potential 
paradigm shift in the way investors, local farmers associations and the government could come 
together to address the much-needed local economic development. 
18. 
Introduction of climate technology product and services solutions. The deployment 
of modern technologies to address traditional issues and challenges in livestock care,15 
breeding,16 natural resources management,17,18,19 community planning,20 monitoring and 
reporting of developmental activities21 and linkages with the wider agriculture business value 
chains22 enables the local communities to transition into more low-carbon and climate-resilient 
development pathways.  
19. 
Overall the mainstreaming of climate in both public and private sector planning is the 
main potential paradigm shift. From the government perspective, the mainstreaming of climate 
will eventually lead to greening of the components of the public financial management systems, 
the effect of which is to enhance the fiscal resilience and sustainability of the government. From 
the private sector’s viewpoint, this enables the stakeholders along the agribusiness value chain 
to manage their potential losses and damage due to the impacts of climate change. 
20. 
Risk to paradigm shift. Given the diversified approaches on mainstreaming climate in 
the policy, planning and investment activities at the community, district and central level, weak 
buy-in from the other activities may delay but will not stop the integration of climate into the 
decision-making processes. 
21. 
Overall, the paradigm shift potential is high.  
1.4 
Sustainable development potential  
                               Scale: High 
 
13 See funding proposal activity 2.1.1.1. 
14 See funding proposal output 3.2. 
15 See funding proposal activity1.1.3 on provision of technical capacities of national livestock institutions to ensure 
efficient provision of public animal health and production services. 
16 See funding proposal activity 3.1.3 on supporting adoption of climate-resilient innovative technologies.  
17 See funding proposal activity 1.1.4 on building capacities of research and academic institutions on climate-resilient 
ecosystem management. 
18 See funding proposal activity 1.2.1 on training on SIPT, GLEAM, EXACT and B-INTACT. 
19 See funding proposal activity 1.2.3 on use of software for monitoring and analysis of public investment projects. 
20 See funding proposal activity 2.1.1 on diagnostic of community needs. 
21 See funding proposal activity 1.1.2 on introduction of combined remote and participatory natural resources 
monitoring and management. 
22 See funding proposal component 3.

=== PAGE 112 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.08 
Page 112 
 
 
22. 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The funding proposal cuts across several 
SDGs. CASP+ will contribute to the achievement of SDG 13 (Climate action), which is 
“intrinsically linked to all 16 of the other Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development”.23 CASP+ will also contribute to achieving SDG 1 (No poverty), SDG 2 (Zero 
hunger), SDG 5 (Gender equality), SDG 8 (Decent work and economic growth) and SDG 17 
(Partnerships for the goals). 
23. 
Economic co-benefits. The local public–private partnership approach24 will foster 
entrepreneurship, business partnerships and commercial or trading activities along the 
agribusiness value chains. The formation of productive alliances, common interest groups and 
the matching grant facilities will enhance the inflow of private sector investments in the target 
sectors, boosting jobs and livelihoods. The infrastructure facilities (e.g. off-farm mating stations) 
and services (e.g. artificial insemination)25 will provide long-term confidence among 
entrepreneurs and investors in carrying out more local business activities.  
24. 
Environmental co-benefits. Carbon sequestration is the main co-benefit due to the 
initiatives on management of forests and pasturelands. Another is the potential increase in 
biodiversity, including plant diversity and production of nectar for pollinators and beneficial 
insects. The proposed project will also lead to improvements in soil fertility and increased water 
retention.26 
25. 
Social co-benefits. The potential social co-benefits, enhancing the socioeconomic 
conditions of the communities involved, are as follows: (i) employment generation via labour in 
forest plantations, nursery plantations, introduction of modern agriculture equipment, climate 
proofing of agricultural infrastructures and animal care services; (ii) enhanced community 
resilience via improved erosion and flood control measures versus extreme climate events; (iii) 
training on artificial insemination, veterinary/farm animal care services and manning of off-
farm mating stations for the youth and veterinary practitioners; (iv) climate-smart agricultural 
practices via use of modern and efficient farm technologies, learning in farmer field schools on 
improved livestock and agriculture production techniques and adapting practices to changing 
climate conditions;27 and (v) access to finance and markets via common interest groups and 
productive alliances. 
26. 
Gender-sensitive development impact. Women and female-headed households are 
active agents of change under this funding proposal. Women’s capacity will be enhanced 
through increased access to climate knowledge and technology solutions to manage 
communities and ecosystems,28 as well as economic assets and micro-enterprises in the 
mountainous regions.29 Gender is also taken into consideration in the mainstreaming in climate-
smart agriculture.  
27. 
The risk to sustainable development is low given the multi-pronged, integrated and 
holistic approach of CASP+. 
28. 
Overall, the sustainable development potential is assessed as high.  
1.5 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
                               Scale: High 
 
23 See https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/climate-action/. 
24 See funding proposal activities 3.2 and 3.3. 
25 See funding proposal activity 3.1. 
26 See funding proposal para. 104 for more details. 
27 See funding proposal annex 21, para. 98. 
28 See funding proposal output 2.2. 
29 See funding proposal output 3.2.

=== PAGE 113 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.08 
Page 113 
 
 
29. 
The funding proposal endeavours to address the needs of the people, community, 
critical ecosystems, investors and entrepreneurs, and government stakeholders through several 
interventions, as discussed in paragraphs below. 
30. 
Need for bottom-up approach in community planning. The use of DCRD in 
developing climate-sensitive community action plans shows a strong bottom-up approach and 
community linkages. DCRD is based on the assessment of risks and opportunities emerging in 
each district, and this will provide the basis for the subsequent community planning in the 400 
targeted CASP+ villages. DCRD will form the basis for defining the climate-sensitive community 
action plans and the potential adaptation investment for pasture improvement and restoration 
(pasture management plans), strengthening and rehabilitation of climate-resilient 
infrastructures, procurement of agricultural machinery and forestry and agriculture business 
value chain investments. 
31. 
Need for climate-related technical capacity and knowledge of government 
stakeholders. The proposed project will provide the technical capacity to manage natural 
resources such as pastures, forests and agricultural land, as well as optimize ecosystem services 
(biodiversity, carbon sequestration). It will also provide technical capacity in support of the 
planned Green Economy Program, and the implementation of DCRD, which is the main 
intervention that will enhance the capacities of village communities and at the district level to 
formulate development and investment plans that are framed within the climate context. 
32. 
Need for farmers’ sustainable livelihoods and investments. The proposed project 
will address the needs of the whole agriculture value chain from production and post 
production to access to markets. On production, it will provide improved pasture management 
schemes, climate-resilient infrastructure, agriculture assets, a grant window facility for bee 
farming/keeping greenhouses and modern drip irrigation systems for eligible farmers. On the 
post-production side, the interventions will open a grant window facility for the set-up of cold 
storage facilities, vacuum dryers and milk processing centres.30 To enhance access to markets, 
the project will help to set up alliances such as the productive alliances and common interest 
groups,31 which will facilitate the agribusiness trade between the farmers and buyers along the 
agriculture business value chain.32 It will also facilitate access to investors via the Platform for 
Remittances, Investments and Migrants’ Entrepreneurship (PRIME) Central Asia to increase 
access to formal remittances and expand the digital financial inclusion of migrants and 
remittance recipient families and returnees, with a focus on women and youth in rural areas. 
33. 
Overall, the needs of the recipient are assessed as high. 
1.6 
Country ownership 
  
 
 
                               Scale: High 
34. 
Alignment with national climate strategy and priorities. CASP+ is aligned with 
climate initiatives as envisioned under Tajikistan’s intended nationally determined 
contribution, the National Disaster Risk Reduction Strategy (2019–2030) and the National 
Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 2030. It will also support the national development plans, 
such as the National Development Strategy 2015–2030 (sustainable use of agricultural land and 
water) the National Agricultural Investment Plan for Sustainable Agriculture Development and 
Food Security 2021–2030 (investments for food and nutrition security and sustainable 
agriculture, including investments in forestry, pasture and livestock intensification), the Water 
Sector Reform Programme (2016–2025) (water resources) and the Strategy for the 
Development of the Forestry Sector (2016–2030) (forest, livestock grazing). 
 
30 See funding proposal output 3.1.   
31 See funding proposal activities 3.3.1 and 3.3.2. 
32 See funding proposal output 3.3.

=== PAGE 114 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.08 
Page 114 
 
 
35. 
Strong bottom-up approach. DCRD is possibly the main anchor of the funding proposal 
in that it will ensure that there is strong country ownership in the project interventions and 
deliverables under this programme. The DCRD bottom-up approach will feed into and inform 
the formulation and development and investment plans and policies.  
36. 
Country ownership is assessed as high.  
1.7 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high 
37. 
Strong project foundation. The proposed interventions build on the successful 
experiences of four projects funded by the International Fund for Agricultural Development 
(IFAD) over the last 15 years (2008–2024) in vulnerable mountainous areas of the Khatlon 
region in Tajikistan, specifically on the livestock and pasture development projects (phases I 
and II).33 This provides strong confidence that CASP+ will be relying on the robust evidence-
based data and information, best practices (e.g. community action plans, common interest 
groups, women’s empowerment, pasture users associations and unions, joint forest 
management) and lessons learned when it comes to implementing and overseeing this project 
during its lifetime. 
38. 
Strong technical and institutional partners for project implementation. The choice 
of accredited entity and executing entities presents capable project managers who will guide the 
effective and efficient implementation of the proposed project. IFAD, as accredited entity, has 
strong experience in Tajikistan (e.g. Khatlon Livelihoods Support Project, Livestock and Pasture 
Development Project and Community-Based Agriculture Support Programme). IFAD has 
substantial global experience in designing and supervising rural development investments, with 
a strong focus on integrating climate change across its portfolio. Key highlights of IFAD 
experience include climate fund management, climate and environmental finance and GCF 
climate project management (i.e. FP101, Belize; SAP012, Niger; FP143, Brazil; FP162, West 
Africa; FP183, West Africa; and FP220, East Africa).34    
39. 
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, as executing entity, has 
extensive experience and active involvement in significant climate finance projects, which 
shows its capability in providing comprehensive climate change assistance and support. The 
relevant GCF climate projects it has been involved in include FP116, Kyrgyzstan, and SAP014, 
Armenia.35 
40. 
Concessionality of GCF funds. Tajikistan has B minus country rating which signifies its 
high credit risk.36 This is compounded by the high vulnerability of the country given its low 
capacity37.  
41. 
If the funding proposal is approved, GCF will provide USD 39.0 million in the form of 
grants (USD 30.0 million) and loans (USD 9.0 million). The co-financing commitment from IFAD 
is in the form of grant (USD 31.01 million) and senior loans (USD 6.75 million), and there will 
also be in-kind contributions (USD 2.84 million) from government and United Nations agencies. 
The co-financing ratio is at 1:1.04 and accounts for 51 per cent of total financing. 
42. 
The requested participation from GCF will represent approximately 49 per cent of total 
programme size in a partly loan- and grant-funded project. The level of concessionality in terms 
of funding share between GCF and the accredited entity is evenly distributed. For component 1, 
the GCF share of 61 per cent is allocated to strengthening public sector capacity on 
transformative climate-resilient natural resource management ; this is co-financed by IFAD, the 
 
33 See funding proposal para. 38 and annexes 29 and 30 for more details of IFAD projects. 
34 See funding proposal para. 127 for more details. 
35 See funding proposal para. 130 for more details. 
36 S&P Global. 2024. Tajikistan 'B-/B' Ratings Affirmed; Outlook Stable. Accessed on June 2024. 
37 See ND Gains Ranking of Tajikistan.

=== PAGE 115 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.08 
Page 115 
 
 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and State Forest Agency   For 
component 2, the climate-sensitive community action plans will be developed and financed by 
IFAD (86 per cent) along with the other partners (i.e. the Ministry of Agriculture, State Forest 
Agency  and the Committee for Environmental Protection).38 Then GCF will allocate 72 per cent 
of the funding for the roll-out of 400 climate-sensitive community action plans developed for 
the 21 districts benefiting 100,000 rural households. Component 3 will be funded mainly by 
IFAD and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations with GCF co-financing 
around 12 per cent of these activities. 
43. 
The project’s adaptation cost is USD 27 per direct beneficiary and mitigation cost is USD 
3.31 per t CO2 eq. Both costs are in the lower range of the GCF portfolio for climate resilience in 
agriculture and forestry. The co-financing ratio is 1:0.4. Through the matching grant windows, 
there is a potential to leverage further parallel financing, which is confirmed in the funding 
proposal, with an estimated amount of USD 4.6 million. 
44. 
If implemented as planned, the assessment of efficiency and effectiveness is medium to 
high.  
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
45. 
The iTAP recommends that the Board approve this funding proposal. 
46. 
To strengthen further the submitted funding proposal, the following recommendations 
are presented: 
(a) 
Develop a plan to incorporate the potential future distribution of species into a revised 
version of the biodiversity management plan; 
(b) 
The iTAP recommends further that the following be made part of the Project 
Implementation Manual, specifically: 
(i) 
a plan by which to transfer to the community or district level government at the 
end of the implementation phase, and provide budget for the monitoring – 
reporting and verification plan for the CO2 sequestered from the forest 
management components, and GHGs from livestock and pastureland 
management; and 
(ii) 
 a disclosure statement for the target farmer beneficiaries covering (i) the 
potential risks associated with the adoption of new agricultural and livestock 
management methods (e.g. risks or potential adverse effects from changing the 
genetic pool, knock-on effects of the transition from natural pastures to fodder 
feeding); (ii) a caveat that the proposed interventions need to be undertaken as 
a whole programme to ensure higher chances of improving their livelihoods and 
incomes; (iii) an indication that selecting interventions according to the farmers’ 
preference will not guarantee expected changes; and (iv) provision of a safety 
net for farmers that do not become better off even after following the 
programme in its totality. 39 
 
38 See funding proposal output 2.1. 
39 The risk of failure to improve the farmer’s lives and livelihoods even after the farmer’s consistent adherence to the 
programme will adversely impact future projects being proposed by GCF and other development partners.

=== PAGE 116 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.08 
Page 116 
 
 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP233) 
Proposal name: 
Community-based Agriculture Support Programme ‘plus’ 
(CASP+) 
Accredited entity: 
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) 
Country: 
Tajikistan 
Project/programme size:  
Medium 
 
Impact potential 
IFAD takes note of the positive assessment and thanks iTAP for identifying the risks and 
challenges associated to the proposed changes introduced by the project. The challenge of a 
drastic behavioural change in livestock management patterns is a key pre-identified risk in the 
project TOC, whereby in addition to awareness pull factors such as improved genetics, feeding, 
and health services will improve productivity and parallel measures to diversify from 
unproductive practices. In addition, Annex 2.3a details Pasture Users Unions-managed specific 
triggers to virtuous behaviours in this sense.  
IFAD also takes note of the need to assure the monitoring and reporting of GHG emissions post 
project implementation. Training to CEP and other related entities will be provided in order to 
ensure uptake from national entities and mainstreaming GHG sequestration monitoring in 
government institutions.  
Paradigm shift potential 
IFAD takes note of the high paradigm shift potential and equally thanks iTAP for stressing the 
high potential for replication across other agriculture subsectors leading to mainstreaming 
climate in public finance management, by recommending a learning by doing approach for 
the review and update of the regulatory and strategic framework. 
 
 
Sustainable development potential 
IFAD takes note of the positive assessment. 
 
Needs of the recipient 
IFAD takes note of the positive assessment. 
 
Country ownership

=== PAGE 117 ===
GCF/B.39/02/Add.08 
Page 117 
 
 
 
IFAD takes note of the positive assessment. 
 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
IFAD takes note of the positive assessment. 
 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
IFAD thanks the iTAP for its positive review of the funding proposal and the 
recommendations provided. IFAD appreciates the importance of a disclosure statement for 
target farmers beneficiaries during implementation, which will also be informed by the 
demonstrated uptake of improved practices and technologies in similar investment in the 
country.1  
 
 
 
1  Reference: impact assessment of Livestock  and Pasture Development Project – phase II (Annex 18.c).

=== PAGE 118 ===
1 
ANNEX 8 Gender Analysis/Assessment and Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan 
Community-based Agricultural Support Project ‘Plus’ (CASP+) 
June 6, 2021  
(updated in March 2024) 
Gender documentation for FP233

=== PAGE 119 ===
2 
CASP+ Abbreviations and acronyms 
ADB 
Asian Development Bank 
AI 
Artificial insemination  
CASP 
Community-based Agricultural Support Project (phase I) 
CASP+ 
Community-based Agricultural Support Project ‘Plus’ (phase II)   
CIG 
Common Interest Group 
CsCAP 
Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans  
FAO 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
FFS 
Farmers Field Schools  
FHH 
Female Headed Households  
GII 
Gender Inequality Index  
GoT 
Government of Tajikistan  
HDI 
Human Development Index 
HH 
Household 
IFAD 
International Fund for Agricultural Development   
IGA 
Income generating activities  
INRM 
Integrated Natural Resource Management  
JFM 
Joint Forest Management  
MoA 
Ministry of Agriculture  
NIP 
National Agricultural Investment Plan 2021-2030 
NGO 
Non-governmental organization 
NRM 
Natural Resources Management 
PMP 
Pasture Management Plans  
PMU 
Project Management Unit  
PUU 
Pasture Users Union 
PUA 
Pasture Users Associations  
TAJSTAT 
Agency on statistics  
UNDP 
UN Development Programme 
UNFCCC 
UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 
UN Women 
UN Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women 
VO 
Village Organization 
WB 
World Bank 
WFP 
World Food Programme 
WG 
Women group 
WHH 
Women Head of Households 
WUA 
Water Users Associations

=== PAGE 120 ===
3 
PART I: GENDER ANALYSIS AND ASSESSMENTPART I: GENDER ANALYSIS AND ASSESSMENT ............................ 4 
DEMOGRAPHY ........................................................................................................................................... 4 
POVERTY .................................................................................................................................................. 4 
EXTREME POVERTY AND GENDER ................................................................................................................... 5 
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX (HDI) .............................................................................................................. 6 
GENDER DEVELOPMENT INDEX (GDI) ............................................................................................................. 6 
MATERNAL MORTALITY RATE ........................................................................................................................ 7 
CHILD MORTALITY ...................................................................................................................................... 7 
EDUCATION .............................................................................................................................................. 7 
SECTOR OF ENROLMENT ............................................................................................................................... 8 
SCHOOL ATTENDANCE FOR BOYS AND GIRLS ...................................................................................................... 8 
LABOR FORCE EMPLOYMENT AND UNEMPLOYMENT ........................................................................................... 8 
YOUTH .................................................................................................................................................... 9 
WOMEN EMPLOYMENT IN AGRICULTURE ........................................................................................................ 10 
DIVISION OF LABOUR ................................................................................................................................ 10 
FORMAL AND INFORMAL SECTOR (OUTSIDE AGRICULTURE) ................................................................................. 11 
INFORMAL EMPLOYMENT (OUTSIDE AGRICULTURE) .......................................................................................... 12 
WOMEN’S EMPLOYMENT AND ENGAGEMENT IN THE FORESTRY SECTOR ................................................................. 13 
WOMEN’S ROLE IN CONSERVATION OF BIODIVERSITY ........................................................................................ 15 
SMALLHOLDER FARMING IN TAJIKISTAN ......................................................................................................... 15 
WOMEN’S ROLE IN AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES ................................................................................................. 16 
LIVESTOCK, DAIRY AND POULTRY .................................................................................................................. 17 
WOMEN’S ACCESS TO LAND ........................................................................................................................ 19 
WOMEN DEKHAN FARMS ........................................................................................................................... 20 
THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF DEKHAN FARMS (NADF) ................................................................................. 22 
WOMEN ACCESS TO AGRICULTURE INPUTS ..................................................................................................... 22 
WOMEN’S ACCESS TO EXTENSION SERVICES .................................................................................................... 23 
WOMEN ACCESS TO PASTURE AND REPRESENTATION AND DECISION-MAKING IN PASTURE USERS UNION/ASSOCIATIONS 
(PUUS) ................................................................................................................................................. 23 
WOMEN’S ACCESS TO WATER AND REPRESENTATION IN WATER USERS ASSOCIATION (WUAS) ................................... 24 
MAIN CHALLENGES EXPRESSED BY WOMEN FROM FGD AND PROPOSED SOLUTIONS .................................................. 25 
LEGAL STATUS OF WOMEN ......................................................................................................................... 28 
LAWS AND POLICIES ON GENDER EQUALITY .................................................................................................... 28 
NATIONAL MECHANISMS ............................................................................................................................ 29 
GENDER-BASED DOMESTIC VIOLENCE (GBV) ................................................................................................... 30 
VULNERABILITY TO CLIMATE CHANGE FROM A GENDER PERSPECTIVE ..................................................................... 31 
POLICY REVIEW: GENDER AND CLIMATE CHANGE ............................................................................................. 34 
PROJECT DETAILS ................................................................................................................................. 35 
ACCESS TO INFORMATION AND OPPORTUNITIES UNDER CASP+ ........................................................................... 35 
WOMEN’S ACCESS TO EDUCATION, TECHNICAL KNOWLEDGE, AND SKILLS ................................................................ 36 
WOMEN’S ACCESS TO SERVICES AND TECHNOLOGIES PROVIDED BY CASP+ ............................................................. 37 
WOMEN IN DECISION-MAKING .................................................................................................................... 39 
PROMOTION OF WOMEN LEADERSHIP UNDER CASP+ ....................................................................................... 40 
MEN AND WOMEN NEEDS AND PRIORITIES CAPTURED BY PARTICIPATORY PROCESSES UNDER CASP+ ............................ 41 
CASP+ GENDER STRATEGY ......................................................................................................................... 43 
PREVENTING INCREASED RISKS OF SEAH AND GBV .................................................. ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED. 
CASP+ SOCIAL INCLUSION STRATEGY FOR VULNERABLE GROUPS .......................................................................... 46 
REFERENCES ......................................................................................................................................... 51

=== PAGE 121 ===
4 
 
Part I: Gender Analysis and Assessment 
Demography  
1. 
According to the National Statistical Agency, the total population of Tajikistan 
accounts for 9.3 Million. As of July 2020, the regional population distribution was 
the following, showing higher percentage in Khatlon Region (3,3 Million) followed 
by Sughd (2,7Million)1:  
 
 
Figure 1: Population by region. Source: Food Security and Poverty, Statistical Agency under the President of 
the Republic of Tajikistan, 2020. 
 
2. 
Women account for 51.5% of the population. Households are larger on average 
in rural areas (6.5 persons) than urban areas (4.8 persons). Overall men head 
the majority of households (79%), with only 21% headed by women (being 84% 
male headed and 16% female headed in rural areas). More than half (55%) of 
the population is under age 25, and 38% are younger than 15. Four percent of 
the population is age 65 and older (TajDHS, 2017)2.  
 
Poverty 
3. 
Extreme poverty, measured by the international poverty line of US$1.90 per day 
(WB data from 2003 to 2014)3, fell markedly from 27 percent in 2003 to 4 percent 
in 2014. According to the Government’s own calculations, using a national poverty 
line, poverty declined, over the same time horizon from 81 percent to 32 percent 
in 2014 (Tajstat, 2015)4.  
4. 
The most recent poverty data available at national level (2019) register a further 
decline to 26.3 with extreme poverty at 10.7 (Tajstat, 2020)5.The thresholds of 
the national poverty line (2009) on monthly consumption are calculated as 
follows: less than TJS162 for poor, less than TJS230 for vulnerable, and less than 
TJS294 for middle class6. 
 
1 Food Security and Poverty, Statistical Agency under President of the Republic of Tajikistan, 2020 
Available at: https://stat.ww.tj/posts/February2021/2-2020_angl..pdf 
2 Tajikistan, Demographic and health Survey, 2 Statistical Agency under President of the Republic of Tajikistan, 2017 
Available at: https://dhsprogram.com/publications/publication-fr341-dhs-final-reports.cfm 
3 Data available at: https://data.worldbank.org/topic/11  
4 Official figures indicate that the poverty rate dropped from 81% in 2000 to 30.3% in 2016. Source: “Dynamics of 
poverty reduction in Tajikistan,” Statistical Agency under President of the Republic of Tajikistan. The extreme poverty 
rate (measured by food poverty line at 2,250 Kcal per person a day) dropped from 20%in 2012 to 16.8%in 2014,    
Available at: http://www.stat.tj/ru/news/307/  
https://stat.ww.tj/files/metodologia_bednosti_anglisi.pdf 
5 2019 poverty rate according to national Agency of statistics: Food Security and Poverty, Statistical Agency under 
President of the Republic of Tajikistan, 2020 (matrix pp144). 
https://stat.ww.tj/posts/February2021/2-2020_angl..pdf 
6 Poverty measurement in tajikistan: methodological note, Tajstat 2015. 
Available at: https://stat.ww.tj/files/metodologia_bednosti_anglisi.pdf

=== PAGE 122 ===
5 
5. 
Comparing the per-capita monthly consumption aggregate to the poverty lines 
yields a national extreme (food) poverty rate of 16.8 percent and a total poverty 
rate of 32 percent (as official 2014 data). Poverty in Tajikistan ( 2014 data) is 
higher in RRS, Khatlon and GBAO and to a lesser degree in Sughd. Poverty is 
also higher in rural areas (36.1 percent) than in urban households (23.5 
percent). Extreme Poverty in rural areas is 19.7 percent7. 
 
 
Figure 2: Overall poverty and extreme poverty in Tajikistan in 2014. Source: Agency on Statistics, Poverty 
measurement in Tajikistan, 2015  
6. 
In 2014 Khatlon accounted for highest percentage of extreme poverty at 21% 
followed by RRS with 21,1%, GBAO with 18% and then Sughd with 10%. The 
poor are concentrated in rural Tajikistan (81 %) and in three regions of Khatlon, 
GBAO and RRS. Indeed, almost four out of five poor persons lives in rural 
households. Also, as of 2014 statistics, almost 2/3 of the poor are in the regions 
of Sughd (30,2%) and Khatlon (36,7%).  
 
 
 
Figure 3: Share of poor in Tajikistan in 2014. Source: Agency on Statistics, Poverty measurement in Tajikistan, 
2015 
7. 
There is substantial spatial and seasonal variation in poverty. Most rural areas 
are poorer than urban ones, and poverty and income insecurity are higher during 
winter and spring8. 
 
Extreme Poverty and Gender 
 
 
7 Ibidem 
8 Ibidem

=== PAGE 123 ===
6 
8. 
In 2015 UNDP conducted a survey on: “mapping registered extreme poverty in 
rural Tajikistan (2016)”9. The analysis is based on poverty information for the 
427 rural and township jamoats where around 79% of the country's population 
lives.  It emerged that the total number of extreme poor registered by jamoats 
was 163,617. Women accounted for 40% of this figure.   
 
 
Figure 4: Extreme poverty in Tajikistan by region in 2015. Sources: JAMBI dataset, based on records of 
jamoat social assistance commissions 
9. 
The data collected by jamoats allows for an exploration of gender differences in 
terms of extreme poverty. As the numbers reported indicate, there were 64,974 
women, or 39.7% of all extreme poor registered in rural and township jamoats in 
2015. Of the 30,404 extremely poor households listed in the same table, 11,013 
were headed by women, which translates into a 36.2 % share of female-headed 
households (FHHs) among all extreme poor households. (UNDP, 2016). 
 
Human Development Index (HDI) 
 
10. 
Tajikistan’s 2019 HDI of 0.668 is above the average of 0.631 for countries in the 
medium human development group and below the average of 0.791 for countries 
in Europe and Central Asia. From Europe and Central Asia, Tajikistan is compared 
with Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan, which have HDIs ranked 120 and 106, 
respectively (UNDP, 2020)10.  
 
 
Figure 5: Tajikistan Human Development Index (HDI). Source:  UNDP Human Development Report, 2020 
 
Gender Development Index (GDI)   
 
11. 
The 2019 female HDI value for Tajikistan is 0.586 in contrast with 0.712 for 
males, resulting in a GDI value of 0.823, placing it into Group 5. 2 In 
 
9 UNDP, mapping registered extreme poverty in rural Tajikistan, 2016 
Document available at: http://untj.org/jambi-project/images/Extreme-Poverty_ENG.pdf 
10 UNDP, Human Development Report, 2020 
Document available at: http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country-notes/TJK.pdf

=== PAGE 124 ===
7 
comparison, GDI values for Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan are 0.957 and 0.939, 
respectively (UNDP,2020).  
 
 
Figure 6: Tajikistan Gender Development Index (HDI). Source:  UNDP Human Development Report, 2020 
 
12. 
In Tajikistan, 20.0 percent of parliamentary seats are held by women. Life 
expectancy at birth for the total population (both sex) is 70. It is higher for 
women at 70 compared to men at 67.9 The median number of years of schooling 
among women is 10.2   compared with 11,3 years for men (UNDP,2020)11. 
 
Maternal Mortality rate 
 
13. 
According to the Demographic and Health Survey (DHS, 2017) for every 100,000 
live births, 32.0 women die from pregnancy related causes; and the adolescent 
birth rate is 57.1 births per 1,000 women of ages 15-19. According to WHO, 
Maternal mortality  is conditioned by poor quality of services in antenatal, 
intrapartum and postnatal care the lack of a functioning referral system, the lack 
of means of transport especially in rural areas, and inadequate access to 
emergency obstetric care (EOC). While home deliveries decreased in all regions 
of Tajikistan between 2012 and 2017, the most substantive reductions were 
observed in Khatlon (from 31% to 15%), GBAO (from 34% to 24%), and DRS 
(from 29% to 21%). Notable decreases in home deliveries also occurred among 
women at lower levels of education and wealth (TjDHS, 2017)12.  
 
Child Mortality 
 
14. 
Overall, under-5 mortality declined between the 2012 and 2017. The TjDHS 
surveys from 43 deaths per 1,000 live births to 33 deaths per 1,000 live births. 
Infant mortality decreased from 34 to 27 deaths per 1,000 live births over the 
same period, while neonatal mortality fell from 19 to 13 deaths per 1,000 live 
births (TjDHS, 2017).The risk of dying in early childhood is much greater for 
children in rural areas (37 deaths per 1,000 live births) than for those in urban 
areas (20 deaths per 1,000 live births). Khatlon generally has the highest 
mortality rates (40 percent) and Dushanbe the lowest (11percent). The 
percentage for other regions is 30 per cent  DRS, same for GBAO, and 33 per 
cent Sughd (TjDHS, 2017)13. 
 
Education  
 
 
11 ibidem  
12 Tajikistan Demographic and Health Survey, 2017. The survey is  implemented by the Statistical Agency under the 
President of the Republic of Tajikistan (SA) in collaboration with the Ministry of Health and Social Protection 
of Population (MOHSP). Document available at: https://dhsprogram.com/publications/publication-fr341-dhs-final-
reports.cfm 
13 Ibidem

=== PAGE 125 ===
8 
15. 
Eighty percent of the female population and 79% of the male population age 6 
and older have at least some secondary education. Males are more likely than 
females to have post-secondary education (25% versus 13%). Only 7% of 
women and men never attended school. Urban women (52%) and men (61%) 
are more likely than rural women (45%) and men (53%) to have a secondary or 
higher education. The percentage of women with a secondary or higher 
education is lowest in DRS (34%). Men are least likely to have a secondary or 
higher education in Khatlon (51%) and DRS (52%). GBAO has highest 
percentage of both women (69%) and men (67%) with a secondary education or 
higher education.  
16. 
Comparing socio economic level and education, it emerged that 37% of women 
and 45% of men in the lowest quintile have at least a secondary education 
compared with 56% of women and 63% of men in the highest wealth quintile( 
TjDHS, 2017)14. 
 
Sector of enrolment 
 
17. 
Regarding percentage by sector in higher education, an assessment  conducted 
by Asian Development Bank, (2015) indicates the following rate: agriculture 
accounts for 6.5%, Low and Economics  28.8, Industry 11.9 and education 43.7 
(ADB, 2015).15 
 
School attendance for boys and girls 
 
18. 
The primary school Net Attendance Rate (NAR) indicates that 83% of children 
age 7-10 who should be attending the primary level are doing so. The secondary 
school NAR shows that 87% of children age 11-17 who should be attending the 
secondary level are doing so. The NAR for primary school is virtually the same 
for girls and boys (83%), while the secondary school NAR is slightly higher 
among boys (89%) than girls (85%). The NAR for primary school is almost the 
same in urban and rural areas (84% versus 83%). There also is little difference 
by residence in the secondary school NAR (86% in urban areas and 87% in rural 
areas). The lowest primary school NAR is in Sughd (78%) while the secondary 
school NAR is lowest in DRS (85%). GBAO has the highest NARs (88% for 
primary school and 96% for secondary school) (TjDHS, 2017)16. 
 
Labor Force Employment and Unemployment 
 
19. 
According to national statistics, as reported in the Labor Market Survey, female 
employment rate (40.5 percent) is significantly lower than men (59.5 percent) 
and the unemployment percentage stands at 31,6 for women against 68,4 for 
male. The unemployment rate in rural areas amount to 59 percent while in urban 
areas it equaled to 41 percent (TajStat, 2016)17. 
 
 
14 Ibidem 
15 Assessment of Higher Education in Tajikistan, ADB, 2015. Gender disaggregation is not available. 
https://www.adb.org/documents/assessment-higher-education-tajikistan 
16 Ibidem 
17 Situation in the labour market in the republic of Tajikistan, Tajstat, 2016. 
Document available at: http://oldstat.ww.tj/en/img/de8558ce74dda7d9d14c5f7b0cdea0a2_1518005366.pdf

=== PAGE 126 ===
9 
 
Figure 7: Labor force participation, disaggregated data.  
Source: Labour Force Market, Tajstat, 2016. 
 
20. 
It is also observed that employment status varies widely by region. At the time 
of the survey, the highest employment rate registered was in Sughd (31%), the 
lowest in DRS (14%) and ranges from 24% to 30% in other regions of Tajikistan. 
The current employment rate generally increases with increasing education.  
21. 
For women, employment varies depending on the socio-economic status. 
According to the Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) women who are 
currently married or who were previously married are more likely to be employed 
than those who have never been married. Half of women who are divorced, 
separated, or widowed (51%) are currently working, as compared with one-
quarter of married women (24%) and 19% of never-married women (TjDHS, 
2017)18.  
22. 
Women with a higher education are three times more likely to be currently 
employed as women with no education or only a primary education (54% versus 
18%). Women who were employed in the 12 months preceding the survey were 
most likely to work in agriculture (33%); 30% were employed in professional, 
technical, or managerial positions, while 13% worked in sales and services, 13% 
in skilled manual labor, 11% in unskilled manual labor, and 1% in clerical jobs.  
The survey reports that involvement in agricultural work has tripled among 
women in the past 5 years, from 10% in 2012 to 33% in 2017. In contrast, 
involvement in unskilled manual labor has decreased, from 45% to 11% (TjDHS, 
2017)19. 
 
Youth 
 
23. 
The youth unemployment rate (aged 15-29 years old) amounted to 10.6 percent, 
followed by youth 20-24 at 19.5 and 25-29 accounting for 19.1 percent 
Unemployment rate for those aged 30-75 years accounts for 50,8%. (Tajstat, 
2016). The employment rate, according to age brackets, is the following: 7% for 
youth 15 –19 years, 10,2 % for youth 20 - 24 years, 13, 8 for youth  25 -29 
years and finally 68.9 for population age 30-75 years (Tajstat, 2016)20. 
 
18 Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), Tajstat, 2017. 
19 ibidem 
20 Situation in the labour market in the republic of Tajikistan, Tajstat 2016. Document available at:  
http://oldstat.ww.tj/en/img/de8558ce74dda7d9d14c5f7b0cdea0a2_1518005366.pdf

=== PAGE 127 ===
10
 
Women employment in agriculture 
 
24. 
According to FAO Gender Profile (2016), women’s formal employment in 
agriculture presents only a narrow view of women’s engagement in this sector 
because their participation in agriculture is typically informal. Women are 
commonly hired as mardikor workers and organized into informal groups, or 
brigades. Women’s tasks are largely restricted to field labour, such as weeding, 
sowing, transplanting, and harvesting, which do not require decision-making, 
whereas the selection of seeds, fertilizers, and plant protection materials is 
controlled by men. Notably, a large proportion of women working as hectarchi or 
mardikor do not have formal contracts, and while this type of labour offers 
flexibility, women generally receive very low pay or only in-kind payments (FAO, 
2016)21. 
25. 
Women’s labour is concentrated at peak times, such as the harvest season, and 
during the winter months their income-earning opportunities are more restricted. 
Most rural women undertake agricultural work as second and third occupations, 
typically on household plots and presidential lands (cotton farms) to earn extra 
income for the household (FAO, 2016)22.  
26. 
According to the Demographic and Health Survey (TjDHS, 2017)23 women age 
15-19 were more likely to have worked in agriculture (64%) than women in older 
age groups and less likely to have worked in professional/technical/managerial 
occupations. Women in rural areas results to be much more likely involved in 
agricultural occupations than women in urban areas (44% versus 2%). 
Agricultural employment is also far more common among women in Khatlon 
(51%) and Sughd (30%) than among women in other regions (13% or less).  
27. 
Approximately half of employed women who have a general basic education or 
less (52%-53%) and are in the lowest two wealth quintiles (49%-54%) are 
working in agriculture, as compared with 2% of women who have a higher 
education and are in the highest wealth quintile.   
28. 
Results show that three-quarters (75%) of women are paid in cash only and 9% 
are paid in cash and in-kind. Around 1 in 7 women are not paid (13%), and 3% 
receive only in-kind payments. Over half of women are employed by a non-
relative (56%), one-quarter work for a family member, and 19% are self-
employed. The percentage of employed women who were paid in cash only 
increased from 53% in 2012 to 75% in 2017. The percentage of women engaged 
in agriculture who received cash only has also increased since 2012, from 5% to 
47% (TjDHS, 2017)24. 
 
Division of Labour 
 
29. 
The Labour Market Analisis (Tajstat, 2016)25 shows that men and women are 
engaged in different sector of employment. In 2016, those who were engaged in 
numerous types of occupations were unskilled workers. About 309,213 persons 
 
21 National Gender profile of agriculture and rural livelihood, FAO, 2016. 
Document available at: http://www.fao.org/3/i5766e/i5766e.pdf 
22 Ibidem 
23 Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), Tajstat, 2017. 
24 ibidem 
25 See footnote 17

=== PAGE 128 ===
11
were engaged in this type of work out of which the absolute majority was 
women, representing 63.5%.  
30. 
Women’s generally lower level of education (especially vocational education), 
lack of professional qualifications, and high fertility rate combine with the 
absence of childcare facilities and gender stereotypes to place women in a weak 
employment position. Even among the working population, women are more 
commonly  found as unskilled laborer’s, as compared to men who generally work 
as employers or are self-employed. According to the Survey, 45,8 of total 
population is engaged in the sector of agriculture, forestry and fisheries.  
 
 
Work for 
hire  
Employer, 
owner of own 
enterprise or 
own business  
Member of the 
production 
cooperative  
Self- employed, 
working at their 
own expense, in 
their personal 
farm for sale  
Helping family 
members  
Agriculture, 
forestry and 
fisheries  
15,5  
16,3  
1,1  
49,3  
17,8  
Figure 8: Type of Employment by agriculture sector. Source: Labour Market Analisis, Tajstat,  2016.  
 
31. 
Women represent the majority involved in the agriculture sector, at  60,8 per 
cent  (almost double the percentage of men at 35,5). Their presence in 
occupational sector is followed by education, 10,7, health and social services 7 , 
while 6.7 are in trade and retail while manufacturing (processing Industry) 
stands at 6,4. For men the major occupations are agriculture (35,5) followed by 
construction (14.4) wholesale and retail trade (13,2) and transportation and 
storage of goods (8,1). (Tajstat, 2016). 
 
 Sector  
Sex 
Total 
Men 
Women 
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries 
35,5 
60,8 
45,8 
Manufacturing (Processing industry) 
4,7 
6,4 
5,4 
Construction 
14,4 
0,2 
8,6 
Wholesale and retail trade; repair of vehicles and 
motorcycles 
13,2 
6,7 
10,6 
Transportation and storage of goods 
8,1 
0,3 
5 
Public administration and defence; compulsory 
social security 
5,6 
3,2 
4,6 
Education 
6,3 
10,7 
8,1 
Health and social services of population 
2 
7 
4,1 
Figure 9: Gender disaggregation by occupational sector. Source: Situation in the labour market in the republic 
of Tajikistan, Tajstat, 2016. 
 
Formal and Informal Sector (outside agriculture) 
 
32. 
According to the National Labour Survey (Tajstat, 2016), there were 133,359 
persons employed in the informal sector in Tajikistan which amounted to 15.7 
per cent of the total number of people employed in the non-agricultural sector. At 
the same time there were more men (106,354 persons) who worked in the 
informal sector, than women (27,005 persons). Out of the total number of 
persons employed in the informal sector, 30.9 percent were self-employed, 29.3

=== PAGE 129 ===
12
percent were employed, 19.1 percent were employers, 11.3 percent worked as 
home workers in private households, 5.8 percent were unpaid workers who 
helped family members (TajStat,2016). 
 
 
Formal sector 
Informal sector 
 
men  
women  
total  
men  
women  total  
Total employed, persons  
464407  
251047  
715453  
106354  
27005  133359  
% 
65% 
35% 
 
80% 
20% 
 
Employee for wages or 
compensation in cash or in 
kind, or for monetary 
allowance  
308280  
216133  
524413  
31365  
7666  
39030  
Employer, owner of own 
enterprise, own business or 
farm business  
67726  
10468  
78194  
21297  
4185  
25482  
Working for own account  
62391  
16979  
79371  
34493  
6671  
41164  
Member of the production 
cooperative (work 
association)  
3136  
1214  
 
4350  
263  
 
1280  
 
1543  
Homeworker working in a 
private household  
6690  
1732  
8422  
11592  
3478  
15070  
Unpaid worker supporting 
at the enterprise, own 
business or an farm which 
belong to any of the family 
members  
-  
-  
-  
4646  
3145  
7791  
Other  
16184  
4520  
20704  
2698  
580  
3278  
Figure 10: Gender disaggregated data on formal and informal sector (outside agriculture). Source: Situation in 
the labour market in the republic of Tajikistan, Tajstat 2016. 
 
Informal Employment (outside agriculture) 
 
33. 
At the time of the Survey mentioned above (Tajstat, 2016) in Tajikistan, 249,536 
persons were in informal employment at the main work, including 189,289 men 
and 60,247 women. Thus, in the percentage ratio, men accounted for the 
majority of people in informal employment (33.2) percent) outside agriculture 
(versus women at 21,7 per cent). 
 
 
Total  Employed Outside Agriculture  
Formal Sector  
 
Total  
Formal 
employment  
Informal 
employment  
Formal 
employment 
Informal 
employment  
Total  
100  
70,6  
 
29,4  
70,6  
13,7  
Urban 
100  
74,3  
25,7  
74,3  
15,2  
Rural 
100 
 
68,1  
 
31,9  
68,1  
12,6  
Men  
100  
66,8  
33,2  
66,8  
14,5  
Women  
100  
78,3  
21,7  
78,3  
12,0

=== PAGE 130 ===
13
GBAO  
100  
86,6  
13,4  
86,6  
5,7  
Sughd  
100  
68,3  
31,7  
68,3  
9,5  
Khatlon  
100  
65,0  
35,0  
65,0  
16,5  
Dushanbe  
100  
77,8  
22,2  
77,8  
17,3  
RRS  
100  
74,9  
25,1  
74,9  
13,9  
Figure 11: Gender disaggregated data for formal and informal employment (outside agriculture). Source: 
Situation in the labour market in the republic of Tajikistan, Tajstat 2016. 
 
34. 
This flexible and informal labor supply seems to suit many production businesses 
that need low-paid workers, such as agriculture. The outmigration of males in 
the agriculture sector has led to increased involvement of female labor. The 
result is, as in other transition countries, feminization of agriculture “an increase 
in women’s participation rates in the agriculture sector, either as self-employed 
or as agricultural wage workers; in other words, an increase in the percentage of 
women who are economically active in rural areas (Tajstat, 2016).  
 
Women’s employment and engagement in the Forestry Sector 
 
35. 
Official statistics generally combine several categories of related work: 
agriculture, forestry and fisheries / aquaculture. As already reported, women 
represent 60.8% of the sector, no further disaggregation is provided by 
subsector in the latest survey.  Labour market data from 2012 (the most recent 
available reported in the FAO Gender assessment conducted in 2016), indicates 
that few men, and almost no women, are contractually employed in forestry or 
aquaculture / fisheries. Women in the forestry sector account for 0.05 and even 
less in fisheries (0.01), (FAO, 2016)26. 
36. 
The draft Strategy on Forest Sector Development identifies a gender imbalance 
in employment within the forestry industry, with men representing 92 percent of 
employees. According to data submitted to the FAO forest resources assessment 
in 2008, there were only 23 women (two percent) out of a total of 1002 staff 
working in public forest institutions. Labour market statistics for 2010 indicate 
that the total number of people employed in “forestry” was 1,700, of whom 200 
(or 12 percent) were female employees (FAO, 2016).  
37. 
According to FAO, the fact that staff are required to carry out patrol functions on 
foot (covering several thousand hectares of forest land can take a number of 
days), suggests that this type of work is unlikely to be considered suitable for, or 
accessible to, women. However, according to the same source, women’s almost 
invisible role in forestry enterprises and research institutions does not mean that 
they are not engaged in forest activities in other ways (FAO, 2016).  
38. 
Rural women spend a significant amount of time collecting firewood for domestic 
fuel. In comparison, male household heads are usually responsible for buying 
firewood. Ecological organizations have noted that widespread deforestation has 
resulted in women and children spending more time collecting wood. As a 
general rule, women in forest villages engage in the informal collection of non-
timber forest products, for home consumption and for sale, and this pattern is 
likely to be replicated across Tajikistan. In 2013, the sale of non-timber forest 
 
26 National Gender Profile of agriculture and Rural Livelihood Tajikistan (FAO, 2016). 
See footnote 21 for link to document on line.

=== PAGE 131 ===
14
products, combined with ecosystem services, was estimated to value almost six 
million somoni (FAO,2016)27. 
39. 
The design mission of CASP+ (April 2021) collected also information about 
women in joint forest management (JFM). It is found that women account for 
7.3% beneficiaries of Joint Forest Management group (JFMG) as showed in the 
table below: 
JFM overview 
Region 
SFE 
JFM users 
JFM area 
(ha) 
FUG 
Male 
Female 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Sughd  
Sughd 
95 
203,72 
  
95 
  
Ayni 
181 
158,38 
  
158 
23 
Panjakent 
153 
225,42 
1 
111 
42 
Shahrizton 
4 
14020 
  
4 
  
Devashtij 
49 
55300 
  
49 
  
Istaravshan 
14 
88,9 
  
14 
  
Kuhistoni Mastchoh 
22 
46,29 
0 
18 
4 
  
  
518 
70042,71 
1 
449 
69 
Khatlon 
Danghara 
470 
6359 
  
470 
  
Farkhor 
121 
5907 
3 
102 
19 
Khovaling 
198 
2862,57 
5 
198 
10 
Baljuvon 
55 
257,6 
6 
51 
4 
Sari Khosor 
21 
119,1 
3 
19 
3 
  
  
865 
15505,27 
17 
840 
36 
DRS 
Romit, shahri Vahdat 
33 
92,5 
5 
33 
0 
Tojikobod 
1 
127 
  
1 
0 
  
  
34 
219,5 
5 
34 
0 
GBAO 
GBAO 
671 
2945 
37 
612 
59 
Vanj 
220 
1022 
7 
214 
6 
  
  
891 
3967 
44 
826 
65 
TOTAL 
2308 
89734,48 
67 
2149 
170 
 
40. 
The FAO gender assessment points out that women and men can play important 
roles in conserving forest areas by eliminating harmful agricultural practices 
(cropping and grazing) and by identifying the types of indigenous plants that can 
be used in the long term for reforestation. Both women and men have specific 
knowledge about trees and non-timber forest products that should be taken into 
consideration by forest management. However, because women are largely 
absent in the formal forestry sector (in employment and in policy positions), 
special efforts are needed to ensure that they can also contribute their 
knowledge.  
41. 
A similar view was also shared by the representatives from Bioversity 
International met by CASP+ Design Mission (April 2021). It was explained the 
relevance to increase awareness, and participation of women and children in 
forest management and conservation practices.  
42. 
Recommendations from analytical papers and discussion with stakeholders 
during the design mission suggest that the strategy on Forest Sector 
Development for 2016-2030 and the national Action Plan should play a key role 
 
27 Reference is made to the draft Strategy on Forest Sector Development for 2016-2030.

=== PAGE 132 ===
15
in increasing gender-specific information about the forestry sector, including 
awareness events about gender and climate change.  
43. 
The strategy foresees the establishment of a national supervisory board on 
forestry that will include the participation of the Committee on Women and 
Family Affairs and gender experts (FAO, 2016). Continuous actions and follow up 
from responsible entities are required to ensure that gender related constraints 
are captured into the forestry policy agenda and policy dialogues events dedicate 
space and time to discuss the gender and climate change issues.  
 
Women’s role in conservation of biodiversity 
 
44. 
The Sixth National Report on the Convention of Biological Diversity (CBD, 2019)28 
strongly highlights that gender-balanced forest communities are more effective 
in performing all their functions (plant protection, forest regeneration, 
maintenance of biodiversity and distribution of forest use) than communities 
consisting mainly of men. Studies show that, compared to men, women are on 
average able to determine a greater number of plant species (trees, shrubs, 
grasses, vegetable crops, etc.) and used parts of plants (fruits, leaves, bark, 
seeds, roots).  
45. 
The report highlights that women have extensive experience in traditional 
knowledge and practices that are effectively used in the conservation of 
biodiversity. Leased forest areas and dekhkan farms have organized mini-
nurseries to grow seedlings and other plant species, where women do most of 
the work. The most significant initiative implemented by women and benefiting 
both women themselves and contributing to sustainable environmental 
management is the organization of nurseries to breed and expand the 
distribution of local varieties in the Hamadoni district of the Khatlon region (CBD, 
2019)29.  
46. 
The report stresses that despite women’s prominent role in conservation of 
biodiversity, their participation in the design, planning and implementation of 
environmental policies is still low. Action is needed to ensure their participation 
(CBD, 2019)30.  
 
Smallholder farming in Tajikistan 
 
47. 
Tajikistan is a landlocked low-middle-income country located in Central Asia. 
Given the country’s mountainous geography, the total arable land area is limited 
to only 5 percent. The FAO publication, Small family farms country factsheet, 
(FAO, 2018) highlights that ddespite this natural restriction, agriculture remains 
the key source of the population’s income as well as for Tajikistan’s economy. 
Agriculture accounts for 53 percent of total employment (45.8 based on national 
labour survey), but due to high out-migration rates of work-abled men the 
agricultural labour has become increasingly feminized. Yet, 68.5 percent of 
women are employed in the agricultural sector, compared to 41 percent of men 
(FAO, 2018)31. 
 
28 The Sixth National Report on the Convention of Biological Diversity  
Full report is available at: https://chm.cbd.int/database/record?documentID=247273 
29 Ibidem 
30 Ibidem  
31Small family farms country factsheet, FAO, 2018.

=== PAGE 133 ===
16
48. 
Smallholders in Tajikistan live on marginalised farmland, resulting in an average 
farm size of only 0.2 hectare. The head of a smallholder household in Tajikistan 
can take advantage of 10 years of education on average and leads households 
that commonly consists of 7 persons. A significant number of households is 
headed by women, yet, representing 16 percent of small family farms in 
Tajikistan. The number of livestock owned by small family farms in Tajikistan is 
increasing and centres around 1.5 Tropical Livestock Unit (TLU), with poultry, 
small cattle and horses as the most common owned livestock. However, pasture 
resources are exploited and feed is often unaffordable, leading to a consistent 
over-grazing of pastures. More than half of the small family farms in the country 
remain below the national poverty line. (FAO, 2018)32. 
 
Women’s role in agricultural activities 
 
49. 
According to the Tajikistan Country Gender Assessment conducted by the Asian 
Development Bank (ADB, 2016)33 women are heavily engaged throughout the 
entire crop production process. Women’s involvement (owners, users, or 
workers) in agriculture formally counts only when they are registered as legal 
entities or farm workers. Women are also heavily involved in unpaid family 
labor—they take care of a multigenerational family and are responsible for the 
home garden and securing water and food. Although the agriculture output of 
kitchen gardens significantly contributes to production and food security, it is 
presented without sex attribution in statistics and national reports (ADB, 2016).  
50. 
There is little evidence that women have become empowered through 
agriculture. Gender experts point to the agricultural sector as one of the most 
exploitative. As explained above, women’s agricultural work is characterized by 
seasonal, low-wage, and low-paid or unpaid positions, job insecurity, back-
breaking conditions, lack of access to and control over productive resources, 
limited participation in decision-making activities and low technical and 
specialized knowledge (ADB, 2016)34.  
51. 
Women are often described as lacking the appropriate skills and knowledge 
required, whether as farmers or farm managers, influencing their ability to take 
on these roles.  Their continued participation as informal, seasonal laborers 
reinforce the perception that women have no experience or knowledge of 
farming. This is further strengthened by the widespread belief that men, as 
breadwinners and heads of households, are farm managers regardless of 
whether or not they are active in the sector. Due to this, women’s tasks are 
largely restricted to field labor, such as weeding, sowing, transplanting, and 
harvesting, which do not require decision-making, whereas the selection of 
seeds, fertilizers, and plant protection materials is controlled by men. Further, 
although both men and women are involved in livestock-raising, it is men who 
decide on the purchase, sale and other operations linked to its management 
(ADB, 2016)35. 
 
Document available at:  http://www.fao.org/3/I8348EN/i8348en.pdf 
32 Ibidem 
33 Tajikistan Country Gender Assessment, ADB, 2016.  
Document available at: https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/185615/tajikistan-cga.pdf 
34 Ibidem  
35 ibidem

=== PAGE 134 ===
17
52. 
A study developed by Oxfam: Climate Change, beyond coping, women 
smallholder farmers in Tajikistan (2011)36 highlights regional differences in 
women involvement in agriculture activities. Depending on the region, rural 
women typically work two harvests in the Dehkan farms and two harvests in 
their family plots. In the Sughd region, women can sow, up to three times a year 
in their family plots. The family plot is almost entirely the woman’s domain.  
Below is provided a detailed example on the specific tasks of men and women in 
agriculture activities by season. This is based on Oxfam study from the region of 
Sughd: 
 
Season/ months  
What men typically do  
What women typically do  
Winter  
December  Ploughing /tillage/turning up the soil, 
and watering the lands/or wheat  
Gathering the harvest, usually cotton stocks; 
preparing natural fertilizer/compost  
January  
Applying natural fertilizer/manure to 
the lands  
House work; looking after the cattle  
February  
Digging/making ditches, planting the 
young trees, plants  
Preparing for farming according to the weather 
conditions  
Spring  
March  
Preparing the lands for sowing  
Planting fruit and decorative trees; cleaning and 
maintaining the irrigation canals/ditches  
April  
We begin to plant/sow crops; applying 
fertilizer to the new planted  
Bleaching/whitening the trees trunks; planting 
different kinds of vegetables  
May  
If the rain makes lands surface solid, 
loosen the soil  
Plant cotton  
Summer  
June  
Harvesting wheat; Preparing the land 
for the second crop  
Caring for the cotton plants, loosening the soil, 
weeding etc  
July  
To plant the second crop and to fight 
with plant-illnesses by bio methods  
Grain harvest time  
August  
Organizing the harvesting  
Preparing for the second crop  
Autumn  
September  Cotton harvest time  
help pick the cotton  
October  
harvest any other grain yield  
Harvest of vegetables  
November  harvest cotton and prepare land for 
ploughing  
prepare for family events like weddings  
Figure 12: specific tasks of men and women in agriculture activities by season, Sughd Region, Source: Climate 
Change, beyond coping, Oxfam 2011. 
 
Livestock, dairy and poultry 
 
53. 
Animal husbandry is a major agricultural activity, and raising livestock is the 
norm for rural households (73 percent of households have livestock, including 
cattle, horses, donkeys, mules, pigs, sheep, goats and poultry). There are 
gender differences in the extent to which households are engaged in raising 
livestock. Households headed by men are more likely than female-headed 
households to keep livestock and to have a larger number of animals across all 
categories of animal ownership. When FHH do have livestock, they tend to have 
cattle and poultry, possibly because dairy farming is traditionally seen as 
“female” work or because selling extra milk and eggs is a relatively low intensity 
means of supplementing household income (FAO, 2016)37.  
 
36 Climate Change, beyond coping, women smallholder farmers in Tajikistan, Oxfam 2011, Document available at: 
https://networkedintelligence.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/rr-climate-change-beyond-coping-women-
smallholder-farmers-tajikistan-020611-en.pdf 
37 National Gender Profile of agriculture and Rural Livelihood Tajikistan (FAO, 2016).

=== PAGE 135 ===
18
54. 
The pattern of livestock ownership is generally the same for women and men; 
the majority of household own cattle (54 percent and 66 percent of FHH and 
MHH, respectively). Poultry are the next most commonly-owned form of livestock 
(owned by around a third of rural households). 
 
Figure 13: Livestock Ownership in Rural Locations by Female- and Male-Headed Households. Source: 
Country Gender Assessment FAO ( 2016) 
 
55. 
According to FAO gender assessment, gender differences in the ownership of 
livestock is both a reflection of differential access to the resources needed to buy 
or keep animals, and it also indicates the presence of gendered roles in livestock 
management. For instance, feed preparation, household dairy production 
(tending cows and milking) and poultry farming are generally perceived as 
women’s responsibilities.  
56. 
Men have greater involvement in grazing, feed production and the purchasing 
and sale of livestock. Women and men also have differing roles in the processing 
of livestock products: men are more often involved in activities such as sheep 
shearing, transporting products to market and butchering, women are involved in 
dairy production (FAO, 2016)38.  
57. 
Furthermore, women play a prominent role in managing backyard poultry 
farming. The USAID report: agriculture technology and commercialization 
assessment, estimates that roughly one third of all households in Khatlon 
province keep poultry and an estimated one-third of households headed by 
women also have poultry. The scale of these household operations is small-often 
fewer than 20 birds and with few that are laying regularly. Backyard egg 
production is largely used to satisfy household needs, although some may be 
traded or sold to neighbors or in local markets. It is reported that income from 
eggs and poultry meat operations at the household level is mostly controlled by 
women (USAID, 2012)39.  
58. 
As it is the case in other areas of farming, women’s success in raising livestock is 
dependent on their access to information and level of knowledge about running a 
farming enterprise, and their access to finance and to other key resources, such 
as veterinary and extension services and training (FAO, 2016). 
 
See footnote 21 for link to document on line. 
38 Ibidem 
39 Tajkistan Agriculture Technology and Commercialization Assessment, USAID, 2012 
Document available at: https://culturalpractice.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/EAT_AgTCA_Tajikistan_Report.pdf

=== PAGE 136 ===
19
 
Women’s access to Land 
 
59. 
Access to land, and tenure security, remains a severe constraint for women. 
Although the land reforms legally guaranteed equal rights to men and women to 
use land (and be conferred shares or certificates), the reality presents a different 
situation.  
60. 
Women’s lack of access to land is underpinned by several forms of inequality. 
They often lack information about their rights to land as members of collective 
farms or about the process of land registration. Other women do not have the 
means, either financial or in terms of time resources, to undertake the 
registration process. Even when women make attempts to assert their rights to 
land, many are “... effectively excluded from the process of obtaining dekhan or 
household land-use rights because administrators are often dismissive of 
women’s farming capabilities and knowledge”. As a result, women are more likely 
to hold lesser shares of the land that they work and are less likely to report 
tenure security” (FAO, 2016)40. 
61. 
According to data reported by FAO, the majority of rural households possessed 
land (86 percent. Male-headed households were also more likely than female-
headed households to own land (70 percent of MHH, compared with 52 percent 
of FHH), and they tended to own larger plots of land. The average size of land 
plots belonging to MHH was 15.2 sotka, and the average size of FHH land plots 
was 9 sotka. Therefore, on average, men’s plots were about 70 percent larger 
than women’s plots (FAO, 2016).  
62. 
Considering average land areas in rural locations only, data below show that 
when land owned by households is combined with rented land and land rented 
out, MHH have on average almost double the land area of FHH (39 sotka for MHH 
compared with 20 sotka for FHH). Both households headed by women and by 
men use most of their land plots for farming, and very few rural households, 
regardless of the sex of the head, have land that they rent out (FAO, 2016)41.  
 
Figure 14: Average Land Areas in Rural Locations, by Household. Source: Country Gender Assessment FAO ( 
2016) 
 
63. 
In terms of the characteristics of the land plots that are registered to women, 
they are less likely to have rights to use “presidential lands” and more likely to 
have rights to household plots. Furthermore, women’s land plots are generally 
further away from their homes. Women also report that during processes to re-
register their land rights (after divorce or the death of a spouse), they received 
“the worst land plots”, at a considerable distance from irrigation facilities or with 
 
40 National Gender Profile of agriculture and Rural Livelihood Tajikistan (FAO, 2016). 
See footnote 21 for link to document on line. 
41 Ibidem

=== PAGE 137 ===
20
poor quality soil. This observation is substantiated by their smaller harvests and 
lower yields (FAO, 2016)42. 
 
Women dekhan farms 
 
64. 
A particular concern is the serious underrepresentation of women either as 
agricultural title owners or decision makers. Dekhan farms are the most common 
type of agricultural enterprise in Tajikistan. They are privately-owned commercial 
farms that function as legal enterprises and can be based on the work of an 
individual (a sole entrepreneur), a family or a group of people (a collective). 
Family and collective dekhan farms are managed by a head who officially holds 
the farm’s land registration certificate and represents the legal interests of the 
farm. The number of dekhan farms has increased annually, from a total of 
30,842 in 2008 to 108,035 in 2014 (FAO, 2016)43.  
65. 
Looking specifically at dekhan farms, the number managed by women has been 
rising alongside their general growth. In 2014, women headed 13% of dekhan 
farms (up from 8% the previous year)44. The growth in women-led dekhan farms 
from 2013 to 2014 is attributed to state and donor efforts to increase women’s 
involvement in dekhan farming and to register individuals who once worked on 
collective farms as individual farmers (FAO, 2016). 
 
 
 
Figure 15: Trends in Dekhan Farm Management by Women and Men, 2008-2014 (%) Source: FAO Gender 
Assessment, 2016 
 
66. 
However, the average size of female-headed farms is smaller than those 
managed by men, and in 2014, women managed only 6.4% of all planted crop 
land on dekhan farms45. Dekhan farms headed by females also have fewer 
shareholders (but more female shareholders) than farms headed by males. 
Customarily, family plots and presidential lands are registered to the household 
head, most often a male. Furthermore, documents that stipulate the right to use 
collective dekhan farm lands are generally not issued to all members, most of 
whom are women, but instead are issued in the name of the male head, most 
often the husband, brother, or, if a woman is widowed, her eldest son (ADB, 
2016).46 
 
42 Ibidem 
43 Ibidem  
44 State Statistics Agency. Gender Statistics Database, 2013 
http://oldstat.ww.tj/img/en/seling.pdf 
45 Ibidem  
46 Gender Assessment, ADB, 2016,  
Document avallabile at: https://www.adb.org/documents/tajikistan-country-gender-assessment-2016

=== PAGE 138 ===
21
67. 
The low level of leadership, suggests women face gender-based barriers to 
assuming the responsibility of dekhan farms. Although few women are legal 
heads of dekhan farms, women are assuming the de facto leadership on some 
dekhan farms because of male migration.  
68. 
According to National Statistical Data (2013): Gender aspects of agriculture 47, 
there has been increased production and crop yields in dekhan farms headed by 
women in 2008-2012 (ton; hundredweight from 1 hectare). The volume of crop 
production, except raw cotton and wheat in 2012 compared to 2008 increased in 
average from 15.2 to 32.6 percent. 
 
Production and crop yields in dekhan farms headed by women in 2008-2012 
Name of products  
Year 
 
  
2008 
2009 
2010 
 
2011 
2012 
2012 in % 
increased 
compared to 
2008 
Cereals:  
-production  
31183 
65152 
57196 
36647 
31396 
 
107 
-productivity  
21,2 
25,5 
24,4 
23,6 
24,7  
116,5 
Wheat:  
-production  
26245 
55929 
41325 
31395 
26057 
99,3 
-productivity  
18,3 
26,5 
24,9 
24,8 
28,1 
153,6 
Raw cotton:  
-production  
23088 
24840 
23774 
20958 
17800 
77,1 
-productivity  
16,9 
18,4 
19,8 
20 
22 
130,2 
Potatoes:  
-production  
6322 
5905 
3081 
8339 
8381 
132,6 
-productivity  
212 
154 
179,2 
187,8 
204,4 
96,4 
Vegetables:  
-production  
12865 
20855 
13768 
22119 
22115 
171,9 
-productivity  
167 
184 
177 
177,4 
192,4 
115,2 
Fruits: 
-production  
2655 
2416 
8646 
3378 
3292 
124 
-productivity  
18,8 
12,5 
7,7 
11,3 
28,5 
151,6 
Grapes: 
-production  
2910 
2662 
 
3562 
2334 
 
3441 
 
118,2 
-productivity  
28,2 
27,4 
 10,7 
25,7 
 38,6 
136,9 
Source: Tajstat 2013, gender aspects of agriculture 
 
69. 
However, despite the positive growth trend, specific data (2015) about harvests 
on dekhan farms indicates that dekhan farms headed by women have smaller 
harvests than men’s farms in every category of crop. Smaller harvests can be 
explained by the fact that female-managed farms are smaller on average, but 
female farms also have lower yields for every crop, with the exception of corn 
and cotton (which are almost equal to the yields of male-managed farms).  
70. 
According to FAO, lower yields could be related to the poorer quality of the land, 
a lack of irrigation, fertilizers and pesticides, women’s more limited knowledge of 
farming practices to help them increase yields (for example, seed selection, 
planting practices and hybrids) and a lack of access to extension services (FAO, 
2016). 
 
47 State Statistics Agency. Gender Statistics Database, 2013

=== PAGE 139 ===
22
 
Figure 15: Harvest and Yields of Female- and Male-Managed Dekhan Farms (2014)  
Source: FAO Gender Assessment, 2016 
 
71. 
This indicates that mechanisms to move women into leadership positions by 
addressing the real and perceived lack of leadership qualifications or gain access 
to their land shares would improve production and productivity.  Range of 
associations or groups exist in the agricultural space, from formal groups of 
dekhan farms, like the National Association of Dekhan Farms (NADF), to common 
interest groups (CIGs). These serve as a vehicle to deliver extension and 
training, and in some cases credit. Below a brief description of the NADF and 
main functions.  
 
The National Association of Dekhan Farms (NADF)  
 
72. 
The National Association of Dekhan Farms (NADF) is non-governmental, non-
profit membership organization, established at the national conference of 
farmers in 2005, that joins dehkans and farmers on a voluntary basis. The main 
purpose of NADF is to consolidate the Dehkan farm associations and farming 
individual in rural areas. It counts more than 10,900 members  – entrepreneurs, 
individual dehkan farmers, association of dehkan farmers (15% women). 
73. 
The association represent and protect their rights and interests for the aim of 
achieving stable and balanced food security, reducing the poverty level through a 
dynamic and sustainable development of agriculture sector due to intensive 
growth factors and the development of science and modern technology, 
management and marketing. Main services include:  
• 
supporting, protecting the rights, and promote the  interests of dehkans and 
farmers;  
• 
conducting educational and awareness trainings for dehkans farmers, including 
from a gender perspective and women’s rights; 
• 
providing advisory and consulting services, including focus on women 
• 
conducting market researches on agricultural products for agricultural 
suppliers, and buyers;   
• 
publishing and disseminating information on the development of dehkans 
farmers improvement activities;  
• 
establishing an effective data bank to support dehkans farmers associations; 
 
Women access to Agriculture inputs 
 
74. 
There are no sex disaggregated data on the availability of key agricultural inputs 
to rural men and women, therefore conclusions can only be drawn from other

=== PAGE 140 ===
23
available information. In general, a lack of key inputs prevents many people, 
both women and men, from taking up farming as a business. FAO reports that on 
a survey conducted in Sughd, Khatlon and RRS, between 73 percent and 78 
percent of respondents (dekhan farm members and leaders) cited a “lack of 
machinery, seeds, fertilizers, chemicals or water” as the main impediments to 
founding a dekhan farm (FAO, 2016)48. 
75. 
Data about ownership and use of farm equipment, as well as the average 
number of farming machines, for male and female farmers is lacking. However, it 
is known that the majority of small-scale farmers have very limited access to 
agricultural equipment. Many use obsolete equipment or rely on labour-intensive 
practices, such as harvesting by hand and use of traditional tools.  
76. 
According to the Tajikistan Living Standards Survey administered in 2003, small 
numbers of rural households were using machinery, but it was mainly male-
headed households that were likely to have access to such resources (3.6 
percent of MHH used machinery compared with 2.9 percent of FHH). According 
to a survey of a relatively small number of dekhan farmers, female farmers 
experienced greater difficulties than men in “accessing agricultural equipment, 
having it repaired, and seeing agricultural specialists” (FAO, 2016)49. 
77. 
When female-headed households do not own farming equipment, they are able 
to either borrow it from other farmers or lease it if funds are available. Another 
coping mechanism for female farmers is to “work their land less intensively,” 
meaning that they use smaller amounts of fertilizer and improved seeds than 
their male counterparts. In 2003, 43 percent of MHH used fertilizers, compared 
with 38 percent of FHH (FAO, 2016)50. 
Women’s access to Extension Services  
 
78. 
The lack of agricultural extension and advisory services is another major problem 
encountered by all smallholder farmers in Tajikistan and it is of particular concern 
for women. Women’s ability to access extension services is also constrained by 
factors such as more limited mobility, fewer networks and a lower level of 
education than men. Research conducted in Tajikistan on sustainable farming 
practices to mitigate climate-related shocks, found that “within villages, female-
headed households do not seem to benefit from the knowledge-sharing networks 
that male farm heads enjoy”. This lack of knowledge is a key factor in reducing 
opportunities for women farmers to adopt sustainable practices for climate 
change adaptation (FAO, 2016)51. 
Women access to Pasture and representation and decision-making in 
Pasture Users Union/Associations (PUUs) 
 
79. 
In the livestock sector, one of the most significant issues facing women is the 
limited recognition of the roles that they play in raising livestock, or the ways in 
which roles are divided along gender lines. Because women have more limited 
access to land generally, it stands to reason that they are also more constrained 
in accessing pastures. While women are well represented in PUAs (46.7 percent 
of all members), they are less visible in management roles. Fewer than a third of 
PUA management positions are held by women (31.4 percent) (FAO, 2016)52. 
 
48 Tajikistan Gender Profile of Agriculture and Rural Livelihood, FAO, 2016 
49 Ibidem 
50 Ibidem 
51 Ibidem 
52 Ibidem

=== PAGE 141 ===
24
80. 
Similar estimate for women participation is also registered in the IFAD funded 
Livestock and Pasture Development Project II (LPDPII) Mid Term Review Report 
(September 2019). As reported in the LogFrame, all PUUs boards have 
maintained on average a minimum of 30% women. The MTR mission verified the 
same during the field visits and acknowledged the need for some action to 
strengthen the role of women and their leadership53.  
81. 
Similar findings emerged from Focus Group Discussion (FGDs) held with women 
groups during Concept Note and Project Design (October 2020 and April 2021 
respectively) where women interviewed (some of them members and 
representatives of PUUs) confirmed the 30% presence of women as board 
representatives and recognized the need to receive leadership trainings. This has 
been well noted by the CASP+ design mission and integrated into the Gender 
Action Plan (GAP).54 
 
Women’s access to water and representation in Water Users Association 
(WUAs) 
 
82. 
A recent study of Women’s role in irrigated agriculture conducted in the lower 
Vaksh River Basin (ADB, 2020)55 indicates that females comprise only 8.3% of 
total dehkan members of WUAs in the study area. Despite national statics/data is 
not available, the  gender disaggregated data for the Khatlon province (study 
area)  indicate that of a total cropping area of 281,424 hectares used by dehkan 
farms, only 8% was used by female-led dehkan.    
83. 
According to ADB study, women as decision makers are in the minority or absent 
among dehkan farm managers, and therefore are less visible members of WUAs. 
Water institutions do not have gender-disaggregated statistics about their 
members and users (ADB, 2020)56. The study revealed that nearly 80% of male 
respondents said that there are no problems in production. However, over 50% 
of female respondents stated problems, including lack of water, bad condition of 
canals, users at the head of the canal taking a major portion of water, natural 
drought, and unsatisfactory work by WUAs. Around 20% of female respondents 
experienced verbal or physical abuse when asking for water.  
84. 
About half the women reported the main factor facilitating productivity was 
supply of irrigation water. Availability of good quality seeds was also important. 
Particularly for female respondents, access to information, credit, and machinery 
services were important factors.  About 20% of respondents (men and women) 
cited climate change as a serious issue (ADB, 2020)57 . 
85. 
The report concludes that women  face gender disparities and inequalities not 
experienced by males. Clearly, the expanded role of women needs recognition 
and support in practice as well as in legislation. The role of women in irrigation 
management remains weak. Despite the fact that women dominate the crop 
production process but they may not receive training in participatory irrigation 
management. Involvement of women in WUA and farm management is 
important for achieving gender equality and sustainable farming. The  study 
 
53 Livestock and Pasture Development Project II (LPDPII) Mid Term Review Report, September 2019 
54 Greater information are available in the stakeholder consultation report, section on women FGDs 
55 Women’s role in irrigated agriculture in the lower Vaksh River Basin, ADB, 2020 
Document available at:https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/663141/womens-role-irrigated-agriculture-
tajikistan.pdf 
56 Ibidem 
57 Ibidem

=== PAGE 142 ===
25
conclude that it t is paradoxical to consider the reality that women are leading 
agricultural activities, yet lack access to knowledge and skills training (ADB, 
2020)58. 
 
Main challenges expressed by women from FGD and proposed solutions  
 
86. 
During the remote CASP+ Design Mission (April 2021) and also during project 
Concept Note Formulation (October 2020), the mission team met with women’s 
groups to discuss about key issues in relation to: (i) economic activities, (ii) 
livelihoods, (iii) climate change (iv) presence in decision making bodies, (v) 
access to key agriculture inputs and NRM among others.  
87. 
The mission interacted with a total of 31 women through six FGD: four FGDs 
involving 26 women were held in April 2021 in the district of Hamadoni, 
Sh.Sholin, Maschoh, Sharitus;  two FGDs  were held during CN development  
(October 2020) they involved 5 women from Vose and Hamdoni, Farkor, 
Muninobod districts . Women FGD participants included: women producers, 
including women headed households, women leading dehhkan farms, women 
members/representatives of PUUs and also women in CIG formed under LPDPII. 
Below is reported a schematic summary with main challenges faced by women 
and solutions proposed which have been taken into account during the design. 
 
Districts 
Production 
Main challenges related to 
economic activities  
Solutions proposed by women 
interviewed  
Hamadoni 
 
Crop 
• Low fodder availability; 
• Low quality of seeds 
(potato, alfa alfa, 
barley); 
• Lack of access to 
pasture land; 
• Lack of processing 
equipment; 
• Lack of trainings ( 
climate smart practices, 
Business orientation) 
 
• Exchange visits; 
• Trainings ( technologies and 
business). 
• Tomato making equipment; 
• Baking equipment; 
• Processing equipment; 
• Time saving technologies 
(milk machines); 
• Green houses 
Livestock/dairy 
• Local breed is low 
productive; 
• Women produce milk, 
they sell it to local 
markets/neighbours but 
cannot access better 
markets. 
• Introduction of improved 
breed ; 
• Improve access to market to 
sell milk. 
• Business skills trainings  
Sh. Sholin 
Crop 
• Shortage of water 
during rainy season, 
resulting in reduced 
production/losses; 
• Limited knowledge 
about use of pesticide;  
• Provision of water 
(irrigation) for the orchads; 
• Training on the use of 
pesticides; 
• Purchase of quality seeds; 
• New trees. 
 
58 Ibidem

=== PAGE 143 ===
26
• Old trees which require 
replacement with new 
trees; 
• Manual labou very hard, 
especially harvesting, 
lack of technologies for 
women 
• Introduction of time saving 
technologies for women to 
reduce workload. 
Livestock 
• Local breed is not 
productive; 
• Disease of animals and 
low availability of 
vaccines; 
• Shortage of fodder; 
• Shortage of pasture 
land; 
• Shortage of water;  
• Poor conditions of roads 
to pasture areas. 
• Women low 
representation in PUUs 
• Access to improved breeds 
and methods to improve 
breeds naturally; 
• Automatic milking 
equipment;  
• Shops and equipment for 
dairy products, including 
refrigerators; 
• Availability of vaccines for 
animals; 
• Access to pasture land and 
improved infrastructures. 
• Women access to pasture 
land and representation in 
PUUs 
Sh. Sholin  
Representation/D
ecision making 
• Low leadership skills for 
women in local 
committees  
• Increase the number of 
women members in the 
board ( more than 30% as it 
is set at the moment); 
• Leadership trainings for 
women in CBOs 
Maschoh 
Crop 
• Lack of quality seeds of 
potatoes; 
• Lack of machinery; 
• Orchards trees very old; 
• Heavy workload for 
women to do manual 
labour. 
• Irrigation; 
• Local nursery for seeds to 
produce seeds locally; 
• Use of greenhouses; 
• New seedling for orchards; 
• Bee-keeping; 
• Time saving technologies for 
agriculture activities: Small 
size automatic equipment ( 
cultivation/ collection/ 
especially for fodder, 
cutters); 
Forestry 
• Women are in charge to 
collect fire-wood for 
cooking, hitting. They 
also collect forest 
products but limited to 
village selling.  
• Improve /expand this activity 
for marketing of forest 
products (NTFP). 
Livestock 
• 
Women are in charge of 
livestock keeping and 
they also attend animals 
in the higher pasture 
areas (4 months) with 
very poor living 
• 
Women believe that they 
would benefit from having a 
PUU ( as they observed in 
another village where it was 
established as part of a 
development project).

=== PAGE 144 ===
27
conditions ( living in 
camps).  
• 
Use of rangeland areas 
is based on traditional 
practices across 
villages/private persons 
(village head man) 
which is not sustainable 
and women are 
excluded.  
• 
Women to participate in 
PUUs as representatives  
• 
Processing machines for 
dairy products. 
 
Sharitus 
Crop  
 
• 
Seasonal greenhouse 
not enough; 
• 
Restricted  access to 
markets; 
• 
They  cannot sale all the 
items in the markets 
during the peak season 
They need to process it. 
• 
Lack of machinery, lack 
of processing 
equipment is an issue.   
• 
Introduction of green houses 
for the whole year; 
• 
Better access to market 
• 
Business skills  
• 
Processing equipment 
 
FGD with women during CN development ( October 2020) 
Districts  
Production  
Main challenges related to 
economic activities  
Solutions proposed by women 
interviewed  
Vose 
Milk 
• Competition for 
marketing during pick 
season and low income 
from milk; 
• Lack of Additional 
trainings related to milk 
production and selling;  
• Lack of processing 
equipment  
• Introduction of poultry, 
because production is all 
year around and there is 
request from locals (local 
markets); 
• Having processing unit, so 
we can produce cheese and 
other products with added 
value; 
•  food processing /bakery/ 
off-farms for young women.  
Muminobod 
Farkhor 
Hamadoni 
Representation 
and Decision 
making 
• 
No leadership training 
was provided by project 
(LPDP) 
• 
Women needed it, 
especially at the 
beginning; 
• 
Women are member of 
PUU but need more 
leadership skills; 
• 
Women lack business 
and organisational skills  
• 
Leadership skills 
development through 
leadership trainings;  
• 
Business development/ 
entrepreneurial skills to be 
developed.

=== PAGE 145 ===
28
 
 
Legal status of Women 
 
88. 
In the last decade, the social gender equality framework has been expanded and 
strengthened through the adoption of new laws, amendment of existing laws, 
development of national programs, and incorporation of objectives within general 
policy documents. For the most part, however, such developments have focused 
on raising the status of women and girls and eliminating barriers to the 
realization of their rights, rather than on equalizing responsibilities and 
opportunities for women and men or addressing gender stereotypes. 
Laws and Policies on Gender Equality 
 
89. 
The Constitution of the Republic of Tajikistan recognizes international law as a 
component part of the national legal system59, and Tajikistan is a State Party to 
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women 
(CEDAW) and to other fundamental human rights treaties. In 2014, the 
parliament ratified the Optional Protocol to CEDAW, which allows individual 
women in Tajikistan to submit complaints to the CEDAW Committee and gives 
them an additional remedy for violations of the convention. Important steps have 
also been taken to implement UN Security Council resolutions on women, peace, 
and security (1325 and 2122) with the drafting of a national action plan. The 
Constitution guarantees equal rights on the basis of sex (Article 17), and 
principles of non-discrimination are enshrined in basic legislation, for example, 
the Family Code, the Labor Code, the Land Code, the Criminal Code, the Law on 
Education, and the Law on Public Health.  
90. 
In 2005, Tajikistan adopted the Law on State Guarantees of Equal Rights and 
Opportunities for Men and Women, which is the only law to define the concepts 
of gender and sex-based discrimination. The law prohibits discrimination on the 
basis of sex, while distinguishing special measures to protect pregnancy and the 
health of women and men, and it guarantees equal rights in public authorities, 
civil service, education, labor, and the family.  
91. 
Other legislative reforms are aimed at greater protection of women’s rights, for 
example, laws combating human trafficking (2008), and domestic violence 
(2013), and protection of breastfeeding (2006). In 2010, the Family Code was 
amended to raise the legal marital age to 18 (for both women and men), which 
brought it in line with CEDAW. 
92. 
Since 2006, Tajikistan has adopted several policy documents, national programs, 
and strategies that support gender equality goals. Some were intended to 
implement specific laws, for instance the Comprehensive Program to Combat 
Trafficking in Persons for 2006–2010, and the State Program for the Prevention 
of Domestic Violence for 2014– 2023, the State Program for the Education, 
Selection and Placement of Capable Women and Girls in Leadership Positions for 
2007–2016 (adopted in 2006) aims to mitigate the barriers that prevent women 
from entering senior management. 
93. 
The stand-alone policy, adopted in 2010, the National Strategy on Enhancing the 
Role of Women in the Republic of Tajikistan for 2011–2020, recognizes  a lack of 
public gender equality understanding and gender policy support, the role of 
stereotypes, and the need to implement the formal equality that exists, but it 
 
59 Article 10, Constitution of the Republic of Tajikistan.

=== PAGE 146 ===
29
nevertheless covers areas in which women encounter barriers: political 
participation, the labor market, entrepreneurship, and education. The strategy 
lists concrete actions for each sector, but does not establish the responsible 
agencies, a timeframe with milestones, sources of funding, or a monitoring plan. 
94. 
The government has made significant progress in mainstreaming gender into 
national socioeconomic development strategies, beginning with the adoption of 
the Poverty Reduction Strategies for the Republic of Tajikistan for 2007–2009 and 
2010–2012.These strategies and the current Living Standards Improvement 
Strategy for 2013–2015 and National Development Strategy for 2015 all dedicate 
chapters to gender equality as a component of developing the country’s human 
potential. Inclusion of gender equality targets in these strategic documents 
ensures that indicators, implementing agencies, and  financing are also 
delineated.   
95. 
Despite a solid legal and policy framework for protecting the rights of women 
and, to a lesser extent, advancing gender equality, many planned measures are 
never realized due to insufficient implementation mechanisms, weak monitoring 
and evaluation, and lack of dedicated finances.  The concluding observations on 
the sixth periodic report of Tajikistan from the Committee on the Elimination of 
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW,2018) report the following key 
recommendations60. 
 
• 
Accelerate, with a view to its adoption, the drafting of anti-discrimination 
legislation and ensure that it contains a comprehensive legal definition of 
discrimination against women in line with article 1 of the Convention, covering 
both direct and indirect discrimination, and that such legislation prohibits all 
forms of discrimination, including intersecting forms of discrimination; 
 
• 
Strengthen capacity-building for members of the judiciary and legal 
professionals on how to invoke or directly apply the Convention, or interpret 
national legislation in the light thereof, in court proceedings; 
• 
Apply a gender-sensitive approach in the implementation of its legislation, 
policies and programmes to ensure that they sufficiently address pre-existing 
gender inequalities and disparities and the needs of vulnerable groups of 
women and girls; 
 
• 
Intensify existing awareness-raising initiatives and provide training to enhance 
knowledge on women’s rights and gender equality among relevant 
stakeholders, including government and law enforcement officials, 
parliamentarians, judges, lawyers, education and health-care professionals and 
religious and community leaders. 
 
National mechanisms 
 
96. 
The Committee for Women’s and Family Affairs (the Women’s Committee) was 
established in 1991, and its authority was increased in 2006, making it the 
central authority carrying out state policy on protecting women’s interests and 
rights. The Women’s Committee has a broad mandate that includes cultivating 
 
60 Document available at: 
https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/15/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CEDAW/C/TJK/CO/6&Lang=En

=== PAGE 147 ===
30
women’s rights, addressing women’s socioeconomic participation, and delivering 
public services61.  
97. 
The Women’s Committee operates regional information-consultation and crisis 
centers throughout the country (110 in total) and funded locally. The Chair of the 
Women’s Committee is a government appointee, with 22 central offices as of 
2014. Women’s Committee activities are diverse, ranging from research to 
considering citizen complaints, promoting women’s rights through the media, 
monitoring international standard compliance, coordinating government and 
nongovernment gender equality activities, and training. The Women’s Committee 
work plan, which supports the branch offices, covers, among other items, climate 
change, support for labor migrants’ wives, and peace and security issues.   
98. 
The Committee is also part of the coordinating council on Prevention of Violence 
against Women, which consists of representatives from the Ministry of Justice, 
Ministry of Labour and Social Security, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Internal 
Affairs, court officials, representatives of the General Prosecutor’s Office and 
NGOs. 
 
Gender-based domestic violence (GBV) 
 
99. 
According to the Demographic and Health Survey Tajikistan (TjDHS 2017)62, 
24% of women age 15-49 have experienced physical violence since age 15, and 
17% experienced physical violence in the 12 months preceding the survey. Only 
two percent of women have ever experienced sexual violence. In terms of 
spousal violence, it is reported that 31% of ever-married women have 
experienced physical, sexual, or emotional violence by their current or most 
recent husband. The prevalence of spousal violence has increased by 7 
percentage points in the 5 years since the 2012 TjDHS. Among ever-married 
women who have experienced spousal physical or sexual violence, 23% have 
sustained some form of injury, one in 10 women sought help to stop the violence 
they had experienced. Three in four women neither sought help nor told anyone 
about the violence.   
100. In general, women’s experience of spousal physical, sexual, or emotional 
violence by their current or most recent husband increases with age and number 
of children. Women who are divorced, separated, or widowed are more likely to 
have experienced spousal violence (47%) than those who are currently married 
(30%). The proportion of women who have experienced spousal violence varies 
greatly by region, from 16% in Dushanbe to 43% in Khatlon (TjDHS, 2017)63. 
101. According to the Government of Tajikistan’s sixth periodic report to the 
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) on 
October 2018, covering the period 2013-2017, a total of 1,296 complaints of 
domestic abuse were made to police, of which 1,036 were investigated by district 
police inspectors, and 260 by specially-appointed and trained inspectors for the 
prevention of domestic violence. 996 of those filed were complaints against men, 
compared with 296 made against women. Only 65 criminal prosecutions were 
initiated under various articles of the Criminal Code. The commission reviewing 
the report stressed that there is a great need to increase to domestic violence 
 
61 Approved by Government Decision No. 608, 9 December 2006.  
62 Demographic and Health Survey Tajikistan(DHS) Tajstat 2017.  
Document available at: https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR341/FR341.pdf 
63 Ibidem

=== PAGE 148 ===
31
awareness in both the population and law enforcement staff on the National Law 
on the Prevention of Violence in the Family (adopted in 2013) and the 
corresponding State Programme (CEDAW Report, October 2018) 64. 
 
Vulnerability to Climate Change from a gender perspective 
 
102. Tajikistan is at significant risk from disasters triggered by natural hazards. Food 
security is highly susceptible to drought and transportation links are vulnerable 
to flooding. Climate change threatens the food security especially for those who 
depend on small-scale subsistence farming. Women suffer disproportionately 
from this insecurity because they are often responsible for securing income from 
agriculture plots and providing for their families; however, they have limited 
access to information and support. Female farmers and female-headed 
households are frequently among the most vulnerable in rural areas, and often 
have very limited capacity to cope with or recover from weather-related losses. 
This clearly emerged from consultation with women’s groups through Focus 
Group Discussion (FGDs) held during CASP+ design Mission (April, 2021). Key 
notes from the consultations held in Hamadoni, Sh.Sholin, Sharitus and Maschoh 
districts are available stakeholder consultation report.  
103. According to the Tajikistan Country Gender Assessment (ADB, 2016) the main 
indicators of climate change in Tajikistan are rising temperatures, uneven rainfall, 
and melting glaciers; these changes, in turn, can cause natural disasters such as 
flooding and mudslides or droughts. Rural populations are especially vulnerable 
to climate change given their dependence on small-scale farming and natural 
resources. According to the ADB survey conducted to prepare the gender 
assessment, women who participated in Focus Group Discussions (FGDs), 
particularly women farmers, described unseasonably warm weather followed by 
heavy rains that ruined crops (ADB, 2016). Similar findings were confirmed by 
women interviewed through Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) by the project 
design mission65.  
104. Households headed by females are among the poorest and “often have very 
limited capacity to cope with or recover from weather-related losses”; further, 
they will also be disproportionately impacted by staple goods scarcity. In addition 
to increased physical burdens associated with collecting scarce resources, women 
and children are at risk for illness from substandard drinking water and unclean 
fuel (Oxfam, 2011) 66. 
105. Women’s lower educational levels, lack of technical knowledge, and limited 
participation in decision making also impact their climate change adaptability. 
According to Oxfam, households headed by females that operate small farms 
exhibit fewer sustainable land management processes than households headed 
by males, which may be due to lack of technical knowledge or insufficient 
finances. Further more, in the same report, it is mentioned that water-related 
changes have noticeable and immediate effects on women’s options for collecting 
water. When water sources become scarce, those farmers who are situated 
furthest from irrigation systems or who do not have the ability to negotiate their 
 
64 United Nations Human Rights: Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, Tajikistan's sixth 
report (31 October 2018) https://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=23807&LangID=E 
Full report available at: 
https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/15/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=CEDAW/C/TJK/6&Lang=en 
65 Details are reported in the stakeholder consultation report on separate FGDs with women (CASP+ Design Mission, 
April 2021).  
66 Climate Change: Beyond Coping. Women smallholder farmers in Tajikistan, Oxfam, 2011

=== PAGE 149 ===
32
water rights, or who are unable to protect their water access, will lose out first 
(Oxfam, 2011)67.  
106. Similarly, as women are responsible for combustible fuel in poor households, 
their search for wood and brush is affected when there is drought. If harvests are 
damaged or lost a household’s food supply for the entire year could be 
threatened. A summary from the Oxfam study of climate related impacts from 
perspective of women interviewed is summarized below:  
 
Natural Disaster/shocks 
Impacts from the perspective of women (Oxfam survey) 
Drought  
- Water springs dried up 
- the wheat were damaged, not a good harvest 
- all winter saving (food) were damaged 
- couldn`t plough the land 
- because of the drought many livestock suffer from disease 
- fruit tree fell off - not enough fruits 
- having problems with food security meant that many people had 
problems with their health  
Heavy rains and hail storms  
- had to replant seeds because plants were destroyed (economic cost) 
 - wheat with too many weeds 
- bad harvest (very little) 
- bad quality wheat (low in calories). 
Unpredictable cold weather 
- vegetables damaged 
- food saving (for winter) was damaged 
- usual ploughing of the land in autumn could not be done  
Lack of irrigation water  
- arable lands were damaged: as were vegetables, wheat, potato  
Landslide  
- total damage of homes with properties (5hhs, in each 7 family 
members)  
Flood  
- damaged kitchen gardens - damaged cattle sheds  
 
107. As explained above (para 86 and 87) a total of 4 Focus Group Discussions (FGD) 
were held with 26 women during the design mission of CASP+ in April 2021. Key 
questions asked included climate change: (i) Over the last couple of years, did 
you observe any changes in your agriculture work? (ii) Have you experienced 
natural disasters (drought, Heavy rains and hail storms Unpredictable cold 
weather, floods, landslides?). If yes, (i) which negative impact did you experience  
in your production and (ii) how do you think a negative impact could be 
mitigated? Did your workload increase or decrease due to effects of climate 
change?  
108. Below is a summary of the main challenges related to climate change in the 
target areas from a gender perspective as expressed by women interviewed:  
Districts  
Main challenges related to climate change in CASP+ Target areas  
Hamadoni 
• 
Snow in spring season (no yield in fruits); 
• 
Increase in precipitation, land salinity; 
• 
Loss of potato harvest; 
• 
Floods; 
• 
Hot summer season, negatively affected land and yield; 
 
67 ibidem

=== PAGE 150 ===
33
• 
Workload increase, income decrease. 
Sh. Sholin 
• 
Shortage of water during rainy season, resulting in reduced 
production/losses; 
• 
Limited knowledge about use of pesticide;  
• 
Old trees which require replacement with new trees. 
• 
 Workload increased, income decreased. 
Maschoh 
• 
Cold spring and loss of fruits; 
• 
Change in the raining patters; 
• 
Reduced yields and losses. 
• 
 Workload increase, income decreased. 
Sharitus  
• 
Warm winters/cold springs  and loss of  fruits; 
• 
Winds increased due to deforestation; 
• 
Roots of the trees are freezing;   
• 
 Workload increase, income decreased. 
 
109. According to FAO Gender Assessment (2016) research conducted in Tajikistan on 
sustainable farming practices to mitigate climate-related shocks, knowledge 
about such practices is low among all farmers, but there are also gender 
differences with women suffering access to information. Farmers mainly obtain 
information about sustainable practices from other farmers, but, “within villages, 
female-headed households do not seem to benefit from the knowledge-sharing 
networks that male farm heads enjoy”. This lack of knowledge is a key factor in 
reducing opportunities for women farmers to adopt sustainable practices. Women 
do report that they call upon local agronomists when they need assistance or 
advice about their household plots, but they also turn to neighbors or other 
family members (FAO, 2016). 
110. Despite the evident gender inequalities in the agriculture sector, the ADB gender 
assessment points out that women have great potential as agents of change. 
Rural women are quick to “grasp the holistic nature of farming and offer 
examples and solutions that they are already engaging in to adapt to climate 
change.” The report highlights women involvement in renewable energy and 
environmentally safe practices.     
111. Lessons learned: A case study conducted by CARE international of a small 
climate adaptation project in a mountain community in Tajikistan, demonstrated 
that simple technologies that women can implement can also have a positive 
effect on food security. In this case, poor households received frames that 
enabled them to start herb and vegetable seedlings in cold weather and increase 
the growing season. Women also learned about food preservation68. 
112. The Farmer Advisory Services in Tajikistan programme (FAST), for example, has 
a component on training and disseminating good practices among women who 
farm at household level and on commercial dekhan farms. Through jamoat 
agricultural extension teams and farmer learning groups, women gain knowledge 
of new farming practices (for example, selection of high-quality seeds, pest and 
weed management, and improved practices to reduce crop loss and enhance 
storage and food preservation), which has led to increased crop yields for 
women.  
 
68  Care International. 2010. Climate Change Brief: Adaptation, Gender and Women’s Empowerment.  
Document available at: https://www.care.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/CC-2010-CARE_Gender_Brief.pdf

=== PAGE 151 ===
34
113. Recommendations: The ADB country gender assessment, highlights that 
household-level interventions targeting women are crucial in order to improve 
their awareness of climate change adaptability. But efforts are also needed at the 
local and national level to share best practices on “natural resource 
management, on adaptive and mitigative farming,” and to increase information 
about women’s rights with support through investment, credit, and technology. 
Furthermore, training and awareness-raising campaigns for women on climate 
change impacts and decision-making processes on climate resilience and 
livelihoods (e.g., introducing and using alternative crops) need to be considered 
(ADB, 2016).  
Policy Review: Gender and Climate Change 
 
114. The National Strategy for Enhancing the Role of Women in the Republic of 
Tajikistan for 2011–2020 proposes several adaptation measures, which also aim 
at reducing the impact of climate change on women. The National Action Plan 
under the National Strategy on Activization of Women’s Role in Tajikistan for 
2011-2020 includes gender and climate change issues, especially on trainings 
and rising awareness between Tajik women on climate change that is jointly 
implementing by the Committee on Women & the Family, Committee of the 
Emergency Situation & Civil Defence and local regional bodies.  
115. In response for a Decision 23/CP.18 “Promoting gender balance and improving 
the participation of women in UNFCCC negotiations and in the representation of 
Parties in bodies established pursuant to the Convention or the Kyoto Protocol” it 
is reported that state financial resources in Tajikistan are not always available or 
quite limited for supporting these activities (gender and climate change). It is 
reiterated that that further funding consideration should be given to adaptation 
programmes and rising awareness on climate change between women and men 
in rural areas in order to reduce the adverse effects of climate change on 
vulnerable communities. It is also assessed the need to address gender and 
climate change awareness trainings; assistance for gender capacity building 
within government; and strengthen the capacity of NGOs working on gender 69.  
116. In the National Development Strategy of the Republic of Tajikistan for 
the period until 2030, issues of gender equality and climate change are 
discussed in Chapter 4, “Developing Human Capital” 70.The strategy notes that 
the main problems for Tajikistan in recent years have been a high level of risk of 
natural disasters, including due to climate change, from which, first, women and 
children suffer.  
117. To create incentives for reduction impact of climate change considering gender 
aspects, it is suggested to develop and implement mechanisms for reducing 
social vulnerability due to natural disasters, the formation and implementation of 
gender-sensitive system information support and training of the population in 
proactive protective and restorative actions on natural disasters. It is proposed to 
develop a system for implementing climate change issues, disaster prevention in 
strategic regional documents, and strengthening local disaster risk management 
capabilities.  
118. In the draft National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate Change of 
Tajikistan until 2030 (NACC) gender issues are addressed in a cross-sectoral 
 
69 Full Report available at: 
https://unfccc.int/files/documentation/submissions_and_statements/application/pdf/cop_gender_tajikistan_04092013.
pdf 
70Document available at: https://nafaka.tj/images/zakoni/new/strategiya_2030_en.pdf

=== PAGE 152 ===
35
area. The draft of NACC lists gaps that need to be overcome to ensure that the 
risks and impacts of climate change capture the gender dimension. The Strategy 
highlights that the main gender gap in climate change, first, is the low level of 
women's access to information on climate change, lack of decision-making power 
to take adaptation measures71.  
119. Gender aspect of climate change are also found in the National 
Communications of the Republic of Tajikistan on the UN Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. So far, Tajikistan has prepared three National 
Communications of the Republic of Tajikistan under the UN Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. The first National Communication was prepared 
in 2002, the second in 2008, and the third in 2014. In the third communication, 
gender aspects of climate change were considered in more detail in assessments 
of women's reproductive health vulnerability to climate change72.  
120. It is reported that the impact of climate change does not only threaten lives and 
deprive livelihoods, but also widens the gap between the rich and poor and 
increases the inequalities between women and men. Gender equality and 
opportunities in the context of climate change are among the key issues of 
concern covered by the UNFCCC. It is stressed that strategies on climate change 
and risk mitigation cannot be successful without the participation of women. 
Therefore negotiation processes and documentary outcomes need to reflect 
gender equality issues in all areas including adaptation, risk mitigation, 
knowledge transfer, and so on.  
 
Project details  
 
Access to information and opportunities under CASP+ 
 
121. Gender mainstreaming in the project will be done with a focus on gender 
responsive and equitable participation for development planning and 
implementation, as well as ensuring participation of women and other vulnerable 
groups in project implementation and community representation and decision-
making. This includes training and awareness raising in (i) gender responsive 
participatory approach in identification of development needs with specific focus 
on social inclusion of women and other vulnerable groups in the community 
decision making process such as PUUs committees, village organisations (VOs) 
committees, etc., (ii) gender responsive monitoring and evaluation of project 
implementation and progress, (iii) training in community mobilization, 
management and leadership skills, including training in economic diversification 
business advisory services and business plan formulation. 
122. One of the Project’s objectives is to ensure that all project targets groups (men, 
women, young people, including vulnerable groups such as women headed 
households and the elders) have equal access to opportunities resulting from the 
Project, especially in terms of information. For this reason, there is a plan to 
organize a strong communication campaign to inform about project 
opportunities, including  awareness raising sessions with community leaders and 
men, on the role of women in the development process through their 
 
71 Document available at: https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/nap/tainap01e.pdf 
72 Full report available at: https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/tjknc3_eng.pdf

=== PAGE 153 ===
36
representation in grassroots community organizations. Their awareness will also 
be raised on the benefits the community can derive from the involvement of 
women in these development processes. 
123. The communication and mobilisation strategy will also be supported by a strong 
diagnostic process whose objective is to identify the main environmental 
challenges affecting the communities (including from a gender perspective) and 
properly inform communities to take decisions on the opportunities created 
under the project. This includes opportunities for Climate Sensitive Community 
Action Plans (CsCAPs) as well as livelihood diversification through Common 
Interest Groups (CiGs) and access to climate smart technologies and practices 
trainings through participation in Farmers Field Schools (FFs).   
124. Access to information by women at village level largely depends on the channel 
by which this information arrives. To account for this, the Project will conduct 
separate consultations with women, using existing formal/inform women groups  
at village level (if existing) or forming new ones. The separate consultation 
sessions will be conducted by community facilitators (CF) in every targeted 
village. They will also ensure involvement of  women head of households and 
women from very poor households (below poverty line). The consultation will be 
in line with women’s need to accommodate proper time and location. The ToRs of 
community facilitators are included in the PIM and reflect the tasks above.  
125. A strong monitoring process during the information/mobilisation activities will be 
put in place to ensure that information reach the intended beneficiaries 
(including vulnerable socio-economic categories) and indicators will be gender 
disaggregated.  
 
Women’s access to education, technical knowledge, and skills 
 
126. As reported in the gender assessment women have lower level of education, 
technical knowledge and skill to apply climate smart agriculture practices. 
Women often are not able to attend trainings and they account for small 
percentage of training recipients.   
127. An example from ADB survey  (as reported in the Country Gender Assessment, 
2016) reveals that 1,800 farmers indicate that women are more likely to have no 
specialized training than men and specifically to lack vocational training (19.3% 
of men as compared to 7.9% of women) and higher education (5.1% of men and 
2.2% of women) in agriculture. 
128. CASP+ remote design Mission organized  4 separate Focus Groups Discussion 
(FGD) with women’s participants (26) from the districts of Hamadoni, Mashcoh, 
Sharituz and S.Shohin (Khatlong). They drew attention to the need for: (i)  
increasing their knowledge about improved agriculture practices; (ii) marketing 
and (iii) how to expand their businesses and move from unskilled low income 
production to commercial agriculture. They also show interest to increase 
knowledge about  diversification of economic activities. Rural women expressed 
their constrained by:(i) their limited agricultural technological knowledge, and (ii) 
lack of training relevant to areas where they could start businesses. They also 
highlighted the need to participate in exposure visits. 
129. Most of the women interviewed, had rarely received training (on agricultural 
techniques, financial management of their operation and climate smart 
agriculture practices). For this reason the project aims to include training  for 
women (50% beneficiaries) in Farmers Field Schools (FFs) and Common

=== PAGE 154 ===
37
Interests Groups (CIG) as well as trainings on climate smart resilient 
technologies and business trainings: farm as business, business planning, 
proposal writing. This is key to support preparation of business plans and access 
grant financing scheme.  
Women’s access to services and technologies provided by CASP+ 
 
130. The project has a strong focus on gender-equality. Access to services and 
technologies provided by the project will equally benefit men and women. Design 
of services and promotion of technologies are also taking into account the 
different needs of men and women and the different livelihood and economic 
activities they are engaged.  
131. The assessment found that the productivity and resilience to climate change of 
traditional livestock production systems (where majority of women are engaged) 
is limited by the poor capacities of farmers on animal husbandry, in particular 
related to fodder cultivation, fodder conservation and stall feeding, and the 
availability of and awareness on technical innovations that could improve 
productivity, resilience to climate change, and reduce environmental impact. This 
is particularly relevant for women as emerged during the FGDs. The project will 
support the dissemination of these technical innovations and their adoption by 
smallholder farmers through a combination of demonstrations and hands on 
training activities.  
132. As part of the activities planned under component 3: specifically, activity 3.2.3: 
Support adoption of climate smart innovations through demonstrations and FFS, 
women will account for 50% beneficiaries corresponding to about 2,000 women 
(20% will be women head of households) and they will able to access the main 
climate resilient technologies that will be disseminated: 
• 
New varieties and species of drought and heat resistant fodder; 
• 
Affordable and simple fodder conservation techniques, in order to reduce 
seasonality of production and dependance on pasture in winter; 
• 
Biogaz production (in order to reduce utilization of wood, dried cotton 
plants and cow dungs as fuel); 
• 
Composting and manure management; 
• 
Husbandry of alternative livestock species, not or less dependent of 
pasture resources, and resilient to climate change; 
• 
Prevention and management of animal diseases; 
• 
Reproductive management (detection of heats, calving and calf care, 
drying off management). 
133. In communities where the project will support marketing and processing of milk, 
milk hygiene and milk quality/safety management will also be addressed under 
this activity. Based on the livelihood analisis and the role of women in 
agriculture, all the proposed technologies and trainings are suitable for women. 
It is also expected that their presence will be particularly prominent given their 
strong engagement in livestock related activities. The type of proposed training 
and technology introduction correspond to the need expressed by women during 
consultation through Focus Group Discussions (FGDs).  
134. It is also suggested as a key recommendation in the Project Implementation 
manual (PIM) that training location and time take into account women’s need. 
Furthermore, the mission acknowledges the need expressed by women during

=== PAGE 155 ===
38
consultation to have separate trainings groups (only women FFs/groups). In line, 
the project will form only women FFs (where needed) and time and location for 
schools will take into account women’s needs. FFs facilitators, will be trained to 
provide gender-sensitive responsive services. The type of trainings, of interest 
for women, coupled with increased gender sensitiveness of FFs facilitators, will 
ensure women access to services, trainings and technologies promoted. 
135. The thematic focus of FFS will put priority on fodder management and 
conservation (contribution to climate resilience), as well as milk hygiene (needed 
for market access) and processing. All topics are of interest for women, however, 
as required by the FFS methodology, thematic topics will be selected by 
participants according to their needs and this will also take into account women’s 
need and preferences in addition to the above.  
136. Furthermore, women will access information about climate resilient technologies 
and innovations that have been tested, adapted and validated by research 
institutions under Component 1. These will be demonstrated in the field to 
enable men and women farmers to acknowledge their benefits and feasibility, 
and select those that will be further popularized and tested in real farm 
conditions through FFS. 
137. In order to allow farmers to access to these demonstrations, field days will be 
organized and women will account for 50% participants. 
138. In addition to participation in FFS women will also be trained through CIGs 
(Activity 3.3.1. Identify individuals and establish Common Interest Groups 
around selected value chains and capacitate them) and receive trainings on 
climate smart resilient technologies and organization of business trainings: farm 
as business, business planning, proposal writing to enhance their business 
capacity and apply for grant financing . It is expected that women will account 
for 50% of participants for climate resilient technologies and business planning 
corresponding to 7,200 (50% of 14,200 beneficiaries).  
139. A Matching Grant Facility (MGF) will be established and will have MGF Window 1 
(livelihood diversification for vulnerable households) and Window 2 
(commercialisation and agribusiness development). It is expected that a total of 
10,200 households will access 1,020 Window 1 grants and 2,200 households will 
access 110 Window 2 grants.   
   
140. Window 1 will be for grants of up to 6,000 USD and women will account for 50% 
beneficiaries of which 20% are expected to be WHHs . These grants could be for, e.g.  small-
scale processing equipment, local storage infrastructure, community-based seed production, 
inputs and service provision, drip irrigation, greenhouses, nurseries, shelterbelt 
establishment, riverbank stability, access to renewable energy. Farmers accessing Window 1 
will match the grant with a 10 percent cash contribution. Window 2 will be for CIG grants that 
have an average value of USD 30 000.it is expected that 110 groups will access Window 2 
and 30% should be women-led (corresponding to 33 women-led groups).     
141. The productive areas to organize women around CIGs will be identified during 
the consultation process, in line with findings from the diagnostic study. As for 
FFs the training topics, location, time, will take into account the needs of women, 
to ensure the services is fully gender-sensitive and women are able to access.  
142. Component 1: Support to University Students through scholarships. The project 
will also offer services relevant for young women. In addition of being indirect 
beneficiaries (as HHs members) the project will provide direct targeted services

=== PAGE 156 ===
39
for young girls (students). It is expected that the project will support universities 
to develop curricula specific on climate change and number of students will be 
enrolled and some of them will be granted a scholarship.  
143. The scholarship available will be for 50 students in total (BA, MA and PhD level) 
and 25 will be young girls from target areas. The aim of the scholarship 
programme is to increase the climate resilience of communities by enhancing the 
capacities of young women and men in NRM, climate change and climate-
resilient, diversified production systems. Vulnerable youth from the project areas 
who are interested in studying a bachelor’s/master’s/PhD programme (e.g. bee-
keeping, horticulture, forestry and pasture management) at the Tajik Agrarian 
University will be identified. Their scholarship should cover expenses so that they 
can undertake research in their communities on natural resource management 
and climate resilience of production systems. During their studies, students 
should be coached and supported in identifying possibilities to take up posts in 
their areas of speciality in local public institutions or to develop start-ups. 
Support for start-ups on an individual or collective basis could be provided 
through CASP+. In addition, the Tajik Agrarian University is considering the 
development of a start-up programme so close coordination with them in the 
identification of additional funding possibilities will be necessary.  
144. Once youth return to their villages, they should be involved in the preparation 
and implementation of the CsCAPs to share their knowledge and expertise. This 
is an opportunity for youth to take a leading role in mobilising communities 
around certain activities to manage NRM and increase their climate resilience.  
Women in decision-making  
 
145. Women’s decision-making role is limited, although it varies depending on the 
types of decisions under consideration and if it is at households or community 
level. From the consultation with women in FGDs it appears that consultation 
among family members and joint decision-making is prevalent.  This include 
expenses/income related to agriculture production. Kitchen gardens are mainly in 
the domain of women who decide on type and quantity of crops, how much to 
spend on production inputs, and whether to consume or sell their produce. The 
same apply for milk-product, although sale of animals remain in the domain of 
men.  
146. From the consultation from remote with women through FGD, it also emerged 
that younger women, and particularly daughters-in-law, have few assets and 
little power in the household. Intra-household hierarchies among female 
members exist. Elder women are best positioned to make decisions that are 
accepted by other household members.  
147. Conventionally, males conduct all the decision-making within Tajik households. 
However, due to male outmigration, women have become de facto heads of the 
household and decision makers. Land plots may be left to be operated by female 
heads, given for use of close relatives or rented out. In some cases, males 
formalize the land rights in the name of their wives to prevent additional 
problems during their absence. 
148. Consultation with female dehkan farmers during FGDs confirm that they make 
most of the production decisions alone or with the support of male family 
members, especially on buying quality seeds and fertilizers. Decision over milk 
and dairy products is entirely controlled by women while decision over livestock 
is controlled by men.

=== PAGE 157 ===
40
149. At community level most of decisions are taken by male household members, as 
they are represented in higher percentage in Community Based Organisations. 
Presence of women in village development committees (as reported from 
women’s interviews) is lower compared to men and they lack leadership skills to 
have their voice heard. This is confirmed by presence of women in decision 
making as per data reported in this assessment in relation to women in PUUs and 
WUAs. 
 
Promotion of Women Leadership under CASP+ 
 
150. Women limited capacity to assume leadership role is often associated to cultural 
constraints and determining factors which include:  
• 
Low status due to persistent gender discrimination and gender 
stereotyping, where women are generally viewed to be unfit for 
leadership, and subsequent lack of support for women’s entry to 
leadership structures;  
• 
Limited opportunity to engage full time in activities outside the home due 
to unequal burden of care work that falls upon them;  
• 
Low self-esteem and inadequate leadership skills and experience as a 
result of the above factors. 
151. In light of the above constrains which were also identified in the target areas 
through discussion with women, the project intends to support women’s and 
women’s leaders to increase their awareness about their rights, their presence in 
the decision making process of CBO and ability to exercise their rights and 
express their opinion/voice. Specifically, the project will set quotas to ensure a 
minimum representation of women in decision making and representation 
positions.  
152. In line with available data it is confirmed that women are 30% representative in 
PUUs. The same strategy for quotas is also applied by the CASP gender strategy 
to have women as 30% representatives in Village Organisations (VOs). CASP + 
will apply quotas for women as decision makers in key committees such as 
Pasture Users Unions / Groups (PUUs, PUGs), Forest Management Groups (FMG) 
and Village Organisations (VOs). 
153. Women participation as registered in the IFAD funded Livestock and Pasture 
Development Project II (LPDPII) is 30% women in the PUU board. Similar 
findings emerged from Focus Group Discussion (FGDs) held with women groups 
during Concept Note and Project Design (October 2020 and April 2021 
respectively) where women interviewed (some of them members and 
representatives of PUUs) confirmed the 30% presence of women as board 
representatives and recognized the need to receive leadership trainings.  Key 
notes from the consultation are available in the stakeholder consultation report . 
In order to create an enabling environment for women and ensure they can 
perform have an active role, the following activities are planned: 
154. Raise the awareness of women and men leaders and members of CBOs (i.e. VOs 
and PUUs) on the manifestations of gender bias (against women) and on the 
effects of discrimination against women on the personal and interpersonal 
growth of its leaders and members, as well as on the organizational development 
of the organisation. The activity will be part of gender awareness session taking 
place in all targeted districts (1 day workshop).

=== PAGE 158 ===
41
155. The awareness session will also include briefing on women’s legal status ( 
equality of rights) and legislation about women in representation and key 
position as outlined by the national gender strategy. Other gender sensitive 
topics will be touched with particular attention to women and climate change as 
well as women’s access to land (among others).  
156. Trainings for women leaders, targeting 6 women per village, for a total of 2,400 
women across the 400 targeted villages. The objective is preparing women 
members of community organizations to be leaders and change agents in their 
organizations. They will be provided with sensitization on topics including gender 
relations, self-awareness, leadership and accountability, negotiation and conflict 
management, advocacy and lobbying, effective communication. The training will 
specifically include abut 4 modules: Effective and gender-responsive leadership 
and comunication; group management; coping with challenges/conflict resolution 
strategy; and personal development. 
157. The module on “Personal Development,” provides the trainees with tools for self-
analysis, reflection and development. This module is seen to be critical because 
the enhancement of the skills of women can only be translated into their more 
effective participation in leadership structures if they know how to constantly 
check themselves for deep-seated internalization of gender stereotypes, as well 
as to sustainably develop their self-esteem and confidence for leadership.  
158. The training is planned to take place during year 1 with refresh training every 
year conducted by community facilitators. A specialised service provider also 
conducting the mobilisation activity will be in charge to conduct the training in 
the 21 districts covering 400 villages. ToR and tasks are described in the PIM. 
Men and women needs and priorities captured by participatory 
processes under CASP+ 
 
159. Men and women in the target areas have different needs and priorities and this  
depends on their livelihood, age and also socio-economic status.  Desk review 
analisis shows the following gender differences and links to climate change 
vulnerability: 
 
 
Women  
Men  
Link to climate change vulnerability  
Role  
Produce 
household- 
oriented crops 
and livestock 
products  
Produce 
market-
oriented crops 
and livestock 
products 
Both crops and livestock are affected by climate 
change, and this has profound consequences for 
household food security. Men often claim 
safer/more fertile land for growing market-
oriented crops, leaving women to grow 
household-oriented crops. 
Are responsible 
for food storage 
and preparation  
 
Are 
responsible for 
selling valuable 
produce and 
livestock  
In addition to the challenges described above, 
climate change has implications for food 
preparation and storage (in terms of water for 
food preparation and the vulnerability of food 
stores to extreme events). Harvests may be 
reduced or even wiped out by floods or droughts.  
Resource  
 
Have lower 
incomes and are 
more likely to be 
economically 
dependent  
Have higher 
incomes and 
are more likely 
to own land 
Men typically have more money and other assets 
than women. Men’s savings provide a “buffer” 
during tough times and, along with other assets, 
make it easier for them to invest in alternative 
livelihoods.

=== PAGE 159 ===
42
 
and other 
assets  
 
Have less access 
to education and 
information  
 
Have more 
access to 
education and 
information  
 
Managing climate-related risks to agricultural 
production requires new information, skills and 
technologies, such as seasonal forecasts, risk 
analysis and water-saving agricultural practices. 
Men are more likely to have access to these 
resources and the power to use them and are 
therefore, better equipped to adapt. 
Power  
Have less power 
over family 
finances and 
other assets  
 
Have more 
power over 
family finances 
and other 
assets  
Without the power to decide on family resources 
and finances, women’s ability to manage risks by, 
for example, diversifying crops, storing food or 
seeds or putting money into savings, is limited.  
 
Have limited 
engagement in 
community 
politics  
 
Have greater 
involvement/ 
decision-
making power 
in community 
politics  
Men are likely to have more influence over local 
governance-promoting policies and programmes 
that may not support women’s rights and 
priorities.  
 
Face many 
cultural 
restrictions/limit
ed mobility  
 
Face few 
cultural 
restrictions/ 
limited  
mobility 
Mobility is a key factor in accessing information 
and services.  
 
 
160. The activities proposed by CASP+ are relevant to both men and women, 
including from different socio-economic categories and vulnerable groups. 
Stakeholder engagement process has taken place and both men and women 
express their concern in relation to climate change and proposed solutions. In 
some cases, men and women shared the same view, while in other cases they 
expressed different opinions (major details can be found in the stakeholder 
report). 
161. This has taken place during project design mission and reflected into the 
proposed activities. Furthermore, in order to comprehensively capture men and 
women’s needs and priorities for investments, the project will undertake a 
diagnostic study in the 21 targeted districts. The analysis will integrate gender 
considerations.  
162. Technical assistance (TA) to conduct gender analysis in the target area has been 
planned. This will be done in close coordination with the overall diagnostic 
process. Findings will support the identification of women’s needs, potential 
priorities and opportunities to inform the development of CsCAPs and also the 
sectors for CIGs development. The findings from the study will then be discussed 
and validated by women’s groups from targeted communities.  
163. During the mobilisation and consultation process (community level) separate 
consultations with women will take place: women will be informed about the 
opportunities of the project, including acting as representatives in VOs, PUUs, 
and validate the findings from the diagnostic. They will be encouraged to develop 
clear ideas of their priorities for what concerns public (CsCAP) and private (CIGs) 
investments.

=== PAGE 160 ===
43
164. The outcome of the consultation is to ensure that women’s needs and priorities 
are identified and that during the community prioritisation process for public and 
private investments, they are participating (at least 50% of workshops 
participants) and able to clearly express their view. Training to women’s 
representatives will be provided by the facilitators to ensure that women’s take 
action to ensure that their priorities are integrated into the CsCAPs and for CIGs.  
The ToR of community facilitators will reflect these tasks.  
 
 
CASP+ Gender strategy  
 
165. The gender strategy of CASP+ is informed by the Gender Assessment and 
recognizes that rural women in Tajikitan play a key role in the natural resource 
management, and that they have a high stake in both climate change adaptation 
and mitigation measures.  
166. By promoting positive shifts in the natural resource management, CASP+ will 
provide a major contribution to mainstream gender empowerment, increased 
access to agriculture and non-agriculture services promoted by the project on an 
equal basis. Activities will contribute to: (i) increase gender awareness and 
dissemination of knowledge; (ii) increase women’s decision-making and access 
to common resources and (iii) increase women’s resilience, economic and social 
empowerment through access to knowledge, services, capital and markets”.     
It also reflects the understanding that women’s equal participation and as active 
actors and agents of change in the project needs to be facilitated through a set 
of specific measures, including those, related to leadership and decision-making 
skills. The gender strategy  therefore aims to use every possible opportunity in 
the project actions to advance towards gender equality and women’s rights.  
167. Underlying principles and key features of the gender strategy are as follows:  
• 
Women will equally participate in the project implementation at all levels and 
benefit from its opportunities. A minimum of women’s quotas will be set for 
specific activities. 
• 
The project, through the inclusive participation of stakeholders will support the 
strengthening of gender mainstreaming in the policy dialogue. Gender and 
climate change study will be prepared and finding disseminated through gender 
workshops at national level involving key stakeholders engaged in policy 
formulation. 
• 
Women’s informed engagement in decision making processes on related 
matters (e.g. livelihood adaptation, natural resource management) – both at 
community and household levels – will be facilitated;  
• 
Opportunities for women’s social and economic empowerment, as well as their 
leadership and decision-making opportunities, will be identified and supported. 
The project will target women and women head of households to participate at 
decision-making level in the executive committees of  Pasture Users Unions 
(PUUs), Village Organisations (VOs) and Forest management groups (FMG). 
• 
needs for women’s capacity enhancement on relevant topics will be addressed 
and acted upon, and all trainings will take gender issues into consideration in 
the modules, selection of participants, communication and mobilization 
channels, selection of venues and logistical issues.

=== PAGE 161 ===
44
• 
all project stakeholders will be sensitized and trained on the importance of 
gender mainstreaming under the project and of specific GAP actions;  
• 
gender equality and mainstreaming are adequately introduced to the target 
communities, project staff and other stakeholders; all communication materials 
and project messages address gender aspects and use gender-sensitive 
languages;  
• 
staff in the project unit will include a qualified personnel (Gender and Social 
Development Specialist) who oversees gender mainstreaming in the project and 
GAP implementation;  
• 
Activities will conducted in close coordination with the committees of women 
and family affairs. This will enhance impact and avoid duplication of efforts. 
• 
knowledge management of the project mainstreams gender, and the project will 
monitor and evaluate gender-differentiated outputs and outcomes through sex-
disaggregated M&E indicators and other tools . Gender impact assessment will 
also be conducted. 
 
Preventing increased risks of SEAH and GBV  
  
The engagement of women in project’s activities and their acquisition of new 
skills may upset the current gender balance and provoke SEAH, or even GBV. 
For prevention of SEAH and GBV, the project staff will train project-related 
personnel on the subject and sensitizes and mobilizes village heads/chiefs and 
relevant committees for community-driven support measures. The gender and 
social inclusion specialist will also be focal point for advice on SEAH related 
matters and monitor proper implementation of any activity/mitigation measure 
as required.  
 
To minimize any possible risks the project will consider the following options 
during implementation:  
• 
Increase local organizations engagement to work with local leaders and male 
household’s members and promote campaign for sensitization on gender 
equality and against gender biases and GBV.  
• 
Conducting gender-sensitive and participatory consultations while finalizing and 
designing the various sub-programme activities. These have to include safe 
spaces/ women-only focus groups to encourage women’s meaningful 
participation in consultations. 
• 
Sensitize the IP as to the importance of addressing SEAH in the programme, 
and the mechanisms that will be implemented.  
• 
Work with local government or authorities to sensitize community members on 
SEAH safeguarding;  
• 
Identify male champions where applicable to act as allies on SEAH 
safeguarding;  
• 
Provide SEAH training to project stakeholders and communities.  
• 
Provide in the community on SEAH risks, how to report them and the services 
available including SEAH GRM.  
168. The Project Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will be strengthened so that 
SEAH and GBV related grievances are adequately managed in inclusive, 
survivor-centred and gender-responsive ways. Affected women and men will 
be able to file complaints and grievances against the project. IFAD and

=== PAGE 162 ===
45
project executing entities (EEs) will inform communities about the GRM 
through culturally appropriate mechanisms, ensuring information on the 
mechanisms at all three levels is communicated. Principles to be followed 
during the complaint resolution process include among others: impartiality, 
respect for human rights, equality, transparency, honesty, and mutual 
respect.  
169. Affected women and men can make a complaint or appeal on any and all 
aspects of sub-activities’ design and implementation. A complaint and 
grievance feedback form, as well as a pamphlet explaining the mechanism, 
will be developed under the project and distributed to all project communities 
for their use. Complaints and grievances can be filed orally, or in writing 
(digitally or via post) in a culturally appropriate manner.  
170. Project beneficiaries will be clearly informed of the complaint and appeal 
channels (as described above) in community meetings and via other forms of 
communication that are convenient to them (including local languages where 
suitable). Women’s organizations and networks in the project area will be 
informed of the project and GRM, and information on the GRM provided to 
ensure they are able to serve as key resource persons. Detailed information 
on the project’s GRM is provided in appendix 4 of Annex 6 (SECAP) to the 
Funding Proposal.  
171. The gender and social inclusion specialist will be part of stakeholder and 
community consultation throughout implementation, undertake regular 
consultations with women, youth, persons with disabilities and other 
vulnerable groups. All groups will be reminded of the GRMs and made aware 
of the SEAH services available in the project/program area, which can be 
accessed even if a survivor does not wish to make a complaint to the 
project/program’s GRM.  
172. The specialist will among others check mitigation measures are consistently 
being implemented, e.g., undertake spot checks to see if contracts include 
clauses, use basic records to track whether SEAH training is being delivered, 
check reporting mechanisms are functioning, use monitoring visits to check 
whether awareness-raising materials are clearly visible and awareness-raising 
exercises are being delivered and engaged with. 
 
Promoting Gender awareness:  
 
173. The gender assessment presents key areas where intra-household dynamics 
determined by socio-cultural aspects and gender norms limit women agency, 
knowledge, participation and decision-making. All areas presented in the Gender 
Assessment where women have limited access and participation reflect the 
presence of cultural gender norms and patriarchal attitude where gender 
stereotype determine the role of women. To address specifically these socio-
cultural issues and negative gender norms the project propose gender awareness 
activities at all levels.  
174. At community level the project will engage with male community members, men 
leaders and members of CBOs (i.e. VOs and PUUs) on the manifestations of gender 
bias (against women), GBV, and on the effects of discrimination against women on 
the personal and interpersonal growth of its leaders and members, as well as on 
the organizational development of the organization. The activity will be part of 
gender awareness session taking place in all targeted village. The awareness 
session will also include briefing on women’s legal status (equality of rights) and 
legislation about women in representation and key position as outlined by the

=== PAGE 163 ===
46
national gender strategy as well as women’s land rights among others. The 
sessions will also be an opportunity to conduct conversations and awareness on 
key topics including e.g.  imbalance and unpaid care responsibilities within 
families; women’s leadership role in the Hhs and decision making.  
175. At jamoat, district and national level, the project will organize  gender related 
sensitization events/sessions for institutions and local leaders to create 
awareness on gender with a specific focus on the role of women in rural 
developmentThe activity is a continuous activity through the implementation of 
the project. This is now reflected in the GAP. Activities will be conducted in 
coordination with the Committees of Women and family affairs and in line with 
existing work they conduct. 
 
CASP+ Social inclusion strategy for vulnerable groups 
 
176. Gender assessment and stakeholder consultations informed that certain groups 
in the rural community are socially disadvantaged, particularly poor families, 
women-headed households and youth, due to their weak social and economic 
standings.  
177. The project therefore incorporates special actions to ensure their participation in 
the project. It is expected that youth will be 30% participants in key consultative 
workshops for public and private investments; they will be 20% participants in 
FFs and actively participating in CIGs (40%). 
178. Youth (14-30) are largely unemployed, underemployed, and underpaid, and they 
rank among the working poor. The level of youth unemployment (working age 
15-24) is 20.9% (WB, 2020)73. According to the WB (2017) study on addressing 
challenges to create more and better jobs in Tajikistan, only 43 percent of 
Tajikistan’s total working age population are in the labor force. The majority of 
those working are in low quality jobs in the informal sector. Moreover, too many 
jobs in Tajikistan are seasonal or temporary, and their share has increased over 
time. Women and youth are the least represented in the labor force. Inactive 
youth, i.e. those who are neither employed nor in school, represent 40 percent of 
the total youth population, which is high by international standards. While youth 
are more likely than adults to work in private sector wage jobs, almost one third 
of employed young people are in unpaid (informal) jobs, compared to 15 percent 
of adults74.  
179. For youth, in addition to ensuring their equal access to project information and 
benefits, particular attention will be paid to promote their engagement in 
business opportunities in the project supported value chains by proactively 
including them in business related capacity building activities. It is expected that 
youth will be 40% participants in CIGs. It is also expected that 25% of common 
interest groups will be youth-led. Furthermore, ranking criteria for evaluation of 
grant proposal include priority for youth.  
180. Workshops bringing together different parties in the Value Chain will be provided 
where they will have an opportunity to engage and share information with each 
other and discuss specific problems within the value chain. This will be done as 
part of PPP approach and the programme will ensure that this social category 
 
73 World Bank, 2020:  https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.UEM.1524.ZS?locations=TJ 
74 Tajikistan: Addressing Challenges to Create More and Better Jobs, WB 2017 
available at https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/tajikistan/publication/tajikistan-addressing-challenges-to-create-more-and-better-
jobs

=== PAGE 164 ===
47
(youth and also returning migrants) will be included in any platform/consultation 
held. In line with activities and programme conducted by the Ministry of Youth 
and Sport, the programme will also explore coordination with activities and 
initiatives undertaken at district and village level such as: Young farmers’ 
schools, Young entrepreneurs club and related national competition for 
innovative ideas. To support youth mobilisation and information the programme 
will rely on support from existing youth unions and youth committees (districts 
and village levels) formed and organized under the Ministry of Youth and Sport75.   
181. Women headed households: about 40% of all extreme poor registered in rural 
and township jamoats in 2015 are women. Of the 30,404 extremely poor 
households listed in the same table, 11,013 were headed by women, which 
translates into a 36.2 % share of female-headed households (FHHs) among all 
extreme poor households. (UNDP, 2016). since they are a vulnerable category 
and extremely poor,  women headed households are expected to be 20% 
members of FFS and 20% in CIGs. Furthermore, the grant financing schemes 
include priority for poor households and women headed households. In order to 
mobilise poor women and very poor households, the project will work in close 
collaboration with Ministry of Health and Social Protection. 
182. Persons with Disabilities (PWD): The programme will make extra effort to include 
PWDs (with focus on women with disability) in its activities through: (i) 
assessment on activities where PWD can be included; (ii) special awareness 
sessions at community level to ensure inclusion of PWD in selected activities (ii) 
(iii) special trainings to support self-employed PWD in Income Generating 
Activities (IGAs)  they can perform. The programme will work in coordination 
with Community Based Organisations (CBOs) already supporting the work of the 
Social Protection Units (Ministry of Health and Social Protection) to mobilise and 
engage with PWDs76.  
183. Targeting: Similar to the gender strategy above, the project will raise awareness 
among stakeholders on the risks of potential exclusion of the disadvantaged 
groups and importance of inclusive approach, and ensure their informed 
participation through a set of specific actions.  
184. Selection will be conducted in a series of steps as follows: (i) mobilisation 
campaign to present the programme; (ii) wealth ranking exercise conducted by 
the Community facilitators (CF) including support from local CBOs, given their 
knowledge of poorest and disadvantaged households, especially recipients of 
social aid, pensions and also PWD; (iii) involvements of the  local community 
leaders/committee to validate the proposed beneficiaries and avoid risk of elite 
capture; (iv) verification by programme staff through physical visits to the 
households and checking the community validation process (minutes of meetings 
and other documentation provided to ensure process is transparent and records 
are duly kept as part of M&E requirements including the way potential complaints 
are addressed during the process).  
185. A participatory wealth ranking exercise will be conducted at community level to 
identify the poorest and the better off, following the example of the LPDPII where 
such exercise was conducted by Aga Khan Foundation (AKF)77 and details for 
implementation are reported in the LPDP II Programme Implementation Manual 
 
75 Consultation with representatives was held during CN design remote mission. 
76 Consultation with representatives from Social Protection Unit of Ministry of Health and Social protection during the design confirmed 
validity of proposed interventions.  
77 Consultation with AKF representative and LPDP gender focal point  during the  design mission on the validity of the 
proposed methodology and lesson learned.

=== PAGE 165 ===
48
(PIM). The programme will promote services in line with needs of all target 
groups. Some activities will be of interest for the community as a whole: i.e. 
Climate Sensitive Community Action Plan (CsCAPs) for productive and social 
infrastructures/adaptation and mitigation activities and therefore all members 
will be mobilised through Village Organisations (VOs), PUUs, WUAs and Women 
Groups (WG). Targeted activities will be designed for specific groups, especially 
the poorest and vulnerable ones. Poor and poorest households will be identified 
and selected through the wealth ranking exercise (which requires validation from 
the community to avoid elite capture and keep tracking of process transparency) 
and key criteria related to poverty and vulnerability set for their participation in 
Farmers Field Schools (FFS) and Common Interests Groups (CIGs).  It is 
expected that WHHs will be 20% of FFS and CIGs respectively. Furthermore,  
women from vulnerable households will be given priority for grant financing.  
186. The project manager will take the full responsibility to ensure gender 
mainstreaming and social inclusion of the project. All members of the project 
team will be held accountable for gender mainstreaming and social inclusion, and 
will be technically assisted by the Gender and Social Development Specialist 
(part of the PMU). 
 
Target 
Group 
Key Characteristics 
Major Challenge 
Opportunities under 
CASP+ 
Poor 
households  
(including 
Women and 
WHHs) 
 
26.3 
Poverty 
national 
level 
(10% 
extreme 
poverty). 
 
20% WHHs 
total 
national 
population  
 
 
 
• Households below 
poverty line 
• Subsistence farmers 
with household plots 
(‘kitchen gardens’ of 
about 0.2 ha) and a 
small number of 
animals (1-2 cattle, 
5-10 small 
ruminants) 
• Work as labourers 
on others’ farm 
• WHHs, including 
those headed by 
‘abandoned wives’ 
• Women and WHHs 
ranking among the 
poorest (40% of 
those registered 
among poorest are 
women). 
• Receiving assistance 
from National Aid 
schemes 
• Food insecurity 
and malnutrition 
• Low 
production/prod
uctivity due to 
negative effects 
of CC. 
• Decrease of 
income due to a 
drop of 
remittance 
• Lack of 
productive 
infrastructures/c
onnectivity to 
market 
• Women lack 
representation in 
decision-making 
bodies. 
• Empowerment through 
participation in 
VOs/PUUs/FMGs and its 
CsCAP process. 
• Improved well-being 
through access to 
community (social and 
productive) infrastructure 
• Opportunities for cash 
income through income 
generation activities, 
particularly for WHHs 
through participation in FFs 
and CIGs (50% women and 
20% WHHs) 
• Leadership training and 
representation for women 
in key committees of CBOs 
• Access to matching grants   
Transitory 
Poor HHs  
(subsistence 
and semi-
subsistence 
farmers 
• Smallholder farmers 
with access to land 
beyond household 
plots through leasing 
arrangements 
(about 1 ha) 
• Low farm 
productivity due 
to lack of access 
to mechanized 
power, 
irrigation, seeds 
and other inputs 
In addition to the above: 
• Increased productivity and 
farm efficiency from 
productive infrastructure 
and farm mechanization 
(CSCAPs)

=== PAGE 166 ===
49
producing 
surplus)  
• Vulnerable to fall 
back into poverty 
• In possession of 
about 5 cattle and 
15-20 small 
ruminants, that 
graze on community 
pasture land 
• Family dekhan farms 
with similar size of 
productive resources 
(land and livestock) 
• Work as labourers 
on others’ farm 
• No assistance from 
national aid schemes 
(full productive 
capacity) 
and marketing 
opportunities 
• Vulnerable to 
climate and 
price shocks  
• Decrease of 
income due to a 
drop of 
remittances 
• Higher cash income 
through participation in 
CIGs and linkages with 
Private Sector 
• Higher production capacity 
through FFs. 
• Access to matching grants   
Unemployed 
and 
underemploy
ed rural 
youth 
• No agricultural land 
or livestock 
• Assist parents’ or 
relatives’ farming 
• Some with relatively 
good level of 
education  
• Difficult entry to 
farming due to 
lack of access to 
land 
• Sharp decrease 
in migration 
opportunities 
• Lack of 
knowledge 
related to 
farming as a 
business/agribu
siness 
opportunities 
along VCs 
• Empowerment and learning 
of leadership and 
organizational management 
through participation in 
VO/PUUs and its CsCAP 
process. 
•  Access to business 
development services 
/enterprise development 
training   
• Inclusion into 
dialogue/consultation 
Knowledge sharing at 
community level and with 
actors from  Private Sector 
• Priority in accessing 
Matching grants     
People with 
Disability 
(PWD) 
• Ranking among the 
poorest 
• Rely exclusively on 
income from social 
pension (very low) 
• Social stigma and 
marginalisation  
• Women faced double 
marginalisation/discr
imination 
• Difficulties in 
identification of 
suitable jobs, 
• negative 
attitudes and 
lack of 
education and 
skills 
• Assessment of activities for 
PWD 
awareness sessions 
targeting communities to 
ensure inclusion of PWD in 
identified training (IGA) 
• Special trainings to support 
self-employed PWD along 
activities they can perform. 
• Access to matching grants.

=== PAGE 167 ===
50

=== PAGE 168 ===
51
 
References  
 
ADB, Assessment of Higher Education in Tajikistan, 2015 
ADB, Tajikistan Country Gender Assessment, 2016  
ADB, Women’s role in irrigated agriculture in the lower Vaksh River Basin, 2020 
Care International, Climate Change Brief: Adaptation, Gender and Women’s 
Empowerment, 2010 
CBD, The Sixth National Report on the Convention of Biological Diversity, 2019  
Draft National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate Change of Tajikistan until 2030 
(NACC) 
FAO, National Gender Profile of Agriculture and Rural Livelihood, 2016. 
FAO, Small Family Farms Country factsheet, 2018 
National Development Strategy of the Republic of Tajikistan for the period until 2030 
Oxfam, Climate Change, beyond coping, women smallholder farmers in Tajikistan,   
2011,   
Tajstat, Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), 2017 
Tajstat, Dynamics of Poverty Reduction in Tajikistan,2014 
Tajstat, Food Security and Poverty, 2020  
Tajstat, Poverty measurement in Tajikistan: methodological note, 2015 
Tajstat, Situation in the Labour Market in the Republic of Tajikistan, 2016 
UNDP, Human Development Report, 2020 
UNDP, Mapping registered extreme poverty in rural Tajikistan, 2016 
UNFCC, National Communications of the Republic of Tajikistan on the UN Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), 2014 
United Nations Human Rights: Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against 
Women, Tajikistan's sixth report, 2018 
USAID, Tajkistan Agriculture Technology and Commercialization Assessment, 2012

=== PAGE 169 ===
52
Part II: Gender Action Plan 
 
The Gender Action Plan has been developed in alignment with national policies and 
strategies to promote gender equality: The  National Strategy on Enhancing the Role 
of Women in the Republic of Tajikistan for 2011–2020 as well as the National 
Development Strategy of the Republic of Tajikistan for the period until 2030. Both 
strategies include key actions and recommendations to  address the negative impact 
of climate change on women. Furthermore, the GAP aligns with gender specific 
recommendations as reported in the third National Communications of the Republic of 
Tajikistan on the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 2014) and 
the Sixth National Report on the Convention of Biological Diversity (CBD, 2019). 
 
These policies recognize that promoting gender equality and empowering women is 
integral to climate change adaptation and that, whereas women have critical roles as 
educators, caretakers, practitioners, and agents of change in climate resilience the 
country is missing out on a strategic partnership with women. They emphasize the 
disproportionate effects of climate change on women and acknowledge (i) the need to 
enhance women’s knowledge of climate change, (ii) increase women’s participation in 
decision-making at all levels (iii) increase skills, knowledge and access to climate 
adaptive technologies for women working in agriculture, (iv)  provide opportunities 
and strengthen rural women’s voices and leadership capacities to advocate for 
gender-sensitive strategies and policies of adaptation to climate change (vi) develop 
gender-sensitive strategies and policies of adaptation to climate change.  
 
The GAP focusses on women’s visibility and agency as farmers and more broadly 
climate change agents at the community, governorate and national level. It 
recognizes that as a result of differences in socially constructed gender roles and 
social status, women and men experience the impacts of climate change differently 
and differentiated strategies are needed.  
 
Consequently, CASP+ adopts a two-pronged approach to mainstreaming gender in the 
design and implementation arrangements. The first is to ensure that all the activities 
undertaken by the project are gender inclusive and the second is to explore how 
specific activities can be included to enhance women’s agency in dealing with climate 
change risks by supporting activities targeted specifically at women (i.e. leadership 
trainings to increase women leadership skill in decision making).  
 
Under Component 1 the project will increased gender awareness and dissemination of 
knowledge; under Component 2 CASP + will increase women’s decision-making and 
access to common resources and activities in C3 will  increase women’s resilience, 
economic and social empowerment through access to knowledge, services, capital and 
markets.    
The project is designed to deal with the specific issues that women face with respect 
to their roles and responsibilities at the farm level in their role on the homestead 
plots, backyard poultry, livestock feeding, kitchen gardening, etc as well as at 
community level as decision makers.  The project caters to both these roles by 
ensuring that women are  key participants in the decision regarding the Climate 
Sensitive Community Action Plans (public investment at community level) as well as  
private investments from livelihood diversification and improvements through their 
inclusion in the Farmer Field Schools and Common Interest Groups (CIGs). In 
addition, the project recognizes that women-headed households are especially 
vulnerable to climate change risks and often do not have the resources to adapt to

=== PAGE 170 ===
53
them. Thus women-headed households will be given a priority in terms of their 
inclusion and selection in project activities especially in, participation in FFS, CIGs. 
Allocated budget for activities directly supporting women under the Gender Action 
Plan account for USD 5,1 millions.

=== PAGE 171 ===
54
Project impact:  
The overall goal of the project is to contribute to the country’s shift towards low emission sustainable development pathways and climate-adaptive agricultural 
production practices. The specific objective of the project is to increase public sector coordination and technical capacity for building climate resilience at the 
national level and enhance capacity at the district and village level for climate adaptive planning and mitigating the impact of climate change and building more 
effective links with the private sector to help address climate risks by improving integration with markets. 
Contribution to women’s empowerment agenda: While promoting positive shifts in the natural resource management, CASP+ presents a major opportunity to mainstream 
gender empower women to  access to agriculture and non-agriculture services promoted by the project on an equal basis. Activities will contribute to increased gender awareness 
and dissemination of knowledge; increase women’s  decision-making and access to common resources and increase women’s resilience, economic and social empowerment 
through access to knowledge, services, capital and markets.    
Component 1. Strengthening enabling conditions for transformative climate adaptive natural resources management 
Outcome 1 (Component 1): Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate-responsive planning and development.  
Output 1.1: Capacities of relevant national institutions for climate-resilient natural 
Output 1.2: Enabling environment for climate adaptive, inclusive and integrated management of pasture, forestry and livestock resources is enhanced 
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities 
Budget 
Gender sensitive 
based on women 
participation 
Gender activity (Sub-activity 1.1.4.1) 
Develop gender modules to be integrated into the CC  
curricula developed by the project for schools and 
specialized universities. 
Number of gender modules 
prepared as part of curricula 
development. 
Target: 1 
Baseline 0 
By end of year 1 Entity responsible 
to develop the 
curricula 
 
 
 
$ 5,000 
 
12% budget gender 
sensitive 
Gender activity (Sub-activity 1.1.4.2) Provide 
scholarships for male and female youth in training 
curricula on climate-resilient natural resources 
management. 
Number of scholarships granted to 
female students  
Target: 15 ( or 50% of 30)     
Baseline 0 
By end of project University  
$ 360,000 
 
50% of the  budget 
for activity 1.1.2.2. is 
gender sensitive 
Gender activity (sub activities 1.2.1.1) 
Recruit gender expert for (i) stocktaking tasks ( policy 
review and analysis) and (ii) field work  to contribute to 
the diagnostic assessment ( gender and CC). 
Number of gender studies: gender 
and climate change for policy 
briefs and diagnostic study  
Target: 1   
Baseline 0 
By end of year 1 
PMU78  
 
 
$ 27,000 
 
 
 
100% budget gender 
sensitive 
Gender activity (sub-activity 1.2.1.3 and 1.2.1.5) 
Thematic workshops on gender and climate change at 
national level for policy makers (through dissemination 
of findings from gender study, diagnostic , assessment) 
Number of thematic workshops on 
gender and climate change are 
organized. 
Target: 7   
By end of 
project 
Executing Entity, 
led by: Gender 
expert PMU 
 
$ 10,500 
 
100% budget gender 
sensitive 
 
78 The MOA is an executing entity via the State Enterprise Project Management Unit (PMU).

=== PAGE 172 ===
55
to  ensure CC policies/ legal frameworks consider 
gender-specific recommendations. 
Baseline 0 
Gender activity (sub-activity: 1.2.1.5) 
Publication: Gender and Climate Change in Tajikistan 
Number of Publication  
Target 1 
Baseline 0 
By end of 
project 
Gender expert 
PMU 
 
$ 2,000 
 
100% budget gender 
sensitive 
Subtotal Gender Component 1 
 
$ 404,500 
 
Component 2:  Investments in community capacity for adaption and resilience to climate change 
Outcome2:  Increased CO2e sequestration through improved pasture, forests and livestock management 
Outcome 3 (Component 2):  Improved management of land or forest areas contributing to emissions reductions 
  
Output 2.1: Climate-sensitive Community Action Plans (CsCAP) 
 
Output 2.2: CsCAPs executed by local institutions in timely and effective manner 
 
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities 
Budget 
Gender sensitive 
ased on women 
participation 
Gender activity (sub-activity 2.1.1.1) 
Develop gender-sensitive communication materials 
including key message on GBV and SEAH. 
Number  of communication 
(campaign) materials that contain 
gender analysis and gender- 
sensitive messages are developed. 
Target: 1 
Baseline 0 
By end of Year 1  Executive entity  
 
 
$ 300 
 
 
3% of budget for 
activity 2.1.1.1 ( 
communication 
pack) is gender 
sensitive 
 
 
Gender Activity (sub-activity 2.1.2.1, 
2.1.2.3,2.1.2.4, 2.1.2.5 and 2.1.2.6)  
Gender- awareness trainings for local institutions, 
community members, including women’s groups  as 
part of VOs, PUUs, PUAs, PC, FUG establishment. 
Training include section on GBV and SEHA ( e.g 
SEAH safeguarding; SEAH sensitization 
campaigns/trainings to the targeted communities).  
Number of gender inclusive 
consultation and GBV/SEAH 
trainings  
Target: 400 
Baseline 0 
By end of Year 1 
with refresh 
training sessions 
conducted 2 
times a year until 
Y7 
Community 
Facilitators     
Gender Expert  
In collaboration 
with focal 
point/local 
representatives of 
the Women’s 
committees  
$ 253,950 
30% budget for 
formation of key 
institutions 
including 
training/workshops 
activities under: 
2.1.2.1; 
2.1..2.3;2.1.2.4 and 
2.1.2.5 are gender 
sensitive 
 
 
Gender Activity (sub-activity 2.1.2.1, 
2.1.2.3,2.1.2.4 , 2.1.2.5 and 2.1.2.6. ) 
Promotion of women membership and leadership in 
relevant local institutions (VO, PUUs, PUAs, PC,  
FUG,CIG). 
Percentage of women in 
leadership position ( board of 
committees) 
By end of Year 1 
with refresh 
trainings 
conducted two 
times  a year 
every year until 
Community 
Facilitators     
Gender Expert

=== PAGE 173 ===
56
Target: 30% 
Baseline 0 
Y5   
Gender Activity (Sub-activity 2.1.3.1) 
Organize separate consultations (meetings) with 
women in target households for their input in the 
design of CcCAPs and identification of their priorities 
(public and private investments). Meeting should also 
be inclusive of young women and women with 
disability.  
Number and percentage CsCAPs 
designed in consultation with 
women.  
Target:  400 CcASP 
Baseline 0 
By end of Year 1 Community 
Facilitators  
Gender Expert 
In collaboration 
with focal 
point/local 
representatives of 
the Women’s 
committees 
$ 320,000 
50% budget for Sub-
Activity 2.1.3.1: 
CsCAP planning and 
design is gender 
sensitive 
 
 
Gender Activity (sub-activity 2.2.1)  
Promote women’s representation  and voice as 
decision-makers through their inclusion in 
development and validation of  CcCAPs  Pasture, 
infrastructure and Forest Management). 
Percentage of women from VOs  
participating in 
validation/prioritization 
workshops in the  region ( 21 
districts)  
Target: Women comprise a 
minimum of 30 percent of 
workshop participants to validate 
investment plans and youth 30% 
( the above categories shall be 
inclusive of PwD). 
Number of Investments plans  
validated by women 
representative. 
400 
Quality of women’s participation 
in the validation workshop 
Target: Most women felt 
comfortable and confident 
expressing their views and 
endorse  the plan.  
By end of year 1 Community 
Facilitators   
Gender Expert 
In collaboration 
with focal 
point/local 
representatives of 
the Women’s 
committees 
Gender Activity (sub-activity 2.2.1.1.) 
Promotion of women to access  pasture through 
implementation of PMP . 
Number of women accessing 
improved pasture land under PM 
plans. 
Target  30% women 
By end of Y3 
until Y7  
Executing entity  
$ 157,500 
30% budget gender 
sensitive ( activity 
2.2.1.1)

=== PAGE 174 ===
57
Baseline 0 
Gender Activity (sub-activity 2.2.3.2): 
Promotion of women to access to JFM contracts ( 
agroforestry). 
Number of women being selected 
for JFM Contracts  
Target: 20% women  
Baseline 0 
 By end of Y3 
until Y7 
Executing entity  
$20,000 
20% budget gender 
sensitive ( activity 
2.2.3.2 workshop and 
training) 
Gender activity (sub-Activity: 2.1.2.7) Leadership 
trainings  
Organize leadership training for women 
representatives in PUUs/VOs/FMGs (6 women per 
village). 
Women representatives  trained 
in leadership skills 
Target: 2,400  
Baseline 0   
Continuous ( 
one training Y 1 
and other 
refresh training 
session until end 
of projects-Y7) 
Specialized 
Service 
Provider/NGOs 
$ 100,000 
100% budget is 
gender sensitive 
Gender and M&E activity: conduct Gender–sensitive 
impact assessment of Component 2 activities. 
Consultations, analysis and 
findings of impact assessment are 
sex- disaggregated  
Target: Gender-sensitive impact 
assessment report C-2 
By end of 
project 
Company/ 
consultancy  
conducting 
Impact 
Assessment  
Assessment (cost 
under project 
managment) 
Subtotal Gender Component 2 
 
 
$  851.750 
  
Component 3: Strengthening livelihoods for enhanced resilience through market based approaches 
Component 3 - Outcome 4:   Strengthened communities and individuals adaptive capacity and reduced exposure to climate risks 
Output 3.1: Business partnerships between smallholder producer groups and private sector actors are established 
Output 3.2: Climate resilient livestock value chains developed 
Output 3.3: Diversifying Livelihoods for vulnerable households 
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities 
Budget 
Gender sensitive 
ased on women 
participation 
Gender activity (sub activity 3.1.4) 
Number of  women FFS facilitators  trained 
Number and percentage of women
FFs facilitators  
Target: 8 ( 20% of 40)  
Baseline 0 
By end of Year 1 Executive entity 
and FFs master 
trainers  
$ 16,000 
 
20 % of the budget  
for facilitators 
trainings under Sub-
activity 3.1.4.1 is 
gender sensitive 
 
 
Gender activity (Sub-activity 3.2.3.3):  
Formation of women FFs (customized to suit 
women’s specific needs and preferences in terms of 
frequency, duration, timing, location). 
Number and percentage  of 
women-only FFS  
Target: 40 ( or 50% of 80) total  
Baseline 0 
By end of Year 1 Executive entity   
and  FFs master 
trainers   
 
50% of the budget 
for sub-activity 
3.1.4.2 ( roll out of 
FFS) is gender 
sensitive 
 
Gender activity (Sub-activity 3.2.3.3) 
Training women and women head of households 
Number and percentage of women
participants in FFS 
Year 3-7  
Executive entity   
and FFs master 
$ 131,300

=== PAGE 175 ===
58
(WHHs)  in climate smart agricultural practices 
through FFs. 
Assess  impact on women  
Target: 2,000 (or 50% of 4,000 ) of 
which  400  WHHs  
Baseline 0 
Number of women  and women 
head of  households reporting 
increased knowledge as a result of 
their participation in FFS Target 
1400 / 70% of  2000 
Number of women and women 
headed of households reporting 
increased  use of climate smart 
practices as a result of their 
participation in FFS Target:  
1400 / 70% of  2000 
trainers   
 
Gender activity (Sub-activity 3.3.1.1) 
Women trained in income-generating activities 
or business management 
Number of women receiving 
trainings on production 
diversification 
Target: 7,200 (50% total 
beneficiaries, total 14,400 ) 
Baseline 0 
Year 3-7  
Responsible entity 
$ 67,000 
 
50% of the budget 
for subactivity 
3.3.1.1. is gender 
sensitive 
 
 
Gender activity (Sub-activity 3.3.1.3) 
Women receive organization of business 
trainings: farm as business, business planning, 
proposal writing. 
Number of women receiving 
Business training 
Target: 55 CIGs ( 50% total CIG 
110 targeted)  
Baseline 0  
 Year 3-7  
Responsible entity 
$ 47150 
 
50% of the  budget 
for subactivity 
3.3.1.3. is gender 
sensitive 
 
 
Gender activity (Sub-activity 3.3.1.4) 
Women receive trainings on climate smart 
resilient technologies 
Number of women receiving 
trainings on Climate smart 
resilient technologies  
Target: 510 (or 50% of 1,020 final 
target CIGs)   
Baseline 0 
  Year 3-7   
As above 
$ 93,500 
50% of the  budget 
for sub activity 
3.3.1.4. is gender 
sensitive 
 
Gender activity (Sub-activity 3.3.2.4) 
Women access Grant Financing Opportunities ( 
windows 1 for individuals )  for livelihood 
diversification for vulnerable households. 
Number of approved individual 
grants for women  
Target: 510 (or 50% of 1,020 final 
target CIGs))   
Year 3-7 
Responsible entity 
$ 2,400.00 
 
50% of the  budget 
For individual grants ( 
3.3.2.2) is  gender 
sensitive

=== PAGE 176 ===
59
Baseline 0 
Gender activity (Sub-activity 3.3.2.5) 
Women access Grant Financing Opportunities ( 
windows 2 for groups) commercialization and 
agribusiness development.   
Number of approved group grants 
from women-led groups.  
Target:  33 (or 30% of 110)   
Baseline 0 
Year 3-7 
Responsible entity 
$ 990,000 
30% of the budget 
for group grants ( 
3.3.2.2) is  gender 
sensitive 
Gender and M&E: Gender–sensitive impact 
assessment of Component 3 activities conducted 
Consultations, analysis and 
findings of impact assessment are 
sex- disaggregated  
Target: Gender-sensitive impact 
assessment report. C-3 
Company 
responsible for 
the assessment 
Assessment cost 
under project 
Management  
Subtotal Gender Component 3 
$ 3,744,950 
Project Management 
Recruit staff responsible and accountable for 
mainstreaming gender in project: Gender Expert. 
Gender expert recruited 
Target:1 
PMU 
 $ 84,000 
Salary Expert 
To hire company to do the  independent impact 
assessments, including gender impact assessment 
Impact assessment conducted 
Target: 1  
consultancy firm 
for impact 
assessment 
Gender Impact 
assessment  
$  50,000 
100% budget for the 
gender  impact 
assessment   
Subtotal Project Management 
$ 134,000 
Total Budget Gender sensitive 
$ 5,135,200 
Component 
Gender Sensitive budget  
Component 1 
$ 404,500 
Component 2 
$ 851,750 
Component 3 
$ 3,744,950 
Project Managment 
$ 134,000 
Total 
$ 5,135,200 
_______________
