=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 23.8.20470
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 23.8.20470
creationDate: D:20240212160735+09'00'
modDate: D:20240212160735+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
4 – 7 March 2024 
Kigali, Rwanda 
Provisional agenda item 10 
GCF/B.38/02/Add.10 
12 February 2024 
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum X 
Funding proposal package for FP230 
Summary 
This addendum contains the following six parts: 
a) A funding proposal summary titled "Kuali Fund-GCF” submitted by Compañia 
Española de Financiación del Desarrollo S.A.S.M.E. (COFIDES);
b) No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);
c) Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure;
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and
f) Gender documentation of the funding proposal.
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated 
authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled “Kuali Fund-GCF” submitted by Compañia Española de 
Financiación del Desarrollo S.A. S.M.E. (COFIDES) is being circulated on a limited distribution basis 
only to Board Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, 
legally privileged or commercially sensitive information of the entity.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.10 
Page b 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
114 
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure 
125 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
128 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
139 
Gender documentation 
142

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Country(ies): 
Regional – Latin América and the Caribbean 
Accredited Entity: 
COFIDES 
Date of first submission: 
[2020/09/17]  
Date of current submission  
[2023/12/22]  
Version number 
[V.5]

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 1 
 
A. PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Programme 
A.2. Public or private sector 
Private 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s) 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets below. 
For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co-financers’ 
contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 100% for GCF and 
Co-financers’ contribution respectively. 
 
GCF  
contributio
n 
Co-
financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total 
 50 % 
 50 % 
☒  Energy generation and access 
9 % 
9 % 
☒  Low-emission transport 
 3 % 
 3 % 
☒  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances 
 13 % 
 13 % 
☒  Forestry and land use 
 25 % 
 25 % 
Adaptation total 
 50 % 
 50 % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities 
See 
footnote2 
See footnote2 
☒  Health and well-being, and food and water security 
 50 % 
 50 % 
☐  Infrastructure and built environment 
 
 
☐  Ecosystems and ecosystem services 
 
 
 
 
 
Total number of direct 
and indirect beneficiaries: 
884,714 
A.5. Expected 
mitigation outcome 
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, 
avoided or removed / 
sequestered) 
2,707,455 tn 
A.6. Expected adaptation outcome 
 
(Core indicator 2: direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached) 
Direct 
beneficiari
es: 
242,335 
Indirect 
beneficiaries 
642,379  
0.06% of 
total 
population 
0.15% of total 
population 
A.7. Total financing 
(GCF + co-finance3)  
128,2 million Euros 
 
 
A.9. Project size 
Medium (Up to USD 
250 million) 
A.8. Total GCF 
funding requested  
32.8 million Euros 
For multi-country 
proposals, please fill out 
annex 17. 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) 
requested for the GCF 
funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent with 
A.8.  
☒  Grant 
7.8 MM  
☐  Loan 
 
☐  Guarantee 
 
☒  Equity  
 
    25 MM 
☐  Results-based payment     
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition to 
the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or 
programme described in the funding proposal.

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2 
 
 
2 It is assumed that the resources to support mitigation in the different sectors (Energy generation and access, Low Emission 
Transport, Buildings, cities, industries and appliances, Forestry and Land Use) will also contribute to increase livelihood 
resilience (ARA1-SMEs). To avoid duplications, no specific funding is attributed to ARA1, though the total number of 
beneficiaries (SMEs) will be measured (refer to CO2 calculation Excel and E5). 
3 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3 
 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
Investment 
period: 
5 years 
TAF 
implementa
tion period: 
10-12 years 
A.12. Total lifespan 
10-12 years 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
 
Approved 
by 
FONPROD
E Steering 
Committee 
on 
12/20/2022. 
A.14. ESS category  
I-2  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☐    
No ☒ 
A.16. Has Readiness or PPF 
support been used to prepare this 
FP? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP 
included in the entity 
work programme? 
Yes ☐    
No ☒ 
A.18. Is this FP included in the 
country programme? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.19. 
Complementarity and 
coherence  
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF, etc.)? If 
yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
GAWA Capital Partners SGEIC S.A., is a private limited liability firm specialized in impact investment 
management services. GAWA is registered as Alternative Investment Fund Manager (AIFM) and 
supervised by the Spanish Exchange Commission (CNMV). GAWA will act as fund and TAF manager. 
All the vehicles (i.e. Kuali Fund S.C.A. SICAR – EuSEF), GP (i.e. Kuali Fund Management Sarl) and 
manager (i.e. GAWA Capital Partners SGEIC S.A) will be the Executing Entities because of the role that 
each of these entities plays in the channelling of GCF proceeds and the making of investments. 
COFIDES will manage EUR 0.4 million from GCF. Therefore, COFIDES will be also an Executing 
Entity for such activities. 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4 
 
Kuali Fund aims to contribute to the transition to low-carbon and resilient economies in selected countries in 
Latin American and the Caribbean (LAC) countries by fostering the systemic adoption of climate best practices 
by small financial institutions, including small banks (up to Tier 2), Microfinance Institutions (MFIs), 
cooperatives, other non-bank financial institutions and FinTech companies (denominated all as Financial 
Service Providers, or FSP). Kuali Fund will transform FSPs in their transition to become greener and more 
inclusive, so that they ultimately end up providing green and climate products 4 to Small and Medium 
Enterprises (SMEs) and to smallholder farmers (or smallholders). Kuali will also support companies with 
innovative climate solutions5 (denominated as innovative companies) to expand the number of available 
mitigation and adaptation solutions that could eventually be financed by FSP.  
Kuali Fund will invest at least 70% of its capital in 14 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, as 
the region is particularly vulnerable to the negative effects of climate change. Some 14 million Latin Americans 
live in areas considered to be at high risk from climate change. Up to a maximum of 30% will be invested in 
India to share best practices in climate finance between India and Latin America on how to use technology 
to be more efficient and amplify impact. 
Kuali Fund will therefore be invested in 15 countries. However, as some of these countries have not issued 
the No Objection Letter, Kuali Fund will be divided into: i) the Funded Activity (hereinafter referred to as the 
Funded Activity or Kuali Fund-GCF) will only invest in the following seven countries: Mexico, Brazil, Colombia, 
El Salvador, Panama, Honduras and Guatemala; and ii) the Kuali Fund-nonGCF, which will invest in 15 
countries (India and 14 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean). This Funding Proposal has been 
designed according to the universe of seven countries, and even though Kuali Fund will cover a wider area, 
the figures and impacts for the Funded Activity (or Kuali Fund-GCF) are differentiated in this FP from the Kuali 
Fund as a whole. 
Kuali Fund-GCF is expected to directly support over 237,907 smallholders and 4,428 SMEs that will 
collectively avoid 2,707,455 expected tons of CO2 equivalent in 10 years expected lifetime6. 
According to the IFC7, the climate finance gap in developing countries is USD 23 trillion by 2030. This gap 
implies an increase in climate finance from USD 22 trillion to USD 44.5 trillion over this period. If this target is 
met, climate finance from financial institutions will account for 30% of total lending from financial institutions 
by 2030. So far, Financial Institutions’ (FI) lending has traditionally been channeled by large banks to 
finance large renewable energy projects, large industrial power plants and large efficient building 
construction companies.  
However, the smaller financial institutions targeted by Kuali Fund (FSPs) are key to mobilising climate 
finance in markets underserved by FIs (mainly referred to large banks). These small institutions are 
essential to channel climate finance to the two key segments that are the backbone of these recipient 
economies and that larger banks typically do not serve because of their perceived risk: (i) the smallholder 
farmers segment, which is one of the most vulnerable populations to climate change and will need to adapt 
rapidly to new climate conditions by adopting climate solutions, including ecosystem-based adaptation; and 
(ii) the SME segment, which accounts for 60%-70% of the industrial pollution and a significant share of global 
carbon emissions8. 
Kuali Fund will also work with the innovative companies - to increase the number of available adaptation and 
mitigation solutions (mitigation solutions for SMEs and adaptation solutions for farmers) - and Financial 
Service Providers that are seeking to implement more sustainable environmental practices. The FSPs will 
support the SME and smallholder farmer sector and promote the creation of partnerships and synergies 
between traditional FSPs and Fintech companies through open banking cooperation. The impact of the 
Funded Activity’s investments will be maximised with the support of a Technical Assistance Facility, which 
will assist the investees, inter alia, in implementing a green strategy, integrating green risks and opportunities 
into their systems, and launching and expanding green and climate-friendly products and services. 
Regarding the investments to be financed by Kuali Fund-GCF, from an SME perspective, the Funded Activity 
will finance assets or activities such as solar roof panels, high efficiency heat pumps, insulation, low emission 
transport, energy efficient machinery, methane digesters, among others; and the smallholder farmers may be

=== PAGE 9 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5 
 
supported in activities such as tree planting, composting, restoration of abandoned farmlands, on-farm 
irrigation systems, regenerative annual crops, silvopastoral systems or tree intercropping. In terms of 
innovative companies, Kuali Fund-GCF will invest in companies with innovative solutions for mitigation (such 
as electric transport, rural solar energy providers, bio-digester manufacturing companies, EV charging 
network) and in adaptation (farm-to-business mobility supply chain, smart farming, farming as a service 
platform or vertical farming). 
 
Kuali Fund’s structure includes the Kuali SICAR-EuSEF (the SICAR 9) and a Special Purpose Vehicle 
incorporated as a Securitisation Vehicle (SV) and is divided into two funding divisions: Kuali Fund-GCF and 
Kuali Fund-nonGCF10. The size of Kuali Fund-GCF for investments in NOL-countries is expected to reach 
EUR 119.5 million in total commitments to be used for investments and EUR 5.91 million for Technical 
Assistance. An EUR 0.4 million is requested from the GCF for Communication, Audit and Evaluation purposes 
and an additional EUR 2.4 million from the GCF for Monitoring and Evaluative Data Collection.  
 
4 Loan, participation in equity, insurance or any type of financial product denominated green because it will finance the 
acquisition of any SME or smallholder farmers’ asset that have mitigation impact (any improvement in processes that avoid 
CO2 tons, the acquisition of new equipment that reduce the carbon footprint, low emission transport, appliances, power 
generation, efficient vehicles, etc.) and/or adaptation impact (innovative seeds with better adaptation to new climate patterns, 
risk systems, green agriculture solutions, etc.). 
5 Companies that already offer products/services related with mitigation and adaptation, mainly “Agri-tech” and “Climate-tech” 
companies. 
6 The total life of the Fund will be 10 years, with the possibility of extending the life for a further 2 years (12). 
7 Climate Investment Opportunities in Emerging Markets, An IFC Analysis, 2016. 
8 SME and the Environment in the EU, European Commission, 2010. 
9 Detailed information regarding the structure of the SICAR, the SV and Kuali Fund is included in section B.4 of the Funding Proposal. 
10 Kuali Fund-non GCF will include contributions from the EU and private resources to finance investments in 15 countries, including the 8 
countries (Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Paraguay, Nicaragua and India) where the NOL has not been issued 
for GCF contributions, up to EUR 250 million. The GCF will not be involved in these transactions.

=== PAGE 10 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6 
 
Kuali Fund-GCF is expected to catalyse private and institutional investments at scale through a blended 
finance structure. The EU and GCF contributions to the first loss tranche of Kuali Fund-GCF11 (EU: EUR 1.26 
million and GCF: EUR 25 million) will be key to mobilising private investor participation by reducing their 
exposure to the perceived risk of the SME and smallholder farmer’s sector. The GCF, EU, FONPRODE and 
Kuali Fund itself will also contribute to the financing of the Technical Assistance (EUR 5.0 million from GCF; 
EUR 0.57 million from EU; EUR 0.38 million from FONPRODE and EUR 0.04 from Kuali Fund). 
As Kuali Fund-GCF will invest in 7 countries, 100% of the GCF resources will be allocated to NOL countries, 
and a 15% of the sum of both the EU first loss contribution and from the EU, FONPRODE and Kuali Fund 
contributions in TA resources will be allocated to NOL countries, leaving 85% of its resources to cover the 
non-NOL countries of Kuali Fund-nonGCF. 
The Securitisation Vehicle will issue notes that will be subscribed by the Spanish Agency for International 
Cooperation and Development 12 (AECID) through the FONPRODE 13 Sovereign Fund managed by the 
Spanish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, European Union and Cooperation for up to EUR 19.4 million for Kuali 
Fund-GCF, with a maturity corresponding to the duration of the Funded Activity (10-12 years). These notes 
will enhance the return to private investors.  
The remaining funding is expected to come from the private sector (EUR 72.8 million) and a potential 
contribution from GAWA Capital (EUR 1 million). 
The Subsidiary Agreements that COFIDES -as AE- will prepare for the implementation of this proposal are: i) 
for the equity component, the Private Placement Memorandum (PPM), the Commitment Agreement, and the 
Side Letter; ii) for the TA component, the Fiduciary Agreement. 
Kuali Fund-GCF will use part of these resources to transform both innovative companies and FSPs to 
implement climate finance strategies to help the SME and the agricultural sectors to reduce CO2 emissions 
and adapt to the impacts of climate change. The Funded Activity will select the instrument that (i) best meets 
the financing needs of the investee, (ii) where possible, provides the targeted risk-adjusted return and (iii) for 
equity investments, has a clear liquidity event/exit strategy. The following instruments are expected to be 
used: 
A. Debt-like investments: Approximately 60-70% of the portfolio, mainly invested in FSPs (including 
Fintech companies), but could also be invested in innovative companies. 
B. Equity: Approximately 30-40% of the portfolio for investment in innovative companies: 
i. Mezzanine investments, such as royalty financing/profit participation loans. 
ii. Growth-capital equity investments with a significant minority stake (less than 20%), a 
board representation and a clear and/or pre-negotiated exit. 
The investment horizon of the Funded Activity is 5 years, and most investments are expected to be made in 
the first 4 years, implying 3 to 6 investments per year. 
Ultimately, Kuali Fund-GCF must have the capacity not only to invest in innovative companies and FSPs, but 
also to transform them, in order to establish more sustainable business practices, while helping to reduce the 
current financing gap for SMEs and smallholders and the perceived risk of providing financial services to 
these final beneficiaries. Kuali Fund-GCF will transform financial institutions to adopt and implement 
 
11 For Kuali Fund, the catalytic contribution will be EUR 12 million from EU + EUR 25 million from GCF. 
12 AECID belongs to the Secretary of State for International Cooperation of the Spanish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, European 
Union, and Cooperation, organised under the laws of Spain. 
13 FONPRODE is a Governmental Trust Fund managed by AECID, with the advice and support of COFIDES. It has no legal 
personality, and it is aimed to provide aid finance to developing countries under the OECD´s concessional terms. All activities 
carried out by FONPRODE should qualify as Official Development Assistance (ODA). However, according to OECD ODA 
eligibility criteria, only first loss tranches in structured investment vehicles qualify as such. However, Spanish budget law 
establishes that all FONPRODE transactions should be accounted as financial assets (General State Budget Law 2017) 
avoiding an impact on the deficit. The national accounting rules in force in the European Union (SEC 2010) determine that 
first 
loss 
investment 
tranches 
cannot 
be 
counted 
as 
assets, 
but 
as 
deficit.   
Thus, investments in capital structured funds by FONPRODE is only possible through debt instruments.

=== PAGE 11 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7 
 
green strategies, following a progression that will be measured with the Green Index 3.014. This Green 
Index analyses the institutions according to their level of green strategy and their capacity to manage 
environmental risk and transform their model into a greener one. In this context, Kuali will invest 
approximately 40% in Green Investments and 60% in Super Green Investments. 
* Green Investments are those institutions that belong to Phases 1-3 according to the Green Index 3.0: 
• 
Phase 1: FSP has a green strategy and systems in place to implement it, including roles and 
responsibilities and how the institution monitors and reports on the implementation. 
• 
Phase 2: FSP identifies the vulnerability of its clients/portfolio and the institution itself, the negative 
environmental impacts generated on ecosystems caused by clients and the institution, and clients’ 
need and demand of clients for green and climate practices and technologies, as well as the 
opportunities for the institution itself. 
• 
Phase 3: The FSP has processes and tools in place to analyse and respond to the identified 
vulnerabilities, negative environmental impacts, and client needs and demands. The institutions 
translate the vulnerabilities, negative environmental impacts, demands and needs into actual risks and 
opportunities. 
These investments are financed at market rates. 
* Super Green Investments are investments in institutions that belong to Phase 4 according to the Green 
Index 3.0: FSPs offering financial and non-financial green products and services and companies with 
innovative climate solutions. In the case of innovative companies, which are all Super Green Investments, 
Kuali will use its investment and technical assistance to expand their operations, establish alliances with FSPs 
for the distribution of their products, strengthen their business model and social performance systems and 
increase their investor readiness to attract new investors in the subsequent fundraising rounds. These funds 
will aim to increase the FSP green and climate portfolio of FSPs at below market rates. 
 
Kuali Fund-GCF will also be a key instrument in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic and its subsequent 
economic crisis. The Funded Activity will contribute to securing financial support for innovative companies 
and FSPs, especially the latter focusing on SMEs and the smallholder farmers segment, which are particularly 
affected by the pandemic. Kuali Fund will provide FSPs (and eventually innovative companies too) with the 
necessary financing, which is essential to alleviate the current post-COVID liquidity crisis. This will in turn help 
FSPs to secure renewals of current funding or access to new funding. 
 
14 Green Index 3.0: https://hedera.online/gicsf_ag_tools/green-index-digital.html

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 
 
 
 
15 Source: UN, December 2019. 
16 Source: 2019 United Nations; GHG Emissions; European Commission “SMEs and the environment in the EU”. 
17 SMEs contribute 64% of industrial pollution according to a study by the European Commission. 
B. PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Main impacts of climate change  
The countries of Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) - especially in Central America and the Caribbean - are 
already severely affected by climate variability, higher temperatures, deforestation, sea-level rise, ocean 
acidification and the increased intensity and frequency of climate-related disasters, which particularly affect 
indigenous people15. 
Coastal areas, where most people of the Caribbean region live, are experiencing a dramatic increase in category-
5 hurricanes due to the rise in sea surface temperatures. More than 80 million people in LAC have inadequate 
access to clean water and basic sanitation, and some 14 million people in the region live in areas at high risk 
from climate change. Transitioning to a greener and climate-resilient economy is therefore crucial to ensure that 
LAC can reduce its CO2 emissions, better protect itself against climate risks and thrive in the long term.   
LAC accounts for less than 10% of total global greenhouse gas emissions but is particularly vulnerable to the 
adverse impacts of climate change due to direct exposure to climate risks, as well as a high sensitivity to such 
risks and relatively low adaptive capacity. Projections show an increase in mean temperatures of up to 4.5ºC by 
the end of this century compared to pre-industrial levels across LAC. Associated physical impacts include 
changes in precipitation regimes, strong increases in heat extremes, higher risks of drought and increased 
aridity.  
In addition, the average intensity of tropical cyclones and the frequency of the most intense storms are projected 
to increase while sea levels are expected to rise by *0.2–1.1 mm depending on the level of warming and the 
region. Global warming not only affects the right to health, food, water, culture, development and adequate 
housing, but also threatens people’s very survival and their right to life and physical integrity, particularly in the 
region. 
According to the United Nations16, temperatures will rise by at least 1.5°C by 2030 and 100 million people will 
be pushed into extreme poverty by climate change. Partner countries are responsible for 63% of current carbon 
emissions due to strong economic growth, increased access to energy and rapidly growing populations. Partner 
countries therefore have a key role to play in enabling the necessary transition to a low-carbon economy needed. 
In particular, SMEs make a significant contribution to growth, employment and innovation in emerging 
economies, but they also drive energy demand and CO2 emissions growth17. 
Climate change affects every country on every continent, but it does not do it equally. People already living in 
poverty are often the harshest hit (75% of poor people depend on agriculture and natural resources for their 
livelihoods, making them the most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change), while having the least capacity 
to cope with them. It is estimated that climate change will force 25 million people to migrate and will cause 
250,000 deaths per year between 2030 and 2050. From an economic perspective, 78% of SMEs expect climate 
change risks to have a significant impact on their business. The world’s poorest communities often live on the 
most fragile land, and they are often politically, socially, and economically marginalised, making them particularly 
vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. More frequent and intense storms, floods, droughts, and changes 
in rainfall patterns are already affecting these communities, making it harder for them to secure a decent 
livelihood.

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 
 
 
 
18 Michelle Bachelet. 
As the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights18 says: “There must be action to ensure that all affected people 
can participate in designing and implementing climate solutions, and this includes specific assistance and 
protection for environmental human rights defenders”. 
Climate context of each target country 
A summary of the key features of the climate context of each target country is highlighted below. Please also 
refer to the Annex 2 for further description of this context, which includes the NDCs and national climate 
plans/targets of each country and how Kuali Fund-GCF is addressing their key objectives and the Annex 22, 
which includes the calculations and methodology for each target country: 
BRAZIL:   
 
The impacts of climate change in Brazil, which is home to nearly 60% of the Amazon, vary widely: higher 
temperatures can alter the range and distribution of temperature-sensitive species; increased severity of 
droughts can severely affect the Amazon’s freshwater ecosystems and the people who depend on them; 
changes in precipitation and temperature can affect the spread of disease; and sea level rise and storm 
surges will have significant impacts on the lowlands of the Amazon delta. Combined with deforestation 
and environmental degradation, these impacts pose a major threat to the Amazon’s natural resources 
and to tourism in the region. Climate variability and change also threaten Brazilian agriculture. If climate 
impacts reduce agricultural production, Brazil’s food insecurity could increase, as could the pressure of 
farmers on the Amazon’s land and resources. 
 
In recent years, the Brazilian government has implemented numerous policies to reduce deforestation 
rates, which fell to one-sixth of 2004 levels by 2014. However, the Amazon remains under threat of 
deforestation, with the rate of deforestation increasing by 29 per cent in 2016 compared to 2015. In 2008, 
Brazil adopted the National Climate Change Plan, which aims to address (1) reduction of greenhouse 
gas emissions; (2) vulnerability, impacts and adaptation; (3) research and development; and (4) capacity 
building and information dissemination. In 2016, Brazil prepared its third National Communication to the 
U.N Framework Convention on Climate Change, noting the progress the country has made and 
reaffirming its active participation in and support for the Convention. 
 
Brazil has set a relative target of a 37% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2025 compared to 
2005 levels. In addition, the country estimates that it would achieve a 43% reduction in emissions by 
2030 compared to 2005 levels but notes that this is only a benchmark and should not be considered as 
part of its official contribution. 
COLOMBIA:   
 
Most Colombians live in the high Andes, where water scarcity and land degradation exist, and in the 
coastal areas, where sea level rise and flooding may affect human settlements and economic activities. 
Rising temperature and changes in rainfall patterns are likely to lead to water scarcity in Colombia. This 
could affect irrigated agriculture, human health, and sectors such as hydropower, which rely on a steady 
supply of water. Sea-level rise is likely to have localized effects, with significant impacts in tourism-
dependent cities such as Cartagena and may lead to the loss of key ecosystems such as coral reefs and 
fisheries, affecting important livelihoods. 
 
The Government of Colombia’s 2010-2014 National Development Plan identified climate adaptation as 
a priority and established a National Climate Change System to improve coordination between 
institutions. Since 2014, a National Climate Change Policy has focused on mitigation and adaptation 
actions by increasing resilience and achieving low-carbon development. 
 
Colombia has a relative reduction target of 20% of projected emissions in 2030 under a BAU scenario. 
An additional 10% reduction would be conditional on access to international financing.

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 
 
 
MEXICO:   
 
Mexico’s location between two oceans and its complex topography increases the country’s exposure to 
extreme hydrometeorological events such as tropical cyclones, frosts, heat waves and floods. This 
geographical vulnerability is compounded by a significant wealth gap (53.2% of the population lives below 
the national poverty line) and urbanization. Aging transport, energy and water infrastructure is vulnerable 
to damage from floods and strong winds, especially in coastal areas. Coastal tourism, an important 
economic sector for Mexico, is also at risk, as is the destruction of diverse marine ecosystems. In rural 
areas, extreme temperatures and erratic rainfall are drastically affecting agricultural productivity, 
including both crops and livestock. Since 1990, agriculture has accounted for 80 per cent of the country’s 
weather-related financial losses. 
 
Mexico’s 2012 General Climate Change Law (GLCC) defines planning and policy instruments, including 
institutional arrangements and provides general guidelines for the implementation of national climate 
policy. Under the GLCC, the Mexican government, is mandated to formulate and guide national climate 
change policy. 
 
Mexico has a relative reduction target of 22% of projected emissions by 2030 in a BAU scenario. An 
additional 14% reduction would be conditional on access to international finance. In addition, the country 
has an unconditional black carbon reduction target of 30%, which could rise to 70% by 2030 conditional 
on external financing. 
PANAMA:   
 
Widespread poverty and inequality have a negative impact on the environment. Panama is considered 
to be one of the most biologically diverse countries in the world, with more than 12% of its land mass is 
protected. Nevertheless, poverty pressures have led many to exploit the natural resources of the 
Mesoamerican Biological Corridor in harmful ways. Deforestation is also a growing concern, as forests 
cover 40% of Panama’s territory. 
 
Soil erosion and deforestation are among Panama's most serious environmental problems. Soil erosion 
occurs at a rate of 2,000 tons per year. Between 1990 and 1995, the average annual rate of deforestation 
was 2.15%. Air pollution is also a problem in urban centres due to emissions from industry and transport. 
Only 79% of the rural population has access to clean drinking water. Pesticides, sewage, and pollution 
from the oil industry cause much of the pollution. The country's fish stocks are threatened by water 
pollution.  
 
Panama has sectoral mitigation goals. In the case of energy, 30% of the installed capacity of the electricity 
matrix should come from other types of renewable energy sources by 2050; and in the case of the 
USCUSS (Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry Sector), the targets are reforestation of degraded 
areas, the unilateral contribution, increasing carbon sequestration capacity by 10% compared to the 
reference scenario for 2050. 
EL SALVADOR: 
 
El Salvador, along with Honduras and Guatemala, is one of the world’s most vulnerable countries to 
climate change. The reason for this problem is that they are all in the Dry corridor, a phenomenon that 
causes drought in an already dry area, which until now has had two very specific rainy seasons (in June 
and September) that have been disappearing for some decades ago due to climate change. The latest 
projections show that, between 2021 and 2050, annual rainfall will be reduced by between 10% and 20% 
and will become much more erratic, making it much more difficult to maintain their way of live, particularly 
for smallholder farmers and the local population dependent on rural areas. 
 
El Salvador commits itself to reducing the emissions by 819,000 equivalent tons of CO2 per year. The 
NDC document does not indicate what percentage of its total emissions this represents. El Salvador has 
set a renewable energy production target of around 86% of its electricity generation by 2030, an increase 
of 50% compared to the installed capacity in 2019.

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 
 
 
 
19 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Special Report: Warming of 1.5 degrees. 
20 Global Landscape of Climate Finance 2019, Climate Policy Initiative 
GUATEMALA: 
 
Guatemala is a multiethnic, pluricultural and highly biologically diverse country, but also one of the most 
vulnerable countries to climate change in the world. Like Ecuador and many other countries in the Central 
American Dry Corridor, it is regularly affected by El Niño events.  
 
Under these circumstances, Guatemala has published its Nationally Determined Contributions.  
Guatemala intends to commit to reducing GHG emissions by 22,6% below 2016 levels in 2030 under a 
BAU scenario, if the country receives international financial and technical assistance. Without this 
external support, the commitment is reduced to 11,2%. The 4 main axes on which Guatemala focuses 
through in the document are:  i) Land use change and forestry, ii) Energy, iii) Agriculture, iv) Residues. 
 
Guatemala has also prepared the National Action Plan of Climate Change. It is presented as a summary 
of the priority actions and precautions that citizens and institutions should take into account to face the 
risk inherent in climate change, using the IPCC report as a reference. It focuses on identifying 
opportunities for sustainable development to protect vulnerable people. It is in line with the objectives 
captured under the “Ley Marco para Regular la Reducción de la Vulnerabilidad, la Adaptación Obligatoria 
ante los Efectos del Cambio Climático y la Mitigación de Efecto Invernadero” (LMCC) a national law 
primarily aimed at combating climate change. 
HONDURAS: 
 
Located at the heart of the Central American isthmus, Honduras, like its neighbours, is constantly 
exposed to extreme meteorological events. In recent years, these events have become more frequent 
and damaging due to climate change. From droughts to floods and erratic climate. The poverty rate in 
the country is 48,3%. This is exacerbated in the rural areas, which are also among the most vulnerable 
sectors to climate change. 
 
Energy and the agriculture are two main sectors in which the country intends to reduce its emissions. 
The country has committed to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions by 16% by 2030, and almost 90% 
of the reduction will come from these two sectors. 
 
The Honduran government has also published a NAMA for a low-carbon livestock sector in 2018, in line 
with its national 2013 Climate Change Law, which demonstrates the importance of the rural sector in 
Honduras and the need for a rapid transition to a path of sustainability in order to stabilise the livelihoods 
of thousands of families in a sector that is facing more difficulties every year due to the erratic behaviour 
of the climate in the region. 
Limiting warming to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels19 will require changes in our economic system, including 
the way the energy is consumed, the way industries operate, and the way food is produced. The investment 
required to achieve this goal is huge, ranging from USD 1.6 trillion to USD 3.8 trillion per year between 2016 and 
2050. Current annual climate finance represents only one-third of the funding needed20. Financial institutions 
have a key role to play in mobilising the remaining two-thirds of the funding needed to close the climate finance 
gap. 
The IFC has estimated the climate finance gap in developing countries for this decade (to 2030) at USD 23 
trillion. If this target is met, climate finance will account for 30% of total lending by financial institutions by 2030. 
Lending by Financial Institutions has so far been channelled mainly by large banks to finance large renewable 
energy projects, large industrial power plants and large efficient building construction companies. However, 
smaller financial institutions are key to mobilize climate finance to markets underserved by large banks. 
These institutions are essential to channel climate finance to the two key segments that larger banks typically 
do not serve because of their perceived risk:

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 
 
 
 
21 SME and the Environment in the EU, European Commission, 2010. 
22 Climate change impacts and adaptation among smallholder farmers in Central America, Celia Harvey, 2018. 
23 Pathways to prosperity 2019, Initiative for Smallholder Finance  
24 Sarah K. Lowder, Marco V. Sánchez, Raffaele Bertini. Which farms feed the world and has farmland become more 
concentrated? 
World 
Development, 
Volume 
142, 
2021, 
105455, 
ISSN 
0305-750X, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2021.105455.  
 
The SME segment accounts for 60%-70% of environmental impacts and a significant share of global 
carbon emissions21. This segment represents a large opportunity for mitigation as SMEs typically use 
energy-inefficient equipment and vehicles, and unreliable sources of electricity, which could be improved 
by solar solutions. If properly capitalised and trained, Financial Institutions could finance equipment to 
increase energy efficiency and reduce carbon emissions. 
 
Smallholder farmers, who are among the most vulnerable populations to climate change, need to adapt 
quickly to new climatic conditions by adopting climate-smart agriculture practices and equipment. It is 
estimated that 95% out of the 15 million smallholder farmers in LAC are already experiencing the negative 
impacts of rising temperatures, unpredictable rainfall and extreme weather events on crop yields, pest 
and disease outbreaks, declining incomes, and food security22. Smallholders can also reduce their carbon 
footprint by using new equipment such as biodigesters and reforesting degraded land. FSPs can play a 
key role in financing climate-smart agricultural equipment to enhance adaptation and promote mitigation. 
 
Climate adaptation for smallholder farmers 
The smallholder finance gap in the 
region is USD 20 billion 23  . This 
financing gap is explained by the 
lack of capital and risk appetite of 
financial institutions to establish 
the right business model in terms 
of products, appropriate staff and 
processes to properly serve the 
smallholder farmers segment with 
green 
and 
climate 
finance 
products. However, this segment 
represents an attractive market for 
FIs, as the growth of their operations needs to come from their expansion into rural areas, as the penetration of 
financial services in urban areas is already high throughout the LAC region.  
The potential of smallholder agriculture on climate change mitigation is important, but pales in comparison to the 
adaptation and resilience needs and impacts on the sector.  
Five out six farms in the world are less than two hectares in size, occupy around 12 per cent of the world’s 
agricultural land and produce about 35 per cent of the world’s food24, but the contribution of smallholder farmers 
to the food supply varies widely from country to countries. Farmers in developing countries are the most climate-
vulnerable population on the planet. Their livelihoods are entirely dependent on the environment and are 
extremely vulnerable to even small changes in temperature or rainfall. As a result, climate change threatens to 
make smallholders the most climate vulnerable population on the planet.  
The main practical risks faced by smallholder farmers are: 
- 
Drought: A temporary anomaly in which the availability of water is below the availability falls below the 
needs of a particular geographical area. There is not enough water to meet the needs of plants, animals 
and people. It is mainly caused by a lack of rainfall or precipitation. 
- 
Decrease in productivity: Decrease in the volume of the final product, whether agricultural or livestock, 
caused by sub-optimal production conditions.

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 
 
 
 
25 OCDE Índice de Políticas PYME: América Latina y el Caribe 2019 
- 
Loss of production resources: Total or partial damage to the ecosystem in which production activities, 
whether agricultural or livestock, take place. 
- 
Increase in production costs:  The need to cover higher costs of purchasing inputs for agricultural and 
livestock activities. 
- 
Increase or occurrence of pests: Increase or occurrence of diseases in crops/animals of diseases in 
plants/animals, caused by external agents. Change in the phenological cycle of plants and/or the life 
cycle of animals. 
- 
Landslides: landslides or movement of land masses, caused by the instability of a slope. 
- 
Flooding: Occupation by water of areas that are normally free of water, due to overflowing of rivers, 
torrential rain, thaw, tidal waves above normal levels, avalanches, etc. 
- 
Fires: A large scale fire that burns or provokes and destroys vegetation or crops that are not intended to 
burn. 
- 
Erosion: Wear and tear and modelling of the earth's crust caused by the action of wind, rain, fluvial, 
marine and glacial processes, and by the action of living things. 
- 
Decreased availability (scarcity) of water: A decreases in the amount of water available, either due to 
less water being absorbed by the soil or a decrease in rainfall. 
- 
Reduced food security: The availability of food, people's access to food and the biological use of food. 
Building climate resilience for these farmers requires a massive improvement in agricultural value chains by 
adopting climate-smart practices, crops and assets. The improved value chains will expand smallholder access 
to quality assets, inputs, training, processing, and market opportunities for high-value and climate-resilient crops. 
These crops and practices will restore nutrients into depleted soils and enable farmers to achieve sustainable 
yields and profits, bolstering their resilience to climate change. Further, new trees planted, and organic matter 
generated will sequester CO2, helping to mitigate climate change. 
Early adoption of low-emissions agriculture in developing countries is an opportunity for more efficient use of 
land, fertilizer, energy, feed and water. However, substantial funding may be needed to adopt new technologies, 
given diverse and dispersed smallholders and costs of monitoring. 
Climate finance for SMEs 
SMEs facilitate economic inclusion and livelihood benefits for the world’s marginalised by offering employment 
as well as products and services to rural and urban communities, thereby contributing to socially inclusive, 
sustainable development. 
MSMEs account for about 99% of all enterprises and employ about 67% of all workers in Latin America25.  
However, due to a particular productivity gap, they account for only a quarter of the region’s total output value. 
MSMEs are distributed along all sector of the economy so precise emissions levels are difficult to stablish but 
are certainly in line with their importance in the economy. 
SMEs face several specific challenges regarding CO2 emissions and climate change like their difficulty to 
measure and manage the emissions they produce and increasing the efficiency of the resources they use. 
Left unchecked, climate change represents material risk to business cash flow and economic growth, by 
increasing operating costs, limiting resource availability, causing shifts in demand, disrupting supply chains, 
which in turn introduces new challenges to a fragile and vulnerable enterprise system. 
It is in the SMEs self-interest in finding ways to both mitigate emissions and to increase resilience – helps future 
proof business plans, meet the climate expectations of customers, retain market access and enhance their 
competitive edge and thereby make it a profitable business for them.

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 
 
 
➢ Kuali Fund-GCF will work with smaller Financial Service Providers (FSPs) such as microfinance 
institutions, cooperatives, non-bank financial institutions, Tier 2 banks and Fintech companies aiming at 
deepening green and climate financial inclusion to SMEs and underserved farmers. 
Besides, on the technology market available for climate finance, there are innovative climate companies that 
already use technology solutions to prevent climate change, by offering climate mitigation and resilience 
solutions to reduce GHG emissions or addressing the impacts of global warming. These innovative companies 
that employ technology to get positive environmental effects on mitigation and adaptation to climate change 
include, among others, agri-tech companies, climate-tech companies, renewable companies, or ecosystem-
based adaptation companies. For instance, a company with operations in Mexico and Colombia, provides 
farmers with an easy-to-install-and-use prefabricated modular biodigester package that includes a full suite of 
biogas appliances and connections. The system takes organic waste and transforms it to renewable biogas and 
a powerful organic fertilizer that is beneficial to the soil and increases farmer's productivity. The biogas can be 
used as mechanical energy for farm productive activities or as a heating system for the farmer’s home. 
To meet the climate change mitigation goals of most emerging markets, there is an urgent need to finance 
innovative companies that use technology for climate change mitigation and adaptation. 
Summary of sector vulnerabilities and mitigation and adaptation rationale: 
Climate Related Gaps and 
Vulnerabilities 
Region(s) 
affected 
Kuali-Fund Segment 
Potential 
Interventions/Investments 
Expected Impact 
General  
 
 
 
 
Climate finance gap in LAC 
LAC 
All 
119. 5 M € Fund with GCF junior 
equity to catalyze private sector 
capital (approx. 73.8)  
Reduction in climate funding gap in 
LAC. Demonstrating scalability, 
replicability to drive climate funding 
toward the SMEs and Smallholders 
sectors 
Provision of Climate Finance 
through Financial Service 
Providers serving vulnerable 
population 
LAC 
All 
Invest and transform FSPs so that 
adapt current risk management 
system to include environmental 
considerations 
and 
building 
a 
diversified set of green products 
and 
services 
that 
incorporate 
environmental 
benefits 
(loans, 
deposits, insurance). 
Kuali will transform its FSP investees to 
adopt and implement green practices 
following the Green Index 3.0 phases. 
Kuali expects that between 80% and 
100% of its investees will reach phase 4 
after the life of the investments, where 
the FSPs will at least start offering 
financial 
and 
non-financial 
green 
products to their clients. 
Lack of mitigation and 
adaptation solutions for the 
most vulnerable 
LAC 
All 
Kuali will invest in companies with 
innovative climate solutions to 
expand the number of available 
mitigation and adaptation solutions 
that could eventually be financed 
by FSP. 
Mitigation and adaptation innovative 
solutions demonstrating scalability,  
Mitigation: 
 
 
 
 
High energy inefficiency in the 
SME sector 
LAC 
- Energy generation 
and access 
- Low-emission 
transport 
- Buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances 
 
Invest and transform FSPs so that 
they provide financing toward 
energy generation installations, 
low emission transport and high 
efficiency machinery and 
appliances.  
 
 
Achieve increased energy efficiency 
and reduce carbon emissions from the 
SME sector. Demonstrating scalability, 
replicability of energy generation 
installations, low emission transport 
and high efficiency machinery and 
appliances for the SME sector.

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 
 
 
 
26 Financing the transition to a net zero future", October 2021. 
27 The time for climate action is now", April 2021 
Lack of utilization of 
agriculture as a carbon 
sequestration mechanism 
 
LAC 
- Forestry and land 
use 
Invest and transform FSPs so that 
can provide financing and foster 
the implementation of Climate 
Smart Agricultural practices like, 
Conservation Agriculture, 
Regenerative Annual Cropping, 
Sustainable Intensification for 
Smallholders, Sustainable 
Livestock Management 
Farm Irrigation Efficiency, etc.  
Achieve increased carbon 
sequestration derived from sustainable 
agricultural practices. 
Adaptation: 
 
 
 
 
Reduced crop yields, income 
generation and food security 
due to rising temperatures, 
unpredictable rainfall, extreme 
weather events, pest and 
disease incidence, etc. 
 
LAC 
- Forestry and land 
use 
Invest in FSPs so that can provide 
financing and foster adaptation to 
climate change through nature-
based solutions such as tree 
plantation, composting, 
abandoned farmland restoration, 
farm irrigation systems, organic 
fertilizers, regenerative annual 
cropping, silvopastoral systems, 
tree intercropping, etc.  
 
Achieve increased smallholders’ 
resilience derived from sustainable 
agricultural practices understood as 
function of exposure, sensitivity, and 
adaptive capacity 
 
PROGRAMME STRUCTURE: COMPONENTS AND ACTIVITIES 
The emissions reductions that need to occur before 2030 can largely be achieved in the 2020s by existing 
technologies such as solar, while the post-2030 emission reductions depend on innovative technologies. A report 
from the World Economic Forum26 notes that to successfully expand and deploy these climate solutions based 
on technologies in the 2030s, emerging climate technologies need to be validated at commercial scale in the 
2020s. According to a report from Boston Consulting Group27, it is expected that these innovative companies will 
require an estimated USD 100 trillion to USD 150 trillion over the next 30 years—equivalent to roughly USD 3 
trillion to USD 5 trillion annually- to fund their development and expansion. 
➢ Therefore, Kuali Fund-GCF’s investments in these innovative companies will be essential to meet the 
climate change mitigation goals in emerging economies. Additionally, In the context of COVID-19 
pandemic and its subsequent economic crisis, many of these innovative companies have suffered lack 
of funding putting at risk their operations. The Funded Activity investments will be key to secure their 
needed financial stability and to increase their investment readiness so that they can attract further 
funding.  
➢ Finally, Kuali Fund-GCF will foster alliances between FSPs and the innovative companies so that FSPs 
can finance the acquisition of the solution that the company implements. To achieve successful alliances, 
the Funded Activity will leverage its knowledge of FSPs to work with them and with the innovative 
company to understand their incentives, manage their expectations and reach a partnership which is 
beneficial for both. 
Climate Finance – best practices 
Countries, companies and especially the finance industry are under pressure to adopt climate finance best 
practices, driven both by regulation and by market dynamics, in order to reach the international commitment to 
greenhouse gases reduction. As financiers, FIs have the potential to substantially move the scale toward 
mitigation and adaptation to climate change.

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 “Green Finance Latin America Survey” IFC, 2018. 
There are four main areas via which FIs can engage in more sustainable practices, as identified in IFC’s28 2018 
survey: 
 
Green strategic commitment: engaging with top management to implement green finance practices, 
cross-cutting functions, and processes. It implies making green finance a central pillar of core strategic 
decisions. In our methodology this corresponds to Green Index Phase 1. 
 
Environmental Risk Management system: adapting current risk management system to include 
environmental considerations. In our methodology this corresponds to Green Index Phases 2 and 3 
 
Green products and services: building a diversified set of products which incorporate environmental 
benefits (loans, deposits, insurance). In our methodology this corresponds to Phase 4. 
 
Eco-efficiency practices: reduce Fis’ and clients’ environmental footprint. In our methodology this 
corresponds to Green Index Phase 4. 
IFC’s survey highlighted that banks in LAC are taking steps to adopt more sustainable banking models, but still 
need support in the four areas highlighted above. Many banks mention that “sustainable finance models need 
access to new sources of financing, in particular, for growing responsible investors that exercise a strong demand 
for assets classified as green. In this context, institutional investors are catalysts for change, promoting green 
banking and actively influencing the decisions and strategies adopted by companies and banks on climate 
change”. Smaller financial institutions such as small banks, MFIs, cooperatives, other non-bank financial 
institutions and Fintechs (denominated all as FSPs) are key to serve SMEs and smallholder farmers, but they 
are lagging in the adoption of these sustainable practices. Capital offered by the Funded Activity is therefore 
essential to this transformation.  
Another key constraint the financial sector faces to serve the SMEs and smallholder farmers segments is 
performing an efficient detailed credit analysis of these final beneficiaries. Fintech sector is developing very 
interesting solutions to increase efficiency to serve this segment leveraging data and technology. For this reason, 
Fintech sector will be essential in Kuali Fund-GCF investments, by supporting green investments to SMEs and 
smallholder farmers and by supporting collaboration between traditional FSPs (which typically have larger 
balance sheets) and Fintech companies. Fintech represents not only an opportunity to deliver green financing 
to SMEs or farmers, but also an innovative channel to serve SMEs and smallholder farmers more efficiently and 
in underserved areas where only technology can reach them.

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 
 
 
  B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram)

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 
 
 
 
29 Worldbank 2022, The Global Findex Database 2021. 
30 IADB, Gender Lens investing: How finance can accelerate gender equality (2019) 
31 Koning, Antonique, Joanna Ledgerwood,and Nisha Singh. 2021. “Addressing Gender Norms to Increase Financial Inclusion: Designing for 
Impact.” Technical Guide. Washington, D.C.: CGAP 
PROBLEM STATEMENT 
Kuali Fund-GCF’s target countries face serious difficulties in achieving greenhouse gas reduction goals in 
countries with permanent growing demographic expectations. The financial sector worldwide is under 
pressure to embrace climate finance best practices. Likewise, the reduction of activity due to the effects of 
the COVID crisis and its consequent lack of liquidity in the markets has affected economic growth. This lack 
of market liquidity is even more severe with regard to SMEs (USD 900 billion gap) and smallholders (USD 20 
billion gap) due to severe information disparities, large number of informal business practices, high costs to 
access the market in relation to available margins, heterogeneity of the market, impediments to SME and 
smallholder farmers growth and productivity and regulatory constraints. 
The gap between the financial needs and the supply of financial services is anticipated to remain significant 
in targeted countries, where, according to Global Findex29 in 2021, 54% of adults in average had an account 
in a financial institution or mobile money provider (98%-100% in high-income economies). Account ownership 
decreases to 45% and 50% for poor and women adults, respectively.  
Financial access is more challenging for women. In LAC countries, women are 7 percentage points less likely 
than men to have an account. A financing gap worth USD 5 billion has been identified for women-led micro-
business alone and an additional shortfall of USD 93 billion for women-led SMEs30. Female labor force 
participation is lower than men and many women are stuck in the informal sector, lacking access to financial, 
human, and social capital which are key constraints for the growth of their business. These limitations are 
exacerbated by weaker levels of financial literacy, a shortage of available financing options and the issue of 
accessing this finance without legal ownership of assets and guarantees.  Participants in the financial system 
need also to be aware of and understand how gender norms limit women’s access and use of financial 
services31. 
Finally, despite their socioeconomic importance, smallholder farmers, the hardest hit by climate change, are 
the most underserved in financial services.  Women in agriculture have less access to key assets, fewer land 
rights and carry out a greater amount of unpaid work within the family and the community. On top of that, 
women are more vulnerable to the effects of climate change. 
The vulnerability to environmental risks and climate change of SMEs, smallholder farmers, women and poor 
households in general is linked to their reliance on expensive, unreliable, polluting, and potentially harmful 
energy sources for their daily needs and productive activities. Farmers are limited in their capacity to invest 
in climate smart technologies and practices to reduce emissions, gain resilience and increase their yields. 
SHIFT IN THE DEVELOPMENT PATHWAY 
Financial inclusion and environmental protection are critical issues for people living in poverty and key levers 
to achieve inclusive and sustainable economic growth. Financial services are central to the lives of everyone, 
allowing people to participate in the economy, access services, seize green opportunities and build resilience. 
When people participate in the financial system, they are more capable to start and expand businesses, 
invest in mitigation and adaptation, education and manage risks. When the financial sector manages 
environmental risks and fosters green and climate products, it can improve clients’ resilience to climate 
change.

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 
 
 
There are Financial Service Providers (FSPs) deepening financial services to SMEs and people underserved 
by traditional banks. Besides, there are technology solutions and climate smart practices available for 
implementation, offered by Innovative Companies (ICs) to prevent climate change.   
ICs together with FSPs have the opportunity to participate to offset the vulnerability of poor segments and 
support reliable climate solutions to SMEs and farmers, thanks to the provision of dedicated financing and 
technical support. The proximity of microfinance institutions to their clients and their expertise in credit 
provision could give them a comparative advantage. To perform in green/climate inclusive finance, FSPs and 
ICs need to implement appropriate environmental strategies, risk management systems and design, provide 
in turn, green and climate financial and non-financial services to SMEs and smallholder farmers. 
IF Kuali  Fund-GCF succeeds in leveraging private capital investment and establishing sustainable business 
practices in green Innovative Companies (ICs) and Financial service providers THEN due to the reduced 
financing gap and perceived risk of lending, SMEs and smallholder farmers will have access to green 
finance BECAUSE improved green financial ecosystem will allow SMEs and smallholder farmers to invest in 
mitigation and adaptation technologies, increasing their adaptability to climatic threats while lowering GHG 
emissions 
Provided that key external conditions in target countries (assumptions) are not significantly deteriorated, 
i.e., that the regulatory framework remains conducive for Green Financial Inclusion, facilitating  private sector 
participation, that the political situation does not deteriorate significantly and that there are no sudden 
situations of over-indebtedness that make it impossible to support the green transition through financial 
services; Kuali Fund and its associated TA Facility can contribute to mitigating the risks for Green Climate 
Finance and overcoming existing barriers. This is especially the case with respect to the risks related to the 
FSPs’ failure to create a short to medium term project pipeline; the low financial appetite for SMEs and 
farmers in Private Sector; the FSPs’ failure to implement the right business model generating lack of demand 
from SMEs and farmers; the Climatic hazards or the risk of an agriculture sector non conducive for Climate 
Smart Agriculture practices. At the same time, it relates to the barriers such as the business model of FSPs 
which are not ready for the new environment with potential higher credit cost, disruption of operations, etc.; 
the gap between the financial needs of smallholders and the supply of financial services; the gender barriers 
in financial inclusion (economic, eligibility and physical barriers); the limited access and use of low-carbon 
technologies and practices at an affordable cost for SMEs and smallholders to manage climate risks; the 
limited preparedness, understanding and use of climate information; the scarce quality and reliable vendors 
of low-carbon technologies; the limited regional cooperation, knowledge management and, finally, the fact 
that most promising current climate technologies are still at prototype phase. 
Once capital from private investors is raised by Kuali Fund in addition to public funding, debt and equity 
investments into FSPs and ICs will be materialized (activities) - i.e., Kuali fund will be capitalized and 
operational (output)-and SMEs and Smallholder farmers will receive, in turn, green financial services from 
FSPs (activity). 
In parallel, other activities such as the setup of the governance structure and management of the associated 
Kuali’s Technical Assistance will entail the launching of the tendering processes to contract the right service 
providers to carry out the TA projects, which will imply that the Kuali’s TA Facility will be fully operational 
(output). TA Projects will be devoted to Green Enhancement for SMEs and smallholder farmers; Green 
Readiness with FSPs; Social Performance and Environmental Risks Management Systems for FSPs and 
ICs; FSPs‘ General Business Improvement; ICs’ Business Model Improvement; Eco-systemic interventions, 
stakeholder engagement and gender actions and, finally, Knowledge Sharing activities 
On the investment side, Kuali’s financing will result (outputs) in greater availability of green financial services 
adapted to the need of SMEs smallholder farmers. Besides, thanks to the TA Projects capacities for Climate

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 
 
 
 
32 Chiriac, D., Naran, B., & Falconer, A. (2020). Examining the climate finance gap for small-scale agriculture. Climate Policy Initiative and IFAD Rome. 
33 Climate Policy Initiative. 2021. Global Landscape of Climate Finance 2021 
34 International Finance Corporation. 2017. MSME Finance Gap: Assessment of the Shortfalls and Opportunities in Financing Micro, Small, and Medium 
Enterprises in Emerging Markets. 
35 SEED (2020). Translating Climate Finance into Climate Action on the Ground. Leveraging the Potential for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs). 
Smart Agriculture and adoption of Climate Solutions will be enhanced in smallholder farmers and financial 
ecosystem actors’ capacities will be strengthened, enabling green and inclusive finance. 
As a result, it will be achieved (outcomes) the Adoption of climate solutions and improvement management 
of agricultural lands contributing to reducing GHG emissions, the Improved resilience in vulnerable people & 
communities and the Enhanced green & inclusive financial ecosystem (technology and market development, 
as well as knowledge generation). 
Greater availability of finance together with capacity building will also drive co-benefits such as Improved 
Financial Inclusion and gender outreach; Employment preservation and labor women inclusion (the latter two 
specially fueled by the gender action plan) and efficient Technology adoption by SMEs together with CSA 
practices embraced by farmers. 
BARRIERS AND RISKS 
The poor mitigation and adaptation results from the AFOLU and MSME/SME sector in the past has been 
caused by several barriers.  
A. Financial Barrier 
 A large gap exists between the actual finance provided and the need by the AFOLU sector to realize its 
mitigation potential. This gap is particularly important for small-scale agriculture, where climate finance is 
approximately USD 10 billion per year, but where financing needs are estimated at USD 240 billion per year32. 
Besides, most of the finance directed toward the sector in general comes from public sources (84% from 
multilateral and national DFIs alone)33 and it is usually channeled through large banks, public institutions and 
companies towards large agroforestry projects.  
Regarding SMEs, in the developing economies, the finance gap from formal MSMEs is valued at $5.2 trillion, 
which is equivalent to 19 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP). This in turn amounts to 1.4 times the 
current level of MSME lending in these countries34. Approximately 40 percent of all enterprises are credit 
constrained. 
A review of multilateral climate finance funds reveals that the explicit integration of SMEs within multilateral 
climate fund projects still remains marginal and that climate finance flows have only marginally enlisted local 
Fis (microfinance institutions (MFIs) and banks) to deliver capital to SMEs, thus discounting the importance 
of these financial actors for mainstreaming climate finance in the financial sector35. 
FSP are key to mobilize climate finance to markets underserved by large banks, companies and even public 
institutions. These institutions are essential to channel climate finance towards two key segments that larger 
banks do not usually serve because of their perceived risk (smallholders and SMEs). However, FSPs struggle 
to understand and respond to the financing needs of climate-smart SMEs with tailored financial products due 
to lack of assessment frameworks for green-climate tech & business models.  
This finance gap for SMEs hinders the capacity of the whole SME sector to realize its contributions to inclusive 
economic development and achieve climate as well as social impacts at scale.  
Kuali’s innovative blended finance structure and target investees can effectively channel climate finance and 
drive investment into sustainable AFOLU and MSMEs, mobilizing important quantity of private resources. 
Regarding women, specific barriers limit their access to finance, such as physical, economic and eligibility 
barriers and FSPs will implement activities to address them to the possible extent.

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 
 
 
 
36 IEA, Net Zero by 2050, 2021 https://www.iea.org/reports/net-zero-by-2050 
37 PWC State of Climate Tech 2021 
B. Knowledge Barrier 
Financial Services Providers must play a major role in catalyzing clients’ plans to mitigate and increase their 
resilience by providing adequate finance for the required assets and investments. Additionally, FSPs will also 
need to adapt to this new environment with potential higher credit cost, disruption of operations, etc.  
However, their business model is not ready for it as FSPs will need to adapt its risk management systems 
and business model to address these new challenges (i.e., climate maps, more resilient operations, better 
diversified portfolios). 
The main barriers that FSP face are the lack of knowledge about climate change (mitigation and adaptation) 
and their potential impacts in their portfolio and the opportunities and risks that it represents. The is also a 
lack of data, tools and methodologies that can manage climate risks, in the form of management systems 
and “green and climate lending”. The regulators and the ecosystem in general are on their way to create a 
comprehensive framework but there is little external support to individual FSP. 
Kuali through its Technical Assistance Facility will strengthen their FSP investees green and climate products 
design & offering, processes & risk management, technology, and employee capabilities.  
C.  Innovation Barrier  
The so-called Climate Technologies are technologies that are explicitly focused on reducing GHG emissions 
or addressing the impacts of climate change. Climate tech applications can directly mitigate or remove 
emissions, help us adapt to the impacts of climate change and enhance our understanding of the climate. 
It is estimated that by 2050, almost half of global CO2 emissions reductions will come from technologies that 
are currently only at the demonstration or prototype phase36. Significant and sustained investment is required 
across the innovation life cycle to ensure that commercially ready solutions are able to scale within this next 
decade. Besides, commercially ready technologies also need important levels of funding to scale.  
Likewise, only 4% of the funding is directed towards companies outside of North America, Europe or China 
and is also disproportionated directed toward the Mobility and Transport sector receiving 61% of all 
investment37. Areas related to the diverse energy efficient equipment, industry or food, agriculture and land 
use are lagging behind in funding.   
 
PROGRAMME STRUCTURE: COMPONENTS AND ACTIVITIES 
Kuali Fund-GCF investment strategy aims at supporting smaller Financial Institutions in overcoming these 
barriers by offering: 
a. Capital in a form of debt to finance FSP expansion as they transition from Phase 1 of the 
Green Index to Phase 4 so that they become ready to build new green and climate portfolio or 
to promote or foster the green and climate portfolio if it already exists. In the case of innovative 
companies, finance will be used to support their expansion so that their climate solutions can 
reach new clients and markets. 
b. Technical assistance to implement projects that help FSPs to become greener and 
eventually to build state-of-the-art climate finance SME and smallholder farmers business 
model. In the case of innovative companies, technical assistance will be used to strengthen 
their social performance systems, their business model and increase their investor readiness. 
The Theory of Change of Kuali Fund includes the transformation of FSPs business models to become 
greener, scale up green and climate lending for SMEs and smallholder farmers. Kuali Fund-GCF investments 
are expected to be transformational in the following areas:

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 
 
 
a. Implementation of new processes & technologies: such as efficient client origination 
models, credit processes or portfolio risk management systems. Establishing risk mitigation 
systems to monitor and mitigate agriculture and SME/smallholder farmers related risks 
following the “Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosure” recommendations. Using 
of data analytics and client segmentation as tools to reduce credit costs. 
b. Training people on climate finance, including product specialists, risk officers, loan officers 
and managers so that the institution can make strategic commitments of green and climate 
lending figures and environmental mitigation goals. 
c. Implementation of Environmental Risk Mitigation Systems (both internal and external) to 
reduce the institution’s carbon footprint (reduction in waste, paper, water or energy 
consumption) and to include environmental risk as a factor of the activities financed and on 
the credit approval process.  
d. Implementation of green and climate products directed to the SME and smallholder 
farmers such as loans to finance more efficient new machinery or equipment or smart 
agriculture loans. 
After this transformation process, the ICs and FSPs invested by the Funded Activity will be greener and more 
inclusive so that they can continue with their environmental and social impact even after the investment is 
exited and possibly crowding in more Financial Institutions that have not been investees to launch new climate 
finance initiatives. Kuali Fund-GCF will support this transformation by providing capital and Technical 
Assistance to FSPs and innovative companies that will strengthen their green and climate SME and 
smallholder farmers product design & offering, processes & risk management, technology, and employee 
capabilities:   
- 
Processes: reflects the policies, tools, mechanisms, procedures and frameworks that innovative 
companies and FSPs (Fintechs included) use to identify, assess and manage environmental risks. 
Kuali expects to use part of the Technical Assistant facility to support innovative companies and FSPs 
implementing environmental risk management systems to monitor and manage their own ecological 
footprint and their clients’ portfolio, including implementing changes in the loan approval process to 
include the environmental risk level of the clients. 
 
- 
Products:  the ICs and FSPs progress towards sustainability begins in many cases with the adoption 
of eco-efficiency practices, but Kuali Fund-GCF’s purpose is to make them reach a strategic green 
commitment, including offering solutions that incorporate environmental benefits, which are 
intentionally and differentially marketed as green and climate to the FSP’s client base. Climate 
financing products include loans to finance energy efficient equipment, solar panels, hybrid vehicles 
or loans to finance other environmental-friendly activities of the SMEs and smallholder farmers such 
as   ecosystem-based adaptation solutions, recycling, waste management or climatic microinsurance 
products that contribute to help these beneficiaries become more resilient to environmental shocks 
and climate change. 
 
- 
Governance/ People: environmental lending products are potentially more complex in their appraisal 
and reporting. Staff will often require training to recognize potential customer opportunities, 
communicate benefits to customers, ensure that loan applications meet eligibility criteria and to report 
on key indicators. Support will be provided in the form of Technical Assistance that allows innovative 
companies and FSPs to mitigate technical risks through the support of external consultants or by the 
creation of in-house specialist teams. Over time, these skills can be mainstreamed into the 
organization. Technical assistance will also be used to design and launch training programs to SMEs 
and smallholder farmers about environmentally friendly practices.

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 
 
 
 
38 Desigualdad horizontal y discriminación étnica en cuatro países latinoamericanos, Alicia Puyana Mutis, October 2018. 
- 
Technology: recent advances in digital technologies and innovative business models represent a 
game changer that can help close the SME and smallholder farmers finance gap by enabling smaller 
firms to tap alternative sources of funding, thanks to the data generated by their digital footprint. The 
COVID-19 global pandemic has led to a devastating impact on SMEs and smallholder farmers, with 
millions of small businesses being at risk of closing permanently if the crisis persists, while others are 
suffering massive losses and laying off many of their staff. The situation is more dire in emerging 
market countries where there are limited public resources to help small businesses. The use of digital 
technologies is proving to be critical to help SMEs and smallholder farmers in crisis contexts. The 
delivery of digital financial services can be done through several players such as financial technology 
(FinTech) firms, which generally focus on a particular financial product or service and utilize new 
technologies and ways to do business to serve customers in a more efficient and transparent manner, 
or through financial institutions that adopt these new products and services or may partner with 
FinTech companies to deliver these products. These players are transforming the traditional lending 
process by automating the underwriting and loan servicing tasks making it significantly cheaper, 
faster, and easier to provide financing to SMEs and smallholder farmers. In addition, the use of 
alternative data and advanced data analytics is helping eliminate the information asymmetry and 
provide additional information to assess the credit risk of SMEs and smallholder farmers. The data 
from digital transactions can help innovative companies and FSPs better understand their customer 
needs and patterns, thereby helping create new products and services. 
These strategies aim to transform the FSPs’ operations to increase SME and smallholder farmers’ access to 
more affordable lending for climate-related loans. It benefits both levels of beneficiaries FSPs (diversification 
of their portfolio and improvement of their image and reputation) and SMEs and smallholder farmers (greater 
liquidity, more resilient, reduction of their energy costs, or increase access to global value chains). These 
mitigation and adaptation activities undertaken by Kuali Fund will result in three co-benefits: (i) Improved 
Financial Inclusion and gender outreach; (ii) Employment preservation and labor women inclusion (the latter 
two specially fueled by the gender action plan) and (iii) efficient Technology adoption by SMEs together with 
CSA practices embraced by farmers. 
The Funded Activity will provide loans, equity, and grants (through the Technical Assistance Facility) with a 
gender approach as well as increase the availability of inclusive financial products for women led SMEs and 
women farmers and will positively impact indigenous woman as the majority of indigenous communities in 
the region works as smallholder farmers38. 
Kuali Fund-GCF’s commitment in environmental and social fields is reflected in the Portfolio Impact Score 
(PIS), a tool designed by the Fund Manager that has already been successfully employed in previous funds. 
Its main purpose is measuring the socio-economic impact of each investment in order to register the specific 
impacts generated. The methodology of this tool consists of applying a score to the performance of each 
project based on social aspects -including gender- and environmental objectives previously set. The Impact 
Score will be measured at the beginning of each investment during the social and environmental due 
diligence. It will be measured and monitored on a quarterly basis. After the exit of each investment, the 
Investors Advisory Committee will select an independent social auditor that will measure the Audited Impact 
Score. A Kuali Fund-GCF’s Audited Impact Score will be obtained as the average of all the investee’s Audited 
Impact Score. This Audited Impact Score will determine half of the potential carried interest of the managers. 
The PIS supports the Impact Management process ant it is the weighted average of two main dimensions: (i) 
Outcome/Output metrics, measured at investee level, and summed to give an aggregate score at the 
Funded Activity level; and (ii) Transformative metrics, aimed at measuring to what extent the investee is

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 
 
 
 
39 The Green Index 3.0 was developed in order to generate a coordinated response among different stakeholders around 
inclusive finance. The main goals are enhancing cooperation, improving learning from different inclusive finance actors, and 
developing tools to standardize the inclusive finance sector to attract more international attention into the sector from both 
the public and the private side. It is used to assess many different FSPs helping them to develop better action plans regarding 
green inclusive finance. SPI4-Alinus complements the Green Index 3.0 by providing investors indicators to improve their 
Due Diligence processes with the FSPs regarding their social outcomes: https://cerise-spm.org/es/alinus/ 
40 https://www.e-mfp.eu/resources/green-index-innovative-tool-assess-green-inclusive-finance-performance-fsps  
developing its policies/ business model to better serve smallholder farmers or SME’s and these metrics are 
measured and scored at investee level and applied as a weighted average to give the Funded Activity’s score. 
Transformation metrics are made up of two set of metrics: (1) Green Index39 – which measure how well an 
FSP currently performs in inclusive green finance through the Green Index 3.0 conceptualized by the e-MFP 
Green Inclusive and Climate Smart Finance Action Group (GICSF-AG)40 and (2) Social Performance Score 
-– which measures how effectively an organization achieves its stated social and environmental goals and 
creates value for the population it aims to reach through the SPI4-Alinus tool.  
Outcome/Output metrics are made up of two set of metrics for a FSPs: (1) Outcome/Output Map – which is 
designed to measure impact, defined as the change in an outcome/output caused by Kuali activities and (2) 
Investee Customized Outcome/Output -– which is designed to measure a specific impact, defined as the 
change in an outcome/output, at the investee level that is not being capture by the Funded Activity level 
preestablished metrics.   
The score is calculated as a weighted average (by investment value) of the Transformative Metric Score and 
Outcome/Output Metric Scores for FSPs and Innovative Companies. All scores range between 0 and 1.  
The chart below summarizes the process to calculate the Portfolio Impact Score: 
 
The result will be established within a range of 0-10 and will be analyzed and justified by external auditors. 
The carried interest will be linked to this green and climate performance, so if the global portfolio score is 
positive, the Fund Manager will benefit from a better carried interest. In this way, the Manager’s interests are 
aligned with the results achieved in environmental, social and climate issues.

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 
 
 
It should be noticed that the PIS is not used during the identification phase. This phase relates to pipeline 
construction and the preliminary investment committee. At those stages, more macro level variables are being 
taken into account (e.g. financial ratios, overall green portfolio, average loan, social mission and targets, etc.). 
Then, the preliminary IC will approve/reject the mandatory on site due diligence that precedes the final 
investment committee. During this Due Diligence, an initial PIS is constructed to serve as a baseline and also 
to evaluate in detail the social and impact performance of the investee and potential contribution to Kuali 
Fund-GCF’s targets. At this stage, the PIS is used to make an investment decision and if favorable to establish 
a base line for monitoring 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization 
Outcome 
number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation 
and access 
 
MRA 2 
Low-emission 
transport 
 
MRA 3 
Building, 
citiies, 
industries, 
appliances 
MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use 
ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities 
ARA 2 
Health, well-
being, food 
and water 
security 
ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment 
ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services 
Outcome 1   
Adoption of 
climate 
solutions and 
improvement 
management 
of 
agricultural 
lands 
contributing 
to reducing 
GHG 
emissions 
 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Outcome 2 
Improved 
resilience in 
vulnerable 
people & 
communities 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
Outcome 3  
Enhanced 
green & 
inclusive 
financial 
ecosystem  
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
If any co-benefits have been identified in section B.2(a), fill in the Co-benefit table below to map each co-benefit to the 
corresponding category as defined in the FP guidance note. 
Co-benefit 
number 
Co-benefit 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
Gender 
Adaptation 
Mitigation 
Co-benefit 1: 
Improved 
financial 
inclusion and 
gender 
outreach 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 
 
 
 
41 Kuali Fund will include contributions from EU and private resources to finance investments in 15 countries, including the 7 countries 
(Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Paraguay, Nicaragua) where the NOL has not been issued for GCF contributions, 
up to EUR 250 MM. GCF will not be involved in these deals. 
42 For Kuali Fund, the catalytic contribution will be: EUR 12 million from EU + EUR 25 million from GCF. 
43 EU contribution in first loss will be EUR 12 million: 1.26 for Kuali Fund-GCF and 10.74 for Kuali Fund. 
44 AECID’s approved by Spanish Council of Ministers of 12/20/2022.  
Co-benefit 2: 
Employment 
preservation 
and labor 
women 
inclusion 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
Co-Benefit 3:  
Efficient 
technology / 
Climate smart 
agriculture 
practices 
adoption by 
SMEs/ farmers 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) 
Kuali Fund aims to support the transformation of the LAC (minimum of 70% of Kuali Fund resources) and 
Indian (up to 30% of the total resources) financial sector to become more inclusive and greener by providing 
climate finance for SMEs and smallholder farmers, fostering systemic adoption of climate finance best 
practices. Since the Paris Agreement, countries, companies, and the population itself have made a 
commitment to reduce greenhouse gases and to adopt best climate practices. Kuali Fund will invest in 15 
countries in LAC and India. Nevertheless, since the No Objection Letters from the whole universe of countries 
have not been reached, the resources from GCF will only be allocated in seven countries: Brazil, Mexico, 
Colombia, Panama, El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala. The Funded Activity (or Kuali Fund-GCF) will 
invest in those NOL countries jointly with part of the EU resources, the private resources, and the SV 
resources from Kuali Fund. Therefore, as there will be separate contributions, there will be also separate 
cash flows for the different financiers. 
The size of Kuali Fund-GCF for investments in NOL-countries41 is expected to reach EUR 119.5 million in 
total commitments to be used for investments and EUR 5.91 million in Technical Assistance. An additional 
EUR 0.4 million is requested to GCF for Communication, Audit and Evaluation purposes and EUR 2.4 million 
for Monitoring and Evaluative Data Collection. Kuali Fund-GCF is expected to catalyze private and 
institutional investment at scale through a blended finance structure. The EU and GCF contributions to the 
first-loss tranche of Kuali Fund-GCF42 (EU: EUR 1.26 million43 and GCF: EUR 25 million) will be key to 
mobilize private investors’ participation by reducing their exposure to the perceived risk of the SME and 
smallholder farmer’s sector. AECID’s contribution44 to Kuali Fund-GCF (up to EUR 17.6 million) plus EUR 1.8 
million from the SICAR itself would be channeled through a Securitization Vehicle (SV) pari passu with private 
investors.  This SV will be a separate legal entity from the Funded Activity, yet applying the same investment 
strategy, and it will be managed by the same General Partner. AECID contribution to the SV will be in Senior 
notes and the SICAR contribution to the SV will be in subordinated notes to protect the contribution from 
FONPRODE, that enhance the return of the private investors. The remaining funding is expected to come 
from GAWA Capital (1% of the Kuali Fund-GCF commitments) and from private investors (approximately 
EUR 73.8 million), which will be raised in collaboration with top private banking institutions. COFIDES will 
also invest as a private investor (approximately EUR 5 million). 
The GCF, EU, FONPRODE and Kuali Fund itself will also contribute to the funding of the Technical 
Assistance (EUR 5.0 million from GCF; EUR 0.57 million from EU; EUR 0.3 million from FONPRODE and 
EUR 0.04 from Kuali Fund). Since Kuali Fund will invest in 15 countries, 100% of GCF resources will be 
allocated in NOL countries, and a 15% of the sum of EU’s contribution in first loss and EU, FONPRODE and

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 
 
 
 
45 MRA 1 (Energy generation and access); MRA 2 (Low-emission transport); MRA 3 (Buildings, cities, industries and appliances); MRA 4 
(Forestry and land use). 
46 ARA 1 (Most vulnerable people and communities) and ARA 2 (Health, well-being, food and water security).  
Kuali Fund contributions in TA resources will be allocated in NOL countries (Kuali Fund-GCF), keeping 85% 
of their resources to cover the no-NOL countries of Kuali Fund. 
The objective of Kuali Fund-GCF is to transform FSPs in their transition to become greener and more 
inclusive so that they eventually provide green and climate products to SMEs and smallholder farmers. The 
Funded Activity will also support companies with innovative solutions (denominated as innovative companies) 
to expand the number of available mitigation and adaptation solutions that could eventually be financed by 
FSP. The Funded Activity will be contributing to the economic growth and job creation/support of these 
countries from a social and environmentally sustainable perspective. This objective is expected to be met by 
setting up a EUR 119.5 million investment fund (Component I) and accompanied by Technical 
Assistance (TA) support of EUR 5.91 million (Component II).  An EUR 0.4 million is requested to GCF for 
Communication, audit and evaluation purposes and an additional request to GCF of 2.4 MM EUR for 
Monitoring and Evaluative Data Collection. According to the IRMF, the Funded Activity will have an impact 
on four Mitigation Results Areas45 and two Adaptation Results Areas46, both with their respective core project 
chain results and indicators.  
Both Components I and II will support the same beneficiaries (namely, FSPs, including the SMEs and the 
smallholders financed by the FSPs) and Innovative Companies. In order to be eligible for TA support, 
investees must have been previously selected under Component I, implying the provision of funding. 
Therefore, all beneficiaries of Component I will be offered TA support related to TA focus areas, however in 
rare circumstances the beneficiaries could reject the support offered or show little interest, capacity, and 
commitment. The TA Manager will make its best efforts as that all can develop TA projects 52. 
Kuali Fund-GCF will undertake debt and/or equity investments into FSPs and ICs (Activity I.1.1.2) to build  
climate  portfolios and provide or implement climate products and services and therefore  contributing to the 
adoption of climate solutions and improvement management of agricultural  lands and reducing GHG 
emissions  (Outcome 1); improve resilience in vulnerable people and communities (especially in smallholder 
farmers) (Outcome 2);  and  improve Financial Inclusion and gender outreach (Co-benefit 1); Preserve 
employment and labor women inclusion (specially fueled by the gender action plan) (Co-benefit 2); and 
adopting efficient technologies by SMEs and embracing CSA practices by farmers (Co-benefit 3). 
The Funded Activity will invest in Financial Service Providers (Tier 2 banks, MFIs, cooperatives, non-bank 
financial institutions and Fintech companies) to drive transformational change that will generate a positive 
environmental impact and to improve access to finance by channeling capital to specific underserved target 
segments (SMEs and smallholder farmers), supporting its investees in their green transition to develop  
climate lending SME portfolios with high mitigation and adaptation impact. A special effort will be made to 
build collaboration and synergies between these traditional FSPs and in line with emerging Open Banking 
trends in Europe and in Emerging Markets. Kuali Fund-GCF will transform these institutions to adopt and 
implement green strategies following a progression that we measure with the Green Index 3.0. This Index 
divides the Investments into 4 Phases: 
• 
Phase 1:  FSP has a green strategy and systems to implement it.  
o 1.1–- Definition of the green strategy: 
▪ 
Detailed goals, mission, documented strategy. 
▪ 
Compliance with applicable standards and regulation). 
o 1.2–- Implementation of the green strategy: 
▪ 
Management, governance, and processes. 
▪ 
Monitoring of environmental impacts. 
• 
Phase 2:  FSP identifies environmental risks and opportunities. 
o 2.1 -- Identification of direct risks & opportunities

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
 
 
 
 
 
47 The technologies targeting energy efficiency being considered by Kuali Fund-GCF (e.g LED Lighting, High-Efficiency Heat 
Pumps and Solar Hot Water) are proven to have significant efficiency gains. 
48 Innovative climate companies are those companies that already use technology solutions to prevent climate change, by 
offering climate mitigation and resilience solutions to reduce GHG emissions or addressing the impacts of global warming. 
These innovative companies that employ technology to get positive environmental effects on mitigation and adaptation to 
climate change include, among others, agri-tech companies, climate-tech companies, renewable companies or ecosystem-
based adaptation companies. 
▪ 
Identification of building and staff: vulnerability, negative environmental impacts, 
identify green opportunities. 
o 2.2 -- Identification of indirect risks & opportunities 
▪ 
Identification of clients: vulnerability, negative environmental impacts, demand and 
needs 
• 
Phase 3:  FSP manages environmental risks and opportunities. 
o 3.1 –- Management of direct risks & opportunities 
▪ 
Actions and processes to reduce institution’s vulnerability and negative env. impacts 
and exploit green opportunities. 
o 3.2–- Management of indirect risks & opportunities 
▪ 
Inclusion of vulnerability, negative env. impacts, and demand/needs in financial risk 
credit & management processes, tools, indicators 
• 
Phase 4: FSP or innovative companies offer financial and non-financial green products and 
services. 
o 4.1–- Financial products & services 
▪ 
Green loans: clean energy / energy efficiency 47 /sustainable agriculture; Savings, 
emergency loans; Climate insurance. 
o 4.2–- Non-Financial products & services 
▪ 
Awareness raising 
▪ 
Training 
▪ 
Technical assistance 
▪ 
Partnerships. 
FSPs in Phases 1-3 are considered “Green Investments” and FSPs and innovative companies48 in Phase 4 
are considered “Super Green Investments”: 
• 
Green Investments will be financed at market rates and the environmental impact generated by 
mitigation of these FSPs’ own carbon footprint and the integration of the environmental risk 
management will be analyzed (including indicators on vulnerability of clients to climate change and 
identification of green financing opportunities according to the clients’ profile).  
• 
Super Green Investments (institutions and companies with innovative climate solutions in Phase 4) 
will be supported to with below-market rates to increase the green portfolio. 
The breakdown of the Programme’s outputs, activities and sub-activities is shown below: 
COMPONENT I INVESTMENTS 
Output I.1.1: Kuali fund is operational and capitalized (Executing entity: General Partner) 
Activity I.1.1.1. Raise capital from public & private investors  
I.1.1.1 1 Preparation of the Fund's legal documentation and governance: 
- Legal Advisory 
- Finalization of legal documents 
I.1.1.1.2. Marketing Period: 
- Private Capital Raising 
- Formalization

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
 
 
 
 
I.1.1.1.3: Closings: 
- First Closing 
- Final Closing 
Activity I.1.1.2. Debt and/or equity investments into FSPs & ICs 
I.1.1.2.1. Financial, Environmental & Social Due Diligence 
I.1.1.2.2.  Investment Committee meetings 
I.1.1.2.3   Formalization with partners 
I.1.1.2.4   Debt investments in FSPs 
I.1.1.2.5   Debt and equity investments in ICs 
Output I.1.2: Increased green financing available to SMEs and smallhoders farmers (Executing 
Entity: General Partner with support of the Fund Manager) 
Activity I.1.2.1. Delivery of finance towards SMEs and Smallholder farmers through FSPs  
I.1.2.1.1. Implementation of FSPs' Processes & Procedures (Financial and Social) 
I.1.2.1.2. Kuali's Monitoring and Supervision of the operations (Financial and E&S) 
COMPONENT II TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE 
Output II.2.1: Kuali’s TA Facility is operational (Executing entity: TAF Manager) 
Activity II.2.1.1. TA Governance and Management in place 
II.2.1.1.1. Preparation of the Fund's and the TAF legal documentation and governance 
II.2.1.1.2. Identification of TA Projects 
II.2.1.1.3. On-site TA Needs Assessment 
II.2.1.1.4. Elaboration of the TA request  
Activity II.2.1.2. Procurement in place and contractors ready to implement TA Projects 
II.2.1.2.1. Draft of ToRs 
II.2.1.2.2 Call for Proposals 
II.2.1.2.3.  Contracts with Service Providers 
Output II.2.2: Capacities for Climate Smart Agriculture and adoption of Climate Solutions built 
(Executing Entity: TAF Manager) 
Activity II.2.2.1. Green Enhancement projects with SMEs & Smallholder farmers 
II.2.2.1.1. Workshops/ marketing about energy efficient equipment 
II.2.2.1.2 Environmental check-ups of individual businesses & advice on opportunities to 
reduce emissions. 
II.2.2.1.3 Support digitalization of processes 
II.2.2.1.4 Streamlining value chains to make them energy efficient 
II.2.2.1.5 Workshops & practices at farmer level on climate smart agricultural practices through 
cooperatives and producer organizations 
Output II.3.1. Strengthened financial ecosystem actors’ capacities enabling green and inclusive 
finance (Executing Entity: TAF Manager) 
Activity II.3.1.1. Green Readiness TA projects with FSPs 
II.3.1.1.1. Develop Green financial products 
II.3.1.1.2. Implementation of new processes & technologies 
II.3.1.1.3. Training on green finance

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 
 
 
Activity II.3.1.2. Social Performance and Environmental Risks Management Systems projects with 
FSPs and ICs 
II.3.1.2.1 Purchase of specific software packages to be implemented within the FSPs & ICs 
II.3.1.2.2 Establishing risk mitigation systems to monitor and mitigate agriculture and MSME/ 
smallholder farmers 
II.3.1.2.3. Projects aiming at improving the ability of investees to achieve it social mission and 
adequately manage Environmental and Social Risks by following the SPTF Universal 
Standards  
II.3.1.2.4. Elaborating and implementing a gender and SEAH policy and action plan for 
FSPs/ICs' internal dimension (GAP: 2.1 & 2.2) 
II.3.1.2.5. Elaborating and Implementing a gender and SEAH action plan for external 
dimension in FSPs (GAP: 2.3 & 2.4) 
II.3.1.2.6 Training and support for FSPs and IC to implement a ES management system 
including gender and SEAH and to gain knowledge on these issues (GAP: 2.5)  
II.3.1.2.7 Promoting access to finance taking into account women’s barriers for providing 
guarantees (GAP: 3.1 & 3.2) 
Activity II.3.1.3. General Business Improvement projects with FSPs 
II.3.1.3.1. Creation of new lines of business to address the consequences of the COVID-19 
crisis  
II.3.1.3.2. Financial and capacity building education for SMEs and farmers 
II.3.1.3.3. Identifying new green opportunities in the economic recovery. 
II.3.1.3.4. TA Projects on Digitalization 
Activity II. 3.1.4.  Business Model Improvement TA projects with ICs 
II.3.1.4.1. Design and scale of distribution and supplying schemes.  
II.3.1.4.2. Advisory service on green practices 
II.3.1.4.3. Design of marketing strategies. 
II.3.1.4.4. Establish partnerships with local companies.  
II.3.1.4.5. Technical support for operational challenge 
II.3.1.4.6. Talent management support 
Activity II.3.1.5. Ecosystemic Projects, stakeholder engagement and Gender actions 
II.3.1.5.1. Updating and extending gender country assessments and updating Kuali Fund-GCF 
due diligence process (GAP: 1.4 & 1.5) 
II.3.1.5.2. Capacity building and awareness raising of potential final beneficiaries. Support for 
women's economic empowerment (GAP: 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3) 
II.3.1.5.3. Projects in markets for products, country level infrastructure, policy and regulatory 
framework, institutional set up, etc. 
II.3.1.5.4. Partnerships between FSPs via an open-banking collaboration scheme 
II.3.1.5.5. Elaboration of Indigenous People Plans 
Activity II.3.1.6. Knowledge Sharing Program 
II.3.1.6.1 Workshops, symposium and/or conferences for partners, bringing together 
practitioners involved in green finance.  
II.3.1.6.2 Technical packages, systematizing and documenting the knowledge and best 
practices obtained throughout each project.

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31 
 
 
 
 
With respect to Component I and II, COFIDES as Accredited Entity will be the Executing Entity for all activities 
relating to evaluative data collection and communication audit. 
Kuali Fund-GCF will invest approximately 60% of the capital in FSPs (either Green or Super Green 
Investments) and will provide Technical Assistance to foster their transition into a green strategy and 
eventually offering financing for mitigation and adaptation solutions to its clients, an attractive and 
underpenetrated market opportunity. Kuali Fund-GCF will invest the remaining capital (approximately 30%) 
in Innovative Companies (Super Green Companies) which offer products/services related with mitigation and 
adaptation, including “Agri-tech” and “Climate-tech” companies. Kuali will support the growth of these Super 
Green Investments by establishing partnerships with the Funded Activity’s investments in traditional FSPs or 
with its clients, both SMEs and smallholder farmers. Kuali Fund will invest 60-70 % in debt and 30-40 % in 
equity in growth capital opportunities. 
Kuali Fund-GCF will invest in FSPs which, in turn, might finance SMEs in assets or activities such as solar 
roof-top panels, high-efficiency heat pumps, insulation, low-emission transport,  energy-efficient machinery, 
methane digesters, among others; and the smallholder farmers may be supported in activities such as tree 
plantation, composting, abandoned farmland restoration, farm irrigation systems, regenerative annual 
cropping, silvopastoral systems or tree intercropping. As regards to innovative companies, Kuali Fund-GCF 
will invest in companies with innovative solutions in mitigation (such as electric transport, rural solar energy 
provider, biodigester manufacturer companies, EV charging network) and in adaptation (farm-to-business 
mobility supply chain, smart farming, Farming as a service platform or vertical farmings). 
Kuali Fund-GCF expects to build a portfolio of about 12-18 investees. Each investment is expected to range 
between EUR 5 and 20 million, with an average of EUR 8 million. As mentioned above, debt-like investments 
might have an automatic renewal in the case that certain financial and environmental milestones are met. 
• 
Eligibility and investment criteria 
The potential beneficiaries of the Kuali Fund-GCF are defined as follows: 
• 
Potential investees: 
o Financial Service Providers (FPS): An institution focused on the provision of a diverse set of 
financial services to micro and small entrepreneurs or to micro, small and medium enterprises 
including savings, loans, insurance, leasing, and factoring products. These institutions are 
oriented towards providing mainly enterprise financing (versus consumer financing which is 
dominant in institutions operating in developed countries) through basic and transparent 
banking and a close lender-borrower relationship. The institution can take the form of a variety 
of legal entities, including banks, NGOs, microfinance institutions, cooperatives, finance 
companies and other private types of institutions.  
o Innovative Companies: Companies that provide or implement products and services that have 
a direct positive effect on mitigation and adaptation & resilience to climate change as well as 
mitigation. This relation will be established at the beginning of each investment in the 
Investment Memorandum and the Social Due Diligence.  
• 
Final beneficiaries: 
o MSME/SME: enterprise qualifies as a micro, small or medium enterprise if it meets two out of 
three criteria of the IFC MSME Definition (employees, assets, and sales), OR if the loan to it 
falls within the relevant MSME loan size proxy.

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
 
 
 
 
 
IFC MSME Definition 
MSME Loan Size 
Proxy 
Indicator 
EMPLOYEES 
TOTAL ASSETS 
(USD) 
ANNUAL SALES 
(USD) 
LOAN SIZE AT 
ORIGINATION 
Micro 
enterprise 
< 10 
< 100,000 
< 100,000 
< 10,000 
Small 
enterprise 
10-49 
100,000 
-< 
3 
million 
100,000 
-< 
3 
million 
< 100,000 
Medium 
enterprise 
50-300 
3-15 million 
3 -15 million 
< 1 or 2 million 
o Smallholder farmers (IRIS+ definition): marginal and sub-marginal farm households 
constrained in size and resources. Some sources define smallholder farmers as those who 
cultivate between 1 hectare to 10 hectares (for more semi-arid areas) of land. While they will 
vary in farm size and crop/livestock distribution according to their activity and region, common 
characteristics of smallholder farmers are that they have low access to technology, limited 
resources in terms of capital, skills, and risk management, depend on family labor for most 
activities, and have limited capacity in terms of storage, marketing, and processing. The 
definition of smallholder might differ from investment to investment, depending on the 
investees’ location, country, and regional area. This definition will be established at the 
beginning of each investment in the Social Due Diligence Memorandum.  
 
Kuali Fund-GCF will originate potential investing opportunities according to the following criteria: 
1. Social and Environmental Impact Criteria: Kuali Fund-GCF will assess the potential social or 
environmental impact of its investees through a tool called Portfolio Impact Score (PIS). This tool 
applies a score to the performance of each project based on social aspects -gender included- and 
environmental objectives previously set. Further details and methodology are provided in Section B2 
(a). 
 
2. Financial criteria: The Funded Activity’s financial eligibility criteria will be further defined in the Policies 
and Procedures Manual that will be developed in the following phase. In particular, in general terms 
and subject to the specific conditions of the country, potential investees need to meet the following 
financial investment criteria: 
• 
For Financial Service Providers: 
o Minimum total assets of EUR 20MM.  
o A positive Return On Assets in 2021 after the COVID-19 impact.  
o Capital adequacy ratio higher or around 15%.  
o Portfolio At Risk > 30 days + rescheduled loans less or around 10%.  
o Write-off ratio less or around 2%.  
o Operational self-sufficiency higher or around 100%.  
o At least 2 years of audited statements and 3 years of operations.  
• 
For companies with innovative climate solutions: 
o Positive equity. 
o EBITDA breakeven or projection for EBITDA breakeven in following 12 months with 
review of debt-to-equity and debt-service coverage ratios.

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
 
 
 
 
o Sustainable and scalable sources of revenues (> EUR 500k per year). 
o At least 2 years of audited statements and 3 years of operations. 
Finally, according to the investment selection process, Kuali will follow the next phases for any deal: 
• 
A preliminary report is developed to check the initial criteria and needs. 
• 
This report will be presented to a preliminary internal committee. 
• 
If the Committee agrees to continue with the process, then a Due Diligence will be addressed. 
• 
Once dully finalized, a final report of the operation will be developed. 
• 
This final report and complementary information will pass through a final internal committee to 
decide whether the operation is subject to be financed or not. 
• 
If the committee has agreed to move forward, then the legal and financial documentation must 
be negotiated between Kuali Fund and the beneficiaries. 
• 
Signature of the contracts. 
• 
Disbursement. 
3. Selection of the investment instrument:  Kuali Fund-GCF will select the instrument that (i) best fits the 
financing needs of the investee, (ii) provides, in most cases, the expected risk-adjusted returns and 
(iii) in case of equity, has a clear liquidity event.  More specifically, it is expected to invest through the 
following instruments: 
• 
Debt investments usually with a maturity of 2-3+2-3 years, with automatic renewal in the case 
certain financial or social milestones (such as advancing in the investee's green strategy) are 
met; all investments will be in local currency and any foreign exchange risk will be offset 
through swaps. The typical debt investee will be a FSP. 
• 
Equity or quasi-equity investments including common or convertible equity, royalty 
financing and other mezzanine schemes in FSP or innovative companies. Common or 
convertible equity will be used when a liquidity event for the investee (IPO, secondary sales, 
etc) is feasible in the future and liquidity rights are negotiated (such as right-along rights, drag-
along, mandated sale or right to sale on a capital expansion).  Mezzanine investments can be 
structured as loans where the interest rate has a variable component which depends on 
certain Key Performance Indicators of the investee such as revenues or net income, which 
are proxy for how well the company is doing. The advantage of mezzanine instruments is that 
they can capture equity upsides while also providing a clear exit option. This instrument is 
expected to be used for innovative companies where the best financing option would be equity 
but where exit might be an issue as liquidity events could be difficult. 
Kuali will originate potential investing opportunities according to the following criteria: 
• 
Fit of basic investment criteria (size, stage of development, minimum/ maximum amount of the 
investment, country). In the case of FSPs, investee management must have expressed 
interest in advancing towards green and climate opportunities and products. In the case of 
innovative companies, the company must have a clear social and environmental strategy and 
plans to strengthen and expand its operations. 
• 
Basic ratio analysis assessing profitability (ROA or Contribution/EBITDA Margins), 
Capitalization (Capital adequacy ratio), Portfolio quality and revenue growth rate. 
• 
Quality of management team 
• 
Quality of co-lenders or co-investors 
• 
In FSPs, there are certain Social Performance criteria that can directly exclude an opportunity, 
such as high interest rates (relative to sector), elevated levels of profitability or excessively 
aggressive business plans.

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 
 
 
• 
In the case of an equity/ mezzanine transaction, consideration is given of the growth potential, 
quality of shareholders and exit opportunities. 
 
4. Besides all the above criteria, Kuali investment team will ensure that every investment will also have 
an adequate management team with a track record and knowledge of FSPs and appropriate 
Management Systems and Credit Policies. Also, the investments in FSPs need to comply with the 
Anti-Money Laundering and Financing Terrorism (AML-FT) process, have an updated and agreed list 
of exclusion and are not involved in OFAC official and ultimate beneficiary lists. Climatic 
Requirements: Kuali Fund-GCF will be able to support certain beneficiaries with no Climate track 
record in their green transition by incorporating these solutions into their processes and business, 
with the ultimately target of assisting on its transformation. The investment portfolio will balance a mix 
of entities where the majority of their activities are green and entities that are still not advanced in their 
green transition.  
 
• 
Use of funds 
The Funded Activity guidelines for the use of GCF funds are as follow: 
Kuali Fund-GCF Portfolio 
Kuali Fund-GCF’s portfolio will be built during the investment period (5 years from the first closing) complying 
with the following milestones: 
• 
Kuali Fund will use GCF funding for investments in eligible Innovative Companies or for lending to 
FSPs. The FSPs will undertake to use GCF funding only for building Climate Portfolio following the 
eligibility criteria. FSPs will be allowed a period of 3 years to build a Climate Portfolio. If an FSP is not 
able to build this Climate Portfolio by the end of Year 3, then the AE/Kuali Fund will request the FSP 
the total repayment of the stake of the loan provided using GCF proceeds.  
• 
GCF funds will not be used by Kuali Fund/ FSPs for financing assets or projects other than the climate 
projects as per eligibility criteria. 
• 
On an aggregate basis, Kuali Fund commits on a commercially reasonable best effort basis to build 
an aggregate Climate Portfolio equal to one hundred percent of the aggregated amount disbursed by 
co-investors within the Kuali Fund-GCF Funded Activity by the end of the life of the investments. 
• 
Ramp-up period for building Climate Portfolio from co-financing: in 3+3, 50% of Climate Portfolio by 
end of Year 3 and 100% by end of the following 3 years. In 2+2+2, 30% by end of Year 2, 65% by 
end of the following 2 years and 100% by the end of the following 2 years. 
Equity Investments  
GCF funds will be exclusively used for equity investment in Innovative Companies that are companies that 
manufacture or market products and services that have a direct positive effect on mitigation and adaptation 
and resilience to climate change.  
These Companies will not have any other relevant business lines and therefore the funds will exclusively 
support the advancement of climate solutions and impact.  
The sectorial scope is wide-ranging, but it should relate to the sectors, technologies and specific criteria 
depicted in the technology list.

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 
 
 
Equity investments in FSP and other Innovative Companies with mixed climatic and non-climatic portfolios 
and solutions will remain an alternative for the rest of investors. Even in these cases, the funds will support 
the advancement of climate solutions and impact. 
All the investment tickets made available to these companies can be considered fully climate finance.  
Debt Investments  
The overall goal of Kuali Fund-GCF resources is to transform FSPs to start developing products and a 
loan portfolio directed towards climate finance. In this regard, Kuali Fund-GCF commits on a commercially 
reasonable best effort basis that by the exit of the investments 100% of its investees shall have expanded 
their climate finance portfolio (if they already have a climate finance portfolio) or at least will have piloted 
climate finance products for their clients. 
FSP will start with different climate-readiness levels, a few with no climate lending yet, however we expect 
that FSPs Climate Finance portfolio will increase over time as they adapt their business model in terms of 
products, process and people to finance assets related with climate finance. 
Kuali Fund-GCF commits to building a portfolio of debt investments in FSPs. The companies in this portfolio 
will have the obligation to increase their total aggregated Climate Portfolio during the life of the 
investments. 
In order to ensure an adequate path towards relevant climate products and portfolios at the investee level, 
Kuali Fund-GCF will include covenants in the loan agreements that will prevent the renewal of the deals if 
a clear path toward climate finance products has not been achieved. 
The climate lending scope is wide-ranging, but it should relate to the sectors, technologies and specific criteria 
for adaptation and mitigation depicted in the technology list. Analog technologies will be eligible. 
The specific sector and technologies climatic criteria are shown in the Investment Criteria and Governance 
Annex. The technology pool displayed does not present carbon lock in risks of long-lived, high-emission 
infrastructure.  
Requirements 
• 
Climate lending relate to the sectors, technologies and specific criteria for adaptation and mitigation 
depicted in the technology list attached as Figure I and II of the Term Sheet. 
• 
The Kuali fund will not finance fossil fuel assets. 
• 
The Kuali fund will not finance energy efficiency investments that extend the lifetime of fossil fuel 
assets. 
• 
The Kuali fund has selected a wide-reaching list of technological solutions that can be frequently 
implemented by the prototypical clients of the FSP and Innovative Companies in the developing 
countries that Kuali will serve. The solutions list proposed by the Kuali fund is as extensive as possible, 
however, the number of agricultural practices, technologies, etc, that potentially represent a climate 
solution (mitigation and adaptation) are countless. During the life of the fund new solutions are 
expected to be added as robust data and peer-reviewed research becomes more available and 
accessible. 
• 
The Exclusion List (attached in Annex 3 of the Term sheet) shall apply to investments under the 
Funded Activity. Based on updated baseline studies, the exclusion list must be revised in consultation 
with GCF.

=== PAGE 40 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
 
 
 
 
 
49 Investees’ names are confidential in the FP but are available in Annex CO2 Calculations. 
• 
Expected target returns and other terms 
Equity or quasi-equity investments target returns: Kuali Fund-GCF will seek in its equity or quasi-equity 
investments a relevant minority stake (usually between 15 to 25% ownership) and a board seat and a clear 
and/or pre-negotiated exit reflected in the Shareholders Agreement’s liquidity rights. Typical multiples range 
between 2x – 3x Price to Book Value or 7x –- 10x EBITDA, depending on the opportunity and on the country. 
Kuali targets returns exceeding 15-20% p.a. in EUR. 
Debt investments target returns: the Funded Activity targets debt rates to FSPs between 4 and 8% in Euro 
after cost of hedging which vary from country to country. To the maximum extent possible loans will be done 
in local currency and FX fully swapped to EUR with the use of swaps or forwards. 
• 
Expected holding periods 
According to holding period, the senior or subordinated debt with a tenor of either 2+2 or 3+3 years, where 
an option for early repayment will be negotiated so that at year 2 or 3 the investment would be repaid if certain 
financial or environmental milestones are not met (including the commitment to advance in the green 
strategy). The Fund could also consider 2-3 years tenor, with the commitment to extend by 2 or 3 more years 
if the investee is moving forward with the commitment to advance in its green strategy and the financial 
performance remains solid. 
• 
Role in financing rounds: will the Funded Activity act as a lead, co-lead, follower or sole 
investor 
In debt investments, Kuali Fund-GCF normally acts as lead or co-lead lender, investing in companies where 
other large international impact investing firms have already invested in. In equity investments, the Funded 
Activity prefers making co-investments with other carefully chosen investors sharing the same impact 
principles and vision. 
PIPELINE KUALI FUND-GCF49 
Country 
Target Investee 
Avg allocation 
México 
FSP 1 
22.5 
México 
FSP 2 
5 
Brasil 
FSP 3 
13.5 
Brasil 
FSP 4 
10 
Colombia 
FSP 5 
11 
Colombia 
FSP 6 
11 
El Salvador 
FSP 7 
6 
El Salvador 
FSP 8 
6 
Panamá 
FSP 9 
5.5 
Panamá 
FSP 10 
5.5 
Honduras 
FSP 11 
4.5 
Honduras 
FSP 12 
5.5

=== PAGE 41 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
 
 
 
 
Guatemala 
FSP 13 
6 
Guatemala 
IC 1 
4 
México 
IC 2 
3.5 
TOTAL 
 
              119.5 
India plays an important role in Kuali Fund because the country shows a robust development steadily 
maintained through the last years in the FinTech sector even during the pandemic context. The country has 
the highest FinTech adoption rate; 87%, being the world average a 64%. This development was achieved 
due to an enabling policy environment, a sizeable talent pool, a large unbanked population eager to have 
financial services at disposal, an improving internet access tendency combined with a digital literacy increase 
and a quick smartphone penetration in a growing economy.  Fintechs are critical to transform and improve 
the financial sector, both broadening its potential client range and increasing its efficiency by lowering costs 
as physical presence is not as frequent as in traditional banking. The sector accomplishes this improvement 
by providing services to people historically unattended by the sector because of social and geographical 
conditions (places which are tricky to access, remote rural areas populated by groups at risk from social 
exclusion). 
Latin America and the Caribbean would benefit from the Indian sector´s maturity avoiding overlooking risks 
such as data security, privacy leak or consumer protection issues. India´s experience in adapting its 
regulation to a new and changeable Fintech context come handily in a developing market such as the 
American. Either too lax or too restrictive regulation can imply cost-related challenges. Avoiding them is 
extremely valuable and will generate synergies (south-south cooperation: knowledge transference) which will 
enhance Latin America and the Caribbean to break their endogenous barriers. The American continent has 
a better structured and developed traditional banking sector, whose reluctance to embrace this new 
technology acts as a barrier, and the slow data transmission speed in some areas. 
Climate finance activities 
In the following table, the core climate finance activities of Kuali Fund have been identified. Those activities 
will have a positive impact in the environment resulting in the reduction of 6,796,959 tons CO2.The attribution 
to Kuali Fund-GCF is 2,707,455 tons CO2.

=== PAGE 42 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        €              
Technology 
Total CO2 -eq (tn) Reduced 
/ Sequestered Midterm
Total CO2 -eq (tn) Reduced 
/ Sequestered Final
     (€)             
Reduced/Sequestred C02 
Sector
SubSector
Solution
Distributed Solar 
Photovoltaics
13,50
28.261
94.205
143,31
Micro Wind Turbines
0,50
596
1.988
251,52
Small Hydropower
3,00
12.010
40.034
74,94
Methane Digesters
3,00
2.686
8.952
335,12
Biogas 
7,00
6.660
22.200
315,32
Total
27,00
50.213
167.378
161,31
Electrify 
Vehicles
Electric Cars
9,50
4.174
13.915
682,73
Total
9,50
4.174
13.915
682,73
Industrial processes 
and appliances
9,50
94.010
313.367
30,32
Insulation
6,25
77.523
258.410
24,19
High-Performance 
Gl
2,00
95.000
316.666
6,32
LED Lighting
5,50
4.401
14.670
374,91
High-Efficiency Heat 
Pumps
11,75
19.056
63.519
184,99
Solar Hot Water
4,00
4.972
16.572
241,37
Total
39,00
294.961
983.203
39,67
Conservation 
Agriculture
11,00
99.047
330.158
33,32
Regenerative Annual 
Cropping
11,00
99.047
330.158
33,32
Sustainable 
Intensification for 
Smallholders
9,00
102.444
341.480
26,36
Sustainable Livestock 
Management
9,00
24.316
81.055
111,04
Farm Irrigation 
Efficiency
14,00
104.248
347.494
40,29
Managed Grazing
1,00
13.045
43.482
23,00
Bamboo Production
0,50
46.757
155.858
3,21
Silvopasture
2,50
68.105
227.017
11,01
Multistrata 
Agroforestry
2,25
74.702
249.007
9,04
Tree Intercropping
0,50
11.685
38.950
12,84
Perennial Staple Crops
1,00
26.893
89.642
11,16
Abandoned Farmland 
Restoration
1,00
16.798
55.994
17,86
Tree Plantations (on 
Degraded Land)
7,00
996.315
3.321.050
2,11
Biogas 
1,25
1.203
4.009
311,76
Composting
1,75
3.548
11.827
147,97
Methane Digesters
1,75
1.585
5.282
331,33
Total
74,50
1.689.739
5.632.464
13,23
150
2.039.088
6.796.959
22,07
Mitigation Focused Technologies 
Low 
Emision 
Transport
Energy 
generation and 
access
Shift 
Production
Enhance 
Efficiency
Buildings, cities, 
industries and 
appliances
TOTAL - Kuali
Forestry and Land Use  
Shift 
Agriculture 
Practices
Land Sinks -
Shift 
Agriculture 
Practices
Land Sinks - 
Use Degraded 
Land
Use Waste

=== PAGE 43 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
 
 
 
 
Adaptation and Resilience Focused Technologies 
  
  
Invested per 
           ( €) 
Sector 
Subsector 
Solution 
  
Forestry and 
Land Use   
Shift 
Agriculture 
Practices 
Organic 
Fertilizers 
6,50 
Conservation 
Agriculture 
12,00 
Agroecology 
6,50 
Organic 
Agriculture 
6,50 
Windbreaks 
2,75 
Drainage 
Systems 
6,50 
Natural retaining 
walls 
6,50 
Terraces 
6,50 
Greenhouses 
18,50 
Rainwater 
reservoirs 
6,50 
Farm Irrigation 
Efficiency 
18,50 
Silvopasture 
12,00 
Agroforestry 
6,50 
Shift 
Agriculture 
Practices 
Crop 
Diversification  
18,50 
Beekeeping 
2,75 
Biodigester 
6,50 
Aquaculture 
6,50 
TOTAL–- Kuali–- Adaptation 
150 
TOTAL–- Kuali 
300 
*Figures have been realized for Kuali Fund. 
Taking into account the abovementioned solutions and the climate change problems the area faces, here 
below some match examples have been identified between problems and solutions in specific areas and 
sectors: 
Hydrological changes: 
• 
Glacier retreat: Colombia will suffer from water reservoir decreases due to the reduction of glacier 
formations. 
Consequently, the river flow will decrease generating potential water services disruption, distortions 
on the water cycle and a decrease in the hydroelectric power plants generation. To improve water 
efficiency and alternative renewable electricity production, Kuali proposes the following solutions: 
Farm irrigation efficiency, conservation agriculture, distributed solar photovoltaics and high efficiency 
heat pumps.

=== PAGE 44 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
 
 
 
 
 
50 “SME and smallholder farmers Finance Gap. Assessment of the shortfalls and opportunities in financing small and medium 
enterprises in emerging markets”. IFC, Washington DC, 2017. 
• 
Irregular rainfall patterns: Caribbean countries as well as part of Colombia will suffer changes in 
rainfall seasons due to “El Niño” phenomenon. Kuali Fund-GCF will encourage tree plantation and 
intercropping as one of its solutions to achieve rain and soil retention as well as resilient agriculture 
techniques. 
Impact on coastal and marine zones: 
According to the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) the countries suffering 
the sea level rise the most (by number of hectares) would be mostly Brazil and Mexico. However, percentage 
wise, Honduras would be strongly affected by this phenomenon too. It would affect the population living in 
coastal villages and cities, coastal biodiversity, infrastructures (mostly roads and ports) and coastal economic 
activity. Kuali Fund-GCF would be able to reduce the negative effects by the “Tree plantation” solution. 
Specifically, mangroves are quite effective in absorbing potential wave impacts while at the same time 
generating a rich ecosystem and capturing CO2. 
 
Extreme events in coastal zones: 
The Caribbean countries are the main ones affected by this type of catastrophes due to water warming in the 
Caribbean Sea and Mexican golf. In top of the mangroves´ solution, Kuali Fund-GCF can help vulnerable 
people and SMEs living in coastal areas by providing a reliable source of electricity in areas in which the grid 
gets frequently damaged by this kind of events. Off-grid solar photovoltaic combined with high efficiency heat 
pumps or other electric devices can provide a reliable source of electricity and a cost reduction in the medium 
and long term. 
Impacts on agriculture: 
This sector will be affected in many different ways depending on the socio-economic and geographical reality 
of each country as shown previously. Climate change effects (temperature increase, rainfall pattern changes, 
etc.) can produce several effects such as soil moisture, soil loss or reduction of yields. Kuali Fund-GCF 
proposes several solutions for both SMEs and farmers such as: Conservation agriculture, Regenerative 
annual cropping, nutrient management, or farm irrigation efficiency. These solutions generate a resilience 
improvement which helps locals to increase their adaptation capacity to the mentioned natural events.  
Country 
Avg allocation 
Mexico 
31 
Brazil 
23,5 
Colombia 
22 
El Salvador 
12 
Panama 
11 
Honduras 
10 
Guatemala 
10 
 
Traditionally larger Financial Institutions have not served the segments of SMEs and smallholder farmers 
and, as a result, SMEs in LAC region are facing a finance gap of 900 billion USD50. The gap increases by 
additional USD 745 billion if considering demand from informal SMEs. About 31% of formal SMEs in LAC 
have unmet financing needs. The existing funding gap arises from FIs’ limited understanding of the SME 
sector, lack of information or disparities, the large proportion of informal business practices, high market entry

=== PAGE 45 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
 
 
 
 
 
51 https://www.e-mfp.eu/resources/green-index-innovative-tool-assess-green-inclusive-finance-performance-fsps  
52 An enterprise qualifies as a woman-owned enterprise if it meets the following criterium: (A) ≥ 51% owned by woman/women; OR (B) ≥ 
20% owned by woman/women; AND (i) has ≥ 1 woman as CEO/COO/President/Vice President; AND (ii) has ≥ 30% of the board of 
directors composed of women, where a board exists. 
(https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/industry_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/financial+institutions/priorities/ifcs+definitions+of+tar
geted+sectors) 
barriers in relation to available margins, heterogeneity of the market, hurdles to SME growth and productivity 
and regulatory limitations.  Serving efficiently the SME segment requires the adaptation of FIs’ business 
models, as the credit assessment, risk management, marketing strategies and products are different from 
more traditional retail and corporate segments. 
Based on Cerise SPI4 “Green Index”, Kuali Fund-GCF will analyze the “green readiness” of the different 
innovative companies and FSPs and will identify gaps that its investees will need to improve if they wish to 
transform to a more sustainable business model. GAWA Capital’s Co-CEOs are certified SPI4 social and 
environmental auditors. 
The Green Index 3.0 has been conceptualized by the e-MFP Green Inclusive and Climate Smart Finance 
Action Group (GICSF-AG) 51 and it is moreover aligned with the new Environmental Dimension of the 
Universal Standards for Social and Environmental Performance Management (USSEPM), developed by the 
joint work of the GICSF AG, SPTF and CERISE.  
This tool will allow Kuali Fund-GCF: 
• 
To assess and understand the current environmental performance of the investees. 
• 
To compare its performance with its peers. 
• 
To identify environmental policies, actions and strategies that could be implemented in the investee. 
• 
To track progress on environmental performance over time. 
• 
To communicate on their environmental performance to Kuali investors. 
The Green Index will not be directly used to determine which FSP/Companies will be financed.  The 
FSP/Companies that will be financed are determined by their capacity to deliver impact (mitigation, 
adaptation) over the investment period. Through this “green readiness” process, potential improvements to 
be implemented through TA projects will be identified.  
Kuali Fund-GCF will ensure systematic and consistent application of the ESMS framework to its investment 
and its adherence to E&S requirements (Annex 6). Potential investees’ financing activities included in the 
IFC’s Exclusion List or with a record of E&S issues will not be considered for financing. 
Besides, Kuali Fund-GCF will categorize the investments according to their existing and potential portfolio 
activities. The Funded Activity will require all its investees to develop and operate an ESMS commensurate 
with the level of E&S risk. In the case of investees financing activities with medium and high E&S (e.g. small 
hydropower, agriculture, forestry, etc.), it will be required to establish an Internal Environmental and Social 
Management System that assesses and ranks all individual loans according to size, loan amount, economic 
activity, and location. The higher the risk, the more exhaustive the evaluation is needed, requiring the entities 
to conduct formal impact analysis before approval. During the Due Diligence process, the General Partner 
team will also conduct an Environmental and Social Due Diligence that ensures that such procedures are in 
place in the potential investees and designs an Action Plans to solve any minor issues. 
Additionally, Kuali Fund-GCF will tackle the SME and the smallholder farmers segments funding gap in LAC 
from three different angles: 
• 
Address financial constraints by investing in and transforming small Financial Service Providers to 
efficiently serve the SME and the smallholder farmers segments -including women-owned SMEs52

=== PAGE 46 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
 
 
 
 
 
53 During the investment period, the SICAR will also make a one-off contribution of EUR 250.000. 
54 It is common practice that the custodian Bank of the SICAR is also the fiduciary of the TAF. 
and women farmers, expected to represent 30% - and to support collaboration between FSPs and 
Fintechs, leveraging an increasing deployment of open banking solutions by banks and regulators. 
SME clients will benefit from such collaboration because they will have access to wider and more 
innovative products offered by the Fintech companies on banking platforms. TA will be used to adapt 
innovative companies and FSPs’ products, risk management systems, processes, people and 
technology to adequately prepare to serve SME and smallholder clients with green and climate 
products by overcoming main challenges in lending to these two segments (including credit risk, 
engagement of clients and technology adoption, capacity building and financial literacy). TA will also 
be used to improve Social Performance Management and Environmental systems of innovative 
companies and FSPs. 
• 
Productivity/Digitalization: investments in Fintech companies focused on SME and smallholder 
farmers lending, improving the productivity and digitalization processes of these beneficiaries while 
providing financial solutions with a green perspective. Potential collaborations between Fintech 
investees could be established for FSPs and also innovative companies to improve their risk 
assessment by leveraging on-line SME and smallholder farmers data, while Fintechs can broaden 
their marketplace strategies. TA will be used for capacity building and technology adoption in SME 
and smallholder farmers clients, preparing them to access financing from Fintechs and the rest of 
FSPs. TA will also be used to improve Social Performance Management and Environmental systems 
of innovative companies and FSPs. 
• 
Increasing the access to green and climate finance, so that SMEs and smallholder farmers can 
embrace sustainable production and efficient energy use, key elements in achieving a greener 
economy and meeting sustainability standards (required by larger firms integrated in global value 
chains). TA will be used to provide educational programs through innovative companies/FSPs and to 
train also SMEs and smallholder farmers in the economic and financial aspects of renewable energy 
and energy efficiency projects and to train smallholders to adopt climate smart agricultural practices. 
 
Technical Assistance Facility (TAF) 
Structure and Governance 
The TAF (Component II) will be established in parallel with the Funded Activity to provide institution building 
support to investees in enhancing outreach and reducing risk. It will be set up in parallel to the Funded Activity 
base in a Fiduciary Agreement. It shall be managed by the TAF Manager (TAFM), GAWA Capital Partners 
SGEIC, S.A. and oversee by the Technical Assistance Steering Committee (the “TASC”, see below). The 
TASC will have a strategic role and will provide overarching guidance to the TAFM. The TAFM shall operate 
within the guidelines and procedures approved by the TASC and in accordance with a TA Management 
Agreement.  
The Technical Assistance resources shall be made available through a Fiduciary Arrangement (fiducie) 
referred to as the “"Technical Assistance Facility”", “TAF” or “TA Facility”. Therefore, the TA Facility will be 
governed by a Fiduciary Agreement between: (i) the Donors/Contributors to the TAF (including COFIDES on 
behalf of GFC and the EU, AECID and the SICAR)53; (ii) the fiduciary Bank (the fiduciary) and (iii) GAWA 
Capital Partners (the TAFM).  The Luxembourg Trust and Fiduciary Contracts Act 2003 provides the legal 
basis for the creation of this type of contracts.  
The contributions and/or donations of assets made to the TAF are referred as the Fiduciary Assets. The 
Fiduciary Assets shall be credited to the fiduciary account established with a reputable bank in Luxembourg 
(the Fiduciary Bank)54 which will act as the holder of the Fiduciary Assets in its capacity as Fiduciary.

=== PAGE 47 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
 
 
 
 
 
55 For Kuali Fund, the total amount would be composed of different contributors: the EU would contribute with EUR 5 million 
and the GCF would contribute with another EUR 5 million; AECID, through FONPRODE, EUR 2 million and the Kuali Fund 
itself EUR 0.25 million. 
56 GCF might be exempted from such decisions. 
The TAF funds are expected to reach a size of EUR 5.9 million for Kuali Fund-GCF (a total of EUR 12.25 for 
Kuali Fund55) from GCF (EUR 5 million), EU (EUR 0.57 million), FONPRODE (EUR 0.3 million) and Kuali 
Fund (EUR 0.04 million). The TAF contribution provided will be ultimately deployed to address key barriers 
that prevent SMEs and smallholder farmers to adopt mitigation as well as adaptation practices and achieve 
the expected outcomes. GAWA Capital will manage the TAF.  
The TAFM shall apply the contributions in accordance with guidelines (the TA Guidelines) drafted by the 
TAFM and approved by the TASC The TA Guidelines include at least a TA Operations Manual (see initial 
draft in Annex 21), that will refer to TA Policy and TA Procurement Policy, and the TA Annual Plan (TA Annual 
Operational Plan Budget). 
The link between the TAF and Kuali Fund-GCF will be guaranteed by: (i) the innovative companies and FSPs 
supported by the Funded Activity will be also a target for the TAF and (ii) the TAFM will be GAWA Capital, 
which is also the manager of Kuali Fund-GCF. 
 
The TASC shall at any time be composed of at least three (3) members and a maximum of five (5) members, 
including at all times one representative per contributor (GCF or AE in representation of GCF) and one 
independent member (“the Initial Members), and others (e.g. COFIDES), with expertise in SMEs/ smallholder 
farmers finance and TA Funds. This composition shall allow the TAF to benefit from the expertise of relevant 
actors. The Fund manager can attend the TASC meetings but will have no voting rights. The TASC will hold 
at least 3 meetings a year and will have a strategic role (approval of TA Guidelines). However, the TASC will 
also approve all agreements exceeding EUR 200,00056. Decisions among the TASC shall be adopted by the 
simple majority of its members.  
Day-to-day management decisions on TAF deployment will be made by the TAFM. The TAFM will be 
responsible, inter alia, for (see Annex 21-TA Operations Manual): structuring the TA services, managing 
tender procedures, negotiating, and signing agreements with service providers, coordinating and monitoring 
TA Projects, drafting monitoring reports and preparing the TA Guidelines 
Key barriers 
At the level of innovative companies and FSPs, the following key barriers are expected to be addressed: 
• 
Understanding of the addressable market: Kuali Fund-GCF expects to conduct specific country 
market research to identify key opportunities/ clients’ needs for innovative companies and FSPs to 
address profitably.  
• 
Designing financial products that meet clients’ demand: supporting innovative companies and 
FSPs in identifying key assets to finance, engage and build partnership with manufacturers, 
understanding mitigation and adaptation potential. 
• 
FSPs staff able to properly serve SMEs and smallholder farmers segments by providing effective 
training. Effective training will be provided also for innovative companies. 
• 
Ensure that creditworthy clients are able to receive a loan at affordable rates by  
o Adapting credit process to SMEs and smallholder farmers segments by using of data analytics 
and client segmentation as tools to reduce credit costs. 
o Supporting open-banking solutions and Identifying synergies between FSPs in Kuali’s 
portfolio. 
o Leveraging digitalization. 
At SMEs and smallholder farmers level, the following key barriers are expected be addressed with TA:

=== PAGE 48 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
 
 
 
 
• 
Increase awareness about the potential to increase income and reduce CO2 emissions through 
new energy efficient equipment by running workshops/ preparing marketing material. 
• 
Run ad-hoc environmental checkups of individual businesses by suggesting opportunities to 
reduce emissions. 
• 
Support digitalization of processes and streamlining value chains to make them energy efficient. 
• 
Support the adoption of climate smart agricultural practices by running workshops delivered by 
aggregators. 
• 
Support the implementation of climate smart agricultural practices at a farmer level with specific 
training. 
Areas of intervention 
The TAF will support the implementation of new processes that reduce innovative companies and FSPs 
environmental footprint. As a result, approximately 55% of this amount is expected to be delivered to 
FSPs/innovative companies; about 10% to SMEs and smallholder farmers (the final beneficiaries); and other 
10% to ecosystemic projects. The remaining amount will be allocated to TA management (for further 
information, please see Annex 10). 
The TAF will implement  Green Enhancement projects with SMEs and smallholder farmers (Activity II.2.1.1); 
Green Readiness projects with FSPs (Activity II.3.1.1);  Social Performance and Environmental Risks 
Management Systems projects (including gender and SEAH actions) with FSPs and ICs (Activity II.3.1.2.); 
General Business Improvement projects with FSPs (Activity II.3.1.3.),  Business Model  Improvement projects 
with Innovative Companies (Activity II.3.1.4);  Ecosystemic Projects, stakeholder engagement and gender 
actions (Activity II.3.2.1.) The estimated cost breakdown among different activities is provided on Annex 4 
Budget Plan and the TA Operation Manual. 
All these activities together contribute mostly to the Outcomes 2 (Improved resilience in vulnerable people & 
communities) and 3 (Enhanced green & inclusive financial ecosystem).  
Innovative Companies and FSPs will receive TA assistance to improve their Environmental Risk Management 
System (Activity II.3.1.2.); to monitor and mitigate climate and agriculture related risks, aligning it to TCFD 
and reducing innovative companies and FSPs’ environmental footprint. TA will also be used to improve 
innovative companies and FSP’s Social Performance Management System: projects aiming at 
improving the ability of investees to achieve their social mission and adequately manage Social Risks by 
following the Social Performance Task Force Universal Standards (SPTF) and the SPI4 tool of CERISE.  
The Green Index 3.0 tool used during the due diligence will also be used under the TAF. The tool will perform 
a “green-readiness” analysis of the innovative companies and FSPs and identify gaps that these 
institutions need to improve in order to transform to a more sustainable business model.  
This tool includes the following parts, to provide a full picture of the environmental engagement of the potential 
investee: 
• 
Qualitative questions to understand the global environmental performance of the potential investee. 
This will provide a graphic representation of the results, which will help to benchmark the potential 
investee against other financial institutions and identify areas of improvement in the potential 
investee’s green-readiness in the following dimensions: environmental strategy of the investee, 
internal/external environmental risk management, and specific actions being taken by the investee to 
foster green opportunities. 
• 
A quantitative part with detailed data on energy, water, paper, gasoline consumption; number and 
volume of green energy loans disbursed and number of borrowers with active climatic microinsurance 
products. This will help keep track of the progress in the investees’ green activities. 
 
Furthermore, TA will be allocated to innovative companies and FSPs in order to improve their processes and 
provide a comprehensive product offering to SMEs and smallholder farmers as well as supporting these

=== PAGE 49 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
 
 
 
 
beneficiaries in digitalization and implementing better health, safety and environmental protocols. TA will offer 
a general business improvement: projects aiming at improving the financial performance and the risk 
management of the FSPs and ICs, with a special focus on risk assessment for the COVID-19 crisis and 
recovery. 
In addition, TA funding will consider the importance of addressing the consequences of the COVID-19 
crisis in the countries. Therefore, activities such as the creation of new lines of business, financial and 
capacity building education for SMEs and smallholder farmers, new green opportunities in the economic 
recovery or the enhanced development of digital ecosystem will also be supported.  
The investments from Kuali Fund-GCF are also expected to improve opportunities and have a beneficial 
impact on women, given their significant participation in entrepreneurial and farming activities in LAC. The 
objective is to foster an enabling environment by identifying specific areas where the Funded Activity may be 
able to promote women economic empowerment and equality of opportunities. Specific gender interventions 
have been designed to increase women’s participation: i) development of gender policies and action plans in 
innovative companies and FSPs; ii) training and support for innovative companies and FSPs to implement a 
ESMS including gender and SEAH considerations; iii) participation in TA activities; iv) business skills training 
and financial literacy programs and v) financial products adapted to women’s needs and realities. External 
consultants will be hired to carry out country assessments that will serve as the basis for activities included 
in Gender Action Plan (including SEAH). 
 
Eligibility Criteria 
Main eligibility criteria, guidelines, policies and procedures for the application of the TAF /Fiduciary Assets 
will be defined by the TAFM and submitted for TASC approval under the TA Guidelines (i.e. final version of 
the TA Operational Manual drafted in Annex 21 and other Guidelines if requested by the TASC). It is intended 
that partners will be eligible for TA once the investment has been formalized. Some other criteria could be 
anticipated, such as: (i) prevailing interest in advancing towards green and climate opportunities and products 
(FSPs)/clear social and environmental strategy and plans to strengthen and expand its operations (Innovative 
Companies); contribution form partners; etc. For the cross-cutting projects that will indirectly benefit the FSPs, 
Innovative Companies and/or the SMEs/smallholder farmers non investees could be eligible (such as actors 
in the value chains or other agents at meso level). 
TA Implementation (see details in Annex 21. Draft of Ta Operational Plan): 
The TAFM will channel the GCF funds to the final beneficiaries through service providers. The TAFM will 
select and manage reputable service providers as needed to deliver TA services and execute the agreements 
with the relevant service providers. 
TA will be delivered through the provision of grants that cover:  
• 
Consultant Services, i.e., hiring experts and consultants for tailor-made technical assistance for 
investees, SME, smallholder farmers and ecosystemic partners Institutions. 
• 
Trainings: evaluate, train and establish induction programs with green finance related subjects. 
• 
Goods or capital expenditures, i.e., hardware and other goods that the beneficiaries may need, caped 
to a % of the total project cost. 
COFIDES Contracting Procedures, as part of the TA Guidelines, will regulate apply to the selection of 
consultants. The purpose of the Contracting Procedures is to describe all the steps and applicable rules 
required to undertake procurement procedures from the very first steps to the award of contracts with Service 
Providers.

=== PAGE 50 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
 
 
 
 
 
57 TBC – number could vary depending on the final size of the Funded Activity. 
58 FSP total loan portfolios are on average financed on a 20-25% with own resources and the rest with several local and 
international financers. The same can be expected for green and climate portfolios. 
59 Kuali Fund will include contributions from EU and private resources to finance also investments in 8 countries (Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, 
Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Paraguay, Nicaragua and India) where the NOL has not been issued for GCF contributions, up to EUR 
250 MM. GCF will not be involved in these deals. 
60 Kuali Fund and the SV will be two legally independent vehicles. Both will have their respective governing bodies, although 
FONPRODE will only be able to participate in them to a limited extent (observer), given its status as a debt holder and not 
as a shareholder. 
The formalization of the Commitment Agreement also implies the adhesion to the SV with the characteristics set forth in its 
Articles of Incorporation (this document includes the description of the characteristics of the vehicle, such as its objective, 
share capital characteristics of the shares, their transferability, management and governance, confidentiality, responsibilities, 
conflicts of interest, management of annual accounts, etc.). 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
Kuali Fund-GCF expects to build a portfolio of about 12-18 investees in the beneficiaries’ countries57. Each 
investment is expected to range between EUR 3.5 to 20 million with an average of EUR 8 million58. The 
average investment size is expected to be higher for FSPs than for innovative companies. 
As already explained, the following instruments are expected to be used: 
• 
Debt-like investments (approximately 60-70% of portfolio) for FSPs with a maturity of 3+3 years, 
with automatic renewal in the case certain milestones (financial or social) are met, or 6 years with the 
option of calling back the capital if certain conditions are not met. All investments will be made in local 
currency and any foreign exchange risk will be offset through swaps. Innovative companies might be 
also financed by debt. 
• 
Equity: approximately 30-40% of portfolio for investing in innovative companies. 
o Mezzanine investments, such as royalty financing or participatory loans. Expected holding 
period: 5-6 years. 
o Growth-capital equity investments with a relevant minority stake (less than 20%), a board 
seat and a clear and/or pre-negotiated exit. Expected holding period: 6-7 years. 
The investment period of the Funded Activity is 5 years, and most investments are expected to be deployed 
over the first 4 years, implying 3 to 6 investments per year.  Kuali Fund-GCF resources will be used for 
business expansion of the investees and not for refinancing. Investments will be recorded at Fair Value 
Through Profit/Loss (FVTPL), according to IFRS 10 Exception to Consolidation. The implementation period 
for the TA will be the 10-12 years of activity of Kuali Fund-GCF. 
Organizational set-up: 
As already detailed in section A, Kuali Fund-GCF’s structure encompasses the Kuali SICAR-EuSEF (the 
SICAR) and a Special Purpose Vehicle incorporated as a Securitization Vehicle (SV), together “Kuali Fund59”, 
which are two different vehicles with a separate legal set-up60:

=== PAGE 51 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47

=== PAGE 52 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
 
 
 
 
 
61  Regulation (EU) No 346/2013 dated 17 April 2013 on European social entrepreneurship funds, as amended or 
supplemented from time to time (“EuSEFR”). 
- 
Kuali S.C.A., SICAR-EuSEF:  a corporate partnership limited by shares (Société en 
commandite par actions) qualifying as a société d’investissement en capital à risque (SICAR) 
pursuant to the Luxembourg 2004 Law and a Social Entrepreneurship Fund (EuSEF) pursuant 
to the EuSEFR61. A SICAR is an investment company in risk capital that was designed for 
investments in private equity and venture capital. The SICAR is an externally managed 
Alternative Investment Fund (AIF) and, therefore, the Shareholders have a passive role and 
commit to drawdowns upon requests meeting certain formal requirements.  
- 
Kuali SV: It will be a special purpose vehicle constituted under Luxembourg Law as a 
Securitization vehicle to accommodate the contribution of the Spanish Agency for International 
Cooperation and Development. This SV, regulated by the Luxembourg securitization law, will 
not be authorized, and supervised by the Commission de Surveillance du Secteur Financier 
(CSSF), but by making pari-passu co-investments with the SICAR, its activity will be subject 
to the same rules and requirements of operation and transparency as Kuali Fund, which will 
be authorized and supervised by the CSSF. The sole shareholder of the SV will be the SICAR 
General Partner.  
Kuali SV will be managed by GAWA Capital Partners, and its sole shareholder will be the General Partner of 
the Kuali SICAR. Kuali SV will issue senior notes to FONPRODE and subordinated notes to Kuali SICAR, 
whose participation in the SV will be limited to 10% of FONPRODE’s contribution. Kuali SV will not be 
authorized and supervised by the Commission de Surveillance du Secteur Financier (CSSF), but by making 
pari-passu co-investments with the Kuali SICAR, its activity will, de facto, be subject to the same rules and 
requirements of operation and transparency as the SICAR, which must be authorized and supervised by the 
CSSF. The first loss contribution from EU and GCF, and also the resources in concessional conditions from 
FONPRODE will enable to attract private investors’ participation, as this catalytic contribution will provide a 
function of de-risking the private investments:

=== PAGE 53 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
 
 
 
 
 
62 In conformity with the applicable regulation, the General Partner must entrust the investment management of the umbrella 
fund and its Sub-Funds to an authorized alternative investment fund manager. Therefore, the General Partner will appoint 
a manager – GAWA Capital Partners- that is both an authorized Alternative Investment Fund Manager (AIFM) and an 
authorized Qualifying Social Entrepreneurship Fund (align with the requirements set out in the EuSEFR) manager. 
  
The governing bodies of Kuali Fund SICAR will be: 
- 
The General Partner (GP) of Kuali Fund will be a private limited liability company wholly owned by GAWA 
Capital Partners SGEIC S.A., a firm specialized in impact investment management services, fully 
authorized, and supervised by the Spanish Exchange Commission (CNMV). The GP will be responsible 
for the overall management of Kuali Fund and, as a limited managing partner, it will be personally, jointly 
and severally liable for all corporate debts that cannot be paid out of the resources of Kuali Fund. In 
principle, the GP will be responsible for implementing the investment policy of Kuali Fund, including 
making investment and divestment decisions. In conformity with the Law, the GP must entrust the 
investment management of Kuali to an authorized alternative investment fund manager (AIFM). The 
General Partner will appoint GAWA Capital Partners SGEIC, SA, as an external alternative investment 
fund manager (also known as AIFM) of Kuali, authorized pursuant article 42 of Law 22/2014 of 12 
November 2014 (Spanish AIFM Law), pursuant to an AIFM Agreement (signed between the GP and 
GAWA Capital Partners) and as manager of a Qualifying Social Entrepreneurship Fund within the 
meaning of the EuSEFR.  
- 
The Manager62 of Kuali Fund will be GAWA Capital Partners SGEIC S.A. GAWA Capital is a leading firm 
in the Spanish impact investing sector, in terms of assets advised and under management, track record 
and network of relationships with investors and other players in the impact investing sector.  The Fund 
Manager shall perform the investment management functions (i.e., portfolio and risk management), the 
marketing and the other functions as listed the Spanish AIFM Law, in compliance with it and the AIFM 
Agreement. It is worth noting that the General Partner remains responsible for the overall management 
and supervision.  The General Partner and the Manager will be different entities.

=== PAGE 54 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
 
 
 
 
 
63 For more details check Kuali Fund – Manual of policies and procedures. 
- 
The Investors Advisory Committee (IAC) is a body comprised of representatives of Kuali Fund’s 
Investors that have made large commitments (the “Member Investors”) and have requested to be part of 
the IAC. COFIDES shall be a member as well. The number of Member Investors shall be a minimum of 
two and a maximum of eight. One or more observers with no voting rights may be invited. Member 
Investors shall vote on a per capita basis (and not on the size of their respective commitments). The IAC 
shall act on an advisory capacity and shall not decide on the investments. Investments will be identified 
in line with the investment guidelines and requirements included in the Private Placement Memorandum 
(PPM) and the applicable legal documentation. 
In addition, another relevant body will be the Strategic Advisory Group, composed by experts in climate 
change, climate finance, emerging markets, SME, smallholder farmers and indigenous people financing 
agriculture, private sector development and geographical expertise. The Group can make recommendations 
to the Fund Manager on business development strategy for Kuali Fund, purely of an advisory and non-binding 
nature. It will meet on an ad-hoc basis. 
COFIDES will manage the GCF and the EU Proceeds for both investors and the TA.  GCF requirements will 
be further secured through a Side Letter signed between COFIDES and the Kuali Fund. The Fund Manager, 
in coordination with the General Partner, may enter into agreements with certain investors granting specific 
rights (the Side Letters) not included in the Private Placement Memorandum. The Side Letter will be 
formalized as long as the Commitment Agreement (which formalizes the committed contribution to Kuali 
Fund) and will include all the specific requirements that a given Investor (e.g. GCF) obliges Kuali Fund to fulfil 
(e.g. the relevant obligations under the AMA and FAA). Once any financial need is requested by Kuali Fund 
(for either new opportunity, reinvestment, fees…), the General Partner will issue COFIDES, as AE for the EU 
and the GCF, the relevant capital call. COFIDES will review such request and, if agreed, will disburse the 
relevant amount into the Kuali Fund banking account.  Based on Kuali Fund-GCF’s budget and its investment 
estimations, COFIDES will progressively request the GCF to disburse its commitment. The GCF would then 
transfer the requested amount to a COFIDES bank account. According to the TA resources, COFIDES will 
manage the costs related to Communication, which include website design and maintenance, domain and 
logo design, the launching events, promotion and other types of communication and visibility action. For audit 
and evaluation purposes, COFIDES will probably hire an external consultant according to COFIDES 
procedures.  
In summary, the Subsidiary Agreements that COFIDES as AE will put in place for the implementation of this 
Proposal are: i) in the case of the equity component, the Private Placement Memorandum (PPM), the 
Commitment Agreement, and the Side Letter; ii) for the TA component, the Fiduciary Agreement. 
The Executing Entity of Kuali Fund-GCF will be GAWA Capital Partners SGEIC, SA, in its role as sole owner 
of the General Partner (a Luxembourg private limited liability company specifically constituted to set up Kuali 
Fund). The Fund manager (i.e. GAWA Capital Partners SGEIC, SA), as Executing Entity, will establish a 
rigorous investment process with an emphasis on adherence to the investment objectives. The Manager will 
use a disciplined review of potential investments using a standard framework and consistent set of criteria63. 
Investment decisions will only be taken after intensive due diligence, review, and discussion.  
Regarding climate specific knowledge the Investment Committee members have 13 years of experience in 
investing in FSPs and technology companies. The green and climate aspects of the investees have been 
taken into account with several of them already deploying green products. For example, the Technical 
Assistance of the Huruma fund has financed the development of a solar water pump product in Panama, 
targeted to smallholders that currently use diesel pumps. This has allowed the IC members to learn about 
the opportunities and challenges related to climate finance.

=== PAGE 55 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
 
 
 
 
 
64 https://www.oecd.org/greengrowth/GGSD_2018_SME%20Issue%20Paper_WEB.pdf  
65 “Climate change impacts and adaptation among smallholder farmers in Central America” - Celia Harvey, 2018 
Besides, Gawa Capital and its Co-CEOs are initiators and active members of the “microfinance” climate 
community helping develop the Green Index 3.0 of the European Microfinance Platform (e-MFP) and the 
Scale for Resilience Initiative with Yapu and CGIAR.  
In addition, a Senior Climate E&S Expert and E&S Analyst with substantial experience on climate lending 
and microfinance will be hired before the initial investments. They will play an important role, offering more 
in-depth technical expertise to the IC and ensuring that adequate baseline, monitoring and verification 
protocols regarding mitigation and adaptation are in place. The investment team will also be expanded with 
2-3 new positions aligned with past experiences.  
The E&S Analyst will also have expertise in gender. The Gender Officer will report to the Investment 
Committee whenever an investment is to be approved and provide gender information to decision-making 
committees. After the investment approval process, GAWA will call the investor commitments and will be 
responsible to ensure that the funds will be adequately allocated in the relevant approved concept (investee, 
expenses, fees). GAWA will be also responsible for the monitoring of the investees.  
Tracking Shares Methodology and distribution waterfall 
Kuali Fund-GCF will distribute the available cash using a "tracking shares" methodology.  Distribution for the 
Funded Activity will be separated and will come from the eligible operations. 
Given the geographic restrictions of each of the Kuali Fund’s first loss investors (EU India, EU LATAM and 
NOL countries), the Kuali Fund SCA SICAR-EuSEF will have different share classes to address the 
geographical constraints of its investors.  
(i) 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
GCF participation will be essential for Kuali Fund-GCF for several reasons.  The funds will be used to support 
the two sectors in Latin America which are the most vulnerable and potential contributors to reduce CO2 
emissions: the MSME sector as well as the Agricultural sector. 
• 
SMEs are the backbone of the emerging markets economies, representing the vast majority of 
businesses. Estimates suggest that small businesses contribute to 60-70% of total industrial 
pollution 64. Therefore, the ecological transition should be built around decarbonizing MSMEs to 
gradually include environmental practices in their business processes, rethinking the production 
model and adapting the use of energy in companies. Making SME greener will lower production costs 
as a result of lower uses of energy and other resources and it will also enhance their access to export 
markets and to international value chains which are under increased pressure to mitigate the climate 
footprint of their operations. 
• 
Agricultural sector is responsible for 30% of global emissions and farmers are the most vulnerable 
segment of society to the consequences of climate change. Recent research shows that climate 
change is already impacting smallholder farmers activities in Latin America. As a result, 32% of 
smallholder farmers in the region are experiencing food insecurity and producers of essential products 
for the region such as maize and coffee are experiencing drops in productivity as a result of climate 
change.65 
On a positive look there is an increasing number of nature-based solutions that, in addition of providing 
substantial mitigation benefits reducing the carbon footprint of MSMEs and farmers, are also contributing to 
building resilience among these vulnerable segments. When a company invests in a mitigation solution it

=== PAGE 56 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
 
 
 
 
 
66 EU total contribution for First Loss investments will be EUR 12 million for Kuali Fund. 
makes its operations more resilient to climate change. Similarly, many of the nature-based adaptation 
solutions that can be implemented by farmers regenerate the soil producing carbon sequestration. 
The Kuali Fund-GCF aims at ensuring that the MSME and agricultural sector can easily implement these 
solutions by facilitating financing and advisory by MFIs and other financial service providers. These 
institutions have the needed capillarity to deliver the climate-smart solutions to the hands of excluded farmers 
and businesses. The Kuali Fund-GCF will help the institutions to make their green transition so that they start 
offering or expand their financing of climate mitigation and adaptation solution to their clients.   
Apart from investing in MFIs and other feet-on-the-ground financial institutions, the Kuali Fund-GCF will also 
invest in fintech and insurtech companies that are providing financial service and insurance to both MSME 
and farmers in innovative ways, reducing operating costs and tapering new clients in new geographical areas 
in a very efficient way. These players are capturing in increasing market share of the MSME and farmers 
financing market and will be invested by the Kuali Fund-GCF to start offering climate finance solutions to their 
clients. 
In addition, Kuali Fund-GCF will also invest in innovative companies which produce products and services 
related to mitigation and adaptation. Some examples include alternative energy sources such as solar roof 
systems, energy efficient machinery, adaptive/integrated water resource management, climate related 
decision-making services, efficient cold chains or cooling systems and new farming inputs adapted to new 
climate conditions. These solutions are often implemented by climate-tech and agri-tech companies. 
The GCF’s contribution to the first-loss tranche will have a catalytic role. GCF investment will provide a 
function of de-risking (first loss) which is essential to mobilize private investors, particularly institutional private 
investors. This cushion will address perceived risks by the private sector; hence, the proposed structure will 
allow Kuali Fund-GCF to catalyze private sector participation at scale. Besides, the GCF’s contribution will 
foster systemic change via market-based solutions, promoting sustainable private investment and leading to 
less and less need for currently vital, catalytic capital in the future. To this end, a first-loss tranche of EUR 
26.26 million (EUR 25 million provided by the GCF and the EUR 1.26 million by the EU66) is required. 
GCF’s investment will also provide, as a well-respected institutional investor, enormous added value, 
boosting confidence and acting as a stamp of approval to private investors. 
GCF participation will surely attract investors that may be completely new to Impact investing and/or Climate 
finance, giving additional security and boosting environmental awareness in the investing community. 
GAWA’s latest fund (Huruma Fund, focused on boosting financial inclusion and strengthening agri-value 
chains for smallholder farmers in developing and emerging markets) found that the majority of the EUR 90 
million committed by private investors came from investors who had never invested in impact investing or 
agriculture before. This interest was spurred by increasing awareness of the opportunity to boost social 
impact via investments, but also by key catalytic capital injected in the fund thanks to a similar structuring of 
blended finance. 
According to investees, once financial institutions have undergone the proposed transformation and managed 
to begin to cater for the SME and smallholder farmers / climate segment, they will continue doing so after 
Kuali Fund-GCF, creating a systemic shift of capital from financial institutions to SME and smallholder farmers 
/ climate opportunities as well. The participation of GCF in Kuali Fund-GCF will be crucial to the Funded 
Activity's viability and will foster the replication of the project among the countries in LAC. 
The TAF will be key to significantly increase the impact of the financing provided to the FSPs by supporting 
their adaptation to SME and smallholder farmers’ needs. The TAF will also allow improving the outreach in 
scale and depth of SME and smallholder farmers financing and ensuring the sustainability of the project.

=== PAGE 57 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
 
 
 
 
 
TA supported by the GCF, EU, FONPRODE and Kuali Fund itself (EUR 5.9 million) is essential to the 
transformation and is an integral part of what Kuali Fund-GCF is offering: investments + knowledge (TA). 
Without TA there would be no transformation, which is at the core of Kuali Fund-GCF strategy. The TA Fund 
is also a crucial component in order to secure the alignment of interest of all the parties involved and the 
highest potential impact of the investment.  
The GCF contribution will therefore strategically contribute to the sustainability of the action by improving 
innovative companies and FSPs’ capacities.  
For the above reasons, Kuali Fund-GCF would probably not be able to be raised without the participation of 
GCF. 
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

=== PAGE 58 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
 
 
 
 
 
67 Founded in 2009, GAWA Capital is the leading impact investor in Spain. GAWA Capital has directly reached 419,000 low-
income households through its investments, fostering their access to financial services and enabling families and 
businesses to thrive: 
- 256,000 families directly affected. 
- 83% female clients. 
- 50% rural clients. 
- EUR 204 million advised. 
- 52 impact investments, supporting 32 entities. 
- 9.6 million total end-beneficiaries. 
Since its inception, GAWA has pioneered the introduction of the impact investing asset class in Spain, having launched 
three funds, in addition to advising a third-party fund - Magallanes Impacto FIL. Each of these funds invest equity and debt 
in emerging countries, in companies focused on providing market-based solutions to key societal issues such as poverty. 
To date, GAWA has advised over EUR 204 million, with investments in 16 countries and a positive track record of 6.34% 
annual IRR to investors in GAWA’s first fund. 
Source: https://www.gawacapital.com/impact  
Kuali Fund-GCF will have a duration of 10 years, with a possible extension of a maximum of 2 additional 
years, subject to the approval of the Investors Advisory Committee. However, the objective of Kuali Fund-
GCF is that financial institutions will have built the right infrastructure and business model to provide green 
and climate loans beyond the life of Kuali Fund-GCF. 
Kuali Fund-GCF will return investors’ capital with a yield in a form of distributions which will take place as 
and when underlying investments reach maturity. Thanks to its extensive track record (50+ investments and 
no losses so far), the Fund Manager (GAWA Capital Partners SGEIC) has a strong pipeline67 in the region 
and carries out exhaustive initial due diligences in addition to close monitoring of each investee throughout 
the life of each investment, assuring the financial sustainability of the Funded Activity. The Fund Manager 
has developed sophisticated financial models which allow for the detailed follow up and management of 
Kuali Fund-GCF’s cash inflows and outflows. The careful selection of target investees, thorough analysis of 
the robustness of their business models, financial and operating environments, implies that the inability to 
provide targeted return is very low. 
Debt financing (including mezzanine transactions) is self-liquidating and may be rolled over once during the 
Investment period.  Debt investments have an average tenor of 6 years, so that at the end of Kuali Fund-
GCF's life (10 years) they have always matured. These operations are always backed by promissory notes, 
which in certain cases can be endorsed to another investor.  In the case of equity investments, from year 6 
onwards the manager starts planning the exit of the investment, having enough time (4 years) to sell trying 
to get the maximum profit. Equity investments’ exit options are evaluated and documented before making 
an investment and are a key decision point during investment evaluation. Several options are typically listed 
in the Shareholder Agreements, in order of priority including:  
- 
Right to sale on future capital expansion,  
- 
Initial Public Offers (IPOs) 
- 
Put option to the majority shareholder (the right, but not the obligation, to sell an asset to another 
party). 
- 
Tag-along rights (if the majority shareholder sells his stake, minority holders have the right to join 
the deal and sell their stake in the same terms and conditions as would apply to the majority 
shareholder).  
- 
Mandatory sale right with drag-along (if the majority shareholder sells his stake, minority holders 
are forced to join the deal). 
Any investment will require the implementation of gender policies of FSPs and innovative companies, aimed 
at ensuring non-discrimination and empowering women as employees and entrepreneurs. The specific 
gender interventions will make investees more inclusive and strengthen women capacities, knowledge, 
sustainable skills and self-confidence.

=== PAGE 59 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
 
 
 
 
 
C. FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing 
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + 
v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
32.8 
million euro (€)  
GCF financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) Senior loans 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans 
 
 
 
 
(iii) Equity 
25 MM 
10 years 
 
Enter %  
equity return as per 
financial 
model/terms and 
conditions 
(iv) Guarantees 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable 
grants 
 
 
 
 
(vi) Grants (TA) 
5 MM  
10 years 
 
 
(ii) Grants 
(evaluative 
data 
collection 
+Communic
ation, 
Evaluation 
and Audit) 
2.8 MM 
10 years 
 
 
(vii) Results-
based payments 
 
 
 
 
(b) Co-
financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
Total co-financing: 95.4 
 76.86 in equity 
million euro (€)

=== PAGE 60 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
 
 
 
 
+ 17.6 in senior loans 
+ 0.9 in grants 
Name of 
institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
EU (Blending 
Facility) 
Equity 
1.26 
million euro 
(€) 
10 years 
3.9% 
Junior 
EU (Blending 
Facility) 
Grant 
0.57 
million euro 
(€) 
10 years 
 
 
AECID 
Senior 
Loans 
17.6 
million euro 
(€)  
10 years 
Annual 
Euribor - 1% 
floor and 
3.75% cap  
pari passu 
AECID 
Grant 
0.3 
million euro 
(€)  
10 years 
 
 
 
GAWA Capital 
Equity 
1 
million euro 
(€)  
10 years 
TBD% 
senior 
Kuali Fund 
Grant 
0.04 
million euro 
(€) 
10 years 
 
 
Private investors 
Equity 
74.6 
million euro 
(€)  
10 years 
6.5% 
senior 
(c) Total 
financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
Total financing: 128.2 
 101.86 in equity 
+ 17.6 in senior loans 
 6.3 in grants + 2.4 for Eval. Data Collection 
 
million euro (€)  
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 
words, 
approximately 
0.5 page) 
The GCF and EU contributions to the first loss tranche (EUR 25 million + EUR 1.26 
million) will help mobilizing private investors’ participation and reduce their 
perceived risk of the SME and smallholder farmers sectors. The GCF, EU, AECID 
and the SICAR itself will also contribute to the funding of the Technical Assistance 
(EUR 5 million, EUR 0.57 million, EUR 0.3 million and EUR 0.04 million each). 
AECID will contribute with EUR 50 million to Kuali Fund, of which EUR 17.6 million 
in Kuali Fund-GCF through Senior debt and EUR 1.8 million from the SICAR itself 
through Subordinated debt that will be channeled through a Securitization Vehicle 
(SV). This SV will issue notes with a tenor consistent with the duration of Kuali 
Fund-GCF (10-12 years). The GCF will contribute an additional 0.4 million EUR for 
Communication, Evaluation, Audit and other purposes and with EUR 2.4 million for 
Evaluative Data Collection. Finally, private investors will contribute with EUR 73.8 
million in equity. COFIDES and GAWA will invest in the Funded Activity to align 
their interests and perceived risks, but the amount is still to be determined. 
C.2. Financing by component  
 
Componen
t 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
million euro 
(€) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
million 
euro (€) 
Financial 
Instrume
nt 
Amount 
million euro (€) 
Financi
al 
Instrum
ent 
Name of 
Institutions 
Component 
I: 
Investment
s 
 
I.1.1. Kuali 
fund is 
operational and 
capitalized 
 
 
119.5 
(100.1 + 
19.4 
through a 
Securitizati
on Vehicle) 
 
25 
 
Equity 
 
17.6  
Senior 
loans 
 AECID - 
Securitization 
Vehicle 
1.8 
Subordi
nated 
loans 
Kuali Fund 
SICAR– 
Securitisation 
Vehicle

=== PAGE 61 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
 
 
 
 
I.1.2. Increased 
green financing 
available to 
SMEs and 
smallhoders 
farmers   
1 
Equity 
GAWA Capital 
72.8  
 
Equity 
Private 
investor
s 
Private 
investors 
1.26  
Equity 
EU Blending 
Facility 
Component 
II: 
Technical 
Assistance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communica
tion, 
Evaluation 
and Audit & 
Evaluative 
Data 
Collect 
 
 II.2.2 
Capacities for 
Climate Smart 
Agriculture and 
adoption of 
Climate 
Solutions built 
II.3.1. 
Strengthened 
financial 
ecosystem 
actors. 
Capacities 
enabling green 
and inclusive 
finance 
4.75   
 
4.02 
Grants 
0.46  
Grants 
EU 
Blending 
Facility 
0.24 
Grants 
AECID 
0.03  
Grants 
Kuali Fund 
II.2.1. Kuali’s 
TA Facility is 
operational 
1.16  
0.98  
Grants 
0.11  
Grants 
EU Blending 
Facility  
0.06  
Grants 
AECID 
0.01 
Grants 
Kuali Fund 
Communicatio
n, Evaluation 
and Audit 
0.4  
0.4  
Grants 
 
 
 
Evaluative data 
collection 
2.4  
2.4  
Grants 
 
 
 
Indicative total cost (EUR) 
125.8+ 2.4 
for Eval. 
Data 
Collection 
30.4 + 2.4 for Eval. 
Data Collection 
95.4 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
Kuali Fund-GCF provides capacity building to financial institutions to help them become “greener” 
and to lend to SMEs and smallholder farmers with the same goal. The main key objective of the 
project is to develop and strengthen the capacity at bank level to serve SMEs and smallholder 
farmers with a specific focus on climate lending, by implementing the following best practices/ 
technologies: 
- 
Innovative underwriting methodologies which make lending to SMEs and smallholder 
farmers faster and easier. 
- 
Financial products aim at financing assets that promote mitigation and adaptation. 
- 
Internal Environmental best practices.

=== PAGE 62 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
 
 
 
 
- 
Incentivizing climate lending to women led SMEs and women smallholder farmers 
(women led SME and women smallholder farmers are expected to represent at least 30% 
of the total beneficiaries). 
- 
More broadly, all activities supported by the technical assistance facility. 
The TAF is intended to cover the following types of capacity building activities: 
- 
Consultant Services, i.e., hiring experts and consultants for tailor-made technical assistance 
for FSP, Innovative companies and SMEs. 
- 
Training: evaluate prior experience or training in agriculture and establish induction and 
training programs with agriculture related subjects. 
- 
Goods and Services related, i.e., hardware, software and other goods that the beneficiaries 
may need, caped to a percentage to be determined. 
- 
Ecosystemic technical assistance (TA) that will indirectly benefit the FSPs, Innovative 
Companies and/or the SMEs/ smallholder farmers. 
Indeed, to maximize the Funded Activity impact in the agriculture sector, the TAF will support projects 
seeking improvements in markets for products, country-level infrastructure, and other activities that, 
in addition to tailored TA to investees, could be implemented under a Value Chain Development 
(VCD) and/or thematic approach. This will be done through the Cross-cutting TA. The Cross-cutting 
projects of TAF will address specific needs and market failures identified during the investment period 
of Kuali Fund-GCF. TAF should indirectly help the Funded Activity’s end beneficiaries, i.e., producer 
organizations, agribusiness SMEs (both Kuali’s direct investees) or smallholder farmers’ clients of 
FIs which are the investees. 
These activities could embrace specific programs at meso level addressing major common 
challenges for smallholder farmers (e.g., need of better extension Services, access to markets, 
resilience and climate smart agriculture, access to market information, etc.), as well as enhance 
better access to finance for women. The Cross-cutting activities could be channeled through many 
actors in the smallholder support community working at different levels of the value chain, always in 
close relationship and coordination with the Delegations and Government of those countries. 
In addition, Kuali Fund-GCF will support partnerships between FSPs (smaller traditional financial 
institutions and Fintech companies) to build a better offering to SMEs and smallholder farmers; and 
will also develop a methodology/technology to assess “Green readiness” through data analytics, 
machine learning, open banking, etc.

=== PAGE 63 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
 
 
 
 
D. EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Kuali Fund-GCF aims at transforming Financial Institutions to better serve the unbanked SME and 
smallholder farmers segments with a specific focus on climate lending. As a result of better access to 
financing, SMEs and smallholder farmers will have access to more energy efficient equipment and vehicles, 
clean energy production such as solar panels or assets that allow entrepreneurs and smallholders to adapt 
to climate change. Kuali Fund-GCF will have a significant impact in terms of SMEs and smallholder farmers 
support, women empowerment and in the global fight against climate change, supporting a large number of 
SMEs, smallholder farmers and entrepreneurs in LATAM and avoiding 2,707,455 anticipated tons of CO2 
equivalent in 10 years expected lifetime.  
Adaptation and resilience to climate change will be assessed evaluating the change in vulnerability of 
farmers based on the IPCC methodology that considers vulnerability as a function of exposure, sensitivity 
and adaptive capacity. Climate information will be derive using available platforms to set up customized 
baselines and technology/practice adoption will increment their adaptive capacity68, 
To this end, Kuali Fund-GCF will support more than 12 FSPs and innovative companies financed to 
reach approximately 4,428 SMEs and 237,907 smallholder farmers. This would represent approximately 
0.05% of the population of the target countries of Kuali Fund-GCF. 
The Funded Activity expects to support smallholder farmers in financing assets that foster adaptation to 
climate change such as water solutions or farming inputs better adapted to new climate conditions – 
assuming an average loan of EUR 2,100. Hence, people benefiting from Kuali Fund-GCF’s funding in 
FSPs/innovative companies and potential SMEs/smallholder farmers will have greater access to funding, 
increased business opportunities, greater diversification of their activity, better technology employed, more 
sustainable practices and an increase in their quality of life. Also, the total population of these countries will 
benefit from the sum of tons of CO2 reduced and by increasing their resilience to the effects of climate 
change, in line with the commitment of the Paris Agreement. 
In addition to the above benefits, the potential impact of the transformation of the financial system in FSPs 
and innovative companies, SMEs and smallholder farmers towards greener and more innovative models will 
also reduce the financing gap in these final beneficiaries and between the traditional banking, favor the 
digitalization of beneficiary companies and integrate these final beneficiaries into the value chains thanks to 
their greater competitiveness, which will contribute to strengthening the sector and the economic activity at 
the macro level. 
Moreover, the flow of climate finance towards smallholders will help filling up their financing gap, will result 
in resilience to climate change by this vulnerable population, increase in their productivity and their 
household income. 
Finally, gender targets have been established considering existing data regarding the gender finance gap. 
Kuali Fund-GCF propose to target at least 30% women-owned SMEs and women smallholder farmers to 
enhance the engagement of women in accessing financial services and participating in capacity building and 
training programs. Additional activities are described in the gender action plan.  
 
 
 
68 For more details check Annex 22.

=== PAGE 64 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
 
 
 
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Kuali Fund-GCF will be an innovative investment fund in the region, benefiting from the Fund Manager's 
long and successful experience in LAC. The benefits that the Funded Activity will bring to the SMEs and the 
smallholder farmers can be easily replicated in the sector by other smaller or new FSPs once the Funded 
Activity has divested, as Kuali Fund-GCF's main objective is to change the trend of business models in the 
financial intermediation towards a greener and more inclusive transition through good practices, processes, 
technology, and appropriate products. After this transformation process, the financial institutions invested by 
Kuali Fund-GCF will be greener and more inclusive so that they can continue with their environmental and 
social impact even after the investment is exited and possibly crowding in more Financial Institutions that 
have not been investees to launch new climate finance initiatives.  
In this regard, the contribution to paradigm shift of Kuali Fund-GCF will be channeled through FSPs and 
innovative companies. If FSPs implement appropriate environmental strategies and risk management 
systems with the support of Kuali Fund-GCF, then (i) SMEs will reduce their carbon footprint and (ii) 
smallholder farmers will increase their adaptative capacity to climate change, because (i) SMEs will invest 
in more energy efficient equipment and (ii) smallholder farmers will invest in assets that support climate 
smart agricultural practices to increase their productivity, increase the resilience of their communities and 
reduce their carbon footprint. From the Innovative Companies’ perspective, if these companies also 
implement these strategies and risk management system, then they will benefit from higher productivity, a 
reduction in their carbon footprint and an improvement of their resilience to climate change, because of the 
transformation of their processes and business models into a more sustainable and ecological models.  
This replicability is directly related to the potential for knowledge sharing and learning. The transformation 
that Kuali Fund-GCF will make in the target sectors will generate lessons learnt for the future development 
of the companies themselves and for new companies that want to incorporate these business models. With 
partnership from the GCF, this Funded Activity will demonstrate that the technology, processes and products 
that will be developed by the funded FSPs and Innovative Companies will favor an improvement in the value 
chain and in the business structure that is expected to have a high impact on the sector, favoring the 
resilience of SMEs and smallholder farmers towards the ecological transition. Moreover, the influence of 
private capital has the potential to support businesses that build climate resilience for smallholders, while 
also supporting overall growth of SMEs and smallholder farmers sectors. This will allow Kuali Fund-GCF to 
develop a strong track record in climate resilient financing and will enable to raise future, larger funds to 
invest in more companies that are aligned with the GCF’s impact goals. In this regard, by investing in for-
profit companies, GCF and other investors in Kuali Fund-GCF will be creating financially sustainable 
enterprises that continue to operate through internal profits and follow-on investment capital even after the 
Funded Activity has divested. The expected success of Kuali Fund-GCF, due to an experienced Fund 
Manager team and a huge financial gap with a high-potential demand of FSPs/innovative companies and 
SMEs/smallholder farmers, will build further expertise and a strong track-record in the climate resilient 
investment scope, which will enable Kuali Fund-GCF or other investors in the region to raise more money in 
the future and make more investments. 
Kuali Fund-GCF’s investments will develop, prove and scale innovative inclusive finance, reduce the impact 
of climate shocks on the incomes of SMEs and smallholder farmers. Success stories from such investments 
should attract further private sector capital into those same companies and other similar that arise to 
compete, which ultimately will serve to increase the scale and impact of the final beneficiaries.  
In this context, Kuali Fund-GCF will develop its investments within an adequate environmental and regulatory 
framework, thanks to the previous experience in the region of the Fund Manager and of the accredited entity. 
The potential investments will have significant impact within the specific identified countries. Such 
investments will create employment opportunities, local institutional knowledge that can be shared within

=== PAGE 65 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
 
 
 
 
public and private sectors and strengthen local supply and distribution value chains required for scaling 
sustainable businesses.  
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
SMEs are the backbone of the emerging markets economies and contribute 60-70% of total industrial 
pollution. SMEs need to include environmental practices in their processes, which will lower production 
costs and enhance their access to international value chains. On the other hand, the agricultural sector is 
responsible for 30% of global emissions and farmers are the most vulnerable to the consequences of 
climate change. 32% of smallholder farmers in LAC are experiencing food insecurity and producers of maize 
and coffee are experiencing drops in productivity as a result of climate change. 
From the perspective of mitigation measures, preventing and reducing the emission of greenhouse gases 
into the atmosphere will make the impacts of climate change less severe. Kuali Fund-GCF will seek to reduce 
human interference with the climate system in order to ensure that food production is not threatened and to 
enable economic development in a sustainable manner. Securing affordable-climate friendly energy is key 
to support climate mitigation. Several initiatives are being developed to cut greenhouse gas emissions, 
adopting legislation to increase the use of renewal energy and improve overall energy efficiency. From the 
adaptation to climate change side, it is really important to invest in supporting farmers and communities to 
better manage unpredictable weather patterns and maximize the resources by connecting them with 
information, tools and services for growing hardier yields and raising livestock. This includes helping farmers 
diversify their crops and redesign their farmland to improve their productivity and protect the soil, so they are 
better equipped to continue growing food and earning income in the face of drought.  
Kuali Fund-GCF will be deeply committed to creating sustainable development in developing countries, as 
evidenced by previous activities and track record of both the Fund Manager and the Accredited Entity. The 
Funded Activity will always seek to cooperate with local partners with a high potential of sustainable and 
innovative growth. The collaboration with these local partners will create appropriate values and processes 
that provide a sustainable and durable model for the future. Each investment decision will be made on the 
basis of a triple bottom line methodology, considering the economic, environmental and social sustainability 
view: 
- 
From a global perspective, Kuali Fund-GCF will also promote greater competitiveness in the 
target sectors, a modernization of the regional financial sector and the contribution to economic 
growth in the target countries. 
- 
From an economic perspective, the benefits identified are: increase in the number of jobs, (over 
640,000 indirect jobs supported) economic growth of SMEs and smallholder farmers, greater 
access to financing of SMEs and smallholder farmers that have not traditionally been supported, 
the strengthening of small financial services providers that have a high innovative component, 
the reduction of the gap between traditional banking and these FSPs and innovative companies, 
the synergies that can be found with traditional banking and the increase in purchasing power of 
small businesses and families. Additionally, the flow of financing to the smallholders will result in 
an increase in agriculture resilience through climate adaptation, which will result in an increase in 
agriculture productivity. 
- 
From a social perspective, as a result of better financing, SMEs and smallholder farmers will be 
able to grow, increasingly engaging with international value chains, create more quality jobs and 
therefore increase income and purchase, which can result in better health, education and 
livelihood. The increase in smallholders’ productivity will result in higher household income for 
this especially vulnerable segment. The transformation that Kuali Fund-GCF will achieve will 
provide the FSPs/innovative companies and final beneficiaries with a greater knowledge and 
sustainable skills that will be useful after the Funded Activity’s investment. These processes will

=== PAGE 66 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
 
 
 
 
lead to an increase in competitiveness in the sector and better access to new technologies, 
making their business models more efficient. Women’s local organizations will be identified and 
engaged with in country targets to incorporate their knowledge on women empowerment. The 
Gender Action Plan will ensure that cross-cutting gender measures are integrated throughout the 
project. The participation of women into the productive sector has repercussions on economic 
growth and on a better distribution of income, since they are agents that promote the education 
and well-being of children, resulting in an increase in the human capital of future generations. The 
commitment in gender and the number of jobs supported will imply a co-benefit in women 
employment during and after the lifespan of Kuali Fund-GCF. 
- 
In addition, Kuali Fund-GCF will have a clear benefit in the environmental field. The Funded 
Activity will contribute to the mitigation objectives of the GCF through estimated savings of 
approximately 2,707,455 tons of CO2 equivalent, distributed over the life of the Funded Activity; 
and will also contribute the soil structure with the adoption of agro-ecological practices (such as 
improvements with crop residues through mulching, natural restoration of soil fertility, anti-erosion 
techniques through hedgerows or agroforestry, etc.). This will imply a clear co-benefit in the 
improvement of the air quality. 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The climate gap in the LAC region is USD 2.3 billion. Large financial institutions in the region have been 
channeling green lending towards the financing of large renewable energy projects, large industrial power 
plants and large efficient building construction companies.  
However, smaller financial institutions are key to mobilize climate finance to markets underserved by large 
banks. These institutions are essential to channel climate finance towards SMEs and smallholder farmers. 
Nevertheless, capital doesn’t glow into these two segments naturally. As already mentioned, according to 
IFC69, the latest estimates show that the formal SME financing gap70 in LAC is estimated to be over USD 
900 billion – 3.1x the current level of SME lending-. Financing demand increases USD 745 billion if informal 
SMEs are considered. About 31% of formal SMEs in Latin America have unmet financing needs. 
Additionally, smallholders’ finance gap in the region is USD 20 billion71. 
Therefore, these smaller institutions need to transform their risk management systems, processes, 
technology, staff and products to be ready to mobilize green and climate products for SMEs and smallholder 
farmers in a sustainable and efficient way. 
Given the strong adoption of sustainability values among multinationals, the SMEs and the smallholder 
farmers that are proactive on sustainability issues and transparency are in a better position to gain access 
to new value chains and improve their business. Kuali Fund-GCF will therefore transform Innovative 
Companies and mainly FSPs sector with innovative and ecological practices that will transfer this new 
methodology and know-how acquired to the SMEs and the smallholder farmers, which will increase their 
competitiveness in the sector in a sustainable way. This may lead to an increase in opportunities for SMEs 
and smallholder farmers in global value chains. 
The financial institutions financed by Kuali Fund-GCF will support farmers by increasing their financial 
resources to build resilience against climate change (e.g. by improving the irrigation systems, buying more 
suitable seeds…). Smallholder farmers are often more vulnerable to impacts of climate change, especially 
women farmers. This population will need to rapidly adapt to new climate conditions by adopting climate 
 
69 “SME Finance Gap. Assessment of the shortfalls and opportunities in financing small and medium enterprises in emerging 
markets”. International Finance Corporation, Washington DC, 2017. 
70 The financing gap is defined as the amount of credit that would be needed to satisfy the demand of unserved and 
underserved formal SMEs. Unserved SMEs are those that do not have a loan but need one. Underserved SMEs are those 
that have a loan but still find access to finance to be an operating constraint. 
71 Pathways to prosperity 2019, Initiative for Smallholder Finance.

=== PAGE 67 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
 
 
 
 
smart agriculture principle and equipment. It is estimated that 95% of the 15 million smallholder farmers in 
Latin America and the Caribbean are already experiencing negative impacts from rising temperatures, 
unpredictable rainfall and extreme weather events on crop yields, pest, and disease incidence, decreasing 
income generation and food security. Small farmers can also reduce their carbon footprint by using new 
equipment such as biodigesters and reforesting degraded areas. Financial institutions can play a key role in 
financing climate smart agriculture equipment to increase adaptation and promote mitigation. As a result, 
the Funded Activity may also contribute to poverty reduction. 
During earlier stakeholder engagement, the key factors identified were (please refer Annex 7): 
Lack of tools and knowledge of farmers to protect their crops from adverse climatic events. This has been 
integrated into Kuali Fund-GCF's proposal through the financing of climate adaptation financial products and 
technical assistance to entities to develop these green products and offer training to end customers on better 
agricultural adaptation practices. 
Lack of women's access to individual financial products, and mainly lack of access to green financial 
products. Through the focus on gender equity detailed in Annex 8, Kuali Fund-GCF will analyse the reach 
of the entities to women through individual products and propose an action plan to increase that reach. The 
design of a specific financial product for women may also be considered, if relevant. 
Lack of a permanent market for farmers to sell their products, or even very low prices received for the sale 
of their production. Kuali Fund-GCF includes in its technical assistance proposal a block of projects that are 
aimed directly at end customers, and which can help farmers to improve their access to markets and their 
product offering (try to sell value-added product variants) in order to make their product more attractive to 
potential buyers. 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Kuali Fund-GCF’s mission is aligned with the political strategy of the LAC region countries, as evidenced in 
their national climate policies and National Determined Contributions (NDCs) targets submitted under the 
Paris Agreement. Kuali Fund-GCF will contribute to climate change mitigation goal and will provide 
adaptation benefits to climate change and to social development of FSPs, innovative companies, SMEs and 
smallholder farmers in the target countries. Every targeted country72 should promote the transformation of 
the financial system73 with greener practices and the flow of green and climate products to SMEs and 
smallholder farmers.  
COFIDES, as an international private-public company and as a European Development Financial Institution 
(EDFI), is highly committed to various International Climate Change mitigation and adaptation initiatives in 
LAC. The over 30 years of experience working with private sector and with institutional and multilateral 
organizations in sustainable, development and climate projects has also built a significant experience in 
international private sector project mobilization, facilitating the contact with international al national 
institutions based in target countries. Moreover, the Fund Manager’s previous experience and its know-how 
in development and sustainability projects in Latin America, such as Huruma, will be a key factor in the 
potential success of Kuali Fund-GCF. 
Strategies at the national level are highlighted below74: 
 
 
72 Brazil, Mexico, Colombia, Panama, Honduras, Guatemala, and El Salvador. 
73 “Inclusion and Financial Literacy, Keys to Reducing Gaps in Latin America and the Caribbean”, CAF. 
“Fintech Solutions as a Vehicle to Expand Financial Inclusion in Latin America and the Caribbean”, IDB. 
“The Fintechs Promoting Financial Education for All in Latin America”, Crowdfund Insider. 
74 For further information, please see Annex 2.

=== PAGE 68 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
 
 
 
 
BRAZIL 
 
The National Policy on Climate Change (2009) - PNMC, by means of Law no 12,187/09. In 
accordance with this law, Brazil will pursue voluntary actions for the mitigation of greenhouse gas 
emissions with a view to reducing its projected emissions by 36.1%-38.9% by 2020. The PNMC is 
implemented by means of several action and sectoral plans for the mitigation and adaptation to 
climate change, in compliance with the principles and provisions of the Convention:  
o Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of Deforestation in the Legal Amazon (PPCDAm 
in the Portuguese acronym). 
o Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of Deforestation and Burning in Cerrado 
(PPCerrado in the Portuguese acronym). 
o The Ten-Year Energy Expansion Plan (PDE in the Portuguese acronym)  
o Sectoral Plan for the Mitigation and Adaptation to Climate Change for a Low Carbon Emission 
Agriculture (ABC Plan in the Portuguese acronym). 
o Sectoral Plan to Reduce Emissions in the Steel Industry. 
o Sectoral Plan for the Mitigation and Adaptation to Climate Change for the Consolidation of a 
Low Carbon Emission Economy in the Manufacturing Industry (Industry Plan). 
o Sectoral Plan for the Mitigation and Adaptation to Climate Change in Low-Carbon Emission 
Mining. 
o Sectoral Transport and Urban Mobility Plan for the Mitigation and Adaptation to Climate 
Change (PSTM in the Portuguese acronym).  
o Health Sectoral Plan for the Mitigation and Adaptation to Climate Change (PSMC-Saúde in 
the Portuguese acronym). 
Several components of these plans, such as the use of renewable energies and the fight against 
deforestation, are also essential parts of the Brazilian sustainable development strategy. Submitted 
to the Convention as a Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action (NAMA), the National Policy on 
Climate Change provides that the country will adopt voluntary actions to mitigate greenhouse gas 
emissions at the national level with a view to reducing its projected GHG emissions by 36.1% to 
38.9% by 2020. The goals achieved are recognized, including by non-governmental entities, as one 
of the most ambitious contributions undertaken by a single country to fight climate change. 
COLOMBIA 
 
2017 The National Policy for Climate Change - Plan Nacional de Adaptación al Cambio Climático 
(PNACC)- aims to incorporate climate change management into public and private decisions to 
advance in a climate-resilient and low-carbon development path that reduces the risks of climate 
change and allows opportunities to be seized. The long-term objective is for the country to be carbon 
neutral. 
 
The Colombian Low-Carbon Development Strategy (ECDBC) was launched in February 2012 as 
a tool to deliver the objectives of the National Development Plan 2011-2014 and the CONPES 
Document on Climate Change by promoting efficient low-carbon growth. 
 
National Disaster Risk Management Plan and the Development Strategy for the period 2015-
2025 (Decree No. 308) - the Plan has as a general objective to guide the actions of the State and 
civil society regarding risk awareness, risk reduction and disaster management in compliance with 
the National Risk Management Policy. It should also contribute to people's safety, welfare, quality of 
life and the sustainable development of the country. 
 
2017-2022 Indicative Action Plan of the Rational and Efficient Energy Use Programme 
(PROURE) defines objectives and targets for energy efficiency, actions and sectoral measures and

=== PAGE 69 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
 
 
 
 
strategies for the achievement of goals and other provisions for the period 2017-2022. It replaces the 
Indicative Action Plan 2010 to 2015. 
 MEXICO 
 
General Law on Climate Change in 2012, it specifies the different responsibilities of the Federation, 
Mexico's pledge under the Copenhagen Accord, in terms of committing the country to an emissions 
reduction target of 30% below Business As Usual (BAU) by 2020, subject to the availability of 
financial resources and technology transfer, as well as 50% GHG emissions reduction by 2050 
compared to 2000. The law was amended in 2014 to establish a tax on fossil fuels, and in 2016 at 
article 94 to frame a carbon market. The attached regulation sets the framework for the accounting 
of carbon emissions. The law was further amended in 2018 by Decree 13/07/2018, notably to initiate 
a national market of greenhouse gases emissions and to precise the contribution of Mexico within 
the scope of the Paris Agreement. 
 
The National Climate Change Policy includes a 10-, 20- and 40-year outlook for achieving climate 
change goals. Sets a target of 30% GHG emissions reductions from the base year. 
 
The Special Programme on Climate Change, -the Programa Especial de Cambio Climático 
(PECC), published in August 2009- sets Mexico’s long-term climate change agenda, together with 
medium-term goals for adaptation and mitigation. It incorporates the planning for each administration, 
considering specific programs, goals, and resources.  
 
State Climate Change Programs: incorporates the planning of each state, considering their specific 
competences, resources, and climate state level regulations. 
 
2008 Laws for Sustainable Energy Use and for the Use of Renewable Energies and Funding 
the Energy Transition encourage and regulate renewable energy and low-carbon electricity. 
 
2002 General Law for Sustainable Forest Development promotes a variety of initiatives to reduce 
deforestation and forest degradation. 
PANAMA:  
 
National Climate Change Strategy: One of the lines of actions leading to meet this objective is to 
reduce vulnerability of the communities with the highest exposure to adverse climate change effects 
through financial instruments and specific national funds for adaptation to climate change.  
 
Nationally Determined Contribution to the Mitigation of Climate Change (NDC) before the 
UNFCCC: The working focus outlines a set of actions which will allow Panama to responsibly 
decrease its vulnerability in the face of the adverse effects of climate change, by prioritizing and 
implementing specific adaptation measures.  
 
Governmental Strategic Plan (PEG) for 2015-2019: prescribes, among other measures, "to 
consider the battle against climate change and its effects as a fundamental focus of the governmental 
action, by stopping deforestation and restoring the vegetative cover to prevent desertification and by 
reducing the existing vulnerability through the development and application of adaptation and 
mitigation measures".  
 
Integrated Development Plan for Aboriginal Peoples of Panama: promotes actions related to 
political participation, monitoring of human development plans, conflict prevention, poverty reduction, 
access to information, among others.  
 
2008 Biodiversity National Policy Strategy and Action Plan: integrate the group of 7 national 
policies of the Participative Strategic Plan, as well as the Climate Change Policy.

=== PAGE 70 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
 
 
 
 
EL SALVADOR: 
 
Updated Nationally Determined Contributions 2021: The document outlines a set of actions that 
will allow El Salvador to have a consistent strategy in order to face the adverse effects of climate 
change. The NDC includes three strategic areas: i) Ecosystems recuperation through social 
inclusion, ii) Highly degraded areas restauration trough resilient agroforest systems and sustainable 
agriculture and iii) Synergic development of physical and natural infrastructure. 
 
El Salvador Sustainability Plan: Published in 2018, This Plan focusses in identifying paths to create 
economic and social development taking into account the environment. The structure of the Plan 
followed consist in four thematic axes: i) Strengthening institutions regarding sustainability, ii) 
Transforming the productive sectors to efficiency and competitiveness, iii) Enhance sustainability 
education, iv) Holistic risk understanding in terms of climate change to develop an action plan. 
GUATEMALA: 
 
Nationally Determined Contributions Guatemala 2021: This document synthesizes the country´s 
context in order to understand why and how Guatemala aims to develop its sustainable development 
strategy. The document, after being updated, gives special emphasis to four specific sectors in order 
to generate mitigation impacts: i) Land use change of land use and silviculture, ii) Energy, iii) 
Agriculture, iv) Residues. It also provides an adaptation component aligned with the national 
adaptation plan (PANCC). 
 
National Adaptation Plan (PANCC): This Plan presents the different strategies Guatemala wants 
to develop. It is presented as the summary of the priority actions and precautions that citizens and 
institutions should take into account to confront the risk intrinsic in the climate change taking the 
IPCC report as reference. It focuses on the identification of sustainable development opportunities 
of vulnerable people protection. It focuses in the following six sectors: i) Coastal zones, ii) Agriculture, 
farming and food security iii) Forestry resources, ecosystems and protected areas, iv) hydric 
resources integrated management, v) Human health, vi) Infrastructures. 
 
Adaptation, Mitigation and Vulnerability Reduction Regulatory Law: Law primarily designed to 
fight climate change. It also guarantees the correct procedures to develop the PANCC and the NDC 
strategies. 
HONDURAS: 
 
Updated Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) 2021: The document has incorporated five 
key elements to guide the work to do: i) Social inclusion, ii) Greenhouse gases mitigation, iii) Climate 
Change Adaptation, iv) Financing, v) Report and verification mechanisms. The energy and the 
agriculture sectors are the two fundamental areas in which the country wants to reduce its emissions. 
 
 NAMA for a low carbon livestock sector: Published in 2018, this document shows the importance 
of the rural sectors in Honduras and the necessity of a quick transition to a sustainability path in order 
to stabilize the way of living of thousands of families. 
• 
Honduras Climate agenda: Published in 2016, it provides an institutional and programmatic 
framework to develop the National Adaptation Plan and the National Mitigation Plans. 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Thanks to the first loss tranche provided by the GCF and the EU, Kuali Fund-GCF expects to mobilize a 
substantial amount of private capital. The GCF investment will have a de-risking effect (first loss) for private 
investors. The resources of the GCF and the EU will encourage the participation of private investors, who

=== PAGE 71 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
 
 
 
 
will see their investment risk reduced, so the proposed structure of Kuali Fund-GCF will allow catalyzing 
private sector participation. The de-risking resources will represent 22.2%75 of the total investment. 
Concerning the return of capital to First Loss Shares, GCF would be integrated into Class E Shares and will 
receive 100% in proportion to their Capital Contributions until distributions equal four percent (4%) per annum 
above their capital committed to Kuali Fund-GCF, compounded annually, on their aggregate Capital 
Contribution.  
The minimum concessionality of GCF resources is justified as it is the necessary level of leverage for the 
private investors to obtain a minimum return in order to make the investment attractive. Likewise, it also 
ensures the viability of the project and ensures an adequate return for institutional investors. 
The efficiency and effectiveness of the GCF resources, considering the total financing and mitigation/ 
adaptation impact, will be adequate since every ton of CO2 would cost 9.21 EUR (less than the average in 
201976: 23 EUR). 
Moreover, the Portfolio Impact Score methodology designed by the Fund Managers fosters a positive 
environmental and social performance, since a good performance in this field within the global SME and 
smallholder farmers portfolio ensures a higher carried interest for the Fund Managers. 
According to the available technologies and practices, the Funded Activity will use best of art Impact 
management techniques, by supporting banks to implement best practices in terms of integrating technology 
in their business model, such as: 
- 
Open banking. Kuali Fund-GCF will ease the banking transactions for the clients. 
- 
Synergies between FSPs and traditional banking. 
- 
Innovative credit rating methodology leveraging machine learning. 
- 
Fostering banks to lend money to SMEs and smallholder farmers so they can buy the best energy 
efficient equipment. 
 
75 EUR 25 million + EUR 1.6 million out of EUR 119.5 million total Kuali Fund’s size (TA not included). 
76 Source: GCF average projects in 2019.

=== PAGE 72 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
 
 
 
 
 
E. LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus 
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross-cutting proposals, select both. 
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Scale 
Climate finance directed at smallholder agriculture is approx. 
10 billion per year however, financing needs are estimates at 
240 billion per year77. Beside finance it is usually channelled 
through large banks, public institutions and companies 
towards large agroforestry projects. 
Regarding SMEs, In the developing economies, the finance 
gap from formal SMEs is valued at $5.2 trillion, which is 
equivalent to 19 percent of the gross domestic product 
(GDP)78. Approximately 40 percent of all enterprises are credit 
constrained. 
Explicit integration of SMEs within multilateral climate fund 
projects still remains marginal and that climate finance flows 
have only marginally enlisted local FIs (microfinance 
institutions (MFIs) and banks) to deliver capital to SMEs, thus 
discounting the importance of these financial actors for 
mainstreaming climate finance in the financial sector79. 
Low 
Kuali’s target investees will 
improve their green and 
climate 
product 
offering 
overcoming the lack of 
specific 
knowledge 
and 
external financing. This will 
enable to expand their 
green and climate loans 
portfolios. 
Smallholders 
and 
SME 
implementation of green 
and climate solutions will 
increase 
due 
to 
the 
availability of financing and 
better green and climate 
products aimed at them 
mobilizing 
important 
The Kuali Fund-GCF is projected to deliver 
2.7 Million t CO2e over the lifespan of the 
solutions and mobilize EUR 73.8 Million 
from private investors, even before any 
replication effects: this would represent a 
significant step towards paradigm shift on 
emissions 
and 
adaptation 
from 
smallholder farmers and SMEs. 
 
Adapted green finance and products are 
currently 
not 
available 
to 
most 
smallholders and SMEs, as they are 
considered risky or not relevant in terms of 
market potential for the FSP or supplying 
companies. 
 
Through tailored technical assistance and 
specific funds targeted to those sectors, 
Green smallholder and SME finance will 
 
77 Chiriac, D., Naran, B., & Falconer, A. (2020). Examining the climate finance gap for small-scale agriculture. Climate Policy Initiative and IFAD Rome. 
78 International Finance Corporation. 2017. SME Finance Gap: Assessment of the Shortfalls and Opportunities in Financing Small and Medium Enterprises in Emerging Markets. 
79 SEED (2020). Translating Climate Finance into Climate Action on the Ground. Leveraging the Potential for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs).

=== PAGE 73 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
 
 
 
 
 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Besides, smallholders and SMEs are also responsible for high 
levels of greenhouse gas emissions with an emission intensity 
factor well above their sectorial averages due to its limited 
productivity caused among other factors by limited financing. 
The current state shows limited evidence of a pathway towards 
impact in mitigation and adaptation measures. 
quantity 
of 
private 
resources. 
. 
 
become mainstream enabling big parts of 
the economy to transition to greener 
production methods due to the availability 
of 
funding 
and 
support 
from 
the 
ecosystem. 
Replicability 
Currently only a handful of Financial Services Providers offer 
an adapted climate finance product to its clients (smallhoders 
and SMEs) 
Besides, green and climate technologies are not being 
implemented by the smallholder and SMEs sector at a rate that 
its consistent with the necessary emissions reductions and 
adaptation. Even mature technologies need to adapt their 
economics models to work with these financially constraint 
type of clients. 
Significant and sustained investment is required across the 
innovation life cycle to ensure that commercially ready 
solutions are able to scale within this next decade. 
The current state shows limited or no evidence of examples of 
intervention models funded that reduce emissions and 
increase resilience with a similar approach to the Kuali Fund. 
Low 
FSP’s 
and 
Innovative 
business 
models 
will 
develop 
specific 
and 
reliable data tools and 
methodologies 
that 
can 
catalyze 
their 
product 
offering. 
These new methodologies 
will address current issues 
that are limiting the offer 
(i.e, climate maps, risk 
assessment, 
resilience 
assessment, 
diversification, etc.). 
These methodologies and 
implementation processes 
can be easily replicated by 
other entities. 
 
Kuali through its Technical Assistance 
Fund will strengthen their investees green 
and climate products design & offering, 
processes 
& 
risk 
management, 
technology, and employee capabilities. 
Lessons learned through this work will 
directly inform any efforts to replicate the 
work in other cities or countries

=== PAGE 74 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
 
 
 
 
 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Sustainability 
 
Mitigation figures derived from agriculture remain very low and 
indicate unsatisfactory progress, accounting for only 1.4% of 
the mitigated emissions during 2010–2019. 
Also, to boost decarbonization, micro, small and medium-sized 
enterprises need to be brought on board.  
Awareness around smallholders and SMEs mitigation and 
adaptation potential is growing and finance towards it has 
been slowly growing.   
Medium 
 
The Kuali Fund will create 
an ecosystem of “climate 
green” ready FSP and 
innovative companies that 
would channel important 
levels of climate finance 
towards smallholders and 
SMEs. 
Besides, 
a 
profitable, 
commercial lending market 
where incentives clearly 
favor green and climate 
products 
will 
be 
established.  
 
 
The Kuali Fund-GCF will deploy EUR 
119,5 million in “climate green” ready 
FSPs and innovative companies. Those 
companies are expected to improve their 
business models with the help of the 
technical assistance facility and therefore 
attract 
additional 
capital 
from 
other 
lenders. 
 
Green and climate portfolios of FSP and 
sales from innovative are expected grow 
more than the proportional Kuali Fund- 
GCF investment and be sustained beyond 
completion.  
 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term80 
Final81 
TOTAL Result 
Areas Core 1   
Core 1: GHG 
emissions 
reduced, avoided 
or 
- Investee’s quarterly 
reports  
- Technical 
datasheets (of 
solutions financed)   
0 
0.81 
tons of CO2 
reduced 
2.71 
tons of CO2 
reduced 
Assumptions: 
• 
Regulatory framework in target countries remains 
conducive 
for 
Green 
Financial 
Inclusion, 
facilitating private sector participation 
 
80 Mid-term targets represent 30% of the final target, due to the estimated investment progress. 
81 Final targets take into account the specific lifespans of the different technologies.

=== PAGE 75 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
 
 
 
 
 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term80 
Final81 
removed/sequest
ered 
(with information 
about KiloWatts of 
energy generated 
and GHG reduction 
compared with grid 
access collected at 
the client level by 
FSP and ICs) 
- Drawdown.org 
estimates       of : 
CHG emission 
mitigated per 
vehicle , CO2 
sequestration, etc. 
pertaining to 
the lifespan 
pertaining to the 
lifespan 
• 
Political situation in target countries does not 
deteriorate significantly. 
• 
There are no sudden situations of over-
indebtedness that make it impossible to support 
the green transition through financial services. 
See also footnotes 8283 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access 
Core 1: GHG 
emissions 
reduced, avoided 
or 
removed/sequest
ered 
0 
20,002 
tons of CO2 
reduced 
66,672 
tons of CO2 
reduced 
 9% of total investments dedicated to Energy 
generation and access  
 
82 Kuali Fund-GCF assumes a distribution of the total EUR 119.5 million among different sectors and technologies that are related to the investable universe and pipeline. For 
more details and specific data see Annex 22 and CO2 Calculation Excel File. 
  Other externalities to be considered refer to: 
· Technology – The state of available technologies regarding Energy generation, low emission transport and Buildings, cities, industries and appliances, and their prices and 
implementation costs might vary over time.  
· Economic – international financial conditions like inflation, interest rates and bank risk appetite.  
· Political - Commitments and targets regarding climate mitigation and adaptation 
· Legal and Regulatory - Central banks regulations regarding green and climate finance. Taxonomy development.  
· Social – Uptake and popularity of Nature Based Solution, Regenerative Agriculture among smallholder farmers. 
83 CO2 target emission reduction are calculated considering the specific technologies financed in every sector. The emissions are calculated in relation with a baseline scenario: 
Relative Emissions = “With” Project Emissions (Wp) – “Without” Project Emissions, or Baseline Emissions (Be). The baseline scenario (or “without” project scenario) is defined 
as the expected alternative means to meet the output supplied by the proposed technologies. Baseline emission and project emissions are calculated using technology and 
country-specific electricity emission factors. Besides Kuali fund uses assumptions around unitary costs, efficiency gains and capacity factors to construct the “with” project and 
baseline emissions levels, also considering the specific lifespans of the different technologies. Moreover, in order to calculate GHG emissions avoided/removed, the Kuali fund 
will use the Guideline for a Harmonised Approach to GHG Accounting elaborated by the technical Working Group of the International Financial Institutions (IFI TWG) of The 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the GHG Protocol Agricultural Guidance in the case of the Agriculture and Forestry sector. For more 
details and specific data being used see Annex 22 and CO2 Calculation Excel File.

=== PAGE 76 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
 
 
 
 
 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term80 
Final81 
MRA2 Low-
emission 
transport 
Core 1: GHG 
emissions 
reduced, avoided 
or 
removed/sequest
ered 
FSPs/ICs will 
report on: # 
vehicles financed, 
alternative GHG 
grid emissions 
collected at the 
client level ,# ha of 
land reporting land 
use changes by 
FSP’s clients  and 
ICs. etc, 
0 
1,663 tons of 
CO2 reduced 
5,543 tons of 
CO2 reduced 
3,17% of total investments dedicated to Low-
emission transport 
MRA3 Buildings, 
cities, industries 
and appliances 
Core 1: GHG 
emissions 
reduced, avoided 
or 
removed/sequest
ered 
0 
117,493 tons 
of CO2 
reduced 
391,643 tons of 
CO2 reduced 
13% of total investments dedicated to Buildings, 
cities, industries and appliances 
MRA4 Forestry 
and land use 
Core 1: GHG 
emissions 
reduced, avoided 
or 
removed/sequest
ered 
0 
0.67 million 
tons of CO2 
reduced 
2.24 million tons 
of CO2 reduced 
 24.83% of total investments dedicated to Forestry 
and land use (CO2 calculation Excel) 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access 
Supplementary  
1.2: Installed 
energy stoarage 
capacity 
 
0 
8.01 MW 
storage 
capacity 
installed 
26.71 MW 
storage capacity 
installed 
Assuming a 2-hour generation storage capacity 
linked to Energy generation and access 
technologies 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access 
Supplementary 
1.3: Installed 
 
0 
4,01 MW 
13.35 MW 
9% of total investments dedicated to Energy 
generation and access

=== PAGE 77 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
 
 
 
 
 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term80 
Final81 
renewable energy 
capacity 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access 
Supplementary 
1.4: Renewable 
energy generated 
 
0 
3,115 MWh 
generated  
10,384 MWh 
generated 
9% of total investments dedicated to Energy 
generation and access 
MRA2 Low-
emission 
transport 
Supplementary 
1.5 Improved low-
emission vehicle 
fuel economy 
 
0 
30% net 
change in 
fuel/energy 
consumption 
per km 
travelled 
30% net change 
in fuel/energy 
consumption per 
km travelled 
13% of total investments dedicated to Low 
Emissions Transport and efficiency gains 
Assumptions. 
The fuel unit will be converted into a common 
energy unit and reported in megajoule 
MRA3 
Buildings, 
cities, 
industries and 
appliances 
Supplementary 
1.1: Annual 
energy savings 
- Investee’s quarterly 
reports  
- Technical 
datasheets (of 
solutions financed)   
- (with information 
about KiloWatts of 
energy generated 
and GHG reduction 
compared with grid 
access collected at 
the client level by 
FSP and ICs) 
0 
29,862 MW/h 
saved 
99,541 MW/h 
saved 
13% of total investments dedicated to Buildings, 
cities, industries and appliances 
TOTAL Result 
Areas Core 2  
Core 2: Direct 
and indirect 
- Investee’s 
quarterly reports 
0 
Direct: 72,700 
(>30% women 
farmers/ 
women-led)  
Direct: 
242,33585 
(>30% women 
farmers/ 
women-led) 
100 % of total investments to farmers and SMEs  
Indirect beneficiaries’ calculation considers: 3,76 
Average Household size in selected LATAM 
 
85 Mexico (40,362), Brasil (64,972), Colombia (49,410), El Salvador (30,064), Panamá (27,559), Honduras (19,606) and Guatemala (10,363). See sheet Beneficiaries in CO2 
calculation Excel.

=== PAGE 78 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
 
 
 
 
 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term80 
Final81 
beneficiaries 
reached 
(Clients outreach 
information84 
provided by FSPs 
and Innovative 
companies) 
 
Indirect: 
192,714 
> 50 % women 
Indirect: 
642,379 
> 50 % women 
countries (UN Population Division86)(CO2 
calculation Excel/Beneficiaries Tab) 
>30% women 
>30% women 
ARA2 Health, 
well-being, 
food and 
water security 
Core 2: Direct 
and indirect 
beneficiaries 
reached 
 
Direct: 14,931 
> 30 % women 
farmers 
Direct: 
237,90787 
> 30 % women 
farmers 
75 % of total investments going to farmers 
Indirect: 
188,957 
> 50 % women 
Indirect: 
629,856 
> 50 % women 
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities 
Supplementary 
2.1: Beneficiaries 
(female/male) 
adopting improved 
and/or new 
climate-resilient 
livelihood options 
 
797 direct 
beneficiaries 
(SMEs) 
(min 30% 
women-led) 
2,657 direct 
beneficiaries 
(SMEs) 
(min 30% 
women-led) 
Assuming that 60% of SMEs adopt improved and/or 
new climate-resilient livelihood options) 
Assuming the target beneficiaries will meet 30% of the 
final target in the mid-term, once their transformation 
process has started 
 
84 Client outreach information refers to loan tapes, client database, that demonstrate financial flow between FSP and IC and end-beneficiaries. 
86 https://www.un.org/development/desa/pd/data/household-size-and-composition 
87 Mexico (38,015), Brasil (64,972), Colombia (48,660), El Salvador (205), Panamá (27,371), Honduras (19,077) and Guatemala (9,953),.See sheet Beneficiaries in CO2 
calculation Excel

=== PAGE 79 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
 
 
 
 
 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term80 
Final81 
ARA2 Health, 
well-being, food 
and water security 
Supplementary 
2.2: Beneficiaries 
(female/male) with 
improved food 
security 
 
21,412 direct 
beneficiaries 
(Smallholders) 
(min 30% 
women) 
71,372 direct 
beneficiaries 
(Smallholders) 
(min 30% 
women) 
Assuming that 30% of farmers improve food security  
Assuming the target beneficiaries will meet 30% of the 
final target in the mid-term, once their transformation 
process has started 
ARA2 Health, 
well-being, food 
and water security 
Supplementary 
2.5: Beneficiaries 
(female/male) 
adopting 
innovations that 
stregthen climate 
change resilience 
- Investee’s 
quarterly reports 
(Clients reporting 
agricultural 
practices changes 
and consolidated 
by in client reports 
by FSP) 
0 
42,823 direct 
beneficiaries 
(Smallholders) 
(min 30% 
women) 
142,744 direct 
beneficiaries 
(Smallholders) 
(min 30% 
women) 
Assuming that 60% of the smallholder farmers adopt 
any of the adaptation techniques (farm irrigation 
efficiency, regenerative annual cropping, silvopasture, 
tree intercropping, improved rice production, managed 
grazing, multistrata agroforestry, perennial biomass 
production or perennial staple crops) 
Assuming the target beneficiaries will meet 30% of the 
final target in the mid-term, once their transformation 
process has started 
ARA2 Health, 
well-being, food 
and water security 
 
Core 4: Hectares 
of natural 
resources 
brought under 
improved low-
emission and/or 
climate-resilient 
management 
practice 
Ha of land 
reporting land use 
changes by FSP 
and Innovative 
companies. 
0 
8,326 
hectares 
27,753 hectares 
Assuming an average implementation cost per hectare 
of EUR 2.676  
100% of investments in Forestry and Land Use sectors  
Assuming that FSPs will meet 30% of the final target in 
the mid-term, once their adaptation process is 
advanced 
ARA2 Health, 
well-being, food 
and water security 
Supplementary 
4.2: Number of 
livestock brought 
under 
sustainable 
The number of 
livestock will be 
reported in 
Livestock Unit 
(LSU), as unit 
0 
1,017 LSU 
(1,101 ha) 
3,390 LSU 
(3,669 ha) 
Assuming an average implementation cost per hectare 
of EUR 2,475 of investments in Sustainable Livestock 
Management, Managed Grazing, Silvopasture (EUR 
9.76 M). EUR 2.659 of investments in Sustainable 
Livestock Management, Managed Grazing, 
Silvopasture (24,5 M€)

=== PAGE 80 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
 
 
 
 
 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of 
Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term80 
Final81 
 
management 
practices 
aggregating 
various livestock 
species 
(https://www.fao.or
g/livestock-
systems/en/ ) 
Assuming an average of 0,77 LSU/ha of the selected 
countries (FAO Livestock Patterns) and a 20% increase 
in livestock with the same land (0,924 LSU/ha).  
FSPs will meet 30% of the final target in the mid-term, 
once their adaptation process is advanced 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for current 
state (baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
Core Indicator 6: Degree to 
which GCF investments 
contribute to technology 
deployment, dissemination, 
development or transfer 
and innovation 
Green 
and 
climate 
technologies 
are 
not 
being implemented by 
the 
smallhoders 
and 
SMEs sector at a rate 
that its consistent with 
the 
necessary 
emissions 
reductions 
and 
adaptation. 
Maturing 
technologies 
need to 
adapt their 
economics models to 
better 
serve 
smallholders 
and 
SMES, that are typically 
late 
innovators, 
risk 
adverse and financially 
constraint88. 
low 
A profound shift of 
agricultural practices 
and land sinks use by 
smallholder farmers will 
contribute substantially 
to mitigation and 
adaptation goals. 
Besides energy 
generation equipment, 
energy efficient 
appliances and low 
emission transport will 
also contribute.  
 
The Kuali Fund- GCF 
will invest EUR 76.7 
million in promoting 
sustainable agricultural 
practices that require 
technological 
investment, 
dissemination and 
innovation.   
 
Besides, the Kuali 
Fund- GCF is projected 
to invest a minimum of 
7.5 million in Innovative 
Companies that provide 
and/or implement 
climate solutions 
(Climate Tech, Agri 
Multi-countries 
 
88 IEA, Net Zero by 2050, 2021 https://www.iea.org/reports/net-zero-by-2050

=== PAGE 81 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
 
 
 
 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for current 
state (baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
Only 4% of the funding 
is 
directed 
towards 
companies outside of 
North America, Europe 
or China and is also 
disproportionated 
directed 
toward 
the 
Mobility and Transport 
sector receiving 61% of 
all investment. 89  Areas 
related to the diverse 
energy 
efficient 
equipment, industry or 
food, 
agriculture 
and 
land use are lagging 
behind in funding.   
Tech, Sustainable 
agricultural value chain 
business, etc) and this 
way help make 
available fundamental 
technologies to reach to 
climate targets. 
 
Besides, Technical 
assistance will be 
provided to help 
innovative companies 
to refine their business 
models and help them 
scale up solution. 
Core indicator 7: Degree to 
which GCF Investments 
contribute to market 
development/transformation 
at the sectoral, local, or 
national level 
The Microfinance 
industry is in the early 
stages of engagement 
with green/climate 
finance, corresponding 
with institutions scoring 
levels 1-3 in the Green 
Index. The level of 
understanding and 
deployment of lending 
with a climate 
perspective is very low 
low 
The microfinance 
industry has a deep 
understanding of 
“climate” finance, and it 
is an important player in 
the deployment of 
funding toward micro 
entrepreneurs and 
smallholders farmers 
for green/climate 
transition 
The project will provide 
funding and technical 
assistance to build 
capacity in the selected 
entities (investees) that 
will later spread to other 
market participants 
Multi-countries 
 
89 PWC State of Climate Tech 2021

=== PAGE 82 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
 
 
 
 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for current 
state (baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
Core indicator 8: Degree to 
which GCF investments 
contribute to effective 
knowledge generation and 
learning processes, and 
use of good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards 
The main barriers that 
FSPs face are the lack 
of knowledge about 
climate change 
(mitigation and 
adaptation), their 
potential impacts in 
their portfolio and the 
opportunities and risks 
that represent. There is 
also a lack of data, 
tools and 
methodologies that can 
manage the climate 
risks, in the form of 
management systems 
and “green lending”. 
The regulators and the 
ecosystem in general 
are on their way to 
create a comprehensive 
framework but there is 
little external support to 
individual FSPs. 
low 
On the target scenario 
FSPs have an 
adequate perception of 
the risks and 
opportunities of climate 
finance, use adequate 
socio-environmental 
risk management 
systems and offer 
green products in their 
portfolio 
The Kuali through the 
incentives laid out its 
Technical Assistance 
Fund will strengthen 
their FSP investees 
green and climate 
products design & 
offering, processes & 
risk management, 
technology, and 
employee capabilities 
Multi-countries 
 
Investors

=== PAGE 83 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
 
 
 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) change 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
Project/pogramme 
specific Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
OUTCOME 1 
Adoption of climate 
solutions and 
improvement 
management of 
agricultural lands 
contributing to 
reducing GHG 
emissions 
Number of SMEs 
reducing their carbon 
footprint 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
0 
1,764 
(min 30% 
women owned) 
4,428 
(min 30% 
women owned) 
Assuming that all SMEs 
adopt the new 
technologies reduce their 
emissions. 
Number of farmers 
reducing their carbon 
footprint 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
0 
20,847 
52,340       
Assuming that 22% 
farmers adopting new 
technologies reduce their 
emissions 
Output I.1.1 Kuali Fund 
is operational and 
capitalized 
Additional capital 
unlocked through the 
set-up of de-risking 
mechanism to attract 
investors to green 
inclusive finance 
Kuali Subscription Report  
0 
EUR 75.6 
million 
EUR 75.6 
million 
Assuming that the risk 
appetite of private 
investors in the 
predecessor funds 
managed by Gawa is 
confirmed and new 
capital is raised . 
Volume of Kuali’s 
outstanding 
investments with 
FSPs and Innovative 
Companies (ICs) 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio 
0 
119.5 
0 
Volume of outstanding 
Kuali investments (debt 
or equity investments) 
with FSPs and ICs. 
Calculated as follows: 
Outstanding loan 
portfolio [principal 
balance of loans] + 
Amount of equity  
investments at cost. 
There is a peak in the 
outstanding portfolio in 
the middle of the 
investment period which

=== PAGE 84 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
 
 
 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) change 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
Project/pogramme 
specific Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
gradually declines with 
repayments/exits 
Number of Kuali’s 
investees (cumulated) 
Disaggregated by type of 
intermediary, by 
product/service, by target 
group, by served area/ 
sector 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio 
8 
At least 15 
investees 
From which 
- 13 FSPs /2 ICs 
13/Loans/2 Equity 
Investments  
At least 15 
investees 
From which 
- 13 FSPs /2 ICs 
- 13/Loans/2 
Equity 
Investments  
Cumulated during the life 
of the Fund 
Number of 
investments 
(cumulated)  
Disaggregated by type of 
intermediary, by 
product/service, by target 
group, by served area/ 
sector. 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio 
0 
> 3 deals 
> 10 deals 
Cumulated during the life 
of the Fund (an investee 
may benefit from several 
loans) 
Number of 
outstanding loans in 
Kuali’s portfolio  
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio 
13 
TBD 
TBD 
Active loans/equity 
investments with 
FSPs/ICs in Kuali’s 
portfolio as of the 
reporting date.  There is 
a peak in the middle of 
the investment period 
which gradually declines 
with repayments/exits. 
Number of 
outstanding Kuali’s 
equity investments  
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio 
2 
TBD 
TBD 
Output I.1.2.  Increased 
green financing 
Volume of loans 
directed towards 
SMEs 
- Investee’s quarterly 
reports 
0 
EUR 12 million 
EUR 30.1 
 million 
Combines lending to 
Energy generation and

=== PAGE 85 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
90 Client outreach information refers to loan tapes, client database, that demonstrate financial flow between FSP and IC to end-beneficiaries. 
91 Mexico (2,346), Colombia (751), El Salvador (205), Panama (188), Honduras (529) and Guatemala (410), See sheet Beneficiaries in CO2 calculation Excel. 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) change 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
Project/pogramme 
specific Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
available to SMEs and 
smallholder farmers  
Number of loans 
directed towards 
SMEs 
(Clients outreach90 
information provided by 
FSPs and Innovative 
companies) 
 
0 
1,328 
4,428 
access, Low Emission 
Transport 
Buildings, cities, 
industries and appliances 
Number of SMEs 
reached by the Fund 
0 
Direct: 1,328 
(30% women- 
led) 
Direct: 4,42891 
(30% women-
led) 
25 % of total investments 
going to SMEs 
Indirect: 3,757 
> 50 % women 
Indirect: 12,523 
> 50 % women 
Aggregated portfolio 
volume (gross 
outstanding portfolio) 
of FSP investees 
directed towards 
SMEs. 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
n/a 
EUR 71 million 
EUR 179 million 
Average portfolio size of 
investees of EUR 30 
million 
Volume of 
outstanding loans 
directed toward 
Smallholders 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
n/a 
EUR  36 million 
EUR 89 million 
Combines lending to 
Forestry and Land Use 
Aggregated portfolio 
volume (gross 
outstanding portfolio) 
of FSP investees 
directed towards 
Smallholders. 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
n/a 
EUR 87 million 
EUR 219 million 
Average portfolio size of 
investees of EUR 30 M

=== PAGE 86 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
 
 
 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) change 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
Project/pogramme 
specific Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
OUTCOME 2 
Improved resilience in 
vulnerable people & 
communities 
Increased adaptive 
capacity of 
Smallholders 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
0 
5% increased 
capacity 
5% increased 
capacity 
Assuming Kuali’s 
investees can collect this 
information at field level 
through sample survey or 
other tools 
Number of SMEs and 
smallholder farmers 
reporting increased 
turnover (as a result 
of direct support 
received from the 
FSPs) 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
0 
441 SMEs and 
23,690    
farmers 
(Disaggregated 
by sex / min 
30% women 
owned/ women 
farmers ) 
 1,107 SMEs 
and 59,477 
farmers 
(Disaggregated 
by sex / min 
30% women 
owned/ women 
farmers) 
Assuming 25% of the 
FSPs’ clients report the 
information about their 
increase in turnover 
Output II.2.1. Kuali’s TA 
Facility is operational 
Amount of technical 
assistance resources 
directed to Green 
Enhancement 
projects with SMEs & 
Smallholder farmers 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
0 
EUR 0.18 
million 
EUR 0.59 
million 
Awareness about the 
potential to increase 
income and reduce CO2 
emissions,   
ad hoc environmental 
check-ups of individual 
businesses, Support 
digitalization, enhance 
CSA practices, etc. 
Output II.2.2. 
Capacities for Climate 
Smart Agriculture and 
adoption of Climate 
Solutions built 
Percentage of 
FSPs/Innovative 
Companies that 
conduct climate 
awareness activities 
and trainings with 
their SMEs/Farmers 
clients 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
0 
10% of 
investees 
30% of 
investees 
Activities such as training 
sessions and discussions 
/ display of posters / 
flyers on environmental 
impacts 
Trainings to clients 
(directly or in partnership 
with environmental

=== PAGE 87 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
 
 
 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) change 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
Project/pogramme 
specific Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
Number of 
SMEs/Farmers clients 
having received 
climate awareness 
activities and trainings 
on Climate Smart 
Agriculture and 
adoption of Climate 
Solutions (GAP 4.1.) 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
0 
3,635 attendees 
(Disaggregated 
by sex / min 
30% women 
owned 
SMEs/women 
farmers) 
12,117 
attendees 
(Disaggregated 
by sex / min 
30% women 
owned 
SMEs/women 
farmers)  
organizations) on 
environmentally friendly 
practices or businesses. 
Percentage of clients 
of FSPs/Innovative 
Companies having 
adapted climate 
practices as a result 
of climate awareness 
activities. 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
0 
30% of 
attendees 
(Disaggregated 
by sex / min 
30% women 
owned) 
30% of 
attendees 
(Disaggregated 
by sex / min 
30% women 
owned) 
OUTCOME 3.  
Enhanced green & 
inclusive financial 
ecosystem  
Number of Innovative 
Companies with 
green product 
targeting 
Smallholders and 
SMEs 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
n/a 
0 
2 
Assuming that a number 
of non-green ICs are 
financed to become 
green in the future and 
that the target is not fully 
met 
Number of FSPs with 
green finance 
methodologies and 
products 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
n/a 
4 
12 
Assuming that a number 
of non-green FSPs are 
financed to become 
green in the future and 
that the target is not fully 
met

=== PAGE 88 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
 
 
 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) change 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
Project/pogramme 
specific Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
Number of FSPs 
using specific tools to 
evaluate the 
environmental risks of 
clients’ activities 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
n/a 
4 
12 
Assuming that a number 
of non-green FSPs are 
financed to become 
green in the future and 
that the target is not fully 
met 
Output II.2.1. Kuali’s TA 
Facility is operational 
Amount of technical 
assistance resources 
directed towards 
FSPs and Innovative 
Companies 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
0 
EUR 0.8 M 
EUR 2.7 million 
Output 3.1: Kuali’s TA 
Facility is operational 
Amount of EUR 
implemented in 
Knowledge Sharing  
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
0 
EUR 0.11 
million 
EUR 0.35 
million 
 
Amount of EUR 
implemented in 
Ecosystemic projects 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
0 
EUR 0.18 
million 
EUR 0.59 
million 
Projects seeking 
improvements in markets 
for products, country 
level infrastructure, policy 
and regulatory 
framework, institutional 
set up and other activities 
(e.g. creation of 
partnerships between 
FSPs and Fintechs, -
Open banking initiatives) 
Output II.3.1. 
Strengthened financial 
ecosystem actors’ 
capacities enabling 
Percentage of FSPs 
improving their green 
readiness through TA 
Projects 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
0 
15% 
50%

=== PAGE 89 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85 
 
 
 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) change 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
Project/pogramme 
specific Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
green and inclusive 
finance. 
  
Percentage of FSPs 
improving their Social 
Performance and 
Environmental Risks 
Management Systems 
projects through TA 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
0 
2.2% 
7.5% 
 
Percentage of FSPs 
improving their 
General Business 
through TA 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
 
0 
2.2% 
7.5% 
 
Percentage of 
Innovative Companies 
improving their 
Business Model 
through TA 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
0 
3% 
10% 
 
Percentage of 
Innovative Companies 
or FSP working with 
SME or smallholders 
to improve their Green 
Enhancement through 
TA 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
 
0 
3.75% 
12.5% 
 
Number of attendees 
to trainings about 
women’s economic 
empowerment via 
FSP through 
business skills 
training and financial 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
 
0 
199 women-led 
SMEs and 
10,706 women 
farmers 
664 women-led 
SMEs and 
35,686 women 
farmers (50% of 
total women) 
5% of total 
Participation will be 
reviewed prior to the 
trainings being organized

=== PAGE 90 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86 
 
 
 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) change 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
Project/pogramme 
specific Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
literacy completed 
(GAP 4.2) 
 
attendees will 
be indigenous 
women and 5% 
afro descendant 
women (as a 
minimum). 
Tangible knowledge 
products or best 
practices generated 
Technical Assistance 
Facility Reports 
 
0 
 
2 
4 
 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators 
CO-BENEFIT 1 
Improved financial 
inclusion and gender 
outreach 
Number of people 
accessing to 
Financial Services 
(FS) disaggregated 
by sex, poverty line, 
country, region and 
type of service (credit 
savings, other FS, 
non-FS) when 
possible  
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
0 
90,876 
302,919 
The total number of 
borrowers is 242,335 . 
An extra 25% end clients 
using other products than 
credit has been added 
(such as savings, 
insurance etc.)(302,919, 
from which 90,876 
women, 30%). 
 CO-BENEFIT 2 
Employment 
preservation and labor 
women inclusion 
Number of direct FTE 
jobs supported 
disaggregated by 
sex, age, and 
country/region when 
possible 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
0 
101,645 
(30,493 
women’s jobs 
supported) 
356,001 
(107,520 
women’s jobs 
supported) 
See in Annex CO2 
calculation, sheet 
beneficiaries: 
a) Supported jobs in SMEs 
10*4,428 SMEs financed= 
44,280: (conservative, since 
10 is the minimum number 
of employees to be 
considered for SMEs) ;(30% 
women’s jobs, i.e., 13.284)

=== PAGE 91 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) change 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
Project/pogramme 
specific Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
 b) Supported jobs in 
farmers: 237,907 farmers 
financed* 1,28 [Source 
FAO ] FTE jobs /farm=  
304,521 FTE total jobs to 
farmers (30% women’s 
jobs, i.e., 91,356) 
c) FTE in FSPs = 400* 13= 
5,200 jobs in FSPs. (40% 
women’s jobs, i.e., 2,080) 
d) FTE jobs in ICs= 
1.000*2= 2.0000 (40% 
women’s jobs, i.e., 800) 
d) Total Employment 
directly supported: 356,001 
FTE jobs (30.2% women’s 
jobs, i.e., 107,520) 
CO-BENEFIT 3: 
Efficient technology / 
Climate smart 
agriculture practices 
adoption by SMEs/ 
farmers 
 
Number of SMEs 
implementing new 
efficient technologies 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
0 
TBD 
TBD 
Assuming that all SMEs 
and farmers financed 
with green loans adopt 
the new technologies. 
Number of farmers 
implementing new 
efficient technologies 
Kuali’s investment 
portfolio and monitoring 
system 
0 
702 SMEs/ 
78,240 farmers 
2,341 SMEs/ 
260,801 farmers 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
Activity I.1.1.1.  Raise capital from 
public & private investors 
Raise capital from private investors. 
Legal documents, set up of the TA 
Facility, Private Capital Raising, 
I.1.1 1 1. Preparation of the Fund's 
legal documentation and governance: 
- Legal Advisory 
Kuali Fund closed with EUR 213 
million of private capital

=== PAGE 92 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88 
 
 
 
 
 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
Formalization, Closing period (1-1,5 
years), when investors can make 
commitments to invest in the fund 
from the fund until its final closing" 
- Finalization of legal documents 
I.1.1.1.2. Marketing Period: 
- Private Capital Raising 
- Formalization 
I.1.1.1.3. Closings: 
- First Closing 
- Final Closing 
Activity I.1.1.2. Debt and/or equity 
investments into FSPs & ICs 
Financing to FSPs to develop green 
portfolios through the financing 
mitigation and adaptation initiatives. 
Financing to Innovative Companies to 
catalyze the delivery of mitigation and 
adaptation technologies to SMEs" 
I.1.1.2.1 Financial, Environmental & 
Social Due Diligence 
I 1.1.2.2 
Investment 
Committee meetings 
I.1.1.2.3   Formalization with partners 
I.1.1.2.4   Debt and equity 
investments into FSPs 
I.1.1.2.5   Debt and equity 
investments into ICs 
- Environmental 
& 
Social 
Due 
Diligence Reports 
- Impact Score and Fund’s Audited 
Impact Score 
- IC Minutes 
- Preliminary and Final IC Memo (per 
investee), etc. 
-  IC Memo  
(deliverables in Environmental and 
Social Management System of Kuali 
Fund, GAWA, Kuali Fund- Manual of 
Policies and Procedures and Gawa 
Impact Management System) 
- Kuali’s monitoring reports 
Activity I.1.2.1. Delivery of finance 
towards SMEs and Smallholder 
farmers trough FSPs 
FSPs deliver loans and other financial 
services to SMEs & Smallholder 
farmers 
I.1.2.1.1 
.  Implementation of FSPs' Processes 
& Procedures (Financial and Social) 
I.1.2.1.2 Kuali's Monitoring and 
Supervision of the operations 
(Financial and E&S) 
- Increase in the green portfolio of the 
target beneficiaries. 
- Increase SME portfolio of the target 
beneficiaries. 
- Increase Smallholder portfolio of the 
target beneficiaries. 
- FSPs/ICs’ Monitoring Reports 
- Kuali’s monitoring reports 
Activity II.2.1.1.TA Governance and 
Management in place 
Set up of the TA Facility 
 
- TA Fiduciary Agreement 
- TA Guidelines 
- TA Identifications needs Report

=== PAGE 93 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89 
 
 
 
 
 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
II.2.1.1.1. Preparation of the Fund's 
and the TAF legal documentation and 
governance 
II.2.1.1.2. Identification of TA Projects 
II.2.1.1.3. On-site TA Needs 
Assessment 
II.2.1.1.4. Elaboration of the TA 
request 
 
- TA Project Design 
Activity II.2.1.2. Procurement in place 
and contractors ready to implement 
TA Projects 
Procurement processes, call for 
proposals and contract negotiations 
with Non-Financial Services Providers 
 
II.2.1.2.1. Draft of ToRs 
II.2.1.2.2 Call for Proposals 
II.2.1.2.3.  Contracts with Service 
Providers 
- ToR 
- Announcement 
- Contracts 
 
Activity II.2.2.1. Green Enhancement 
projects with SMEs & Smallholder 
farmers 
Projects channeled through FSPs/ 
Fintech or ICs directly targeting and 
benefiting SMEs and smallholder 
farmers. 
(Technology deployment)" 
 
II.2.2.1.1. Workshops/ marketing 
about energy efficient equipments 
II.2.2.1.2 Environmental check-ups of 
individual businesses & advice on 
opportunities to reduce emissions. 
II.2.2.1.3 Support digitalization of 
processes 
II.2.2.1.4 Streamlining value chains to 
make them energy efficient 
II.2.2.1.5 Workshops & practices at 
farmer level on climate smart 
agricultural practices through 
cooperatives and producer 
organizations 
TA Reports and deliverables of 
Service Providers contracted under 
the TAF 
Activity II.3.1.1. Green Readiness TA 
projects with FSPs 
Projects aiming at ensuring that the 
investees have the right People, 
Processes and Products to serve 
 
II.3.1.1.1. Develop Green financial 
products 
TA Reports and deliverables of 
Service Providers contracted under 
the TAF (with indicators about # of 
Green financial products

=== PAGE 94 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90 
 
 
 
 
 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
green solutions to SMEs and 
smallholder farmers. 
(Market Development) 
II.3.1.1.2. Implementation of new 
processes & technologies 
II.3.1.1.3.  Training on green finance 
# & type of new processes & 
technologies,  
Reports on workshops, etc.) 
Activity II.3.1.2. Social Performance 
and Environmental Risks 
Management Systems projects with 
FSPs and ICs 
Implementation of an Environmental 
and Social Risk Mitigation 
Management Systems (both internal 
and external) to reduce the 
institution’s carbon footprint (reduction 
in waste, paper, water, or energy 
consumption) and to include 
environmental risk as a factor of the 
activities financed and on the credit 
approval process. 
Integration of gender issues 
 
II.3.1.2.1 Purchase of specific 
software packages to be implemented 
within the FSPs & ICs 
II.3.1.2.2 Establishing risk mitigation 
systems to monitor and mitigate 
agriculture and MSME/ smallholder 
farmers 
II.3.1.2.3. Projects aiming at improving 
the ability of investees to achieve it 
social mission and adequately 
manage Environmental and Social 
Risks by following the SPTF Universal 
Standards  
II.3.1.2.4. Elaborating and 
implementing a gender and SEAH 
policy and action plan for FSPs/ICs' 
internal dimension (GAP: 2.1) 
II.3.1.2.5. Elaborating and 
Implementing a gender and SEAH 
action plan for external dimension in 
FSPs (GAP: 2.3 and 2.4) 
II.3.1.2.6 Training and support for 
FSPs and IC to implement a ES 
management system including gender 
and SEAH and to gain knowledge on 
these issues (GAP: 2.5)  
II.3.1.2.7 Promoting access to finance 
taking into account women’s barriers 
TA Reports and deliverables of 
Service Providers contracted under 
the TAF, eg. :  software purchased an 
implemented, ESMS implemented, 
policies drafted, report on 
implementations of ICs' Gender Action 
Plans, etc.)

=== PAGE 95 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91 
 
 
 
 
 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
for providing guarantees (GAP: 3.1 & 
3.2) 
Activity II. 3.1.3. General Business 
Improvement projects with FSPs 
Projects aiming at improving the 
financial performance and the risk 
management of the investee. 
 
II. 3.1.3.1. Creation of new lines of 
business to address the 
consequences of the COVID-19 crisis  
II. 3.1.3.2. Financial and capacity 
building education for SMEs and 
farmers 
II. 3.1.3.3. Identifying new green 
opportunities in the economic 
recovery. 
II. 3.1.3.4. TA Projects on 
Digitalization 
TA Reports and deliverables of 
Service Providers contracted under 
the TAF 
Activity II. 3.1.4.  Business Model 
Improvement TA projects with ICs 
Support to IC’s business models to 
make their products ready for market, 
to improve their efficiency and to 
ensure that commercially ready 
solutions are able to be 
adopted/scaled up, aiming at better 
include and serve farmers and SMEs 
 
II. 3.1.4. 1. Design and scale of 
distribution and supplying schemes.  
II. 3.1.4. 2. Advisory service on green 
practices 
II. 3.1.4.3. Design of marketing 
strategies. 
II. 3.1.4.4. Establish partnerships with 
local companies.  
II. 3.1.4.5. Technical support for 
operational challenge 
II. 3.4.6. Talent management support 
TA Reports and deliverables of 
Service Providers contracted under 
the TAF 
Activity II.3.1.5. Ecosystemic Projects, 
stakeholder engagement and Gender 
actions 
Improving green financial ecosystem at 
regional or country level to indirectly 
 
- 
Update of Kuali investment 
due-diligence process,

=== PAGE 96 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
benefit the investees and their clients. 
Supporting 
projects 
seeking 
improvements in markets for products, 
country level infrastructure, policy and 
regulatory framework, institutional set 
up and other activities.  
 
II.3.1.5.1. Updating and extending 
gender country assessments (GAP: 
1.4) 
II.3.1.5.2. Capacity building and 
awareness raising of potential final 
beneficiaries. Support for women's 
economic empowerment (GAP: 4.1, 
4.2 and 4.3) 
II.3.1.5.3. Projects in markets for 
products, country level infrastructure, 
policy and regulatory framework, 
institutional set up, etc. 
II.3.1.5.4. Partnerships between FSPs 
via an open-banking collaboration 
scheme 
II.3.1.5.5. Elaboration of Indigenous 
People Plans 
including the GGA as part of 
E&S appraisal 
- 
. Assessment Report on 
ecosystemic issues and 
market failures  
- 
Gender and SEAH Policies 
- 
Specific reports on gender 
and SEAH training, Cultural 
hazards workshops, 
Sustainable agriculture 
techniques workshops, etc. 
(see Annex 6, 7 and 8) 
 
Activity II. 3.1.6. Knowledge Sharing 
Program 
Systematizing, documenting and 
disseminating the knowledge 
generated and the results of the Fund 
and best practices found as a result of 
Kuali and TA interventions.  
Connecting FSPs and innovative 
companies in difference geographies 
(LATAM – India) 
II. 3.1.6.1. Workshops, symposium 
and/or conferences for partners, 
bringing together practitioners 
involved in green finance.  
II. 3.1.6. 2. Technical packages, 
systematizing and documenting the 
knowledge and best practices 
obtained throughout each project. 
Tangible knowledge products or best 
practices generated. TA Reports and 
deliverables of Service Providers 
contracted under the TAF (eg. 
webinars, workshops, Reports on 
Lessons Learned, etc.) 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

=== PAGE 97 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93 
 
 
 
 
 
Kuali Fund-GCF represents a significant initiative to address current environmental and climate challenges. With the aim of ensuring effectiveness 
and transparency in action implementation, a comprehensive Monitoring Plan has been developed to span the entirety of the Fund's lifespan. This 
plan not only seeks to fulfill regulatory obligations but also aims to maximize the positive impact of the Funded Activity. 
- 
Annual ex-post third party verifications: 
These verifications will be carried out by a third-party validation and verification body. The Programme will appoint a third-party agency to verify the 
GHG emission reductions generated by Kuali Fund investments. By conducting these independent verifications, Kuali will be able to report GHG 
reductions to GCF in an open, transparent, and consistent manner during the project implementation. 
Monitoring: 
The plan encompasses a rigorous project monitoring process to ensure the efficient execution of funded activities. Examples of monitoring activities 
include: Establishment of key performance indicators (KPIs) to measure progress in implementing each project; Periodic reviews of progress reports 
provided by project stakeholders; On-site visits to directly assess the status of projects and address any identified issues. 
Additionally, the AE will undertake the following requirements as monitoring, reporting and evaluation covenants: 
• 
Contractually require, monitor and enforce that the FSPs receiving funding under the Funded Activity apply such amounts towards meeting 
the agreed portfolio targets described in the paragraph below; 
• 
Ensure that subsequent disbursements (whether by way of a capital call or a disbursement under the relevant debt instrument or otherwise) 
from Kuali Fund-GCF to an FSP are based on evidence of the FSP having met the agreed portfolio targets during the Ramp-up Period, where 
such portfolio targets per FSP are based on the baseline studies and proposed by the Kuali Fund-GCF;  
• 
Contractually require, monitor and enforce such requirement, that the verification of targets shall be based on annual sub-loan reporting to 
the Kuali Fund by each FSP and certified by an independent verifier, which shall inform the Kuali Fund-GCF on the type (number and volume) 
of loans that are climate aligned and other loans (which shall form part of APR referred in paragraph above).  The climate alignment aspect 
must be based on the Eligibility Criteria  and the relevant Study referred in Clause 13.I (h). of the Term sheet;  
• 
Ensure that the targets referred to in paragraph above are verified by an independent verifier based on terms of reference and the approach 
agreed between the Accredited Entity and the Secretariat; 
 
- 
Impact Assessment: 
Impact assessment will be an integral component of our monitoring plan. Examples of activities include: Analysis of collected data to assess the real 
impact of interventions in terms of emission reduction and social benefits; Surveys and stakeholder consultations to gather valuable feedback on 
perceived impact at the local level; Comprehensive assessment reports to be shared with all stakeholders, fostering transparency and accountability.

=== PAGE 98 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94 
 
 
 
 
 
The AE (COFIDES) will monitor the EE’s (General Partner or GAWA) in two different scopes: (i) ESG performance and compliance, and (ii) impact 
reporting both on an annual basis and by the corresponding evaluations. Furthermore, the General Partner is available on an on-going basis for any 
questions the AE may have regarding Kuali Fund-GCF assessment and impact reporting/methodologies. 
The value of the EE’s impact indicators should be based on reliable source documents, such as latest audited annual reports or consultant reports. 
If none of those are available, then data coming directly from client may be used. The information will be referred for verification purposes to the 
original source including the name of the document, the year of the report, the page number, etc. and saving the document in a permanent folder for 
the rest of the fund life. To verify data, Partnerships for Development (area in COFIDES in charge of the GCF accreditation and identification, analysis, 
monitoring, evaluation and all issues related to GCF) will check this monitoring information internally in collaboration with E&S department, legal 
department and internal audit department. For measuring the impact data correctly, EE will develop an impact measurement tool to enable portfolio 
companies measure its GHG emission reduction; enhancing capacity of portfolio companies to measure climate impact. GAWA will be in charge also 
of any update in the monitoring framework, reporting and verification of GHG emission of any portfolio company of Kuali Fund-GCF. 
GAWA Capital is focusing not only on measuring its environmental and social impact, but also to actively managing the investments in order to 
maximize the potential environmental and social impact. To do so, the Fund Manager have integrated a social performance management system to 
the investment process.  
The Impact Score will be measured at the beginning of each investment during the social and environmental due diligence. It will be measured and 
monitored on a quarterly basis. After the exit of each investment, the Investors Advisory Committee will select an independent social auditor that will 
measure the Audited Impact Score. An Audited Impact Score will be obtained as the average of all the investee’s Audited Impact Score. This Audited 
Impact Score will determine half of the potential carried interest of the Fund’s managers. 
The Fund Manager shall report to the Shareholders on a quarterly and on an annual basis.  
The quarterly reports shall be delivered to Shareholders 45 days after the end of each quarter and shall include, at least, the following information: 
- 
NAV of the Funded Activity and by share class and unaudited financial statements. 
- 
Economic and markets information of the investee countries. 
- 
Information about the investee portfolio and breakdown by geographies. 
- 
Financial performance of investees as well as ESG metrics and gender metrics (including, if available, the reporting indicators). 
- 
Impact score evolution.

=== PAGE 99 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 95 
 
 
 
 
 
 
92 https://www.marketplace.spglobal.com/en/solutions/ilevel-software-(1480715a-1925-49f3-8b63-4e88178a2300)  
- 
Information 
about 
the 
investments in pipeline. 
- 
Expected capital drawdowns 
and 
distributions 
to 
Shareholders 
during 
the 
following quarter. 
- 
Capital invested, capital to be 
called 
and 
total 
capital 
committed. 
 
On an annual basis, the Fund Manager 
shall deliver to the Shareholders: 
- 
Audited annual accounts of 
Kuali Fund (according to IFRS) 
and the auditor’s report. 
- 
Main 
milestones 
achieved 
during the financial year and 
expected achievements for the 
following year. 
- 
E&S Annual Report including 
gender issues and GAP 
implementation. 
- 
TAF Annual Report. 
 
The aggregated quarterly and annual reports are constructed by the sum of individual reports at the investees level. Data will be captured and 
recorded through the iLEVEL92 software a tool that streamlines data collection, portfolio monitoring, analytics, valuation, and reporting. At the Due 
Diligence and initial investment phases (sometimes with the help of dedicated consultants that will guide the institution) specific Climate lending 
eligibility requirements, CO2 baselines, CO2 mitigation calculations, Adaptation baselines and all expected targets will be embedded in the software.  
During the Due Diligence (DD) process, GAWA Capital conducts a detailed environmental due diligence with the 
objective of assessing (i) investee environmental adaptation using a tool called Green Index which is part of the 
Cerise SPI4 tool and (ii) transformation potential of the investee to better serve/include SMEs and the smallholder 
farmers. All the strengths, weaknesses and areas identified for improvement will be included in the Environmental 
and Social Due Diligence report, which will serve as an initial input for the TA Steering Committee to explore 
potential TA interventions that could be implemented in agreement with the investee’s management. 
Legal documents will include social covenants (e.g. implementation/further development of environmental 
policies; etc.) as well as key impact-related goals (e.g. new SME or smallholder farmers clients to be reached 
with green lending, new products to be launched, etc) which the investees commit to achieving during the life of 
the investments. In addition, goals will be set that the investment needs to achieve. These goals will be linked to 
the calculation of carried interest for the General Partner. Goals will refer to the number of SMEs or smallholder 
farmers to be reached and to transformative metrics both referring to green adaptation of the investee and to 
SME/smallholder farmers adaptation of the investee. 
The monitoring system follows the evolution of the environmental and social metrics and of the implementation 
of agreed TA projects, revised quarterly. The investee will need to fill out a social monitoring form and there will 
be a monitoring call with management to understand recent developments of TA projects. The Fund will also 
monitor the compliance with environmental and social covenants included in the investment agreements. The 
result is reported quarterly to investors. 
When generating pipeline, GAWA always seeks Investees with the potential of servicing the SME and the 
smallholder farmers segment and with willingness to become “greener”: opportunities in potential investees 
which target and/or plan to expand their operations in the SME and smallholder farmers sectors and which are 
committed to improve their environmental practices. 
O           
DU  D          
             
D  U

=== PAGE 100 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 96 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
External evaluators will assess twice (mid-term (year 5) and final (year 10)) progress across each of the three paradigm shift dimensions (scale, 
replicability, sustainability). Assessments will be scorecard-based following the IRMF and supported by a qualitative, narrative assessment. Enabling 
environment scorecard assessments for the interim and final evaluations will also be reported (core indicator 6, 7 and 8). A brief qualitative report of 
the progress against the selected enabling environment indicators will also be provided whenever possible. 
The TAF Manager shall report to the TA Steering Committee (TASC) on a quarterly and on an annual basis. The governing documents of the TAF 
shall determine the specific contents of the quarterly and annual reports.

=== PAGE 101 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 97 
 
 
 
 
F. RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
Please describe financial, technical, operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing (ML/TF), sanctions, 
prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the 
proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.  
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability 
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact 
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as well as 
fraudulent, coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Legal 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The top-down due diligence approach starts with country selection. Kuali Fund-GCF will select target 
countries analyzing the political, macroeconomic and social situation and the risk of political intervention in 
the financial system. 
 
Political intervention in the financial sector can bring new regulation that may hinder the development 
of financial inclusion and, more specifically, the SMEs and the smallholder farmers finance. Before 
investing in any country, GAWA Capital conducts a detailed analysis and due diligence of the political, 
economic and regulatory risks and screens out countries that are politically unstable, prone to transfer 
and convertibility risk. Part of the analytical review entails: (i) discussions with sovereign rating analysts, 
(ii) meetings with multilateral representatives, (iii) reviewing country reports and (iv) discussions with 
embassy officials and other relevant third parties (including government bodies). Emerging economies 
are more exposed to volatility of macroeconomic events such as recession, inflation or government-
related defaults which, as a result, can negatively affect the financial and agricultural sectors. Commodity 
prices can also strongly impact the economy and further exacerbate currency volatility. This risk is 
mitigated in two ways: 
• 
Top-down investment approach, picking countries which are less likely to suffer macroeconomic 
events and/or are more resilient to shocks. Extensive macroeconomic/political analysis is carried 
out before making an investment. 
• 
Picking companies that have the financial strength to be resilient to a potential shock. For 
example, companies that are well capitalized and have demonstrated the ability to raise capital 
in difficult times (e.g. owned by shareholders that can inject more capital if needed) or which are 
profitable and use these profits to strengthen their capital base. 
 
Concerning foreign exchange risk, thanks to its partnership with hedging providers, Kuali Fund-GCF 
can lend in local currency and hedge to EUR for all debt investments. In equity investments, where 
hedging is not an option given the lack of a clear exit date, we invest in local currency after careful 
consideration of the historical performance of the currency against the EUR and after a thorough analysis 
of the currency perspective. 
 
Another risk has been identified regarding possible economic turndowns due to global fluctuations or 
specific crisis like COVID-19. At a lower level, credit risk would be also related to specific risks linked to 
the SMEs and the smallholder farmers sectors or even the credit/financial intermediary risk.  
Political instability (Transfer restriction, expropriation, currency convertibility, war and civil 
disturbance, economic turndowns).

=== PAGE 102 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 98 
 
 
 
 
Finally, a thorough scoring model has been developed, providing the maximum percentage of Kuali Fund-
GCF that can be invested in a specific country by analyzing a wide range of macro-economic, political, 
regulatory and market indicators. 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Credit 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
- 
Specific risks linked to the SMEs and smallholder farmers sectors. 
- 
Credit /Financial intermediary risk. 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Kuali Fund-GCF will seek investments with a low risk profile activity in order to create a portfolio with an 
adequate quality, according to the experience and the long track record of the Fund Manager and the 
accredited entity in developing markets. There will be also a diversification policy in the portfolio investments 
in order to mitigate this risk, that will be also lowered by the TA facility (with a thorough selection process 
and the Fund Manager expertise) in the SMEs and smallholder farmers’ adaptation process. 
Credit risk is extensively analyzed during the on-site due diligence. In addition to this, there will be a quarterly 
monitoring review where credit risk parameters are closely followed and a thorough analysis is carried out if 
portfolio quality worsens or any covenant is broken. If the situation persists, an additional on-site due 
diligence may be arranged to visit affected branches and assess the situation. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Fiduciary 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
- 
Money laundering. 
- 
Terrorism financing. 
- 
Prohibited Practices. 
- 
Sanction lists. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
No activities will be undertaken in any UNSC sanctions regimes. 
No individual or entity that is listed on any UNSC sanctions list will be involved in any manner with the project 
or its activities, either as a counterpart, implementer or beneficiary. 
There is no intention to distribute or disburse to beneficiaries, either directly or indirectly, cash, vouchers, 
commodities or other items of value. 
An integrity channel has been set up to enabling the report of complaints and allegations of impropriety, 
wrong-doing or other related issues to the projects or its activities. The channel is publicly available (both in 
Spanish and English) in the following link: https://www.cofides.es/integridad. 
Regarding jurisdictions that are listed by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) such as Panama, a 
reinforced due diligence will be carried out, in line with the requirements of COFIDES’ AML/CFT procedure. 
The specific activities declared by the potential investee and the identification of the holder will be closely 
looked at.

=== PAGE 103 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 99 
 
 
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
- 
Social and Environmental risks: SMEs and smallholder farmers specific risks (i.e. Client Protection 
Principles, financial consumers’ rights). 
- 
Implementation and operational risks. 
- 
Others. 
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The due diligence will include a social and an environmental risk analysis that will cover SMEs and 
smallholder farmers specific risks (i.e. Client Protection Principles, financial consumers’ rights) including 
special needs of vulnerable groups such as indigenous peoples if any risk or harm is estimated to be possible 
(see more details in Annex 6). Regarding the implementation risk, an adequate and thorough selection 
process together with the previous experience of the senior managers would mitigate the potential lack of 
experience in managing direct operations with Fintech companies. 
The operational and fraud risk is mitigated via field audits performed during the on-site due diligences, 
analysis of investees’ full operating manuals, in addition to random checks.  
For corruption related risk, there will be background checks on the key individuals of the FSP and 
innovative companies, including the OFAC list, analyzing the existing shareholders and their affiliations and 
monitoring information from Transparency International and other corruption-focused information providers. 
Regarding the asset-liability management, it will be mitigated by an initial ALM analysis and the 
correspondent monitoring of the investee’s liquidity position. 
Another risk in technology and innovation of Fintech has been identified, which will be mitigated by 
the support on technology use, both in the field and in the head offices, recommending potential technology 
vendors if needed. Kuali Fund-GCF will benefit from the Technical Assistance facility, that will act as a strong 
mitigant of some of these risks. TA will be used to help investees in improving aspects such as technology 
adoption or product improvement. 
Finally, as for the business cycle of the investees, it is important for FSPs to adjust their sourcing 
requirements to the cash model of their loan products’ cycles. In the same line, it is essential to adapt their 
loan products to the business cycle of their clients’ productive activities (i.e. longer tenor for agricultural 
loans, amortization consistent with harvests). The Fund Manager analyses the cash flow models of 
invested FSPs and may advise the management in achieving the optimal funding structure.

=== PAGE 104 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 100 
 
 
 
 
G. GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
RISK CATEGORY 
Kuali Fund-GCF (and Kuali Fund) is categorized as I-2, though investments mostly will be rated as I-3. The 
Funded Activity is not intended to finance or invest in FSP/ innovative companies with exposure to high 
Environmental and Social (E&S) risk sectors according to IFC standards. FSP/ Innovative Companies are 
expected to trigger Green Climate Fund E&S Standards in their Environmental and Management Systems 
(ESMS). GAWA will support this through capacity building (by means of its Technical Assistance (TA) 
facility). As for Innovative Companies (IC), the risk associated is C. 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT INSTRUMENTS 
GAWA has developed an operational ESMS according to the Green Climate Fund E&S Standards (See 
Annex 6). It is integrated into Kuali Fund-GCF’s own investment process and is focused on the E&S 
assessment of the FSPs/ Innovative Companies with a risk-based approach. In this regard, the E&S due 
diligence and monitoring of the clients will be based on the project life cycle and will comprise the following 
stages: 
STEP 1: SCREENING AND CATEGORIZATION 
Kuali Fund-GCF Portfolio and the expected project activities will be screened by the investment analyst 
against IFC exclusion list to ensure no activity on this list will be financed. 
The E&S Officer will carry out the E&S risk categorization according to the ICF Categorization List. 
Kuali Fund-GCF’s investments in FSP will normally fall into the I-3 category (low risk) and the I-2 category 
(medium risk). As for Innovative Companies (IC), the risk associated is C or B, rated according GCF Risk 
Categorization Ratings (being A -high, B-medium; C-low) for direct investments.  Potential investments that 
fall on the A category for ICs or I-1 category for FSPs will be screened out and will not be considered for 
further analysis and investment. 
The Investment Officer will include in the Preliminary Investment Memorandum the conformance with the 
exclusion list and the E&S Officer will include the key E&S issues, the proposed investee E&S risk category, 
the proposed scope of the ESDD and any anticipated E&S requirements. 
STEP 2: E&S and SEAH DUE DILIGENCE (ESDD) 
During the due diligence, Kuali Fund-GCF’s team will gain an insight into the nature and scope of the FSPs/ 
innovative companies’ operations. An E&S performance due diligence is conducted in parallel with the 
business due diligence process when evaluating a potential investee.  
An E&S due diligence and an on-site visit is conducted in parallel with the business due diligence process 
when evaluating a potential investee. This ESDD shall be carried out by the investment team in collaboration 
the E&S Officer.  
The level of ESDD actions and requirements depend on the E&S risk of a potential FSP/ innovative 
companies. In all cases, the management of the E&S risks -and the E&S risks associated to its investments- 
of every FSP/innovative company will be evaluated. According to the E&S level of risk, an E&S Action Plan 
(ESAP) will be established in order to strengthen the ESMS of the FSP/ Innovative Company and it will have

=== PAGE 105 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 101 
 
 
 
 
to be accomplished along the loan tenure. In this stage, the TA could be used to address the ESAP(please 
refer to Annex 6). 
A particular case within social risks is SEAH risk management. The ESDD will include an assessment of the 
situation and the need to include actions and requirements (from training, zero-tolerance of SEAH 
Guideline’s code of conduct, policy and management system and resolution of incidents, GRM, among 
others) in a survivor-centered and gender-responsive manner. The objective will be avoided, and where 
avoidance is impossible, mitigate the risks of SEAH to people impacted by Kuali Fund-GCF. 
Despite being a very novel risk issue during due diligences, the SEAH risk forecasted for the project rated 
low-medium risk based in the AE experience in microfinance and SMEs investments (according to UN criteria 
-UN Protocol on Allegations of Sexual Exploitation and abuse involving IP, 2018- for considering SEAH high-
risk activities the Funded Activity will not take place in high risk environments such as camps and shelters 
and involve nor the Funded Activity management company neither the FSP and ICs having direct contact 
with children. The aspect to be considered as relevant is the fact that the subprojects (FSP and IC) will take 
place in countries where sexual and gender-based violence is prevalent, therefore medium rate is present). 
It is required that every single subproject/investee company (FSP and IC) has a SEAH risk diagnosis and a 
SEAH plan accordingly to the satisfaction of AE and based on the SEAH risk assessment tool developed by 
the GCF’s Secretariat. 
SEAH risk management is far from being systematized and understood in the corporate world. This implies 
that for the management of SEAH risks in this program, the first measure that will necessarily have to be 
established is a specific staff training plan with a top-down flow (Kuali Fund-GCF to FSPs/Fintech 
companies/investors). It will cover: 
1. 
The fund management company will (i) acquire the necessary knowledge and skills in this area, 
including general aspects and country specificities (ii) adopt an explicit commitment to combat the 
SEAH and in favour of zero-tolerance of SEAH, and it has to be reflected in a code of conduct and a 
management system. 
2. 
The E&S officer will include in the contracts with the underlying entities, clauses of commitment to 
Kuali Fund-GCF Zero-Tolerance policy and the implementation of an ad-hoc management system, 
which may be the same as that of Kuali Find for the better centralization of data and its subsequent 
evaluation or based in the GCF SEAH risk assessment tool. 
3. 
Within this contractual framework, the underlying companies of Kuali Fund-GCF shall undertake to 
receive training in the field of SEAH, to increase their capacities transversally in the organization and 
to appoint a person responsible for making that commitment materialize (an E&S officer or a Human 
Resources Officer). 
4. 
The EA will be reviewing and monitoring all these acts: Kuali Fund-GCF's commitment and capacity; 
incorporation of clauses in contracts with underlying companies; training and assignment of 
managers in the underlying companies; aggregate and integrated monitoring by the Funded Activity 
of all these issues in an annual report that will reflect actions taken, incidents, resolution of the same 
and lessons learned. 
The management system will not only be preventive to avoid SEAH but inclusive survivor-centered and 
gender responsive as well.  
Additionally, the GRM of each underlying entity will be adopted not only for E&S claims but also to receive 
SEAH complaints in an anonymous way.  Kuali Fund-GCF will be informed quarterly about SEAH incidents 
and actions taken. This information will be processed and included in the annual E&S report to the AE. 
Besides, the AE will also be available to receive and process SEAH complaints in its Program mailbox. 
Those complaints will be evaluated by the AE Sustainability and Impact Division.

=== PAGE 106 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 102 
 
 
 
 
Kuali Fund will use several tools/guidelines to support this process: IFC Performance Standards, IFC EHS 
Guidelines, Alinus/SPI4 with Green Index module and Global Map of Supply Chain Risks in Agro-Commodity 
Production, UN SEAH Policies and Protocols (UN Protocol on Allegations of Sexual Exploitation and abuse 
involving IP), among others.  
The result of the ESDD will be documented in an ESDD Report which will include all the strengths and 
weaknesses detected in the FSP/innovative company, in addition to the areas identified that could be 
improved with TA interventions. 
STEP 3: E&S Conditions of Investments 
The Investment officer and director of the Fund Manager will negotiate and agree with the FSP/ innovative 
company the E&S provisions and investment conditions in the term sheet and investment agreement. These 
consist of standard E&S terms applicable to all Fund investments, and specific conditions identified during 
the ESDD of a proposed investment (ESAP with SEAH requirements will be included in the legal 
documentation).  
The Funded Activity’s Fund Manager should ensure that any conditions of investment tied to disbursement 
of funds, as specified in the investment agreement, are met before disbursing funds. 
STEP 4: TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE 
The ESDD will help identify potential TA projects with regard to the green readiness, E&S risks management 
and gender approach integration of FSPs and Innovative companies. 
Examples of Green Readiness projects: 
- Implementation of green products directed to the MSME or smallholder farmers such as loans to finance 
more efficient new machinery or equipment or climate smart agriculture loans. 
-Training people on climate finance, including product specialists, risk officers, loan officers and man. For 
more details about the Technical Assistance Facility and its use please refer to the Kuali Fund TA Operations 
Manual. 
STEP 5: MONITORING AND REPORTING 
The Investment officer and E&S Officer should actively supervise and monitor compliance with the E&S 
covenants included in the investment agreements and the E&S performance of each of its portfolio 
investments. For this purpose, FSPs/ innovative companies will fill out an E&S Performance Report on a 
yearly basis. It will include at least the following: 
• 
Portfolio breakdown by industry sectors, E&S risk category and product lines, and sample ESDD 
reports carried out by I-1 investees. 
• 
Cases of non-compliance with E&S requirements 
• 
Serious E&S accidents or incidents related to a transaction, including SEAH information. 
• 
Information on the implementation of any changes to the E&S Management System. 
 
Besides, Kuali Fund-GCF will prepare a E&S monitoring report for all investors on an annual basis with 
aggregated information of the FSPs/ innovative companies: 
• 
E&S risk category of each investee.

=== PAGE 107 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 103 
 
 
 
 
• 
Major E&S performance related activities per investee.  
• 
Evolution of E&S covenants and E&S Action Plan, if applicable. 
• 
Evolution of the Green Impact Score (GAWA customized metric that measures social impact and 
green readiness based on SPI4 and other indicators) of each investee and on an aggregated basis. 
• 
Evolution of SEAH measures, incidents, and their solution 
• 
Status of implementation of Technical Assistance projects by each investee and underlying 
investments, if applicable. 
GRIEVANCE MECHANISM 
The grievance mechanism ensures the right to be heard for complainants who feel affected by Kuali Fund-
GCF’s financed operations in order to enable resolution of disputes and assist the Funded Activity in drawing 
lessons learned for current and future operations. Any person or group may lodge a complaint and it can be 
submitted in any language by letter, e-mail and/or web form (e-mail and web to be determined). Kuali Fund-
GCF will require all investees to have a GRM in place in which they compile all complaints and follow up 
their resolution.  
DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION 
After the ESDD of a potential investee and before the financial legal agreement is signed, the E&S Officer 
will disclose an “Executive Summary E&S Assessment” (includes the E&S category of the investee and a 
brief description of the identified E&S risks and mitigation measures to be implemented) in the Funded 
Activity’s webpage according to the requirements of GCF’s Disclosure Policy. 
CAPACITY IN TERMS OF HUMAN RESOURCES 
Senior Management 
The CEOs of GAWA Capital as representatives from the upper management are responsible for Kuali Fund-
GCF’s overall commitment to E&S objectives during the whole investment process. In particular, the CEOs 
establish the Funded Activity’s E&S requirements and conditions for investees, as defined herein. In cases 
of unresolved E&S issues or non-compliance associated with a transaction that cannot be resolved by the 
Investment Officers, Senior Management determines the appropriate course of action to follow to reduce the 
financial institution’s potential exposure to E&S risk, which may include taking legal action against the 
client/investee. 
E&S Officer 
The Technical Assistance Manager of GAWA Capital will act as the E&S Officer of the Kuali Fund-GCF. The 
E&S Officer is responsible for developing and implementing the ESMS as well as for communicating with 
senior management on E&S issues and concerns. 
The E&S Officer is responsible for developing and updating the procedures and documents that are part of 
Kuali Fund-GCF ESMS. This person also evaluates the E&S risks at the portfolio level and provides 
assistance to Investment Officers in evaluating and monitoring the E&S performance of clients/investees. 
The E&S Officer in coordination with the Gender Officer will be involved in the solution of all E&S claims 
(including SEAH) received through the Funded Activity’s GRM. 
The E&S Officer will also lead the communication with the Members of the Technical Assistance Committee 
and, when necessary, with the management of the TA implementation partners.

=== PAGE 108 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 104 
 
 
 
 
The E&S Officer will receive annual training of E&S issues, including SEAH in order to keep up to date and 
will integrate and share the updated knowledge with the investees. Given the multi-country nature of the 
programme, the training will need to collate cross-cutting material subjects with countries E&S specificities. 
Investment Officer   
The Investment Officer is responsible for following the procedures of the ESMS at the transaction level. They 
discuss and negotiate possible E&S mitigation measures with the client/investee. 
The Investment Officer is also responsible for evaluating the E&S risks at the level of individual transactions 
and make a recommendation to the Credit/Investment Committee on whether to proceed with a transaction. 
The Investment Officer ensures that the Funded Activity’s E&S requirements are incorporated in legal 
agreements for each transaction. The Investment Officer may advise if a client’s/investee’s non-compliance 
with E&S clauses constitutes a breach of contract and is considered an Event of Default under the terms of 
the legal agreement that requires follow up by Senior Management. 
Investment Committee   
The Investment Committee is responsible for deciding if E&S risks are acceptable to Kuali Fund-GCF overall 
exposure to risk before proceeding with a transaction. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Kuali Fund-GCF aims at improving access to financial services with a special focus to support women 
entrepreneurs. In addition, specific gender interventions through TA funding will enable for more empowered 
women participation. The gender assessment is built on quantitative data and qualitative evidence derived 
from a desk review of existing literature and secondary databases. It includes general data about women in 
LAC as well as country-specific ratings and information.  
Target countries have made substantial progress in recent decades, particularly in the topics of access to 
education and health services and have a solid legal framework. However, social norms limit the practical 
impact of the legally recognized rights of women. Gender gaps are still large in areas such as access to 
employment, entrepreneurship, representation in informal work, assets’ property and control, access to finance 
and distribution of household and caring tasks. Gender-based violence continues being a major social issue in 
all countries. An external consultant will be hired to carry out country assessments. 
Women in LAC has a strong history of entrepreneurial activity as the female/male led TEA ratio shows: 0.84, 
the highest in the world. Like other regions, women entrepreneurs are often driven more by necessity than in 
the case of men. For this reason, supporting them via financing and other mechanisms gains further 
importance. On top of that, over 60% of women are stuck in the informal sector, lacking access to financial, 
human and social capital, key constraints for the growth of their business. These constraints are exacerbated 
by weaker levels of financial literacy and lower legal ownership of assets or guarantees. However, women 
have shown to be responsible and loyal financial clients with higher aversion toward indebtedness than men. 
 
Regarding agriculture, a high proportion of rural women employed in this sector are also unpaid family workers 
which puts them at a disadvantage. Gender gaps accentuate the vulnerability of women to the impacts of 
climate change, limit their adaptation capacity and reduced their potential contribution to reduce emissions of 
greenhouse gases.

=== PAGE 109 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 105 
 
 
 
 
The project will mainstream gender equality and women’s empowerment at the Funded Activity level, the FSPs 
and Innovative Companies’ level and their portfolio. Women’s local organizations will be identified in each 
country and consultations with them will be conducted to incorporate their knowledge and views in the 
implementation of the project. Institutions and initiatives to address gender-based violence will also be 
identified in the target countries and dissemination of information on gendered violence as well as resources 
available in each country will be included. A gender policy will be required in the FSPs and innovative 
companies for both internal and external dimension. A gender approach management system has been 
integrated in the ESMS to evaluate gender issues and implement an action plan. To ensure that gender equality 
is addressed, specific covenants will be introduced in loan agreements.  
 
Tracked indicators include, among others, the number of trainings about business skills and financial literacy 
and % of participation in capacity building activities (see Gender Action Plan for further information). 
 
Regarding human resources, a Gender Officer who will receive periodic training will monitor the investee’s 
compliance with the gender action plan and will be responsible for developing and implementing the gender 
management system. An E&S officer with expertise in gender will also be hired and work in coordination with 
the gender officer. In addition, gender related issues will be part of the calculation of an environmental and 
social performance score which will be linked directly to carried interest of the fund managers – if objectives 
are not achieved, the fund manager will earn a lower performance fee. Annual report will include information 
on the implementation of the Gender Action Plan. 
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Kuali Fund-GCF will apply best practices in its financial management and procurement practices. The Funded 
Activity will benefit from the extensive experience in fund management of the Fund’s Manager, GAWA Capital 
Partners SGEIC S.A., in addition to the support of external service providers such as a Fund Administrator, 
Custodian, Auditors, Legal and Tax advisors, amongst others. The Fund’s Administrator will be in charge of 
book-keeping and preparation of the quarterly NAV and Annual Accounts of Kuali Fund, supported by 
documentation from the Fund Manager. The Funded Activity will undergo annual external audits, to be realized 
by a Big-Four company, again supported with documentation and evidence from the Administrator and the 
Fund Manager. 
A detailed Financial Model enables the Fund Manager to oversee all operational and investment cashflows to 
ensure Kuali Fund-GCF’s adequate financial management. The Funded Activity’s Financial Model will include 
the consistent logging of cashflows in line with real bank cash movements and balances, whilst projecting the 
future cash inflows/outflows, thus enabling the Funded Activity to maximize return of capital/dividend payments 
to investors whilst ensuring the timely payment of all service providers. 
Disbursements will be carried out on an investment-by-investment basis, involving a Capital Call procedure 
following the IC approval of each investment. Capital Call notifications are sent out to investors by the 
Administrator and funds enter the Kuali Fund’s Investor Account from each investor, to be then transferred in 
their totality to Kuali Fund’s Transaction Account (as per industry best practices) for disbursement. Prior to any 
disbursements, both Kuali Fund’s Administrator and its Custodian must have received all pertinent 
documentation backing the transaction. In the case of debt financing, a disbursement schedule will be 
established. In the case of capital subscription, a Commitment Agreement for every investor will be made and 
this will be accompanied by the corresponding request for resources through a capital call93. Commitments 
from Component I (loans and equity for investments) and commitments from Component II (grants for TA) will 
be separate and there will be therefore different calls for either financing capital and TA capital. 
 
93 As long as COFIDES will be a limited partner, COFIDES will not provide any no objection to the disbursements. COFIDES 
will ensure that the process will comply with the legal documentation that will be established the eligibility criteria and the 
rights granted to investors.

=== PAGE 110 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 106 
 
 
 
 
To ensure the financial sustainability of the Funded Activity’s investments, close monitoring of each investee 
is carried out by the Fund Manager’s investment team and CRO. Monitoring is typically carried out on a 
quarterly basis, involving the review of a detailed Reporting Factsheet to be filled out by investees, Financial 
Statements and the holding of quarterly monitoring calls with the management of the investee in addition to 
relevant third parties. Country risk is managed on-the-go, with the team keeping actively informed of political, 
macroeconomic and sectoral developments to ensure the sustainability of the investee’s operating 
environment. Monitoring is up-stepped to a higher frequency where relevant (for example, in COVID-19 
situation, Fund Manager’s monitoring of current investees has been heightened). 
The procurement of the different service providers necessary for the correct functioning of the Funded Activity’s 
operations (e.g. Administrator, Custodian, Auditor, Insurance, Technical Assistance partners such as 
Consultants, etc.) will entail the hiring of renowned and trusted specialists in each field, which will be selected 
following thorough market research and the evaluation of the most appropriate provider for each task. This 
evaluation is based on cost, adequacy and scope of services provided in each provider’s proposal. In the case 
of partners (such as external consultants) selected for the implementation of the Technical Assistance Facility, 
the process will involve a tender procedure, with decision-making in the power of the Technical Assistance 
Steering Committee during at least the first year of Kuali Fund-GCF’s life. COFIDES’s approved Procurement 
and Consultant Guidelines reviewed and accepted by the Fund will apply under these grants. Procurement will 
be carried out by Grant Recipients themselves and procurement plan will be agreed with the Grant Recipient. 
COFIDES will carry out constant monitoring of the project. COFIDES will elaborate monitoring reports for the 
Spanish Cooperation through AECID and progress reports for the EUR and also for the GCF to ensure the 
proper use of its resources. GAWA will conduct frequent on-site missions during the investment period and 
also during the monitoring phase and will report to COFIDES and maintain constant communication between 
COFIDES and the management team. COFIDES will also receive information from each Investment Committee 
of the Funded Activity. Likewise, Kuali Fund will have independent evaluations and annual audits. It will also 
have an ESG auditor to assess the portfolio's environmental and social performance. 
Finally, thanks to the joint experience of GAWA with COFIDES in GFIF Fund and Huruma Fund (where 
resources from COFIDES, FONPRODE, and the EU through COFIDES are invested), a highly developed 
knowledge of the procedures of these types of programs has been achieved. In particular, COFIDES' 
experience in reporting and compliance with EU regulations is also essential for the proper use of GCF 
resources. 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure for 
all information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and programme 
funding proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the 
redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in confidence is one of 
the exceptions, but this exception should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the document contains specific, 
segregable portions that can be disclosed without prejudice or harm.  
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information. 
☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may not 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited entity 
is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
• 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with an 
explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and

=== PAGE 111 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 107 
 
 
 
 
• 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 112 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 108 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
H. ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☒ Others: Indigenous People’s Plan 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☐ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☐ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☒ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☒ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting-projects)94 
☒ 
Annex X 
Other references 
Annex Investment criteria & Governance 
CO2 Calculation & Ex-ACT 
Manual of Policies and Procedures

=== PAGE 113 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 109 
 
 
 
 
 
94 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects.

=== PAGE 114 ===
25/07/22, 13:35
SEI/ME - 26279314 - Ofício
https://sei.economia.gov.br/sei/controlador.php?acao=documento_imprimir_web&acao_origem=arvore_visualizar&id_documento=29448369&infr…
1/2
MINISTÉRIO DA ECONOMIA
Secretaria Especial de Comércio Exterior e Assuntos Internacionais
Secretaria de Assuntos Econômicos Internacionais
Subsecretaria de Instituições Internacionais de Desenvolvimento
Coordenação-Geral de Instituições Globais de Desenvolvimento
OFÍCIO SEI Nº 196177/2022/ME
Brasília, 08 de julho de 2022.
Mr. Yannick Glemarec
Deputy Executive Director
Green Climate Fund
G-Tower, 24-4 Songdo-dong, Yeonsu-gu
Incheon City, Republic of Korea
Subject: Funding proposal for the GCF by COFIDES regarding the program "Kuali Fund".
Dear Mr. Glemarec,
1.
We refer to the program titled "Kuali Fund" as included in the funding proposal submitted by
COFIDES to us on May 24th, 2022.
2.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Secretariat for International
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Economy, the National Designated Authority of Brazil.
3.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have reviewed,
we hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as included in the funding proposal.
4.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
a) The government of Brazil has no-objection to the programme as included in the funding
proposal;
b) The program as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with Brazil’s national
priorities, strategies and plans;
c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the programme as
included in the funding proposal is  in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
5.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the programme as
included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.
6.
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be implemented
within the scope of the programme.
7.
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF website.
No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 115 ===
25/07/22, 13:35
SEI/ME - 26279314 - Ofício
https://sei.economia.gov.br/sei/controlador.php?acao=documento_imprimir_web&acao_origem=arvore_visualizar&id_documento=29448369&infr…
2/2
 
Best regards,
 
Electronically signed document 
MARCO AURÉLIO DOS SANTOS ROCHA
Secretary for International Economic Affairs
National Designated Authority for Brazil
 
Documento assinado eletronicamente por Marco Aurélio dos Santos Rocha, Secretário(a) de
Assuntos Econômicos Internacionais, em 08/07/2022, às 20:18, conforme horário oficial de Brasília,
com fundamento no § 3º do art. 4º do Decreto nº 10.543, de 13 de novembro de 2020.
A autenticidade deste documento pode ser conferida no site
https://sei.economia.gov.br/sei/controlador_externo.php?
acao=documento_conferir&id_orgao_acesso_externo=0, informando o código verificador 26279314
e o código CRC 5E9DE175.
 
Esplanada dos Ministérios, Bloco K, 8º andar, sala 874 - Bairro Zona Cívico-Administrativa
CEP 70048-900 - Brasília/DF
(61) 2020-5644 - e-mail cgpin.sain.df@fazenda.gov.br - gov.br/economia
Processo nº 12120.100391/2022-06.
SEI nº 26279314

=== PAGE 116 ===
Dirección: Calle 26 # 13 – 19 Bogotá, D.C., Colombia       
 
www.dnp.gov.co 
Conmutador: 601 3815000   
 
 
 
 
 
Página 1 de 2 
Línea gratuita: PBX 381 5000       
 
Bogotá D.C., viernes, 07 de julio de 2023 
 
 
*20234500431861* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Al responder cite este Nro. 
DADS  
 
 
 
 
20234500431861 
 
 
 
To: The Green Climate Fund (“GCF”) 
Att. executive-office@gcfund.org  
 
 
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by Compañía Española de Financiación 
del Desarrollo (COFIDES) regarding Kuali Fund  
 
 
 
Dear Madam, Sir, 
 
We refer to the programme titled Kuali Fund in Colombia as included in the 
funding proposal submitted by COFIDES to us on June 17th 2022. 
 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of National Planning 
Department, the National Designated Authority of Colombia. 
 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we acknowledge to have 
reviewed, we hereby communicate our no-objection to the programme as 
included in the funding proposal. 
 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
 
(a) The government of Colombia has no-objection to the programme as 
included in the funding proposal; 
(b) The programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with 
the national priorities, strategies and plans of Colombia; 
(c) In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social safeguards, the 
programme as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with 
relevant national laws and regulations. 
 
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the 
programme as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed.

=== PAGE 117 ===
Dirección: Calle 26 # 13 – 19 Bogotá, D.C., Colombia       
 
www.dnp.gov.co 
Conmutador: 601 3815000   
 
 
 
 
 
Página 2 de 2 
Línea gratuita: PBX 381 5000       
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities to be 
implemented within the scope of the programme 
 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the GCF 
website. 
 
 
 
Kind regards, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAROLINA DIAZ GIRALDO 
Director of Environment and Sustainable Development  
National Planning Department 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CC: 
josecarlos.villena@cofides.es; 
nuria.rodriguez@cofides.es; 
marialuz.garcia@cofides.es; 
vvilloria@gcfund.org; clcortes@dnp.gov.co      
 
Preparó: Claudia Jimena Cortés Mora

=== PAGE 125 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
Yes  
Sector (public or private) 
Private 
Accredited entity 
Compañía Española de Financiación del Desarrollo 
(COFIDES), S.A., S.M.E 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category I-2 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
The target countries are Brazil, Colombia, El Salvador, 
Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, and Panama. 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Wednesday, January 31, 2024  
Language(s) of disclosure 
English, Spanish, and Portuguese 
Explanation on language 
These are the official languages of each of the target 
countries. 
 
Spanish is the official language of Colombia, El Salvador, 
Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, and Panama. 
 
Portuguese is the official language of Brazil.  
Link to disclosure 
English:  
https://www.cofides.es/sites/default/files/adjuntos/2024
-
01/Annex%206%20-%20Environmental%20and%20Socia
l%20Management%20System_Jan%202024_EN.pdf  
 
Spanish:

=== PAGE 126 ===
https://www.cofides.es/sites/default/files/adjuntos/2024
-
01/Annex%206%20-%20Environmental%20and%20Socia
l%20Management%20System_Jan%202024_ES.pdf  
 
Portuguese:  
https://www.cofides.es/sites/default/files/adjuntos/2024
-
01/Annex%206%20-%20Environmental%20and%20Socia
l%20Management%20System_Jan%202024_PT.pdf  
Other link(s) 
English: 
https://www.cofides.es/en/financing/kuali-fund/reports-
and-documents  
 
Spanish: 
https://www.cofides.es/financiacion/fondo-
kuali/informes-documentos   
Remarks 
An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I-
2 programme is contained in Annex 6 “Environmental and 
Social Management System”. 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
The “Environmental and Social Management System” 
(ESMS) includes the Indigenous People Policy Framework 
(IPPF) as Annex 6. bis. 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English, Spanish, and Portuguese 
Explanation on language 
These are the official languages of each of the target 
countries. 
 
Spanish is the official language of Colombia, El Salvador, 
Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, and Panama. 
 
Portuguese is the official language of Brazil.  
Link to disclosure 
English:  
https://www.cofides.es/sites/default/files/adjuntos/2024
-
01/Annex%206.bis-%20Indigenous%20People%20Policy
%20Framework_Jan%202024_EN.pdf  
 
Spanish:  
https://www.cofides.es/sites/default/files/adjuntos/2024
-
01/Annex%206.bis-%20Indigenous%20People%20Policy
%20Framework_Jan%202024_ES.pdf  
 
Portuguese:  
https://www.cofides.es/sites/default/files/adjuntos/2024
-
01/Annex%206.bis-%20Indigenous%20People%20Policy
%20Framework_Jan%202024_PT.pdf  
Other link(s) 
English:

=== PAGE 127 ===
https://www.cofides.es/en/financing/kuali-fund/reports-
and-documents 
  
Spanish: 
https://www.cofides.es/financiacion/fondo-
kuali/informes-documentos 
Remarks 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Thursday, February 1, 2024  
Place 
Brazil: Secretariat for International Affairs, Ministry of 
Finance. 
Esplanada dos Ministérios, Bloco P, 6° andar, Brasilia, Brazil. 
 
Mexico: Ministry of Finance and Public Credit, Unit of Public 
Credit and International Affairs. 
Av. Insurgentes Sur 1971, Plaza Inn, Torre III, Piso 3, Col. 
Guadalupe Inn, Alcaldía Álvaro Obregón, Ciudad de México, 
Mexico. 
 
Guatemala: 
Ministry 
of 
Environment 
and 
Natural 
Resources 
7 Avenue 06-67 zone 13, Guatemala City, Guatemala 
 
Panama: Ministry of Environment. 
Diego Dominguez Street, Building 804 Albrook, Ancón, 
Panama City, Panama. 
 
Colombia: National Planning Department. 
Calle 26 No. 13-19, Bogotá, D.C, Colombia 
 
El Salvador: Ministry of Environment and Natural 
Resources (MARN) 
Kilómetro 5 ½ Carretera a Santa Tecla, Col. Las Mercedes, 
Frente a Círculo Miliar, Edificios MARN, San Salvador, El 
Salvador. 
 
Honduras: Secretary of Energy, Natural Resources, 
Environment and Mines. 
Edificio Principal, 200 metros al Sur del Estadio nacional, 
Tegucigalpa, Honduras 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
N/A 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  
Monday, March 4, 2024  
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above. 
 
 
________

=== PAGE 128 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.10 
Page 128 
 
 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP230 
Proposal name: 
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Accredited entity: 
Compañia Española de Financiación del Desarrollo (COFIDES) 
Country/(ies): 
Brazil, Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, 
Panama 
Project/programme size: 
Medium 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Overview 
1. 
Latin America is highly vulnerable to climate change due to its exposure to acute climate 
events, chronic climate risks and limited adaptation and mitigation capacity.1 High exposure to 
climate events and limited adaptation and mitigation capacity make some countries especially 
vulnerable. Adaptation investments are insufficient partially due to increased public debt levels 
and a weak domestic revenue base.  
2. 
Agriculture is an important economic sector and source of employment in Latin 
America, especially in rural areas. The agriculture sector’s structure and scale vary significantly 
between countries in this region.2 Countries with an extensive agricultural industry sensitive to 
climate change are especially vulnerable. South American states have a significant agricultural 
sector, which has been hit hard, especially by severe droughts. Climate change damages farm 
assets such as livestock shelters, and farmers incur losses related to lower crop yields. 
Smallholder farmers are more affected and exposed to climate risks as they lack the instruments 
and know-how to increase their resilience. 
3. 
The region’s financial service providers (FSPs) are indirectly exposed to climate change 
since a significant proportion of the lending portfolio is in sectors exposed to climate risks, for 
example the agricultural sector.3 At the same time, FSPs are crucial for shifting investments 
towards increasing climate resilience and greenhouse gas (GHG) mitigation activities. 
4. 
Micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises constitute the majority of enterprises and 
generate around 60 per cent of formal productive employment in “the Americas”. The 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has identified that Latin 
American small and medium-sized companies have a higher productivity gap than their peers in 
other world regions.4 Like smallholder farmers, small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) 
have less ability than large companies to deal with the effects of climate change due to limited 
resources and know-how. 
5. 
The programme realizes investments and provides technical assistance (TA) in seven 
countries: Brazil, Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico and Panama. The 
 
1 European Investment Bank (EIB), 2023, Climate Risks for Latin America and the Caribbean. 
2 Inter-American Development Bank, 2021, Landscaping the Agritech Ecosystem for Smallholder Farmers in Latin 
America and the Caribbean. 
3 EIB, 2023, Climate Risks for Latin America and the Caribbean. 
4 OECD, 2019, Latin America and the Caribbean 2019: Policies for Competitive SMEs in the Pacific Alliance and 
Participating South American Countries.

=== PAGE 129 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.10 
Page 129 
 
 
 
 
programme (Kuali Fund) may also undertake activities in other countries of the region, as well 
as India, but this is outside the scope of the funded activities.5 The funded activity is thus named 
“Kuali Fund-GCF”. This assessment is therefore of the Kuali Fund-GCF. 
6. 
Kuali Fund-GCF shall increase the adoption of low-carbon technologies and improve the 
resilience to climate change of involved countries by supporting small financial service 
providers to green their portfolios and finance investments of smallholder farmers and SMEs in 
activities which increase climate resilience and reduce GHG emissions. The fund will also 
directly support companies which provide climate solutions with the aim of growing climate-
relevant products and services available to farmers, which could then in turn be financed 
through FSPs. 
7. 
Kuali Fund-GCF will fund an expected 13 FSPs to build a “climate portfolio”. More than 
90 per cent of the fund shall be used for this purpose, while the remaining part is to be used to 
invest in innovative companies, as indicated in the response to question 13 raised by the 
independent Technical Advisory Panel (TAP) to the accredited entity (AE). FSPs shall provide 
loans to SMEs (around 20 per cent of the total fund) and farmers (about 80 per cent of the fund). 
Loans to SMEs provided through FSPs are expected to be, on average, EUR 18,000 for a tenor of 
two years to finance assets or activities such as solar rooftop panels, high-efficiency heat pumps, 
insulation, low-carbon transport, energy-efficient machinery, etc. Loans to smallholder farmers 
given through FSPs are expected to average EUR 2,100 with a one-year tenor for supporting 
activities such as tree plantation, composting, farmland restoration, farm irrigation systems, etc. 
Debt investments in FSPs will usually have a maturity of two to three years and are renewable 
for the same amount of time. All debt investments of the Kuali Fund-GCF will be in local 
currency, with offsetting of foreign exchange risks through swaps. The fund has targeted returns 
from debt investments in FSPs of 4–7 per cent in euros after the cost of hedging. 
8. 
The primary purpose of this programme is to green small financial service providers. A 
successful implementation of this approach allows for a transformational change and an influx 
of private capital into climate investments. The progression of FSPs will be measured with the 
Green Index 3.0,6 a framework to assess the performance of FSPs in green-inclusive finance. 
FSPs shall grade their performance using this index over time due to the investments made by 
the Kuali Fund-GCF. FSPs will start to offer their clients financial and non-financial green 
products. The Kuali Fund-GCF allows FSPs a ramp-up period to build their climate portfolio with 
an initial loan to FSPs for two to three years and a second loan over the same period and 
intermediate monitoring of the climate portfolio. The Kuali Fund-GCF will require the FSPs to 
build 50 per cent of the climate portfolio by the end of the third year and 100 per cent by the 
end of the following three years.  
9. 
Kuali Fund-GCF will also invest around 10 per cent of its resources in agritechnology 
and climate technology companies with innovative solutions in mitigation (e.g. rural solar 
energy providers, biodigester manufacturer companies, electric vehicle charging networks) and 
in adaptation (e.g. farm-to-business mobility supply chains, smart farming), with an average 
ticket size of EUR 4 million using primarily equity or quasi-equity investments basically with a 
tenor of six years, on average. Two investments are expected for the Kuali Fund-GCF. The fund 
has target returns of 15–20 per cent per annum for equity investment projects in innovative 
companies. 
10. 
Around 50 per cent of investments are expected in adaptation and resilience-focused 
technologies and 50 per cent in mitigation technologies. 
 
5 No-objection letters were not received by the accredited entity for other targeted countries. The total Kuali Fund 
aims to achieve a volume of EUR 300 million working in 14 countries of Latin America and the Caribbean and in 
India.  
6 See: The Green Index: An innovative tool to assess green inclusive finance performance of FSPs | e-MFP

=== PAGE 130 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.10 
Page 130 
 
 
 
 
11. 
GAWA Capital Partners, a private limited liability firm specializing in impact investment 
management services, registered as an alternative investment fund manager and supervised by 
the Spanish Exchange Commission, will act as a fund and TA fund manager and is the executing 
entity (EE).7 GAWA Capital has 14 years of experience and EUR 220 million in assets under 
management across four funds investing in various Asian and Latin American and Asian 
countries in microfinance, SMEs and agriculture. The Kuali Fund-GCF will have an investment 
advisory committee comprised of large investors, but with a purely advisory role, and a 
strategic advisory group to make recommendations to the fund manager of a strictly advisory 
nature.  
12. 
The EUR 128.2 million project has a financing source of (i) EUR 25 million from the GCF 
as equity with a tenor of 10 years and an equity return of 3.9 per cent; (ii) A GCF grant of EUR 
7.8 million for TA and monitoring; (iii) EUR 1.26 million from the European Union as equity 
with the same conditions as GCF; (iv) EUR 17.6 million from the Spanish Agency for 
International Development Cooperation (AECID) as senior loans with a tenor of 10 years and a 
3.75 per cent cap; (v) EUR 1.8 million from the Kuali Fund, indirectly from AECID, as a 
subordinated loan with the same conditions as the AECID direct loan; (vi) EUR 1 million in 
senior equity from GAWA Capital; (vii) EUR 72.8 million in private investor senior equity at 10 
years with 6.5 per cent interest; (viii) EUR 0.57 million in grants from the European Union; and 
(ix) EUR 0.3 million in grants from AECID and EUR 0.04 million in grants from Kuali Fund, 
indirectly from AECID. The GCF and European Union contributions to the first-loss tranche (EUR 
26.26 million) will help mobilize private investors’ participation and reduce their perceived risk 
of the SME and smallholder farmer sectors. It is expected that Compañia Española de 
Financiación del Desarrollo (COFIDES) and GAWA Capital will invest in the programme to align 
their interests and perceived risks. 
1.2 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
 
  Scale: Medium 
13. 
The programme claims an adaptation impact of 242,000 direct and 642,000 indirect 
beneficiaries (0.28 per cent of the total population). The GHG mitigation impact is estimated at 
2.71 million tonnes of carbon dioxide (t CO2) over the lifespan of the technologies and 
investments. 
14. 
Direct beneficiaries are smallholder farmers and SMEs which receive a loan from FSPs. 
Indirect beneficiaries include the household members of the beneficiary. The calculation of 
beneficiaries is based on (i) the number of loans extended by FSPs to SMEs and farmers, 
assuming 100 per cent of loans are relevant to climate resilience; (ii) an average loan size per 
group, and (iii) an average tenor per group with a fund investment period of six years. 
Beneficiary numbers will be lower (higher) if the average loan size is higher (lower), the tenor is 
longer (shorter), and the share of climate-relevant loans is lower.  
15. 
Beneficiary numbers are considered to be overstated in the original funding proposal 
for the following reasons: (i) Investments in SMEs are for mitigation activities, such as 
insulation or solar hot water with no direct resilience impact. The beneficiary number 
calculated in this area is thus deemed incorrect. (ii) It is assumed that 100 per cent of loans are 
given for climate investments, while in the funding proposal (page 35), it is stated that the 
climate portfolio of FSPs will be 50 per cent by the end of year three and 100 per cent by the end 
of year six. Thus, on average, only 50 per cent of loans would be given with a direct climate 
impact. Therefore, beneficiary numbers of farmer-related loans need to be divided by two to 
account for the gradual portfolio build-up of climate investments.  
16. 
The mitigation benefit is calculated based on 50 per cent of the investment targeted 
towards mitigation and an estimated average cost per t CO2 avoided based on a calculation of 
 
7 Compañia Española de Financiación del Desarrollo (COFIDES) is also an EE with an amount of EUR 0.4 million.

=== PAGE 131 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.10 
Page 131 
 
 
 
 
total CO2 mitigated and total investments made. Calculations are based on typical investment 
projects, differentiating between types of projects and sectors (buildings/industrial, energy 
generation and access, transport, and forestry and land use) and between investments from 
FSPs to SMEs and from FSPs to farmers, as well as investments in climate technology 
companies. Approx. 83 per cent of mitigated CO2 is based on forestry and land-use change (50 
per cent from tree plantations, albeit having less than 5 per cent of investments), followed by 14 
per cent for buildings and industrial appliances, 2 per cent for energy generation and less than 1 
per cent for transport. Around 60 per cent of the calculated mitigation impact is due to 
investments in innovative firms, and 40 per cent is due to loans from FSPs. 
17. 
The mitigation benefit is considered to be overstated in the original funding proposal 
due to calculations being based on the total Kuali Fund, which has a different distribution of 
investments, with a higher share going to innovative firms with a higher GHG impact per 
invested capital compared to loans channelled through FSPs. The total Kuali Fund invests 24 per 
cent of the total fund in innovation companies, while the Kuali Fund-GCF invests less than 10 
per cent. The mitigation numbers of the Kuali Fund-GCF are lower than initially estimated based 
on a 10 per cent share of investments in the Kuali Fund-GCF 8 going to innovative firms and 90 
per cent being channelled through FSPs.  
18. 
The impact calculations for energy generation follow a standard methodological 
approach using the grid factor per country based on the methodology and dataset as published 
by the UNFCCC / International Financial Institutions. For buildings and energy generation, an 
assumption is made that 20 per cent (e.g. for insulation or industrial appliances) to 60 per cent 
(e.g. for light-emitting diodes (LEDs)) of electric energy can be saved. It also assumes a capacity 
factor of 10 hours per calendar day, or 40 per cent, which means, on average, double shifts. 
These assumptions are not deemed as conservative. However, the impact of these assumptions 
on the total projected GHG mitigation impact is minor, as the share of energy generation in the 
total mitigation impact is only 14 per cent. 
19. 
The impact calculations in the transport sector are overly optimistic and overstate 
emission reductions for this sector due to (i) usage of assumptions concerning efficiency 
improvements,9 which are very optimistic; (ii) baseline emissions of vehicles, which are very 
high and presumably correspond to old poorly maintained vehicles instead of comparing, as 
requested by GHG transport methodologies, a project alternative of a new vehicle with a 
baseline new vehicle; and (iii) assumption for electric vehicles of zero emissions instead of 
applying the grid factor per country and electricity usage. Using a more conservative approach, 
expected GHG reductions in this area are deemed to be 20–30 per cent of the amount suggested 
by the AE. However, the impact of these assumptions on the total projected GHG mitigation 
impact is marginal as the share of transport in the total mitigation impact is less than 1 per cent. 
20. 
The approach used to determine agricultural, forestry and land-use impacts is based on 
total hectares (has) financed using the GHG Protocol Agricultural Guidance and impacts per 
activity per ha based on the EX-ACT tool of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations (FAO). GHG reductions of 3–24 tonnes per ha of land are expected per annum, 
depending on activities. Other sources10 used by other GCF-financed or to-be-funded 
programmes estimate impacts for the same activities as ranging from 0.07 to 4.7 t CO2/ha. 
Project Drawdown GHG data, as one example, shows two tonnes per annum for bamboo 
cultivation, while the AE assumes 24 t CO2 per annum. For tree plantations, 24 tonnes per ha 
were considered, while other sources show 3.3 tonnes (see Tree Plantations (on Degraded 
Land) | Project Drawdown). The emission factors therefore do not seem to be on the 
 
8 The AE indicated in its written response to question 13 raised by the independent TAP that indicatively, EUR 7.5 
million out of EUR 119.5 million (i.e. 6.3 per cent) shall be invested in innovative companies. 
9 For example, 50 per cent of fuel savings using hybrid vehicles, while standard figures are in the order of 20–30 per 
cent. 
10 For example, https://www.jswconline.org/content/jswc/71/3/68A.full.pdf; see tables 2 and 3.

=== PAGE 132 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.10 
Page 132 
 
 
 
 
conservative side but are rather optimistic. The AE considers, in general, an impact period of 20 
years for agriculture, forestry and land use based on FAO EX-ACT guidelines. However, the 
investment period is one year for the average credits and six years for innovative companies. 
Various areas targeted, such as the usage of organic fertilizers, are reversible if no further loan 
is given, and others, such as terraces and rainwater reservoirs, require continuous maintenance. 
A more conservative approach also used by other GCF-funded projects is to assume the impact 
only over the invested period, that is a maximum of six years. 
21. 
Multiple agricultural investments, for example in forestry, have potential issues of 
permanence. This is not discussed nor accounted for in calculations. Therefore, mitigation 
numbers need to be taken with caution as they reflect, to a certain extent, avoided and 
sequestered emissions, which have the risk of not being permanent. 
22. 
Based on the above considerations, the independent TAP estimates a more realistic 
adaptation and mitigation benefit for this programme: 121,000 direct beneficiaries, 321,000 
indirect beneficiaries and a GHG mitigation impact of 0.95 million t CO2 avoided with the remark 
that the GHG mitigation impact is partially based on sequestered emissions with the risk of non-
permanence. 
23. 
The programme allows for some investment areas which can be considered to lock in 
fossil technologies, such as investments in fossil-efficient trucks or hybrid vehicles. 
Technologies have moved fast in this area, and investments in such vehicles have long 
permanence. Electric vehicles in trucking are also already cost-competitive in most markets. 
Climate investments should avoid continuing investments into outdated technologies to achieve 
a maximum climate impact and achieve the target countries’ decarbonization goals. 
24. 
Neither the EE, GAWA Capital, nor the fund management’s designated investment 
committee members have relevant experience in assessing climate impacts of climate 
investments or projects. This endangers the potential impact of the programme. GAWA Capital 
has, however, ensured the independent TAP that relevant expertise will be brought on board. As 
this is considered critical not only for the programme impact but overall, for programme 
success, independent TAP approval is conditional upon fulfilment of this point.  
25. 
The project interventions include investing in innovative companies and FSPs. While the 
former has higher immediate GHG mitigation impacts per invested euro, the latter interventions 
green the FSPs, presumably resulting in continued ongoing lending of FSPs in climate-friendly 
investments, thus multiplying the impact of the initial investment. The indirect implications of 
this thus favour investments in FSPs and not in innovative companies. 
26. 
The programme aims to green FSPs. Greening their lending practices has a potentially 
high multiplication impact, resulting in private capital flowing into this sector and multiple 
instances of follow-up lending by the greened FSPs. Thus, the medium and long-term indirect 
impact is considered high or very high.  
27. 
Appropriate monitoring of the achieved impact in terms of resilience and mitigation is 
critical to ensure that investments achieve their desired impact and realize corrections during 
programme implementation by avoiding investments with low impact and strengthening those 
with high impact. FSPs must also be provided with simple-to-manage monitoring tools to track 
the climate performance of their investments. 
28. 
Overall, the independent TAP considers the project to have a medium impact. The short-
term or direct impact is regarded as a medium. The long-term indirect impact is viewed as 
potentially high, conditional upon successfully integrating climate-relevant know-how into 
programme execution. 
1.3 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
               Scale: Medium-High

=== PAGE 133 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.10 
Page 133 
 
 
 
 
29. 
The Kuali Fund-GCF targets FSPs. The greening of FSPs and their shift towards financing 
investments with favourable climate impact is paramount for moving large amounts of capital 
from the private sector towards investments with an adaptation and/or mitigation impact. 
Small FSPs in Latin America have, at the moment, limited exposure to and experience with 
climate-related lending, and unlocking this potential is a crucial paradigm shift.  
30. 
The investee companies are intended to be financially sustainable enterprises that 
continue operating after project termination. Successful companies have the potential to attract 
additional investments, thus expanding their impact. Successful loans from FSPs and exits of the 
fund in innovative enterprises could provide an essential signal to private investors concerning 
the profitability and risk of investing in this area, thus supporting a paradigm shift. 
31. 
The Kuali Fund-GCF intends to transform small FSPs to adopt and implement green 
strategies. The status and progression of the FSPs will be measured with the Green Index 3.0. 
This is considered an appropriate approach to assess the progression of the FSPs in 
accommodating climate-related investments in their portfolio. The gradual build-up of the 
portfolio in the climate change arena is also considered proper, as FSPs are new to the topic. 
Together with grant-based TA, this incentivizes FSPs to make the required adjustments. The 
intermediate assessment of target achievement in year three provides the required pressure to 
stay on track. 
32. 
The paradigm shift is achieved through greening the loan portfolio of FSPs. The area of 
direct investment in companies which provide climate solutions is less transformational. Also, 
with only a few investments expected in this area (two currently planned investments), no 
critical mass is achieved, and no transformational impact can be predicted. Investments in 
individual enterprises can be justified to diversify risks and increase the fund’s profitability, 
which are both critical to attracting private investors. However, investments in this area should 
be limited to allow for a clear focus on FSPs.  
33. 
High-quality TA and capacity-building on climate lending will be crucial to achieving the 
target of greening FSPs. The TA strengthens the FSPs and is considered essential and 
acknowledged for attaining high climate impact and reducing risks to FSPs. GAWA Capital 
Partners and the fund management’s designated investment committee members have an 
excellent background and experience working with financial institutions and impact 
investments but lack the critical climate focus. This can and must be brought on board to ensure 
the transformational potential is achieved.  
34. 
Ecosystem issues and failures are also significant barriers to greening FSPs. The AE has 
not yet identified these at the country level. The TA includes an analysis of the ecosystem and 
activities to remove identified barriers. A further strengthening of this area and collaboration 
with other initiatives would result in a more substantial impact on the macro level, which is also 
considered critical to achieving a transformational impact. Knowledge-sharing with other FSPs 
and organizations in this space will be essential to entice other FSPs to engage in climate 
lending and spread out from investments in individual FSPs to the larger market (for example, 
160,000 fintech companies (finance and insurance area) are registered in Brazil alone).11   
35. 
Based on the above, the independent TAP considers the proposed investments in FSPs 
linked with TA to be critical to green the financial sector, which is crucial for the massive 
deployment of private capital towards climate-related investments. This will be a 
transformational change. However, the effort of this programme alone will be insufficient to 
achieve such change in all the targeted countries; nevertheless, it is a critical first step. Focusing 
on FSPs, collaborating with other institutions in the same sphere and good outreach with a high-
quality knowledge management system are essential to ensure and strengthen the 
transformational impact. The rating given is thus medium to high. 
 
11 Brazil: number of finance and insurance companies | Statista.

=== PAGE 134 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.10 
Page 134 
 
 
 
 
1.4 
Sustainable development potential  
    
             Scale: Medium 
36. 
The project is aligned with several Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): SDG 1 (No 
poverty), SDG 2 (Zero hunger), SDG 3 (Good health and well-being), SDG 5 (Gender equality), 
SDG 6 (Clean water and sanitation), SDG 7 (Affordable and clean energy), SDG 8 (Decent work 
and economic growth), SDG 11 (Sustainable cities and communities), SDG 13 (Climate action), 
and SDG 15 (Life on land). 
37. 
Environmental co-benefits are related to organic farming and reduced fertilizer use, 
reduced nitrogen and chemical run-off, efficient water usage, sustainable land use with less 
post-harvest loss, and reduced pressure on land. On the mitigation side, environmental co-
benefits are reduced energy usage, which can again translate into fewer pollutants. 
38. 
Economic benefits are achieved through investing in businesses with services that will 
improve the incomes of smallholder farmers and SMEs in the host countries. Farmers can 
improve their incomes through crop diversification, improved efficiency using fewer input 
materials, increased productivity and yields, and improved sales prices of agricultural products 
through enhanced quality of products and market information. SMEs and invested companies 
can improve their revenues and profits and position themselves with products and services 
with a high growth potential. 
39. 
Social benefits are realized through improving the livelihood of farmers by increasing 
crop productivity (through the adoption of climate-smart agriculture) and incomes, resulting in 
enhanced quality of life. The project also expects to create around 1,600 jobs over the life of the 
fund. 
40. 
The project seeks to invest in and support agribusinesses and SMEs through a gender 
lens. It also provides TA to the invested companies and FSPs to enhance their gender expertise.  
41. 
Overall, the project’s sustainable development potential is considered medium. It can 
make contributions in the area of gender and have positive social, economic and environmental 
impacts. 
1.5 
Needs of the recipient  
 
                          Scale: Medium-High 
42. 
The countries included are vulnerable to climate change, and many have a significant 
agricultural sector that is especially exposed to climate risks. FSPs are exposed to climate risks 
through lending, among other things, to the agricultural sector, which has high climate risks. 
Also, SMEs experience above-average exposure to climate risks due to their lack of adaptive 
capacity. 
43. 
Many countries involved have significant and persistent fiscal deficits, which have led to 
public debt accumulation, crowding out private sector borrowing, and posing macroeconomic 
risks. Limited access to credit results in low levels of private investment. High-level government 
borrowing from the financial sector crowds out private sector financing and has kept the 
financial system from extending finance to riskier and vulnerable sectors like agriculture or 
SMEs. It also limits government financing in the area of adaptation to climate risks.  
44. 
The independent TAP considers the recipient’s need medium to high.  
1.6 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
    Scale: Low-medium  
45. 
The programme is consistent with the nationally determined contributions (NDCs) of 
the involved countries, which is unsurprising in itself as the programme intends to cover two 
large sectors of the economy (agriculture and SMEs), adaptation and mitigation, and a broad 
range of technologies. These technologies, as well as the sectors, are included in the NDCs.

=== PAGE 135 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.10 
Page 135 
 
 
 
 
However, the funding proposal submitted does not show if the NDCs or country policies and 
strategies specifically include FSPs for achieving climate targets.   
46. 
The no-objection letters (NOLs) of the seven countries included (Brazil, Colombia, El 
Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico and Panama) have been provided. The programme is 
designed for 14 countries in Latin America, the Caribbean and India, but it has not (yet) received 
an NOL from the other 8 countries. 
47. 
The project did not undergo formal stakeholder engagement. The formal stakeholder 
engagement strategy shall be realized once the programme is operational. This is also related to 
the fact that the FSPs have not yet been selected, and the direct beneficiaries have not yet been 
determined. This is acknowledged, and the funding proposal has a procedure which includes 
formal stakeholder engagement at a later stage. However, it would have been helpful to engage 
multiple FSPs, and not only the ones already working with the AE and the EE before or during 
programme formulation to better understand their needs, constraints and possible support for 
such a programme. This is also critical to ensure replication of efforts and to create a knowledge 
management platform that is useful to the invested FSPs and others. 
48. 
The independent TAP therefore assesses country ownership as low to medium.  
1.7 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
                         Scale: Medium 
49. 
Kuali Fund-GCF has a blended finance structure. The European Union and GCF 
contributions to the first-loss tranche (EUR 1.26 million from the European Union and EUR 25 
million from the GCF) are essential given the risk perspectives of investors and enable the influx 
of private capital to the agriculture and SME sectors. The AE intends to establish a EUR 119.5 
million returnable fund with a 10–12-year duration. 
50. 
The European Union (EUR 1.26 million in equity and EUR 0.57 million in grants) and 
AECID (EUR 17.6 million in loans, EUR 1.8 million indirectly through Kuali Fund-GCF and EUR 
0.3 million in grants) commitments have been approved, and legal drafting is being finalized. 
COFIDES is expected to invest EUR 5 million from its balance sheet and GAWA Capital is 
expected to invest EUR 1 million as equity. The targeted private funding is EUR 72.8 million 
from private investors, including from COFIDES as equity. Current investors in the Huruma 
Fund managed by GAWA Capital have expressed interest in investing, including large 
institutional investors from Europe and the United States of America and several prominent 
family offices. Considering the challenging market conditions and high interest rates, the target 
for the overall Kuali Fund-GCF of reaching private investment of EUR 213 million might not be 
achieved. In that case, the total fund would be smaller than expected. To ensure that private 
capital is not spread out over the entire Kuali Fund-GCF, leaving the GCF with a higher share of 
equity than envisaged, the GCF disbursements should be tied to achieving the private sector 
capital inflow targets.  
51. 
The AE requests EUR 25 million in equity capital from GCF with a 3.9 per cent equity 
return. This vehicle, and GCF’s anchoring investment, should enable the fund to raise EUR 17.6 
million in senior loans, capped at 3.75 per cent from AECID, EUR 1.8 million in subordinated 
loans from Kuali Fund-GCF (indirectly from AECID), EUR 1 million in equity from GAWA Capital 
and EUR 72.8 million as equity from private investors with a 6.5 per cent equity return. GCF 
participation is considered material to provide de-risking in attracting additional capital. Thus, 
the GCF equity investment could be leveraged by nearly factor 4, a high leverage factor. At the 
moment, it is, of course, not yet guaranteed if the programme will achieve its private investment 
target. A staged or tranched investment of the GCF with clear achievement targets of private 
sector financing is required to ensure that the leverage ratio is not significantly lower than 
expected.

=== PAGE 136 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.10 
Page 136 
 
 
 
 
52. 
The fund expects to raise EUR 8.7 million in grant finance for the TA fund and data 
collection, EUR 7.8 million from GCF and EUR 0.9 million from the European Union and AECID. 
GCF grants could thus be leveraged with a low rate of 0.1. 
53. 
The total investment amount is EUR 128.2 million, of which EUR 32.8 million is from 
GCF, with an expected co-financing ratio of 74 per cent and a leverage factor of 2.9. This is a high 
leverage ratio and a high co-finance ratio. The positive aspect of co-finance is that the large 
majority is actual private capital and does not come from multilateral development banks or 
government/semi-government financial entities. GAWA Capital has experience and a proven 
track record with their previous Huruma Fund in attracting private capital, which shall also be 
used for this programme.   
54. 
Kuali Fund – GCF is a for-profit fund. This can potentially increase the impact, 
replicability and sustainability and bring efficiency and effectiveness to investment decisions. 
55. 
Based on 50 per cent of the finance used for adaptation and the updated number of 
beneficiaries, the GCF cost per direct beneficiary is EUR 136. Based on 50 per cent of the 
mitigation finance and the updated GHG mitigation income, the GCF cost per t CO2 avoided is 
EUR 17. Both figures are considered reasonable and have a good cost-benefit relationship.  
56. 
The fund and TA fund manager, GAWA Capital, is a private limited liability firm 
specializing in impact investment management services with considerable experience in fund 
management and the agricultural and SME sectors working through FSPs. GAWA Capital has 
performed in multiple countries in Latin America. The targeted investments in FSPs are 
essentially existing clients from a previous and ongoing GAWA Capital fund (Huruma Fund). 
Neither the fund manager nor the four designated members of the investment committee have 
relevant climate or climate finance experience. GAWA  Capital has, however, committed to 
bringing a senior climate expert on board. 
57. 
The overall independent TAP assessment concerning efficiency and effectiveness is 
considered medium. The co-finance ratio, if achieved, is high. To achieve this level, safeguards 
must be implemented to prevent the GCF from funding the programme with a higher share than 
anticipated. The involvement of GAWA Capital and COFIDES is also deemed essential to ensure 
the alignment of interests. The inflow of private finance into the fund is considered very 
favourable. The cost per direct beneficiary and tonne of CO2 mitigated are relatively low but are, 
as with any programme, dependent on the final projects financed.  
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
58. 
The independent TAP considers the funding proposal to be in line with the GCF’s 
strategic targets. The independent TAP notes that the programme aims to invest in FSPs in the 
agriculture and SME sectors, which are considerably affected by climate change and face serious 
climate risks. Greening financial service providers is critical to achieving a large-scale 
deployment of private capital towards climate investments. Greening the portfolio of small FSPs 
is paramount to completing a transformational impact and moving investments from one-time 
projects towards structural changes in the financial system. GAWA Capital, as an EE, has 
experience attracting private capital and working with FSPs and, indirectly, smallholder 
farmers. Investments are expected to happen in the field of adaptation and mitigation. This 
novel programme approach, the financial experience background of the managing entity, the 
significant impact and especially the transformational nature of this programme proposal 
warrant approval. 
59. 
The independent TAP also recognizes some significant deficiencies in the funding 
proposal, including (i) the current lack of climate experience in the management team; (ii) the 
deficient and non-conservative calculations regarding GHG impact and the number of 
beneficiaries; (iii) incomplete documentation within the funding proposal; and (iv) the risk of

=== PAGE 137 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.10 
Page 137 
 
 
 
 
losing focus and spreading out scarce capacities by investing in geographical areas outside Latin 
America and the Caribbean and by focusing too many efforts on investment companies.  
60. 
Nevertheless, the independent TAP ultimately decided to provide an endorsement with 
conditions (see para. 61 below). Factors which tip the scale for endorsement of this funding 
proposal are (i) the relevance of the programme itself and its innovative nature; (ii) the 
experience of the managing entity with FSPs, SMEs and the agricultural sector in target 
countries; (iii) the limited size of the funding request with a high leverage ratio; and (iv) the 
amount of design that has already taken place. We think it is imperative to provide a path 
forward and consider that the weak points identified can be amended with the conditions listed 
below. 
61. 
Therefore, the independent TAP endorses this funding proposal subject to the following 
conditions: 
(a) 
Condition to be met prior to the effectiveness of the funded activity agreement 
(FAA): Delivery by the Accredited Entity to the GCF, in a form and substance satisfactory 
to the GCF Secretariat, of the disbursement schedule under the FAA for the GCF 
Reimbursable Funds and the GCF Non-Reimbursable Funds, with the amount and 
schedule for each disbursement tied to milestones in securing private capital for the 
Kuali Fund-GCF, such disbursement schedule to set out the breakdown in terms of 
amount per disbursement and the equity/grant split as agreed between the Accredited 
Entity and the GCF Secretariat (the “Disbursement Schedule”).   
(b) 
Condition to be met prior to the effectiveness of the FAA: Delivery by the Accredited 
Entity to the GCF, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, that GAWA 
has contracted a senior climate expert (acceptable to the GCF Secretariat) with 
specialisation, preferably in adaptation and agriculture and experience in Latin America, 
whose role is to provide approval authority on the climate validity of Kuali Fund-GCF 
investments (the “Senior Climate Expert”).   
(c) 
Condition to be met prior to the effectiveness of the FAA: Delivery by the Accredited 
Entity to the GCF, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, of 
evidence that GAWA has subscribed for shares in the Kuali Fund-GCF in an amount of 
not less than EUR 1 million.  
(d) 
Condition to be met prior to the effectiveness of the FAA: Delivery by the Accredited 
Entity to the GCF, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, of 
evidence that the Accredited Entity has subscribed for shares in the Kuali Fund-GCF in 
an amount of not less than EUR 1 million. 
(e) 
Condition to be met prior to each disbursement under the FAA: Unless otherwise 
agreed by the GCF Secretariat, delivery by the Accredited Entity to the GCF, in a form 
and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, of evidence that the amounts 
requested by the Accredited Entity in the Request for Disbursement are consistent with 
the Disbursement Schedule. 
(f) 
Condition to be met prior to the first disbursement under the FAA: Delivery by the 
Accredited Entity to the GCF, in form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat, 
of a stakeholder review report, setting out the outcome of a formal stakeholder review 
conducted by the Accredited Entity, such review to include, at minimum, FSP providers 
of the different Host Countries, government entities (at minimum from the agricultural, 
industry, environmental and finance ministries), SME and farmers associations. 
(g) 
Covenant to be included in the FAA: The Accredited Entity shall ensure that the GCF 
proceeds and the Co-financing are used exclusively in the Host Countries. 
(h) 
Covenant to be included in the FAA: The Accredited Entity shall ensure that the Kuali 
Fund-GCF (i) invests at least 80% of its capital into FSPs; and (ii) invests no more than

=== PAGE 138 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.10 
Page 138 
 
 
 
 
20% of its capital in innovative companies. For the avoidance of doubt, the “capital” of 
the Kuali Fund-GCF means the aggregate of the commitments of the Class E Shares and 
the relevant Co-financing. 
(i) 
Covenant to be included in the FAA: The Accredited Entity shall ensure that the Kuali 
Fund-GCF ensures that (i) each FSP builds a balanced investment portfolio in adaptation 
and mitigation; and (ii) if an FSP’s combined adaptation and mitigation investments fall 
below 30% or the ramp up period target as set by Kuali Fund for that FSP, whichever is 
higher, of total invested monies by the Kuali Fund-GCF in that FSP, no further 
disbursements are made by the Kuali Fund-GCF to that FSP until that FSP meets  the 
threshold of 30%. The threshold value is set at the level of the FSP's aggregate portfolio. 
(j) 
Covenant to be included in the FAA: The Accredited Entity shall ensure that the Kuali 
Fund-GCF does not invest more than 30% of its capital into any single country. 
(k) 
Covenant to be included in the FAA: The Accredited Entity shall ensure that the Kuali 
Fund-GCF does not invest in fossil fuel vehicles, including, without limitation, any 
investment in hybrid, plug-in hybrid, or “efficient” fossil vehicles, even if operated with 
biofuels (including gaseous as well as liquid fossil fuels). 
(l) 
Covenant to be included in the FAA: The Accredited Entity shall ensure that (i) a 
Senior Climate Expert is engaged by GAWA/Kuali Fund-GCF at all times; and (ii) the 
Senior Climate Expert is a member of the Kuali Fund-GCF’s investment committee with 
the same decision rights as other investment committee members.

=== PAGE 139 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.10 
Page 139 
 
 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP230) 
Proposal name: 
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Accredited entity: 
Compañia Española de Financiación del Desarrollo (COFIDES) 
Country/(ies): 
Mexico, Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Panama, Colombia, 
and Brazil 
Project/Programme size: 
Medium 
 
Impact potential 
1. Realistic Adaptation and Mitigation Benefits: 
 
ITAP suggestion of a more conservative approach for impact calculations due to potential risk 
of overestimation it is acknowledged and accepted. An important upside to the committed 
targets will remain a potential scenario as some current and recommended assumptions might 
change in the future.  (More than avg. 50% climate portfolios, relevant number of IC clients and 
suppliers as beneficiaries, etc.) 
 
Besides, the highlighted importance of monitoring for achieving impact in terms of resilience 
and mitigation it is shared by the AE and the EE. Technical Assistance resources will play a key 
role on catalysing and ensuring the equipment of FSP with the proper tools.  
 
Paradigm shift potential 
The Fund manager, GAWA Capital, has committed to hiring a climate expert to complement 
their sound expertise and background in the financial inclusion sector and impact investment 
with the required climate expertise.  
The intermediate three-year assessment is directly linked to the agreed requirement for FSPs 
to build 50% of their climate portfolio by the end of year three. Moreover, GAWA Capital has 
extensive experience in working with FSPs. In the case of Kuali GCF, the covenants will be 
defined to ensure that FSPs’ interests are aligned with those of Kuali GCF’s.  
Following the previous experience with Huruma Fund (www.fondohuruma.com), Kuali GCF is 
committed to knowledge sharing. Furthermore, part of the TA resources will be dedicated to 
identifying specific barriers at country level, although GAWA Capital has already a sound field-
knowledge of nearly all the countries where Kuali GCF is going to be deployed.  
 
Sustainable development potential 
No Comments

=== PAGE 140 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.10 
Page 140 
 
 
 
Needs of the recipient 
One of the key outcomes of COP28 was the need to promote a joint effort by governments, 
international financial institutions and the private sector to align financial flows with global 
climate goals. 
As a result of growing adaptation finance needs and stagnating flows, the current adaptation 
finance gap is estimated at US$194-366 billion per year1. Simultaneously, adaptation planning 
and implementation appears to have stagnated. This has severe consequences, especially for 
the most vulnerable. 
Kuali will help mobilise private capital to finance the climate transition. In particular, it will 
support the adaptation of MSMEs and smallholder farmers by helping FSPs to transform 
themselves to be able to offer adapted products and solutions. 
 
Country ownership 
As the ITAP itself stated Kuali Fund is alligned with the nationally determined contributions 
(NDCs) of the host countries.  
AE consideres that the Country Ownership is higher than the level assesed by the ITAP for the 
following reasons: 
• 
Kuali will focus on SMEs and it will support agriculture sector, specially on adaptation, 
as well as mitigation with a comprehensive range of technologies. These technologies, 
as well as the sectors, are included in the NDCs.  
• 
In order to obtain the Non Objection Letters, the proposal was not only assessed by the 
NDA, but also underwent a validation process involving various ministries and 
institutions in all the countries concerned.  
• 
Host countries have assessed the proposal in relation to their NDCs and policies, and 
have found Kuali's strategy for achieving climate objectives (i.e. support for the FSP) to 
be relevant and in line with their climate strategy. 
• 
As ITAP acknowledges, Kuali has established a process that includes formal 
stakeholder engagement once implementation has begun. Knowledge sharing is part of 
Kuali's value added, as explained above, and technical assistance and capacity building 
on climate finance will be the tools to achieve this. 
 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
GAWA Capital and COFIDES have a long track record of working in similar blended finance 
structures where alignment of interests is a critical condition.  
The participation of AE and EE is granted because of their fiduciary duties, responsibilities, and 
economic interests. 
The funding request is small and the leverage ratio is high.  
 
 
1 Adaptation Gap Report 2023. UNEP

=== PAGE 141 ===
GCF/B.38/02/Add.10 
Page 141 
 
 
 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
AE Comments on the deficits in the funding proposal highlighted by the ITAP 
(i) 
the current lack of climate experience in the management team;  
As mentioned above, the Fund manager has committed to hiring a senior climate expert to 
complement the management team with the required climate expertise. 
(ii) 
the deficient and non-conservative calculations regarding GHG impact and the number of 
beneficiaries;  
ITAP suggestion of a more conservative approach for impact calculations due to potential 
risk of overestimation it is acknowledged and accepted.  
(iii) 
incomplete documentation within the funding proposal;  
Full package (with agreed term sheet) has been provided to GCF and it has been reviewed 
and cleared by the Secretariat.  
(iv) 
the risk of losing focus and spreading out scarce capacities by investing in geographical areas 
outside Latin America and the Caribbean and by focusing too many efforts on investment 
companies.  
We consider this risk to be fully mitigated as the Kuali Fund-GCF will invest exclusively in 
Latin America.  
Alignment of interests is ensured by the minimum co-financing rate negotiated for the 
investment of GCF funds, which gives the fund manager a clear incentive to invest in 
countries eligible for GCF commitments. 
The experience, track record and capacity of both AE and EE in financing these activities in 
the region should also be highlighted.  
Conditions requested by ITAP has been accepted.

=== PAGE 142 ===
1 
GCF GENDER ASSESSMENT & ACTION PLAN – KUALI FUND-GCF 
1. GENDER ASSESSMENT
1.1. Introduction 
This Gender Assessment and the resulting Gender Action Plan has been prepared following the “Gender 
Analysis/Assessment and Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan Templates” 1 and the guiding questions listed 
therein. The Kuali Fund-GCF gender analysis/assessment is built on quantitative data and qualitative evidence 
derived from a desk review of existing literature and secondary databases, introduced as in body and footnote 
citations on this document. 
The Kuali Fund-GCF objective is to promote the transformation of the Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) financial 
sector into a more inclusive and greener industry by fostering systemic adoption of climate best practices by smaller 
financial institutions, including Microfinance Institutions, Cooperatives or other Non-Bank Financial Institutions and 
companies with innovative climate solutions (Innovative companies)2 so that they start serving green lending products 
to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) and smallholder farmers in participating countries (Brazil, Colombia, 
El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Panama,). 
There is ample literature about gender issues in MSMEs and smallholder farmers in some of the target countries and in 
LAC as a whole. Consequently, the gender assessment is divided in two main chapters. Chapter 1.2 focuses on a general 
overview of gender issues regarding MSMEs and smallholder farmers in Latin America and Chapter 1.3 provides a 
gender analysis/assessment for the specific target countries with an emphasis on national gender strategies/policies 
and gender issues in specific areas like entrepreneurship and agriculture.  
The Kuali Fund-GCF gender targets are considered to be ambitious and of significant contribution. These targets have 
been defined in general terms, not for each country in specific. Nonetheless, the targets have been structured according 
to GAWA Capital’s current investments including most of the countries of this multi-country proposal. 
1 Accessible online under: https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/gender-assessment-and-action-plan-annex-8-funding-proposals  
2 Companies that already offer products/services related with mitigation and adaptation, including “Agri-tech” and “Climate-tech”. 
Gender documentation for FP230

=== PAGE 143 ===
2 
 
1.2. Country Analysis 
1.2.1. General overview of LAC region 
A general overview of the target countries regarding gender dynamics can be provided by the Gender 
Development Index (GDI)3, the Gender Inequality Index (GII)4 of the United Nations and the Global Gender Gap 
Ranking5 of the World Economic Forum. 
 
Country 
Gender 
Development 
Index (GDI) 
Group 
Rank6 
Gender 
Inequality Index 
(GII) 
Rank 
Global Gender 
Gap7 
Rank 
Brazil 
0,993 
1 
0,408 
95 
0.695 
93 
Colombia 
0,989 
1 
0,428 
101 
0.725 
59 
El Salvador 
0,975 
2 
0,383 
85 
0,738 
43 
Guatemala 
0,941 
3 
0,479 
119 
0,655 
122 
Honduras 
0,978 
1 
0,423 
100 
0,716 
67 
Mexico 
0,960 
2 
0,322 
71 
0.757 
12 
Panamá 
1,019 
1 
0,407 
94 
0.737 
46 
 
Looking at GDI, disparities in development between men and women are more pronounced in Guatemala which 
belongs to group 3 that comprises countries with medium equality in HDI with absolute deviation of 5–7.5 percent. 
Then, El Salvador and México belong to group 2 which comprises countries with medium to high equality in HDI 
achievements between women and men (absolute deviation of 2.5–5 percent). The rest of target countries have 
high equality in HDI achievements between women and men (absolute deviation of less than 2.5 percent). 
Regarding the GII which reflects inequality in achievement between women and men in three dimensions: 
reproductive health, empowerment and the labor market, all target countries range between the 62-119 positions 
 
 
3 The GDI measures gender gaps in human development achievements by accounting for disparities between women and men in three basic dimensions of 
human development—health, knowledge and living standards using the same component indicators as in the HDI. The GDI is the ratio of the HDIs 
calculated separately for females and males using the same methodology as in the HDI. It is a direct measure of gender gap showing the female HDI as a 
percentage of the male HDI. 
4 The GII is an inequality index. It measures gender inequalities in three important aspects of human development—reproductive health, measured by 
maternal mortality ratio and adolescent birth rates; empowerment, measured by proportion of parliamentary seats occupied by females and proportion of 
adult females and males aged 25 years and older with at least some secondary education; and economic status, expressed as labour market participation 
and measured by labour force participation rate of female and male populations aged 15 years and older. The GII is built on the same framework as the 
IHDI—to better expose differences in the distribution of achievements between women and men. It measures the human development costs of gender 
inequality. Thus, the higher the GII value the more disparities between females and males and the more loss to human development. See Technical note 4 
at http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/hdr2020_technical_notes.pdf for details on how the Gender Inequality Index is calculated. 
5 The index benchmarks national gender gaps on economic, education, health, and political criteria (see Figure 1), and provides country rankings that allow 
for effective comparisons across regions and income groups 
6 Countries are divided into five groups by absolute deviation from gender parity in HDI values. 
7 World Economic Forum. Global Gender Gap Report. 2021

=== PAGE 144 ===
3 
 
out of a total of 189 countries. Guatemala shows the biggest level of inequality. Mexico shows the lowest level of 
inequality.  
The Global Gender Gap of the World Economic Forum (WEF) benchmarks national gender gaps on economic, 
education, health and political criteria, and provides country rankings that allow for effective comparisons across 
regions. Western Europe is once again the region where the gender gap is smallest (77,6%), placing it ahead of North 
America, which has closed 76,4% of its gap, Latin America and the Caribbean (72,1%), and Eastern Europe and Central 
Asia (71,2%). The East Asia and the Pacific region (68,8%) is just ahead of Sub-Saharan Africa (67,6%), while South Asia 
has closed 62,7% of its gap and is ahead of the Middle East and North Africa, the region with the lowest performance 
(61,6%) 
Looking at the four subindexes, regional performance is well positioned in terms of Health and Survival (97,6%) and 
gender parity in Educational Attainment (99,7%). Regional performances on the Economic Participation and 
Opportunity subindex  (64,2%), however, vary within a wider range. Political empowerment gaps (27,1%) are also large 
in many countries of the region.  
All target countries in LAC region have ratified the CEDAW, Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
against Women as well as the “Convention of Belem do para” Interamerican Convention on the Prevention, punishment 
and eradication of  violence, except Colombia which is adhered to this last one. In relation to ILO Conventions, all 
countries have ratified Core Conventions 100 on equal remuneration for work of equal value and 111 on discrimination 
(employment and occupation). Regarding maternity protection, two countries (El Salvador and Panamá8) have ratified 
number 183 which is the most advanced in rights and protection for women and two countries have ratified number 
103 (Brazil and Guatemala). Two countries have ratified Convention 156 on workers with family responsibilities (El 
Salvador, Guatemala). Finally, two countries have ratified Convention 190 on violence and harassment at work (México 
and Panama9) 
1.2.2. Specific Gender Analysis by country 
1.2.2.1. Brazil 
From a strictly legal standpoint, men and women are fully equal in Brazil. The Citizens' Constitution of 1988 declared 
women equal to men in all legal respects, explicitly stating in Article 5 of Title II that "men and women have equal rights 
and duties under the terms of this Constitution." Women, Business and Law Index scores 85, with legal constraints 
found in the areas of workplace (law does not mandate equal remuneration for work of equal value) and assets (law 
does not prohibit discrimination in access to credit based on gender)10. Besides, 91.7% of legal frameworks that 
promote, enforce and monitor gender equality, with a focus on violence against women, are in place according to UN 
Women. 
The Ministry of Women, Family and Human Rights (MMFDH) has the purpose to implement, promote, and protect 
human rights, civic rights, and the rights of children, adolescents, women, families, the elderly, and the disabled. 
The OECD Development Centre’s Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI) 11 which measures discrimination against 
women in social institutions taking into account laws, social norms and practices that restrict women’s access to 
 
 
8 For El Salvador and Panama the Convention will enter into force in 2023 m 
9 For Mexico, Peru and Panama the Convention will enter into force in 2023 
10 World Bank. Women, business and the law. 2023 
11 https://www.oecd.org/stories/gender/social-norms-and-gender-discrimination/sigi/dashboard

=== PAGE 145 ===
4 
 
resources and empowerment opportunities, scores 21,612. 19% of population think that a man should have more right 
to a job than a woman and 22% that men makes better business executives. 
The road to equality is still a long one for women and even more difficult if the woman involved is black, brown, or 
mixed race and lives outside of the urban centres in the South and Southeast Regions. 
The following table shows some basic gender data about Brazil: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Brazil is fairly egalitarian when it comes to providing education and health rights for men and women but continues to 
have large gender gaps within the workforce and government representation. Gender gap in management positions 
and in top management is 26% and 19% respectively.  
Some representative indicators show for example that the proportion of women aged 20-24 years old who were 
married or in union before age 18 is 26.2%. Also, the adolescent birth rate is 58.6 per 1000 population as of 2016.  
UN Women also states that in Brazil, only 43.8% of indicators needed to monitor the SDGs from a gender perspective 
are available, with gaps in key areas such as violence against women. In addition, many areas such as gender and 
poverty, women’s access to assets including land, physical and sexual harassment, and gender and the environment 
currently lack comparable methodologies for comprehensive and periodic monitoring. 
Data regarding entrepreneurship, access to finance, digitalisation, and agriculture, show gender inequalities exist:  
 
Account at a financial institution 
M.: 73%, F.: 68% (WB) 
Saved to start, operate, expand a business or farm 
M.: 16%, F.: 10% (WB) 
Saved at a financial institution 
M.: 19%, F.: 10% (WB) 
Borrowed from a financial institution 
M.: 10%, F.: 7% (WB) 
Borrowed from family or friends 
M.: 16%, F.: 11% (WB) 
 
 
12 0= no discrimination. 100= absolute discrimination 
Maternal mortality (deaths per 100,000 live births) 
60 (WEF) 
Life Expectancy (years) 
F: 67.4 ; M: 67.3 (WEF) 
Adult Literacy Rate  (%) 
F: 93.4 ; M: 93 (WEF)  
Labor force participation rate (%) 
F: 61.9 ; M: 80.2 (WEF) 
Share of women membership in boards (%) 
16,9 (WEF) 
Unemployment adults (%) 
F: 14.39; M: 10.44 (WEF) 
Employment in agriculture (%) 
F: 4; M: 13 (WB) 
Employment in service (%) 
F: 85 ; M: 59 (WB) 
Women in parliament (%) 
15.2 (WEF) 
Prevalence of gender violence in lifetime (%) 
33.5 (WEF) 
Time spent on unpaid domestic and care work (%) 
F: 18.2; M: 5.3 (UN CEPAL)

=== PAGE 146 ===
5 
 
Received payments for agricultural products 
M.: 5%, F.: 2% (WB) 
Received payments from self-employment 
M.: 18%, F.: 13% (WB) 
Made or received digital payments 
M.: 59%, F.: 57% (WB) 
 
Regarding the program specific areas of intervention, Brazil has 16 million MSMEs, being the largest contributor in the 
region to total enterprises13.  MSMEs form an essential part of the Brazilian economy, accounting for 98.5% of all legally 
constituted companies, for 27% of GDP, and for 41% of the total payroll14. Out of 49 economies, Brazil rank 8 in Total 
Early-stage Entrepreneur Activity (TEA), 7 in Established Business Ownership (EBO) and 5 in informal investment. There 
is a significant gender gap in both TEA (23% male: 17.2% female) and EBO (14.2% male: 6.8% female)15 
Despite their importance to economic growth, MSMEs and smallholder farmers suffer more from credit constraints 
than larger companies, since they usually have less collateral to secure a loan and are more likely to default than large 
companies. This situation is often exacerbated by the lack of financial planning and training of the manager. 
Women account for 31% of the total entrepreneurial population in Brazil, but for 47% of individual micro-entrepreneurs 
(MEI), suggesting that women-owned businesses are on average smaller than men-owned businesses. Other studies 
also confirm that Brazilian businesses owned by women are less growth-oriented, export-oriented, innovative and 
profitable than those owned by men16.  It has been estimated that if women were to start growth-oriented businesses 
at the same rate as men, 5.8 million more jobs would be created in two years17  
In terms of policies, there is a common perception in Brazil that special programmes for women entrepreneurs are not 
needed since all programmes are open to everyone. However, a lack of explicit exclusion is often not enough to build a 
culture of full inclusion in which women enjoy the same opportunities as men. This is also true for other 
underrepresented groups in the entrepreneurial population, such as Afro-Brazilians, migrants, and refugees. 
The finance gap in LAC is the second largest after East Asia region, mainly driven by Brazil ($0.6 trillion). This large 
financial gap is especially relevant for women, around 45 percent of women-owned SMEs identify access to finance as 
a major constraint in operating and growing their businesses18.  
According to OECD SIGI, regarding access to productive and financial resources, Brazil scores 16.219, better than other 
target countries of the Fund such as El Salvador (22.1) and Colombia (33.7). According to an OECD study20, in Brazil, the 
gender gap in financial knowledge, one of the main barriers for inclusion, is 8 points, similar to financial behaviour, 
understood as budgetting, setting goals, choosing financial products and using independent advice, where the gap is 7 
points. Meanwhile, there is also a relevant difference in financial attitudes in favour of women, with 52% showing 
positive attitudes towards the longer term compared with 49% of men. In terms of formal education, Brazil has 
experiences of interest in the framework of the national financial education strategies21. 
 
 
13 WB, IFC, SME Finance Forum (2017). MSME Finance Gap 
14 OECD (2020), Financing SMEs and Entrepreneurs 2020: An OECD Scoreboard, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/061fe03d-en  
15 GEM (Global Entrepreneurship Monitor) (2023). 2022/2023 Global Report. Adapting to a “New Normal”. London: GEM. 
16 Kelley, D. , B. Baumer, C. Brush, P. Greene, M. Mahdav, M. Majbouri, M. Cole, M. Dean, R. Heavlow (2017), Global Entrepreneurship Monitor Women’s 
Entrepreneurship 2016/2017 Report, Babson College, Smith College, and the Global Entrepreneurship Research Association (GERA), 
https://www.gemconsortium.org/report.  
17 Aidis, R., J. Weeks and K. Anacker (2015). The Global Women Entrepreneur Leaders Scorecard 2015: From Awareness to Action Report, ACG, Inc., 
Washington, DC 
18 IFC 
19 O= no discrimination. 100= absolute discrimination 
20 OECD (2016), “OECD/INFE International Survey of Adult Financial Literacy Competencies” 
21 Corporación Andina de Fomento (2018/. Inclusión Financiera de las Mujeres en América Latina y el Caribe. Situación actual y recomendaciones de

=== PAGE 147 ===
6 
 
According to a study of the Interamerican Development Bank (IDB) about leadership in microfinance institutions22, 50%  
of these institutions in Brazil have a female general manager and 20,83% of women in senior management positions.  
Despite provisions protecting women's land ownership rights, local customs often infringe on the enjoyment of this 
right in the case of inheritance or after divorce. Also, many women in rural areas lack birth certificates or identity cards, 
which prevents them from accessing land titles. Evidence shows that the entire financial architecture of lending, 
especially in relation to microcredit, has not taken into account the needs of women, particularly poor women and 
women at the intersection of multiple discriminations23. 
Regarding climate change, Brazil is the fifth-biggest emitter of greenhouse gases, an important agro-exporter and also 
home to the Amazon Basin ecosystems that provide essential services for many people both regionally and globally. 
Brazil’s Amazon deforestation and the agriculture sector are increasingly main contributors due to the expansion of 
cattle-ranching, soy cultivation, illegal gold mining and logging. 
Climate change effects can be felt notably in such a dynamic environmental and socio-economic system. Important 
impacts can therefore be expected from both global price changes and local yield changes. Previous studies on the 
impacts of climate change on agriculture in Brazil have found potentially severe impacts, with farms losing on average 
23 percent of their land values by 2060 in the worst climate scenario24 
Brazil has an unusually large share of female-headed households compared to other countries in Latin America25 (34,8), 
but they are mainly concentrated in urban areas. In rural areas it is 18% and they are less likely to be vulnerable due to 
reasons such as higher levels of per capita income which are also more diversified. This could be because in those 
households there are several income earners, women are older and so have grown-up children and since they earn less 
money in equivalent jobs, women tend to have more than one main source of income. Female-headed households 
should therefore be better able to absorb the impacts of climate change regarding decreasing yields and increasing 
prices of agricultural products. However, according to IFAD26, family farms headed by women have performed worse 
than average in reducing poverty over recent years and rural women suffer more the constraints of a social environment 
marked by discriminatory practices 
 
1.2.2.2. Colombia 
 
Colombia has a robust normative system and institutions to support the rights of girls and women. The country’s 1991 
Constitution recognises women’s equality and outlaws gender-based discrimination. Particularly, the High Presidential 
Office for the Equality of Women was created to monitor policies on gender equity. Besides, Colombia has introduced 
over the years vigorous legislation to promote equality like the law requiring that women candidates comprise at least 
30% of party electoral lists that has been crucial for obtaining higher representation of women in public institutions.  
 
 
políticas. 
22 Interamerican Development Bank (2016). El  liderazgo femenino en las entidades microfinancieras en America Latina y el Caribe.  
23 OECD. Development Centre. Social insitutions and gender index. 2019 
24 Seo, S. N., and R. Mendelsohn. 2008. “A Ricardian Analysis of the Impacts of Climate Change on South American Farms.” Chilean Journal of Agricultural 
Research 68 (1): 69–79 
25 Lykke E. Andersen, Clemens Breisinger, Luis Carlos Jemio, Daniel Mason-D’Croz, Claudia Ringler, Richard Robertson, Dorte Verner, and Manfred 
WiebeltIFPRI (2016). Climate change impacts and household resilience. Prospects for 2050 in Brazil, Mexico and Peru. Food Policy Reports. International 
Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) 
26 IFAD (2016). Country strategic opportunities program.

=== PAGE 148 ===
7 
 
The National Development Plan 2018-22 includes an entire chapter on women’s rights based on three dimensions: the 
economic, the political and physical integrity, which includes violence against women27. 
Despite a good legislative framework, in practice, girls and women still endure discrimination, the most prominent on 
women participation in the labour market and their economic development in general. Women, Business and Law Index 
scores 84.4, with legal constraints found in the areas of workplace (law does not mandate equal remuneration for work 
of equal value) and pension (periods of absence from work due to childcare are not accounted for pension benefits)28. 
Particularly important is the exclusion of rural women in the processes of social and productive order that leads to 
equitable and sustainable rural development.  
An important factor affecting women in Colombia has been the civil armed conflict of recent decades. An estimated of 
8.8 million people have been registered as victims of the armed conflict. The majority are victims of forced 
displacement, of which about 80% are women and children and 87% are from rural areas. Furthermore, 15.8% of the 
women displaced because of the armed conflict have stated that they were also victims of sexual violence. 
The following table shows some basic gender data about Colombia: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Significant gaps are in the labour and political participation rate. Likewise, the participation of women in decision-
making spaces is still low despite the specific legislation introduced. The direct influence on policies that affect women 
remains low. OECD SIGI scores 23.5 and a significant 19% of population think that a men should have more right to a 
job than a woman and that men makes better business executives. Only 19% of firms have women in top management 
positions. 
Data regarding entrepreneurship, access to finance, digitalisation and agriculture, show gender inequalities exist:  
 
 
27“Pacto de equidad para las mujeres” Accessible online under: https://colaboracion.dnp.gov.co/CDT/Prensa/Resumen-PND2018-2022-final.pdf  
28 World Bank. Women, business and the law. 2023 
Maternal mortality (deaths per 100,000 live births) 
83 (WEF) 
Life Expectancy (years) 
F: 70.5; M: 67.4(WEF) 
Adult Literacy Rate  (%) 
F: 95.3; M: 94.9 (WEF)  
Labor force participation rate (%) 
F: 61.6 ; M: 84.6 (WEF) 
Share of women membership in boards (%) 
12,9 (WEF) 
Firms with female top managers 
18,9 (WEF) 
Unemployment adults (%) 
F: 13.17;  M: 8.04 (WEF) 
Employment in agriculture (%) 
F: 8 ; M: 23 (WB) 
Employment in service (%) 
F: 79; M: 54 (WB) 
Women in parliament (%) 
18.8 (WEF) 
Prevalence of gender violence in lifetime (%) 
37.4 (WEF) 
Time spent on unpaid domestic and care work (%) 
F: 18.2; M: 5.3 (UN CEPAL)

=== PAGE 149 ===
8 
 
Account at a financial institution 
M.: 49%, F.: 41% (WB) 
Saved to start, operate, expand a business or farm 
M.: 19%, F.: 13% (WB) 
Saved at a financial institution 
M.: 11%, F.: 7% (WB) 
Borrowed from a financial institution 
M.: 16%, F.: 13% (WB) 
Borrowed from family or friends 
M.: 20%, F.: 21% (WB) 
Received payments for agricultural products 
M.: 4%, F.: 3% (WB) 
Received payments from self-employment 
M.: 17%, F.: 14% (WB) 
Made or received digital payments 
M.: 42%, F.: 33% (WB) 
 
Regarding the program specific areas of intervention, MSMEs and smallholder farmers represent an important part of 
the Colombian economy. In 2017, according to the National Department of Statistics (DANE), MSMEs and smallholder 
farmers contributed to 40% of GDP, generated 80% of employment and constituted 90% of the country's productive 
sector. 
According to figures from the Bogotá Chamber of Commerce, of the total number of entrepreneurs in the capital, 38.7% 
of legal representatives are women. Figure that can certainly be estimated to be much lower on other areas of the 
country. Often the need for economic subsistence is the main reason for entrepreneurship, accompanied by the 
aspiration to balance family and work responsibilities and to achieve professional development. 
In Colombia, the historical gaps in entrepreneurship by gender have shown a decreasing trend and the ratio of male 
entrepreneurs to female entrepreneurs it close to 1. Despite this data, women face significant barriers when it comes 
to participating in the formal economy. The perception of gender roles, the sexual division of labour and the lack of 
access to financial capital are some of the factors that condition women's access to the productive sphere. 
Women entrepreneurs are characterized by participating in fragile business initiatives, not very intensive in job creation 
and in branches of activity with few entry barriers (requiring little initial capital, intensive in labour, etc.). Thus, women 
entrepreneurs operate in highly competitive sectors that are more vulnerable to changes in the economic context. 
According to the GEM report, with respect to ventures, the extractive sector is the one with the lowest participation of 
women, with 2.3%, and the consumer-oriented sector is the most prevalent, with 57.4%, followed by that of 
transformation, with 20.5%. 
The degree of innovation and internationalization of women's business initiatives is equally low, their presence in high-
impact sectors is low. The influence of a culture and social structure articulated around gender differences, which 
condition their attitude and self-esteem, represent greater difficulties for them. Despite reporting high educational 
levels and social skills comparable to those of men, companies created by women tend to have a slower size and 
expansion than those created by men. 
Business financing in Colombia was rated with a score of 3.5 on a 5.0 scale (GEM Colombia, 2022), which indicates that 
Colombian entrepreneurs do not have sufficient sources of financing such as angel investors, equity capital, bank debt, 
public subsidies, venture capital, crowdfunding, etc. The gender gap in perceived entrepreneurship skills remains at 
around 10 points over the last five years and in terms of no fear of failure is closed to 4 points in 2022.

=== PAGE 150 ===
9 
 
Out of 49 economies, Colombia rank 2 in TEA, 34 in EBO and 34 in informal investment. The proportion of adults starting 
or running a new business is highest in five Latin America & Caribbean countries, being Colombia one of them29. 
Moreover, it is one of the seven countries in which one in five women were starting or running a new business. Female 
new entrepreneurship has moved in line with the males, so a small gender gap has persisted. Regarding the levels of 
TEA and EBO by gender, the gap is 4 and 2.2 points respectively. 
The country has no legislation prohibiting discrimination in access to credit30. Colombia scores 33 regarding access to 
productive and financial resources31, and there is a 6 point gap in ownership of land32. There are differences in access 
and use of financial products between women and men. Gap in access is 6.6 and in use is 3.8. Access to credit product 
also show a gap of 3.3. In addition, in all forms of credit, the average amount of money disbursed is higher for men than 
for women. Women aged 18-25 and in rural areas are the groups with a lower level of access to financial products33.  
According to a study on female leadership by the Interamerican Development Bank, 54,5% of microfinance institutions 
have a female general manager and 51,4% of women in senior management positions, the best figures among the target 
countries of the Kuali Fund-GCF, together with Panama. 
Regarding the rural context, women are commonly involved in unpaid agricultural jobs and housekeeping due to strong 
gender roles in rural family structures. Therefore, their entrepreneurship activity tends to move towards sectors other 
than the traditional ones where they find space for growth and that enables them to have economic independence. 
Due to internal displacement and the tendency of rural men to migrate to urban areas, the number of female-headed 
households has increased in the last 10 years. As a result, women must shoulder the responsibilities of both domestic 
and productive activities. Their poverty rate is 52.3% compared with 44.7% of households headed by men. Regarding 
extreme poverty rate, is 29.3% and 20.5% respectively. Among the main barriers, it stands out their limited access to 
credit, paid work, land, and participation in decision-making; 31.3 % of agricultural workers are considered unpaid family 
help and these activities are often not reported as work34.  
The promotion of female entrepreneurship and companies run by women in agricultural activities, the increase in 
activities related to the secondary and tertiary sectors in the rural economy constitute an essential aspect of rural 
development policies to bring progress to the regions hardest hit by the conflict.The Second Biennial Update Report on 
Climate Change in Colombia35 built by IDEAM and UNDP states for the first time the importance of addressing climate 
change with gender perspective. In Colombia the main source of carbon emissions is linked to the agricultural sector, 
according to the latest inventory of greenhouse gases (IDEAM 2017), the emissions of this sector were of a 36%, above 
sectors such as transport (11%) and energy (10%). Rural women in Colombia constitute more than 48% of the registered 
rural population, and 36% of them are agricultural producers. The recognition of the central role played by women in 
aspects such as agricultural production, food security and resilience in communities to climate change are essential 
aspects for the promotion of sustainable and inclusive development 
From the Directorate of Climate Change, the "Proposal of Technical Guidelines to Promote and Strengthen the Gender 
Approach in Attention to the Establishment of the PNCC (2017)" was built, which is framed in the provisions of the 
national and international contexts, both in terms of gender approach as in relation to its incorporation in the 
management of climate change. 
 
 
29 GEM 2022/2023 
30 Women, Business and the Law. World Bank. 2023 
31 OCDE SIGI 
32 O= no discrimination. 100= absolute discrimination 
33 https://www.findevgateway.org/sites/default/files/publications/2022/Memorias%20-%20Caf%C3%A9%20con%20Finequity.pdf 
34 IFAD, 2016. Country strategic opportunities program.  
35Accessible online under: http://www.ideam.gov.co/documents/24277/77448440/PNUD-IDEAM_2RBA.pdf/ff1af137-2149-4516-9923-6423ee4d4b54

=== PAGE 151 ===
10 
 
 
1.2.2.3. El Salvador 
El Salvador has implemented numerous legislative amendments in the last years regarding, among others, improving 
maternity protection, prevention of violence against women, reinforcing gender equality and non discrimination in the 
workplace including equal pay for equal work and a place free from violence36.  
The Salvadoran Institute for the Advencement of Women37  is the institution responsible for formulating, executing and 
monitoring compliance with the National Policy for Women. 
During the period 2016-2020 a National Equality Plan has been the main policiy tool with national scope but with 
regional and sectoral specificites. Institutional changes have been achieved and today more women are working at all 
levels of public service. In the executive branch, representation of women in decision-making positions increased from 
two female ministers in the period 2009-2014 to seven in the present presidential term (43,8%). In the municipal 
councils in 2021, 11% of mayor’s offices are women.  
Women, Business and Law Index scores 88.8, with legal constraints found in the areas of pay (law does not mandate 
equal remuneration for work of equal value), marriage, parenthood and pension. Access to assets are equal38. 
The following table shows some basic gender data about El Salvador: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regarding employment, the IGUAL-ES programme has been rolled out to encourage businesses to establish egalitarian, 
inclusive and decent workplaces, which can be certified by a “gender equality seal”. Since 2018 employers have a duty 
to provide childcare facilities for their employees’ children between the ages of 4 months and 3 years for the duration 
of the workday.  
El Salvador scores 19.6 in OECD SIGI and a significant 27% of population think that a men should have more right to a 
job than a woman and that men makes better business executives. Gender gap in management positions is only 3 points 
but just 28% firms have women in top management positions. 
 
 
36 UN CEDAW. Tenth Periodic Report. October 2021 
37 https://isdemu.gob.sv/  
38 World Bank. Women, business and the law. 2023 
Maternal mortality (deaths per 100,000 live births) 
46 (WEF) 
Life Expectancy (years) 
F: 67.8; M: 61.6 (WEF) 
Adult Literacy Rate  (%) 
F: 87.2; M: 91.1 (WEF) 
Labor force participation rate (%) 
F: 49.3; M: 79.6 (WEF) 
Firms with female top managers (%) 
28 (WEF) 
Unemployment adults (%) 
F: 4.62; M: 4.21 (WEF) 
Employment in agriculture (%) 
4; 29 (WB) 
Employment in service (%) 
78; 47 (WB) 
Women in parliament (%) 
33.3 
Prevalence of gender violence in lifetime (%) 
26.3 (WEF) 
Time spent on unpaid domestic and care work (%) 
F: 20,2; M: 7 (UN CEPAL)

=== PAGE 152 ===
11 
 
More specifically, data regarding entrepreneurship, access to finance, digitalisation and agriculture, show gender 
inequalities:  
 
Account at a financial institution 
M.: 36%, F.: 24% (WB) 
Saved to start, operate, expand a business or farm 
M.: 15%, F.: 11% (WB) 
Saved at a financial institution 
M.: 14%, F.: 9% (WB) 
Borrowed from a financial institution 
M.: 9%, F.: 8% (WB) 
Borrowed from family or friends 
M.: 14%, F.: 7% (WB) 
Received payments for agricultural products 
M.: 5%, F.: 1% (WB) 
Received payments from self-employment 
M.: 15%, F.: 15% (WB) 
Made or received digital payments 
M.: 30%, F.: 18% (WB) 
 
To support the growing economy of microenterprises and small and medium-sized businesses, in 2019, the Legislative 
Assembly approved amendments so that 25% of the annual budget for procurement and contracts will be earmarked 
for goods and services provided by microenterprises and small and medium-sized businesses, with at least 10% reserved 
for purchases from businesses whose owner, majority shareholder or legal representative is a woman.  
The Women’s Entrepreneurship Programme promotes the entrepreneurship and economic empowerment of 
Salvadoran women. Women in El Salvador own 64% of microenterprises and 29% of medium and large enterprises39, 
which are also a more formal type of business. This offer an opportunity to train women so that their businesses grow. 
One of the objectives of the National Policy for Enterprise Development is to strengthen competitive and productive 
capacities from a territorial and gender perspective. 
Companies are located mainly in urban areas (91,13%). In the rural areas, entrepreneurship by women are more than 
double than those leaded by men. Both male and female MSMEs owners used their own resources as a primary source 
to finance their economic activity. For women owners, also stand out as important sources of financing community 
banks, NGOs, other cooperatives, moneylenders and seed capital granted by CONAMYPE40.  
Women have lower default rates. However, the lack of assets in their name are the main barriers to accessing formal 
sources of finance. Access to productive and financial resources scores 22.141. National data show that less than 30% 
of population has an account in a formal institution. The country has a National Policy for Financial Inclusion that has 
gender equity as one of the main goals. According to the National Survey of Demand of Financial Services  the gap in 
the use of at least one financial product, including savings, insurance, pensions and credit, reached 13 percentage 
points. There is no gender gap in relation to the use of mobile phones to make payments or transfers and the gap in 
relation to obtaining credit is also small (2%). In 2018 the Salvadoran Institute for the Advencement of Women in 
coordination with the Central Reserve Bank of El Salvador, conducted an assessment of the invisible barriers to women’s 
access to financial services with a view to prepare guidelines on financial inclusion from a gender perspective. 
 
 
39 CONAMYPE, 2022 
40 CONAMYPE, 2017. Encuesta Nacional de la Micro y Pequeña Empresa 
41 OECD SIGI. 0 = no discrimination and 100 = absolute discriminations.

=== PAGE 153 ===
12 
 
The IDB study on female leadership show that 20% of microfinance institutions have a female general manager and 50% 
of women in senior management positions.  
Measures have been taken in order to ensure women’s rights access to and control over land, housing and property, 
especially in rural areas. In 2018, the Salvadoran Agrarian Reform Institute revised and incorporated a gender 
perspective into its user service guidelines and provided information on Legislative Decree No. 719, which establishes 
land as a family asset. The Ministry of Agriculture has also taken steps to include women in its services (agricultural 
packages, TA programmes, trainings) but there is still a significant gender gap. 
Although the rate of rural poverty  decreased by 18% between 2000 and 2013, many rural people continue to live in 
poverty. Traditionally excluded groups such as young people, women, indigenous peoples and seniors are especially 
vulnerable. Young rural people are trapped between the lack of access to education, which makes it difficult to enter 
the formal labour market, and the lack of assets needed to launch a sustainable business. They are also among the main 
victims of crime and, as a result, many choose to migrate. They are reluctant to work in the agriculture sector because 
of its low profitability and the perception that agriculture is drudgery. 
The National Policy for Rural, Indigenous and Campesina Women was designed to guarantee human rights and promote 
the autonomy of rural women. Women and girls are 52,1% of rural population. 32.1% of households are headed by 
women (67.9% by men). However, they make up only 9% of the rural population engaged in agricultural activities and 
almost 30% as unpaid family workers. Most of the majority of these women, 75 %, declare themselves as economically 
inactive and 50.8 % have no income of their own, compared to 17% of men42.  
The illiteracy rate among women stood at 17.4 per cent in rural areas. In 2019, the rate of participation in the labour 
force was 59.1% in rural areas (36,8% women and 84,4% men). Data regarding wages show a gender gap: the average 
monthly salary at the national level was $344.29, with women earning $306.11 and men earning $373.40 on average 
and in rural areas, women earning $213.23 and men earning $276.34 on average. 
El Salvador is located in one of the world's most vulnerable areas to the impact of natural hazards in the world. 2.2 
million people live in poverty and climate vulnerability in the 114 municipalities that make up the so-called “dry 
corridor”. The effects of climate change and environmental degradation are causing the displacement of thousands of 
people. The link between gender and climate change has been scarcely studied but there is consensus on the types of 
strategies that should be addressed.  In the case of adaptation measures, subsistence farming practices and rural water 
management are tasks often assigned to women. UN WOMEN highlights strategies such as empowering women 
through work in the areas of land, credit, agricultural inputs, technology, extension and training services to broaden 
their capacity and the sustainable use of natural resources43. 
 
1.2.2.4. Guatemala 
In Guatemala, the Constitution incorporates an article on the right to non-discrimination and the Constitutional Court 
upheld the exercise of this right in the workplace and the family, informed by a perspective of intersectionality and 
equality44. The Presidential Secretariat for Women (SEPREM) is the high level institution which depends directly from 
the President of the Republic. It is the advisory and coordinating body for public policies to promote the comprehensive 
development of women.  
 
 
42 UN WOMEN, 2020 
43 UN WOMEN, 2020 
44 UN CEDAW. Tenth periodic report. December 2021

=== PAGE 154 ===
13 
 
Guatemala, the biggest economy in Central America, is known for its fertile land, abundant natural resources and robust 
agricultural sector, which employs half of the population and accounts for 10% of the country’s GDP. However, the 
country has one of the highest inequality rates in Latin America and the lowest rate of women’s participation in the 
workforce in LAC. Rates of poverty, malnutrition and maternal-child mortality, especially in rural and indigenous areas, 
are some of the worst in the region. Additionally, chronic malnutrition affects almost one half of all children under the 
age of five, predominantly those living in rural areas (53%)45. Access to formal financial services and resources, health 
and education services are still limited. Interrelated territorial, ethnic and gender inequalities intensify women's 
constraints to full participation in development 
The National Policy for the Promotion and Comprehensive Development of Women have set three priorities for the 
period 2021-2024: education, eradication of violence against women and girls and women’s economic development. In 
2021 the strategy for the implementation of the 2020-2029 National Plan for the Prevention and Erradication of 
Violence against Women was adopted. In 2017, the Ministry of Labour and Social Security presented a protocol for 
addressing and preventing workplace harassment against women working in both public and private sectors. 
Women, Business and Law Index scores 73.8, with legal constraints found in the areas of workplace (the law does not 
prohibit discrimination in employment and there is no legislationon sexual harassment), pay (law does not mandate 
equal remuneration for work of equal value), marriage, parenthood and entrepreneurship (law does not prohibit 
discrimination in access to credit). Access to assets are equal46. 
The following table shows some basic gender data about Guatemala: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The 2017–2032 national policy for decent employment implemented by the Ministry of Labour and Social Security 
include gender equity as priority area, with the aim of ensuring that women have access to fairly paid and productive 
work under conditions that ensure respect for their freedom, security and human dignity.  
 
 
45 IFAD country reports 
46 World Bank. Women, business and the law. 2023 
Maternal mortality (deaths per 100,000 live births) 
95 
Life Expectancy (years) 
F: 64.1; M: 6.5 (WEF) 
Adult Literacy Rate  (%) 
F: 76.4; M: 86.8 (WEF) 
Labor force participation rate (%) 
F: 42.5; M: 88.2 (WEF) 
Firms with female top managers (%) 
18,50% 
Unemployment adults (%) 
F: 3.63; M: 2.03 (WEF) 
Employment in agriculture (%) 
F: 9; M: 39 (WB) 
Employment in service (%) 
F: 73; M: 38 (WB) 
Women in parliament (%) 
19.4 (WEF) 
Prevalence of gender violence in lifetime (%) 
18 (WEF) 
Time spent on unpaid domestic and care work (%) 
F: 19,5; M: 2,6 (UN CEPAL)

=== PAGE 155 ===
14 
 
OECD SIGI scores 25.7 and a significant 22% of population think that a men should have more right to a job than a 
woman and 18% that men makes better business executives. Only 19% of firms have women in top management 
positions and 37% of managers are women. 
Data regarding entrepreneurship, access to finance, digitalisation and agriculture, show gender inequalities:  
 
Account at a financial institution 
M.: 46%, F.: 41% (WB) 
Saved to start, operate, expand a business or farm 
M.: 21%, F.: 17% (WB) 
Saved at a financial institution 
M.: 15%, F.: 10% (WB) 
Borrowed from a financial institution 
M.: 11%, F.: 9% (WB) 
Borrowed from family or friends 
M.: 13%, F.: 13% (WB) 
Received payments for agricultural products 
M.: 14%, F.: 6% (WB) 
Received payments from self-employment 
M.: 15%, F.: 17% (WB) 
Made or received digital payments 
M.: 35%, F.: 32% (WB) 
 
Regarding entrepreneurship, out of 49 economies, Guatemala rank 1 in TEA, 5 in EBO and 2 in informal investment. 
Women in Guatemala own 40.37% of microenterprises and 16.27% of small and medium enterprises47. The proportion 
of adults starting or running a new business is highest in five LAC countries, being Guatemala one of them and is one of 
the seven countries in which one in five women were starting or running a new business48. In the levels of TEA and 
EBO by gender, the gap is 2.6 and 3.9 points respectively, scoring better than other countries of the project. The 
percentage of adults starting or running a new business in Guatemala has actually increased over the pandemic cycle, 
from 25% in 2019 to 29% in 2022, although the level of EBO has gone the other way, from 15% in 2019 to 12% in 2022. 
There were more than two adults starting a new business for every adult running an established business in 2022, with 
men slightly more likely than women to be running those new businesses. Guatemala is an example of a country with 
low levels of human development and high levels of TEA. Consumer services made up 78% of startups.  
The Women’s Economic Development Act facilitates access to economic and productive resources as well as 
technological services to implement projects for the economic empowerment of women. As at December 2020, 
statistical data show that women have limited access to the financial system and when they do, they, in general, receive 
financing in lower amounts and with higher interest rates than men, even though women have a lower default rate. 4 
in 10 loans were for women, the interest rate applied was 21.2 (19.4 for men), while the default rate was 1.8 in the case 
of women and 2.6 of men49. Through the Fund for the Development of MSMEs, during the period 2017–2021, 35.1 % 
of loans was granted to women. Guatemala scores 28.4 in access to productive and financial resources. In spite of equal 
ownership rights to immovable property the gender gap in ownership of land reaches 26 points50. 
According to the IDB study on female leadership, 38% of microfinance institutions have a female general manager and 
33% of women in senior management positions. 
 
 
47 SME Finance Forum 
48 GEM 2022/2023 
49 UN CEDAW.  Tenth periodic report submitted by Guatemala. December 2021 
50 OECD SIGI. O= no discrimination. 100= absolute discrimination

=== PAGE 156 ===
15 
 
In 2019, women represented 8.3 per cent of employers in the agricultural sector. The procedure to facilitate access to 
ownership of land and other assets for peasant was approved in 2018. Under the State Land Regularization and 
Allocation Programme, the Government provides peasant families with legal certainty regarding land, granting titles to 
applicants and their spouses. The Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food is empowering women by providing them 
with training and technical guidance in the implementation of best practices and the use of agricultural products, and 
by providing them with supplies in order to improve household finances.  
The Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food is empowering women by providing them with training and technical 
guidance in the implementation of best practices and the use of agricultural products, and by providing them with 
supplies in order to improve household finances. Between 2017 and 2021, 60.9% (538,014) of the beneficiaries of the 
various activities implemented under the Ministry’s institutional programmes were women. In order to advance equal 
opportunity in the rural areas it is critical to target women producers and it is also a significant driver of improved 
nutrition at home51. Exclusion and racism have generated various forms of structural, legal and institutional violence 
and discrimination, particularly those living in rural areas.  
Guatemala is one of the 20 countries in the world that are most affected by the severe impacts of extreme climate 
events. Some studies have shown that losses caused by natural disasters affect directly to more vunerable people, old 
age, women and children living in poor rural areas.  
 
1.2.2.5. Honduras 
Honduras is a middle-income country of Central America that is facing persistent poverty, insecurity and socio-economic 
inequality. Poverty rate reached 66% in 2016. The country has one of the lowest Human Development Index of the 
region, specially due to the low expectancy life and gross national income per capita. 
Since 2015, Honduras has adopted several laws to protect women’s rights such as the Wage Equality Act, the Credit for 
Rural Women Act, regulations for the implementation of the principle of parity on electoral lists, regulations to monitor 
investigations of violent deaths of women and cases of feminicide, among others. Likewise, Honduras has also adopted 
policies against racism, on trafficking with persons, cities for women and sexual and reproductive health52.  
The National Institute for Women is implementing the Second National Gender Equity and Equality Plan 2010-2022 
through the Gender Units and the municipal offices for women. The Plan was developed with wide participation of 
women's movements, civil society, and municipal governments and has had the support of international agencies such 
as AECID, UNFPA and UNDP. 
Women, Business and Law Index scores 75, with legal constraints found in the areas of pay (law does not mandate equal 
remuneration for work of equal value), marriage, parenthood and pension. Access to assets are equal53. 
The following table shows some basic gender data about Honduras: 
 
 
51 
https://blogs.worldbank.org/latinamerica/promoting-food-security-and-empowering-women-farmers-guatemala-
one-school-day-time 
52 UN CEDAW. Ninth Periodic Report. April 2021. 
53 World Bank. Women, business and the law. 2023 
Maternal mortality (deaths per 100,000 live births) 
65 (WEF) 
Life Expectancy (years) 
F: 63.3; M: 62.7 (WEF) 
Adult Literacy Rate  (%) 
F: 87.3; M: 87.1 (WEF)

=== PAGE 157 ===
16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data regarding entrepreneurship, access to finance, digitalisation and agriculture, show gender inequalities:  
Account at a financial institution 
M.: 47%, F.: 39% (WB) 
Saved to start, operate, expand a business or farm 
M.: 17%, F.: 10% (WB) 
Saved at a financial institution 
M.: 17%, F.: 12% (WB) 
Borrowed from a financial institution 
M.: 17%, F.: 13% (WB) 
Borrowed from family or friends 
M.: 17%, F.: 4% (WB) 
Received payments for agricultural products 
M.: 10%, F.: 9% (WB) 
Received payments from self-employment 
M.: 13%, F.: 12% (WB) 
Made or received digital payments 
M.: 43%, F.: 32% (WB) 
 
OECD SIGI scores 26 mainly because of restrictive access to productive and financial resources, laws on land assets. 
Gender gap are significant in ownership of land (28% of women are owners of land). women in top management 
positions (28%) and in management positions (40%). 
The National Service of Entrepreneurship and Small Businesses gives credits and support to women to strength their 
businesses. More specifically, Honduras has a program, INNOVAMUJER54, to foster the developmen of women-led SMEs 
by providing training, mentoring and services for the digitalisation of businesses. 
According to UN WOMEN, the limited access to land and credit severely restrict women’s economic prospects and 
autonomy. Some women wishing to form their own businesses often cannot do it due to their need of capital or 
incapacity of complying with some requirements such as having a formal account. The National Banking and Insurance 
Commission launched the Financial Inclusion Plan for Women, aimed at ensuring that data disaggregated by sex is 
compiled and promoting access to and use of financial services and products by women.  
According to the IDB study on female leadership, 31% of microfinance institutions have a female general manager and 
29% of women in senior management positions. 
In 2015, 45% of population lived in rural areas and 65% of rural households lived in poverty. Agricultural land accounts 
for about 28% of the country's land area, and the agricultural sector employs almost 39% of the population. Most of 
 
 
54 http://innova.ciudadmujer.gob.hn/  
Labor force participation rate (%) 
F: 54.3; M: 88 (WEF) 
Firms with female top managers (%) 
28% (WEF) 
Unemployment adults (%) 
F: 8.50; 4.47 (WEF) 
Employment in agriculture (%) 
F: 9; M: 45 (WB) 
Employment in service (%) 
F: 71; M: 35 (WB) 
Women in parliament (%) 
21.1 (WEF) 
Prevalence of gender violence in lifetime (%) 
21.6 (WEF) 
Time spent on unpaid domestic and care work (%) 
F: 17,3; M: 4,3 (UN CEPAL)

=== PAGE 158 ===
17 
 
the agricultural land is used for the production of low-yielding crops such as bananas, plantains, rice, maize and beans. 
In addition, the agricultural sector has lost almost a third of its income over the past 20 years, partly due to the decline 
in prices for the country's export crops, especially bananas and coffee.55.  
Rural women and youth are particularly vulnerable, impacted by violence, migrations and poverty. 50% of rural 
population is composed of women but only 27% of this population is economically active. Women are involved in much 
lesser extent in agricultural activities with limited access to land or financing. There is an invisibility phenomenon of the 
contributions women do in agriculture hidden by the domestic tasks they usually perform. Rural women combine 
agriculture activities (mostly related to subsistence production and taking care of nutrition with their households) with 
other the economic activities. In spite of having achieved greater educational results, opportunities have not increased 
for rural women and gender gaps have not changed. Strong patriarcal culture continues to prevent rural women from 
reaching their economic autonomy. Poverty in rural areas has affected the women-headed households in a 
disproportional manner 
Initiatives related to the empowerment of rural women have included the adoption of the Act and regulations on credit 
for rural women and the launch of the microenterprise credit line “Working Capital for Women”. In 2019, the National 
Institute for Women advised the Ministry of Natural Resources and the Environment on the creation of the Gender 
Equity and Environment Strategy with a view to eliminating gender inequalities related to the environment and 
encouraging women’s participation in the development, implementation and evaluation of environmental policies and 
programmes for sustainable development. 
The country is prone to natural disasters. Climate events such as droughts increase women’s vulnerability. Decreases in 
the quantity and distribution of rainfall lead not only to failed crops, but also to fewer employment and income 
opportunities, price increases, and changes in the consumption patterns of the most vulnerable population. Therefore, 
the most impacted families are landless producers or those with small plots dedicated to subsistence farming, day 
labourers and women heads of households56. With regard to the active inclusion of women in the design and 
implementation of climate change policies, the School for Equality and Empowerment of Rural Women offers advice 
and support to rural women. The initiative is designed to develop skills and promote equality and equity in the use, 
conservation and preservation of the environment and natural resources. 
 
1.2.2.6. Mexico 
Mexico is the second-largest economy in Latin America. Despite being a large, upper-middle-income country, Mexico 
continues to have high rural poverty levels and wide social and economic disparities.   
The country has made significant progress in the achievement of women’s rights and gender equality, especially in key 
areas at federal level: strengthening of national laws to ensure women and men equality; strong gender institutionalism 
and increased public resources earmarked for gender equality. The most prominent legislation at the federal level to 
promote gender equality is the National Constitution57, the Federal Law for the Prevention and Sanctioning of 
 
 
55 FIDA, 2020 
56 Oseguera de Ochoa, M.; Guillén de Bográn, M. A.; Borjas, R.; González, J. A.; Cáceres, R.; Ordoñez, R. A.; Jiménez Tabora, M.; Rodríguez M. A.; Schrunder 
A. I.; Agulla J.; Rizzo C. 2009. Estrategia Nacional de Seguridad Alimentaria y Nutricional 2010-2022. Secretary of State in the Office of the Presidency, Food 
and Nutrition Security Technical Unit, World Food Programme, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and Food Security Support 
Programme in Honduras – European Union.. 
57 http://www.diputados.gob.mx/LeyesBiblio/pdf_mov/Constitucion_Politica.pdf

=== PAGE 159 ===
18 
 
Discrimination58, the General Law of Equality between Women and Men59 and the General Law Women Access to a 
Life Free from Violence60 
Regarding institutions, the National Institute of Women61 is the federal office that works for gender equality in Mexico, 
combating violence and discrimination against women. The National Gender Equality Pogram (2019–2024)62 is focused 
on advancing substantive equality around 6 strategic goals (economic autonomy, domestic work, health rights, violence, 
decision-making and safe environments). Important milestones recently achieved were the Political-Electoral Reform 
that elevated gender parity to a constitutional level for candidacies to Federal and State Congress.  
Despite the progress made, gender equality in Mexico faces a series of structural challenges characterized by an 
unrelenting gap between formal and substantive equality in all areas of development. Besides, a cause for concern is 
the escalation of generalized violence in several target areas of the country, showing patterns of human rights violations 
and impunity at all levels, in particular enforced disappearances, torture, arbitrary detention, as well as attacks on 
human rights activists and journalist men and women alike.  
Women, Business and Law Index scores 88.8, with legal constraints found in the areas of pay (law does not mandate 
equal remuneration for work of equal value), parenthood and pension. Access to assets are equal63. 
The following table shows some basic gender data about Mexico: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Less than half of Mexican women of working age participate in the labour market. Only 10,60% women are members 
of the Boards and 15% are in top management positions. Almost 60% of the women who do work have informal jobs, 
 
 
58 http://www.diputados.gob.mx/LeyesBiblio/pdf/262_210618.pdf  
59 http://www.diputados.gob.mx/LeyesBiblio/pdf/LGIMH_140618.pdf  
60 https://www.gob.mx/cms/uploads/attachment/file/209278/Ley_General_de_Acceso_de_las_Mujeres_a_una_Vida_Libre_de_Violencia.pdf  
61 https://www.gob.mx/inmujeres  
62 http://cedoc.inmujeres.gob.mx/documentos_download/Proigualdad%202020-2024%20Web.pdf  
63 World Bank. Women, business and the law. 2023 
Maternal mortality (deaths per 100,000 live births) 
33 (WEF) 
Life Expectancy (years) 
F: 67.2; M: 64.3 (WEF) 
Adult Literacy Rate  (%) 
F: 94.6 ; M: 96.2 (WEF)  
Labor force participation rate (%) 
F: 49.1 ; M: 82.4 (WEF) 
Share of women membership in boards (%) 
10,6 (WEF) 
Unemployment adults (%) 
F: 3.65;  M: 3.61 (WEF) 
Employment in agriculture (%) 
F: 4 ; M: 18 (WB) 
Employment in service (%) 
F: 79 ; M: 51 (WB) 
Women in parliament (%) 
48.2 (WEF) 
Prevalence of gender violence in lifetime (%) 
14.1 (WEF) 
Time spent on unpaid domestic and care work (%) 
F: 24.2; M: 8.8 (UN CEPAL)

=== PAGE 160 ===
19 
 
with low social protection, high insecurity and low pay. One of the causes of this low participation is the excessive unpaid 
work burden which prevents them from devoting time to formal work.  
OECD SIGI scores 21,9 and a significant 25% of population think that a men should have more right to a job than a 
woman and 19% that men makes better business executives. 
Data regarding entrepreneurship, access to finance, digitalisation and agriculture, show gender inequalities:  
 
Account at a financial institution 
M.: 41,1%, F.: 33,3% (WB) 
Saved to start, operate, expand a business or farm 
M.: 16,5%, F.: 8,4 % (WB) 
Saved at a financial institution 
M.: 12,1%, F.: 7,8% (WB) 
Borrowed from a financial institution 
M.: 5,5%, F.: 5,9% (WB) 
Borrowed from family or friends 
M.: 16%, F.: 12,3% (WB) 
Received payments for agricultural products 
M.: 8,4%, F.: 2,1% (WB) 
Received payments from self-employment 
M.: 10,9%, F.: 10% (WB) 
Made or received digital payments 
M.: 35,8%, F.: 28,2% (WB) 
 
Regarding entrepreneurship, smallholder farmers and MSME, there are 4 million SMEs, of which 97.4% are 
microenterprises that represent 12.4% of total gross production and employ 47.2% of the workforce64. Altogether 
account for 99.7% of all private enterprises, 62.6% of private-sector employment and 35.2% of national total gross 
production. 
Out of 49 economies, Mexico rank 18 in TEA, 49 in EBO and 42 in informal investment.The national entrepreneurship 
context substantially worsened over the pandemic period in Mexico. The score fell from 4.7 in 2019 to 4.1 in 2020 and 
3.9 in 2022, in part due to be heavily dependent on tourism. There is not a significant gender gap in entrepreneurship 
in TEA (13.8% male: 12.1% female) nor EBO (2.2% male: 1.0% female)65, scoring better than other countries of the 
project. 
According to the IDB study on female leadership, 33% of microfinance institutions have a female general manager and 
27% of women in senior management positions. 
Mexico is one of the most populous countries in LAC, with more than six million microfinance borrowers, the largest 
number in the region with nearly 5,000 FSPs but has the smallest loan portolio  which implies a small average loan size 
provided mainly through the group lending approach, the dominant model in the country to reach low-income 
entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs66. Group lending is a good entry point for the unbanked into the formal financial 
sector but it does not serve well microenterprises as they grow. Since 80% of Mexico microfinance borrowers are 
women, moving to an individual lending model will affect women’s access to finance. There seems to be a big potential 
to grow the financial services sector in Mexico. 
In 2018, the average interest rates varied according to the amounts of the loans and the size of the borrowing company. 
For large companies, the average interest rate was approximately 11.78%; for SMEs, the average was 17.70%. In recent 
 
 
64 OECD (2020), Financing SMEs and Entrepreneurs 2020: An OECD Scoreboard, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/061fe03d-en  
65 GEM (Global Entrepreneurship Monitor) (2023). 2022/2023 Global Report. Adapting to a “New Normal”. London: GEM. 
66 Women’s World Banking. 2014. Individual Lending to Microenterprise in Mexico: An overview of constraints and opportunities.

=== PAGE 161 ===
20 
 
years, the Mexican government has developed a series of initiatives to support entrepreneurs and strengthen the access 
of SMEs to finance. These initiatives have included programs for young people and women.  
In a recent study by Value for Women on women-led small and growing businesses67 found that women-led SMEs are 
smaller than those led by men, which limits their economic potential. The percentage of business led by men with 
profits over $4 million MXN ($222,000 USD) is twice that of women-led. The study also found that in Mexico 70% of 
women were looking for finance. Yet, according to this report, many Mexican women-led businesses (42%) have never 
applied for credit due to high interest rates and aversion to indebtedness but also due to lack of appropriate credit 
products. 93% of the sample said they believe that there is a lack of financing opportunities available to and accessible 
for women–led businesses specifically, while very few (14%) reported knowing about opportunities for financing that 
exist for women-led businesses. 
Socioeconomic disparities are more marked in rural areas, where 61% of the indigenous population is extremely poor, 
compared with only 19% of the non-indigenous rural population. Although there is no gender gap in the poverty rate 
(44% of women versus 43% of men), women experience higher levels of deprivation in terms of food, healthcare and 
education. Most poor women live in rural areas68  
Mexico's agriculture sector is facing increasing vulnerabilities and a degraded natural resource base. Rural people are 
constrained by limited human and social assets, inadequate production-related investments and value-adding 
infrastructure, scarce financial resources and services, weak public-sector technical assistance and poor access to 
markets. These constraints result in low productivity, depressed consumption and incomes, and poverty. 
A key factor in the sector’s performance is a lack of smallholder access to financing. Although Mexico has various 
national development banks, access to rural finance remains a challenge. Women face additional obstacles such as 
access to land and inputs and restrictions on decision-making in the home. The insertion of women in productive 
activities requires considering and knowing the role that perform in society, especially taking into account the increase 
in their responsibilities, due to the migration of man69.  
Low-income households are increasingly dependent on women's work. Increasing their income requires access to 
microcredits, productive inputs, training and access to better markets. The incursion of women into productive activities 
has repercussions on economic growth and in a better distribution of income, since they are agents that promote the 
education and well-being of children, resulting in an increase in the human capital of future generations. 
Crops that are key to the smallholder economy, such as coffee and seasonal white corn, are frequently exposed to 
shocks such as climate-related events or market imperfections. The country also faces vulnerability to climate-related 
disasters exacerbated by inappropriate agricultural practices70. 
 
1.2.2.7. Panama 
 
In Panama, the basis for gender equality is the Political Constitution of the Republic, whose article 19 establishes that 
“there will be no privileges or discrimination based on race, birth, social class, sex, religion or political ideas”.  According 
to UN Women, in Panama, 83.3% of legal frameworks that promote, enforce and monitor gender equality, with a focus 
on violence against women, are in place.  
 
 
67 Value for Women, Exxon Mobil, Cherie Blair Foundation for Women, ‘Understanding how to unleash the untapped potential of women entrepreneurs in 
Mexico,’ 2018 
68 National Council for Evaluation of Social Development Policy (2017) and IFAD-FAO, Closing the gaps: Public policy note for the inclusion of gender and an 
intercultural perspective in agriculture and rural development (2019), 
69 CEPAL. “Productividad agrícola de la mujer rural en Centroamérica y México”  http://hdl.handle.net/11362/26078  
70 FIDA

=== PAGE 162 ===
21 
 
An important milestone was the creation of the National Institute for Women (INAMU) by law No. 71 of December 23, 
2008 as a decentralized public entity that ensures compliance with legal instruments, international agreements ratified 
by Panama and other national laws and regulations related to equal opportunities for women. 
Despite recent good progress and a low level of disparity compare with other countries in Latin America, work still needs 
to be done in Panama to achieve gender equality. The National Strategic Plan 2020-202471 recognizes that there are 
still forms of discrimination against women and highlights several subjects to be improved. According to INAMU, major 
issues that affect women in Panama relate to unequal employment opportunities (only 39% of productive work force 
are women), unequal salaries, domestic violence and femicide. At national level, disparity of labor income between men 
and women is 0.61.  Panamanian government is committed to the implementation of the Public Policies for Equality of 
Opportunities for Women and has designed an Action Plan for the equality of opportunities for women 2014-2024. 
Major challenges remain in the area of interinstitutional coordination and the assignment of a specific budget line for 
gender for the implementation of the policies as well as investment in entrepreneur cooperatives financing, microcredit 
programs, education related to rural development, environment management and climate change impacts72. 
Women, Business and Law Index scores 79.4, with legal constraints found in the areas of pay (law does not mandate 
equal remuneration for work of equal value), marriage, parenthood, entrepreneurship (law does not mandate 
discrimination in access to credit based on gender) and pension. Access to assets are equal73. 
The following table shows some basic gender data about Panama: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the labour market, there are still obstacles that limit participation and full development of women. In the workplace, 
productivity gaps are very relevant, 76.1% of women are at a low productivity level sector, compared to 53.7% of men, 
and as productivity levels sectors increase, the participation of women is getting smaller74. 
Data regarding entrepreneurship, access to finance, digitalisation and agriculture, show gender inequalities:  
 
Account at a financial institution 
M.: 50%, F.: 42% (WB) 
 
 
71 “Plan Estratégico Nacional 2020-2024”. Accessible online under: https://www.gacetaoficial.gob.pa/pdfTemp/28931_A/GacetaNo_28931a_20191231.pdf  
72 FIDA. Country Strategy Note  
73 World Bank. Women, business and the law. 2023 
74 http://oig.cepal.org/es/indicadores/distribucion-la-poblacion-ocupada-segun-nivel-productividad-sexo  
Maternal mortality (deaths per 100,000 live births) 
52 (WEF) 
Life Expectancy (years) 
F: 70; M: 67.4 (WEF) 
Adult Literacy Rate  (%) 
F: 94.9 ; M: 96 (WEF)  
Labor force participation rate (%) 
F: 60 ; M: 84.2 (WEF) 
Unemployment adults (%) 
F: 6.03;  M: 4.21 (WEF) 
Employment in agriculture (%) 
F: 9; M: 18 (WB) 
Employment in service (%) 
F: 82 ; M: 58 (WB) 
Women in parliament (%) 
22.5 (WEF) 
Prevalence of gender violence in lifetime (%) 
n.a. (WEF) 
Time spent on unpaid domestic and care work (%) 
F: 22.9; M: 12.1 (UN CEPAL)

=== PAGE 163 ===
22 
 
Saved to start, operate, expand a business or farm 
M.: 20%, F.: 13% (WB) 
Saved at a financial institution 
M.: 18%, F.: 11% (WB) 
Borrowed from a financial institution 
M.: 9%, F.: 7% (WB) 
Borrowed from family or friends 
M.: 13%, F.: 8% (WB) 
Received payments for agricultural products 
M.: 4%, F.: 3% (WB) 
Received payments from self-employment 
M.: 11%, F.: 11% (WB) 
Made or received digital payments 
M.: 40%, F.: 30% (WB) 
 
Women in Panama own 12,44% of microenterprises and 11.04% of small and medium enterprises75. Out of 49 
economies, Panama rank 3 in TEA, 28 in EBO and 8 in informal investment. The proportion of adults starting or running 
a new business is highest in five LAC countries, being Panama (together with Guatemala) one of them. Panama is one 
of the 10 economies which had more than one in 20 of their adults both starting or running a new business and 
expecting to employ an additional six or more people in five years time. There is a significant gender gap in 
entrepreneurship in TEA (31.2% male: 24.6% female) and EBO (7.9% male: 3.7% female)76 
MSMEs and smallholder farmers represent 96% of all companies in Panama, generating 45% of total employment 
according to AMPYME. Also, around 51% of all MSMEs and smallholder farmers are concentrated in Panama capital and 
more than 57% of microenterprises are led by women. 
Among the main obstacles that women entrepreneurs face can be mentioned the access to credit. It is necessary to 
finance the seed capital and make more flexible credit conditions when it comes to loans to women entrepreneurs. In 
addition to this, there is a limited supply of microfinance services that does not supply the great demand for it 77. 
Other potential barriers that can be mentioned are that most regulatory standards are designed in a gender-neutral 
way. Women tend to feel less prepared, and businesswomen report not having sufficient information on the procedures 
for business registration and compliance with other rules. Besides, traditional gender roles continue to 
disproportionately assign family and domestic responsibilities to women78. 
According to the IDB study on female leadership, 51% of microfinance institutions have a female general manager and 
55% of women in senior management positions. 
More than 50% of the population lives in urban areas which reflects that the rural development has significantly been 
neglected. The rural population is estimated to be composed of 626,000 women y 688,000 man79. Women mostly 
contribute to agriculture production and the design of strategies to confront climate changes but are not considered 
key actors in the elaboration of local, national or international strategies. According to INAMU, climate change impacts 
such as lack of access to water or degradation of the land, unequally affect woman’s rights as well the women’s health. 
 
 
 
 
 
75 SME Finance Forum 
76 GEM (Global Entrepreneurship Monitor) (2023). 2022/2023 Global Report. Adapting to a “New Normal”. London: GEM. 
77 Patiño, A. “Emprendimientos Económico de Mujeres y Acceso al Crédito en Panamá” 
78 Figueroa, M. Rodriguez, M. (2012) Diagnóstico de la situación de la Mipyme en centroamericana y República Dominicana 
79 FAO, 2017

=== PAGE 164 ===
23 
 
1.3. MSME and smallholder farmers overview  
The Latin America & Caribbean continent represents ca. 8.4% of the world’s total population80, yet is the third largest 
region in terms of number of MSMEs. The continent is home to 27.5 million MSMEs, of which 26.2 million are 
microenterprises and 1.3 million are SMEs81. In fact, out of 50 countries surveyed by the “Global Entrepreneurship 
Monitor, 2019-20 Report” (GEM Report), the top 6 countries in terms of Total Early-Stage Entrepreneurial Activity (TEA) 
were in Latin America, four of which form part of this multi-country proposal (Brazil, Panama, Guatemala and Colombia). 
The region showed an average TEA of over 24%, compared to ca. 12% in both Africa and in Asia & Oceania and ca. 10% 
in Europe & North America – indicating the importance of MSMEs in Latin America’s populations’ daily livelihoods. The 
MSMEs bring life to LAC economies, they represent 99,5% of all companies, create 60% of the total employment and 
generate around a 25% of the regional GDP82.  
Women in the region have a strong history of entrepreneurial activity, which can be seen via the high female/male-led 
TEAs ratio for Latin America: 0.84 in comparison with 0.72 for the countries surveyed in Africa, 0.69 for those in Asia & 
Oceania and 0.67 in Europe & North America. Despite this, Latin American women entrepreneurs are often driven more 
by necessity than in the case of men – a seemingly general standpoint for women worldwide, as the GEM Report’s 
findings suggest. Out of 50 countries surveyed, in 36 countries more women than men cited that their main motivation 
for working as an entrepreneur was ‘to earn a living because jobs are scarce’. Furthermore, in each of the 8 countries 
surveyed in Latin America (of which 6 are relevant to this multi-country proposal), whilst both men and women cited 
this reason as their main motivation for working as an entrepreneur, the % of women agreeing with this statement in 
these countries was 7% higher than males (88.2% and 81.3% respectively). In this regard, supporting women 
entrepreneurs in their activities via financing and other mechanisms gains further importance given the fact that limited 
other options are available. 
In 2019, women represented 50.8% of Latin America’s total population, yet only 41% of the region’s total employed 
population. In line with this, the labour force participation rate of men (77% in 2019, according to ILO data as of Jun-
20) is significantly higher than that of women (52%), the latter of which has only increased slightly since 2010 (51%). 
Despite the region’s high rate of women participation in entrepreneurial activities in comparison with other 
geographies, many women are stuck in the informal sector, lacking access to financial, human, and social capital – key 
constraints for the growth of their businesses83. Over 60% of women in the Latin America & Caribbean region operate 
in the informal sector, unable to grow out of the informal economy due to a lack of women role models in business, 
social/cultural constraints, and greater domestic responsibilities.  
 
Financial inclusion 
Latin America is the region with the second highest level of failure in women-led businesses in the world, with women 
entrepreneurs highlighting financing constraints as the main reason for business discontinuation (as opposed to poor 
profitability, in the case of men). Whilst access to microfinance for women is easier, women are often not able to access 
more “sophisticated” products that provide the appropriate terms and conditions that will enable their 
microenterprises to grow into more established SMEs. Increasing women’s entrepreneurs’ access to capital is therefore 
key in ensuring the sustainability of MSMEs and smallholder farmers and boosting female livelihoods, whereby for Latin 
 
 
80 World Bank data. 
81 “International Finance Corporation. 2017. MSME Finance Gap: Assessment of the Shortfalls and Opportunities in Financing Micro, Small, and Medium 
Enterprises in Emerging Markets. Washington, DC. © International Finance Corporation. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/28881  
82 OECD/CAF (2019), Latin America and the Caribbean 2019: Policies for Competitive SMEs in the Pacific Alliance and Participating South American 
countries, SME Policy Index, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/d9e1e5f0-en  
83 IADB, Gender Lens Investing: How Finance can Accelerate Gender Equality (2019).

=== PAGE 165 ===
24 
 
America a financing gap worth USD 5 billion has been identified for women-led micro-businesses alone, and an 
additional shortfall exits worth USD 93 billion for women-led SMEs84.  
Women have shown to be responsible and loyal financial services clients, whilst BCG analysis found that as much as 
USD 2.5-5 trillion could be added to global economic growth if women and men participated equally as entrepreneurs85. 
Women clients can contribute to reduced client attrition and portfolio risk, and to increased fee income, thanks to 
women’s responsible behaviour towards loan repayments but also to their interest in savings and other complementary 
products that financial institutions can offer86. As per Global Banking Alliance findings, women are 16% more likely to 
save than men, whilst women also show higher aversion toward indebtedness than men.  
Several barriers limit in general the financial inclusion of women. On the supply side, there are physical barriers (related 
to travel and time costs to a financial institution, insecurity and restrictions to mobility and social interactions outside 
the home), economic barriers (related to lack of autonomy and decision-making power about income and expenses as 
well as less labour opportunities) and eligibility barriers related to greater difficulty in obtaining an official 
documentation and collateral, direct and indirect discrimination by the financial institution (based on biases, conscious 
and unconscious, about women’s roles) or even the need of permission or signature of husbands. On the demand side, 
women often have less self-esteem in their skills and capabilities, less levels of financial literacy and can even have less 
confidence in financial institutions87.  
On top of these constraints, it is also very relevant to take into account social norms and their influence on the different 
barriers identified. Gender norms are a part of social norms and are defined as “collectively held expectations and 
perceived rules for how individuals should behave based on their gender identity”88. In LAC region, overload of unpaid 
work, domestic and agricultural activities as well as patriarchal norms about the role of women limit their autonomy in 
social and economic fields, especially in rural areas and for indigenous women. The Gender Social Norms Index89 show 
that the % of people with no bias against gender equality in areas such as politics, economic, education, intimate partner 
violence and women’s reproductive rights worldwide is 14% of women and 10% of men. Data for target countries are 
10,50% in Brazil, 8,60% in Colombia and 12,30% in Mexico. 
The project will implement measures to take into account those barriers and will set targets to reach women-owned 
SMEs and female smallholder farmers which were previously unbanked. Compilation of sex-dissagregated data, 
trainings on gender equality and women empowerment (GEWE), gender and SEAH policy and action plans implemented 
at every FSP and business skills and financial literacy sessions, which will include concepts such as business 
management, innovation for business expansion, strategic decision-making, financial management, cash flows, savings 
investment and credit, will help to challenge constraints in the women’s participation. As a minimum, 5% of total 
attendees will be indigenous women and 5% afrodescendant women. 
The project will also identify opportunities and challenges of targeting women as clients such as the design of financial 
products that target women and vulnerable populations. Outcomes of this activity will depend on FSP and country 
context since every FSP will design the financial products that best adapt to women’s realities and needs. 
 
 
84 See notes 2 and 4 above. 
85 https://www.bcg.com/publications/2019/boost-global-economy-5-trillion-dollar-support-women-entrepreneurs 
86 FMO and IFC, Non-Financial Services: The key to unlocking the growth potential of WSMEs for banks (2020). 
87 M. J. Roa, “Normas sociales: la barrera invisible para la inclusión financiera de la mujer”, Documentos de Proyectos LC/TS.2021/184; 
LC/MEX/TS.2021/21), Ciudad de México, Comisión Económica para América Latina y el Caribe (CEPAL), 2021. 
88 Koning, Antonique, Joanna Ledgerwood,and Nisha Singh. 2021. “Addressing Gender Norms to Increase Financial Inclusion: Designing for Impact.” 
Technical Guide. Washington, D.C.: CGAP 
89 UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2020. 2020 Gender Social Norms Index (GSNI): Tackling Social Norms: A game changer for gender 
inequalities. New York

=== PAGE 166 ===
25 
 
Participants in the financial system need to be aware of and understand how gender norms limit women’s access and 
use of financial services even in aspects where the law has been changed but endure as a social norm90. Barriers and 
social norms will be taken into account in the trainings implemented as part of the GAP aimed at supporting other 
activities and their effectiveness. 
Consultants hired will make emphasis on specific barriers of each country and partnerships with women’s organisations 
will also help to ensure a more enhanced knowledge about women’s situations and influence other stakeholders.  
Several activities in the GAP (e.g. 2.3, 2.6, 3.1, 3.2) are aimed at enabling women get the funding they need. 
 
Agriculture and rural areas 
Regarding agriculture, women play a key role in food production, nutrition, and natural resources management. 
According to FAO, women provide around 20% of all agricultural employment. However, there are specific issues that 
make women entrepreneurs more prone to inequality compared with their male counterparts, such us: land rights, 
productive resources, unpaid work, employment and decision making. 
In the case of rural Central America, inequality is deepened by the structural consequences of urban-centric bias in the 
distribution of strategic investments for national development. According to a study by ECLAC on women in the 
agricultural sector, it reveals that in 2010 women constituted only approximately 28% of the rural economically active 
population in Central America. A high proportion of rural women employed in agriculture are unpaid family workers 
which puts them at a disadvantage, as they do not receive financial reward for their activities.  Increasing the income 
of these women means raising the resources of more than 40% of poor rural households in Central America where they 
are the household head. This would translate into improvements in education and nutrition of children, and in higher 
economic growth of the countries. 
Women are less likely to hold statutory land rights, and, when they do own land, their plots are often relatively small 
due to many customary land rights systems. The need of collateral and asset-based lending implies that women have 
to own and control assets to unlock finance. Collateral requirements are generally much stricter for women, and 
customary laws and social beliefs favor men and put rural women at a great disadvantage. Being deprived of access to 
key assets and employment directly impacts access to credit, making it more difficult to acquire production inputs and 
technologies that would enable them to increase their productivity. This is also a missed opportunity since developing 
good products and services tailored to the specific needs of women entrepreneurs, financial institutions could capture 
an underserved market and boost the entrepreneurial potential of an entire generation. 
Moreover, they often are expected to provide unpaid farm work, and bear a disproportionate burden of care and 
reproductive roles within the family and community. 
As said above, the project will implement measures to take into account women’s barriers in providing guarantees and 
will set targets to reach women farmers. Awareness about social norms will also be part of the activities implemented 
so those root causes of gender inequality are better known for all participants. 
 
Gender and climate change 
Women are also more vulnerable to the effects of climate change, as they spend more time and energy on activities 
related to their environment. The United Nations Development Program (UNDP) and the United Nations Environment 
Program (UN AMBIENTE) have identified 4 major areas that link the environment and poverty, including women and 
 
 
90 See note 44

=== PAGE 167 ===
26 
 
girls: direct dependence on natural resources, vulnerability to climatic shocks such as floods and landslides, health 
effects from the indiscriminate use of agrochemicals, substances that deplete the ozone layer or poor waste disposal. 
These effects can increase gender inequality, reduces women's ability to be financially independent, and has an overall 
negative impact on the social and political rights of women, especially in economies that are heavily based on 
agriculture91. As a result, women and girls find themselves with less time for education, income-generating activities, 
and participation in community decision making processes, further entrenching unequal gender relations. 
Global studies show that 70% of consumer decisions are made by women. However, in decision-making in general, 
women do not achieve positions of power on an equal basis with men. This applies to issues of climate change and 
biodiversity. Women must participate in decision-making processes regarding access, use and control of natural 
resources, as well as in the equitable distribution of the resulting benefits. 
Public environmental policies for the conservation of biodiversity and climate actions, among others, must incorporate 
gender equity, including access to training, education, access to tools or mechanisms for entrepreneurship.  
Currently, Financial Service Providers (FSPs) included in the multi-country proposal reach 40% women in general 
through products and services. Typical products provided are MSME loans, village banking, and in some cases, specific 
agricultural and education loans. In relation to health and education services, FSPs generally provide health capacity 
building, specifically during COVID-19 pandemic, and other education related to financial literacy and agricultural best 
practices. 
Women-owned MSMEs and women farmers reach by FSPs is much lower, thus, the Kuali Fund-GCF aims to contribute 
increasing their reach by FSPs and improving products and services offered. By achieving these improvements, it is 
expected that women end-clients will be empowered. 
The project will include an activity aimed at improving awareness about the potential to increase income, reduce CO2 
emissions and improve adaptation through green strategies financed by FSPs. 
 
The table below provides a summary of the main barriers identified for women to access the credit and achieve SME 
development and the activities that will be implemented as part of the GAP to address them, taking into account that 
all are interrelated. 
 
 
 
91 Andersen, Lykke E.; Breisinger, Clemens; Jemio, Luis Carlos; Mason-D’Croz, Daniel; Ringler, Claudia; Robertson, Richard D.; Verner, Dorte; and Wiebelt, 
Manfred. 2016. Climate change impacts and household resilience: Prospects for 2050 in Brazil, Mexico, and Peru. Washington, D.C.: International Food 
Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). http://dx.doi.org/10.2499/9780896295810

=== PAGE 168 ===
27 
 
 
 
 
1.4. Other aspects in the implementation of the Kuali Fund-GCF 
Country assessments will be updated and extended once Kuali Fund-GCF is approved and the countries are confirmed. 
The country assessments will be updated by external consultants prior to the due diligence. Moreover, the Gender 
Action Plan will be adjusted as the project progresses. Updated gender country assessments, including SEAH, and 
gender action plan will be resubmitted to GCF. 
Kuali Fund-GCF’s stakeholders92 include women smallholder farmers and women-owned SMEs as borrowers of FSPs in 
order to increase their participation in the proposed activities and ensure that their concerns are heard, taken into 
account and influence decisions that affect their wellbeing and livelihoods. Women’s organisations will also be identified 
in each country and consultations with them will be conducted to incorporate their knowledge and views in the 
 
 
92 See Annex 7 Stakeholder engagement 
BARRIERS
Lack of autonomy and decision-making power about income and expenses 
4.2
4.3
Less labour opportunities and more participation in the informal economy
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.7
3.2
4.2
4.3
Greater difficulty in obtaining an official documentation and collateral
Less access to land ownership and to productive resources, smaller plots 
Burden of care and reproductive roles within the family and community
Less self-esteem in their skills and capabilities 
Less levels of financial literacy
Less confidence in financial institutions
Greater vulnerability to climate events
4.1
Direct and indirect discrimination by the financial institution 
Gender-blind processes and policies
Inapproriate product offerings
Sociocultural barriers and gender norms which influence all above
2.1
2.3
2.4
3.2
4.1
4.2
4.3
GAP
Physical barriers (travel and time costs, insecurity and restrictions to mobility and social 
interactions outside the home)
2.3
2.4
2.6
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
2.5
3.1 
4.4
4.5
2.3
2.4
2.6
3.1
3.2
2.3
2.4
2.6
2.7

=== PAGE 169 ===
28 
 
implementation of the project. Replication of successful initiatives implemented in a FSP or innovative company (IC) in 
the same country or from one country to another will be analysed. 
A gender gap assessment will be conducted in each investee which together with the country information and the 
insights of the women’s organisations, will be the basis for developing specific gender policy and procedure93. Gender 
Officer will report to the Investment Committee whenever an investment is to be approved and provide gender 
information to decision-making committees. Specific covenants regarding gender equality will be introduced in loan 
agreements with FSPs and ICs. The Gender Officer will monitor quaterly the investees gender and SEAH indicators and 
FSPs / IC will provide data on an annual basis as part of an ES performance report94. Finally, Kuali Fund-GCF will prepare 
an ES monitoring report for COFIDES with data and information on the implementation of the GAP.  
 
Human resources in GAWA for gender activities 
A Gender Officer will be appointed and an E&S Officer with expertise in gender will be hired and provide support to the 
Gender Officer. The Gender Officer will be in charge of integrating the gender approach across the full investment cycle 
(analysis, legal agreementas and monitoring) Gender Officer will also support Kuali Fund-GCF’s staff on gender issues 
at any time95. GAWA will support with specialized gender and SEAH training to these officers. Training will be also 
provided to the whole team to enhance competencies and knowledge in the areas of gender, SEAH and social inclusion. 
Moreover, external consultants can be hired to provide support to Kuali Fund manager and Gender Officer on the 
elaboration of Gender Action Plans of external and internal dimensions of investees as well as for the design of financial 
products adapted to women’s needs. Priority will be given to local expert consultants. 
Within FSPs, there will be the possibility of naming a focal person in gender issues, in order to execute the GAPs more 
effectively. 
 
Budget for gender actvities 
Specific activities included in GAP will be financed with Technical Assistance Facility (TAF) budget. COFIDES will monitor 
the implementation of GAP activities and targets set on an annual basis. The following table show TA disaggregated 
budget for GAP activities: 
 
 
 
 
93 Additional information is included in Annex B of Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
94 See Annex B in ESMS  
95 More information on gender officer responsibilities In Annex B in ESMS 
GAP
Social Performance and 
Environmental Risks Management 
Systems (FSPs and ICs)
Ecosystemic Projects, stakeholder 
engagement and gender actions
Output 1
67.962,21
Output 2
Output 3
Output 4
152.724,08
Total
213.813,71
220.686,29
TA Budget Category
213.813,71

=== PAGE 170 ===
29 
 
Total amount for GAP activities will be EUR 434,500. Additional clarifications: 
- 
The amount EUR 67,962.21 will be for GAP activities in Output 1. This amount is 11,5% of the total amount for 
Ecosystemic Projects, stakeholder engagement and Gender actions (EUR 590,750). 
- 
The amount EUR 213,813.71 will be for GAP activities in outputs 2 and 3. This amount is 49,26% of total amount 
for Social performance and enviromental risks (EUR 434,021). 
- 
The amount EUR 152.724.08 will be for GAP activities in Output 4. This amount is 25,85% of total amount for 
Ecosystemic Projects, stakeholder engagement and Gender actions (EUR 590,750). 
Additional GAWA capital’s internal budget (EUR 13,000) will be allocated to support gender and SEAH periodic training 
as detailed in the GAP. 
 
Explanatory diagram 
The following diagram sums up the approach to implement the gender integration in Kuali Fund-GCF. It is developed in 
the Gender Action Plan.

=== PAGE 171 ===
30 
 
2. GENDER ACTION PLAN (GAP) 
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Baseline 
Timeline  
Responsibilities  Costs 
Impact Statement: Women and other vulnerable groups in Latin America benefit from the mainstreaming of green finance among Tier 2 financial institutions for mitigation and 
adaptation of climate change.  
Outcome Statement:  
Increased availability of gender and socially inclusive financial products for different social groups, in particular women-led SMEs, farms and households, to switch to low carbon 
technologies and to implement adaptation strategies to the climate change effects.  
Output 1: Kuali Fund-GCF’s Governance. Policies and procedures enhanced to include comprehensive gender approach. Competencies and capacities development enhanced 
at Kuali Fund-GCF team. Gender Officer appointed and E&S Officer with expertise in gender hired. Country gender assessments extended. 
1.1 
Develop a Gender and SEAH Policy 
and amend existing ESMS to 
incorporate gender aspects and 
implementation arrangements  
Gender and SEAH Policy and new ESMS 
adopted and shared with relevant 
stakeholders. The gender and SEAH 
management system will follow the 
project life cycle and will comprise of 
the following steps: due diligence and 
gender gap assessment, action plan, 
legal agreement, monitoring, reporting 
and human resources 
No Gender and 
SEAH Policy 
Within 3 
months of FP 
approval. 
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Manager. E&S 
Officer and 
Gender Officer 
No cost  
1.2 
Appointment of Kuali Fund-GCF’s 
Gender Officer and an E&S officer 
with expertise in gender. Training 
for Gender and E&S Officers 
Gender Officer appointed among 
current Kuali Fund-GCF’s staff and 
receiving periodic training.  
 
An E&S officer with expertise in 
gender will be recruited 
No Gender 
Officer 
 
Gender Officer 
will be appointed 
and Gender and 
E&S Officers will 
be trained within 
3 months of Kuali 
Fund-GCF’s 
constitution. 
 
Quarterly 
monitoring. 
 
Gender Officer 
will have to 
report to the 
Investment 
Committee (IC) 
whenever an 
investment is to 
be approved 
and will monitor 
quarterly the 
investees’ 
gender and 
SEAH indicators, 
as well as any 
Appointment of Gender 
Officer included in 
GAWA’s internal budget  
 
Recruitment of E&S 
officer  
included in TA 
Management section 
within the TAF Budget 
 
Up to EUR 8.000 of GAWA 
Capital’s internal budget 
to support periodic 
gender and SEAH 
specialization courses for

=== PAGE 172 ===
31 
 
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Baseline 
Timeline  
Responsibilities  Costs 
Reports directly to 
the Investment 
Committee 
meetings. 
country 
indicators.  
The Gender 
Officer should 
support Kuali 
Fund-GCF’s 
staff at any 
time. 
GAWA will 
support this 
employee with 
specialized 
gender and 
SEAH courses. 
the Gender and E&S 
Officers 
1.3 
Enhance competencies of key 
Kuali Fund-GCF’s staff in the 
areas of gender, SEAH and social 
inclusion 
 
Specific gender and SEAH training, 
periodic workshops and online 
courses/training from reputed 
organisations such as UN WOMEN. 
New activity 
First training 
within 3 
months of Gender 
and SEAH Policy 
approval and then 
at least annually. 
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Manager and 
team 
Up to EUR 5.000 of GAWA 
Capital’s internal budget 
1.4 
Hire external consultants to 
update and extend the gender and 
SEAH country assessments once 
Kuali Fund-GCF is approved and 
the countries are confirmed.  
Country assessments completed and 
submitted. 
Country 
assessments 
displayed in 
Annex 8. 
Prior to the due 
diligence. Within 5 
months of Kuali’s 
constitution. 
External 
consultants and 
Gender Officer. 
Up to EUR 67.962,21 of 
“Ecosystemic 
projects, 
stakeholder engagement 
and 
gender 
actions” 
component of the TA 
budget. 
Output 
1 
(activities 1.4, 1.5) 
1.5 
Kuali Fund-GCF investment due 
diligence process will be updated 
to include a Gender Gap 
Assessment (GGA) and an action 
plan for each of its potential 
investees.  
Kuali Fund-GCF investment due-
diligence process updated, including the 
GGA as part of E&S appraisal96.  
 
GGA will assess the project specific 
gender vulnerabilities, risks, 
New activity 
Due diligence 
updated within 3 
months of 
approval 
Checklist 
prepared within 3 
External 
consultant, 
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Manager, 
Gender Officer, 
 
 
96 See Annex 6

=== PAGE 173 ===
32 
 
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Baseline 
Timeline  
Responsibilities  Costs 
opportunities and impacts/outcomes. 
Action plan will propose measurable 
interventions to support gender actions. 
 
Prepare a standardised checklist for 
collecting sex-disaggregated data and 
information regarding gender aspects 
within the FSPs and IC. 
 
Develop a digital tool for the follow-up 
of the ES and gender system that could 
also be used by FSPs and IC. 
months of 
approval 
 
Digital tool 
developed within 
6 months of 
approval 
 
Duration of the 
investment cycle 
E&S Officer and 
FSP/ IC 
Output 2: Implement level gender assessments and action plans in Financial Service Providers (FSPs) and innovative companies (IC) for both internal and external dimensions 
(NOTE: investee level assessments and specific gender indicators and targets, can only be established once specific investees are identified). 
2.1 
FSPs and ICs to elaborate a gender 
and SEAH policy and action plan 
for internal dimension after the 
gender and SEAH assessment97  
Every FSP/ IC with a gender and SEAH 
policy (formal commitment). A 
requirement to develop the policy will 
be included in legal agreements with 
FSP/IC. 
 
Each gender policy will include a 
procedure about equality and non-
discrimination in aspects such as: staff 
composition, access to leadership 
positions, recruitment, promotion, 
training on GEWE (including root causes 
and barriers), equal remuneration for 
work of equal value, and a sexual 
harassment protocol. It will include 
mechanisms of monitoring and 
reporting 
No policy and 
action plan. 
 
 
Policy and action 
plan within 6 
months after 
investment.  
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Manager, 
Gender Officer 
and FSP/ IC  
 
Gender and 
SEAH policy and 
action plan to 
be reviewed by 
the Gender 
Officer. 
Requirements 
will be included 
in legal 
agreements. 
Up to EUR 213.813,71 of 
“Social Performance and 
Environmental 
Risks 
Management 
Systems” 
component of the TA 
budget can be allocated 
to activities related to 
FSPs and ICs – Output 2 
(activities 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 
2.4 and 2.5) & 3 (activities 
3.1 and 3.2). 
 
 
 
97 See Annex B in ESMS

=== PAGE 174 ===
33 
 
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Baseline 
Timeline  
Responsibilities  Costs 
 
 
2.2 
Identify opportunities and 
challenges/ constraints in 
promoting women’s workforce 
participation (internal dimension) 
 
Participation in the 
workforce 
 
Participation in leadership 
positions 
 
Gender equitable practices 
 
Monitoring and follow up of 
female employment creation in 
Kuali’s portfolio – internal 
dimension. 
Percentage of women representation in 
the Board and Management of 
investees: 
 Target: At least 30% 
 
Female staff in investees: 
 Target: At least 40% 
 At least one gender equality support 
practice implemented beyond legal 
requirement98  
 
Targets will be reevaluated after the 
assessment of investees. 
 
Monitoring of female employment 
creation in Kuali’s portfolio. Final fund 
target: 2.880 total female employment 
directly supported - internal dimension 
To be identified in 
each investee. 
Targets will be 
reevaluated after 
gender gap 
assessments of 
investtees 
Duration of the 
investment cycle 
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Manager, 
Gender Officer 
and FSP/ IC 
2.3 
FSPs to develop a gender and 
SEAH policy and action plan for 
external dimension after the 
gender and SEAH assessment99 
Every FSP with a gender and SEAH policy 
(formal commitment). A requirement to 
develop the policy will be included in 
legal agreements with FSPs. 
Each gender policy will include an action 
plan together with pertinent 
environmental and social aspects about: 
i) analysis of gender dissagregated client 
data (e.g. client type, number/size 
profitability, savings, client satisfaction, 
age, geography, belonging to 
To be identified 
and reviewed if 
there is a gender 
policy in each 
investee. 
 
 
Policy within 6 
months. 
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Manager, 
Gender Officer 
and FSP 
 
Gender and 
SEAH policy and 
action plan to 
be reviewed by 
the Gender 
Officer. This 
 
 
98 Examples of Initiatives in place:.diverse representation policy, fair compensation policy, gender wage equity, flexible work arrangements, remote working and care work permits. 
99 See Annex B in ESMS

=== PAGE 175 ===
34 
 
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Baseline 
Timeline  
Responsibilities  Costs 
Indigenous Peoples); ii) products or 
services specifically targeting women 
and girls; iii) periodic training for staff 
on GEWE in the financial sector 
(including specific barriers women face); 
iv) monitoring and reporting. 
 
requirement will 
be included in 
legal 
agreements. 
2.4 
Implementation of policy and 
action plan for external dimension  
Each gender policy and action plan will 
have to be implemented and periodic 
monitoring will be done accordingly. 
Depending on 
activity 2.3.  
 
Implementation 
of management 
system within 1 
year after 
disbursement. 
 
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Manager, 
Gender Officer 
and FSP. 
 
2.5 
Training and support for FSPs and 
IC to implement a ES management 
system including gender and SEAH 
and to gain knowledge on these 
issues  
Workshop/training aimed at developing 
and implementing a ESMS with 
adequate digital mechanism/tools that 
include gender considerations. 
Training and development of ESMS with 
gender & SEAH focus. Appropriate 
monitoring tool including gender 
considerations implemented. 
No ESMS, or 
ESMS without 
gender & SEAH 
focus. 
Within 6 months 
after 
disbursement. 
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Manager, E&S 
Officer, Gender 
Officer and FSP/ 
IC 
2.6 
Identify opportunities and 
challenges/constraints of targeting 
women as clients (external 
dimension) 
 
 
Indicators: 
 Sex- disaggregated data availability 
and use 
 Products adapted to women’s needs 
and realities 
 Gender-sensitive delivery 
mechanisms 
 Gender-sensitive requirements to 
open and manage accounts 
Target: At least 72.700 women reached 
(71.372 farmers and 1.328 women led-
SMEs) (women borrowers) 
 
 
To be determined 
in each investee. 
Duration of the 
investment cycle 
External 
consultant  
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Manager, 
Gender Officer  
and FSP

=== PAGE 176 ===
35 
 
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Baseline 
Timeline  
Responsibilities  Costs 
2.7 
 
Monitoring and follow up of female 
employment creation and 
improved resilience in Kuali’s 
portfolio – external dimension. 
 
Monitoring of female employment 
creation in Kuali’s portfolio. Final fund 
target: 104,640 total female 
employment directly supported - 
external dimension. 
 
332 women led-SMEs and 17.843 
female smallholder farmers reporting 
increased turnover (as a result of direct 
support received from the FSPs). 
 
To be determined 
in each investee. 
Duration of the 
investment cycle 
External 
consultant  
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Manager, 
Gender Officer  
and FSP 
 
Output 3: Promote access to finance and take into account women’s barriers for providing guarantees 
3.1 
Develop mechanisms to monitor, 
report and verify gender impacts of 
FSP  at final beneficiary levels 
Women final beneficiaries in general 
(including women-owned SMEs and 
female smallholder farmers).  
 
New activity 
Duration of the 
post -investment 
cycle 
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Manager, 
Gender Officer 
and FSP  
Up to EUR 213.813,71 of 
“Social Performance and 
Environmental 
Risks 
Management 
Systems” 
component of the TA 
budget can be allocated 
to activities related to 
FSPs – Output 2 (activities 
2.1, 2.3, 2.4 and 2.5) & 3 
(activities 3.1 and 3.2). 
 
3.2 
Implement measures to take into 
account women’s barriers in 
providing guarantees 
Procedure to specifically evaluate and 
consider guarantees provided by 
women beneficiaries. 
Identify the guarantees required by 
each investee. 
Evaluate mechanisms or action plans to 
be developed by FSP to address 
barriers.  
Target #1: at least 5% women owned 
SMEs which were previously unbanked. 
Target #2: at least 10% of female 
smallholder farmers which were 
previously unbanked. 
Targets are in relation to the total 
number of women SMEs and women 
farmer beneficiaries. Both targets will 
be reevaluated after the assessment of 
gender consultants. 
New activity. 
External 
consultants will 
establish the 
baseline and 
evaluate targets 
accordingly 
 
Yearly monitoring 
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Manager, 
Gender Officer 
and FSPs 
Output 4: Capacity  building and awareness raising of potential final beneficiaries

=== PAGE 177 ===
36 
 
Activities  
Indicators and Targets  
Baseline 
Timeline  
Responsibilities  Costs 
4.1 
Climate awareness activities and 
trainings on Climate Smart 
Agriculture and adoption of Climate 
Solutions (energy access and power 
generation, buildings, cities, 
industries and appliances, forestry 
and land use, etc) being financed by 
FSP.  
 
 
Number of attendees to the training: 
12.117 of which 30% women. 
 
Follow up of adaptation products 
implemented and follow up of 
attendees that measure emissions 
after the training. 
New activity 
 
Potential 
attendees with no 
adaptation 
products and not 
measuring their 
GHG equivalent 
emissions. 
Duration of the 
investment cycle 
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Manager, 
Gender Officer 
and FSP  
Up to EUR 152.724,08 of 
“Ecosystemic 
projects, 
stakeholder engagement 
and 
gender 
actions” 
component of the TA 
budget can be allocated 
to activities related to 
Output 4 (activities 4.1, 
4.2 and 4.3)  
 
 
4.2 
Support for women’s economic 
empowerment via FSP through 
business skills training and financial 
literacy. 
 
Number of training attendees: 664 
women-led SMEs and 35.686 women 
farmers (50% of total women) Trainings 
will be opened to women non-FSPs 
clients. 
  
5% of total attendees will be indigenous 
women and 5% afrocedescendant 
women (as a minimum). 
 
Participation will be reviewed prior to 
the trainings being organised. 
New activity 
 
Potential 
attendees with no 
business skills and 
financial literacy.  
Duration of the 
investment cycle 
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Manager, 
Gender Officer 
and FSP 
4.3 
Support for women’s economic 
empowerment via FSP  through 
financial inclusion programs. 
Exploring how access to finance can 
contribute to women’s autonomy and 
independence: 
 
Result of women obtaining finance 
 
How are they using it and 
changing their lives 
 
How are they empowered 
N. of SME women investees’ clients 
which have exceeded the national 
poverty line. 
N. of smallholder women investees’ 
clients which have exceeded the 
national poverty line. 
To be identified  
in each investee. 
Initial, mid-term 
and final lifecycle 
periods. 
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Manager, 
Gender Officer 
and FSP

=== PAGE 178 ===
37 
Activities 
Indicators and Targets 
Baseline 
Timeline 
Responsibilities 
Costs 
Targets will be set within 3 months since 
disbursement. 
4.4 
Build partnerships with local 
women’s organizations in each of 
the target countries to ensure a 
more specific knowledge about 
women’s situation and local 
expertise.  
Evaluate the potential partnerships with 
local women’s organisations when 
investment agreements are signed with 
investees in each country. The aim will 
be to build one partnership as a 
minimum per country.  
New activity 
Duration of Kuali 
Fund-GCF lifecycle 
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Manager, 
Gender Officer  
and local 
women 
organizations 
No cost 
4.5 
Replication of successful initiatives 
from one country to another.  
Whenever a gender focused initiative is 
developed in an FSP or IC, the potential 
replication of the initiative will be 
analysed. The aim will be to replicate 2 
initiatives as a minimum. 
New activity 
Duration of Kuali 
Fund-GCF lifecycle 
Kuali Fund-GCF 
Manager/Gend
er Officer 
No cost 
Total budget allocated to GAP activities: EUR 434,500 
__________
