=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.6
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Acrobat PDFMaker 23 for Word
producer: Adobe PDF Library 23.6.96
creationDate: D:20231002094932+09'00'
modDate: D:20231002101252+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
23 – 26 October 2023 
Tbilisi, Georgia 
Provisional agenda item 12 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.12 
2 October 2023 
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum XII 
Funding proposal package for FP221 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following six parts: 
a) A funding proposal summary titled "Rwanda Green Investment Facility (RGIF)" 
submitted by African Development Bank; 
b) No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
f) Gender documentation of the funding proposal. 
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated 
authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled “Rwanda Green Investment Facility (RGIF)” submitted by 
African Development Bank. is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board Members 
and Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally privileged, or 
commercially sensitive information of the entity.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.12 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
116 
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure 
118 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
120 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
132 
Gender documentation 
134

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
Country(ies): 
Accredited Entity: 
Date of first submission: 
Rwanda Green Investment Facility (RGIF) 
Rwanda 
African Development Bank 
[2019/06/18] 
Date of current submission 
[2023/09/30] 
Version number 
[V.1]

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0 
Contents 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
•
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc.
•
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be
reflected in all relevant documents.
•
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual
service standard time.
•
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.
•
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board,
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP.
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.2.0 | PAGE b
LIST OF ACRONYMS 
AE 
Accredited Entity 
AMA 
Accreditation Master Agreement 
EE 
Executing Entity 
ESIA 
Environment and Social Impact Assessment 
ESMF 
Environment and Social Management Framework 
ESMP 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
ESMS 
Environmental and Social Management System 
ESS 
Environmental Social Safeguard 
FP 
Funding Proposal 
GHG 
Greenhouse Gas Emission 
IDP 
Information Disclosure Policy 
IRMF 
Integrated Results Management Framework 
NDA 
National Designated Authority 
RFP 
Request for Proposals 
In the spaces below, please add any additional abbreviations or acronyms that specific 
to the project.

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 1 
PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
A.1. Project or
programme
Programme 
A.2. Public or
private sector
Private 
A.3. Request for
Proposals (RFP)
If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals, 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+. 
Not applicable 
A.4. Result area(s)
 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets 
below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co-
financers’ contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 
100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively. 
GCF 
contribution 
Co-financers’ 
contribution 
Mitigation total 
75 % 
75 % 
☒Energy generation and access
25 % 
25 % 
☒Low-emission transport
25 % 
25 % 
☒Buildings, cities, industries and appliances
25 % 
25 % 
☐Forestry and land use
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Adaptation total 
25 % 
25 % 
☐Most vulnerable people and communities
0 % 
0 % 
☒Health and well-being, and food and water security
25 % 
25 % 
☐Infrastructure and built environment
0 % 
0 % 
☐Ecosystems and ecosystem services
0 % 
0 % 
A.5. Expected mitigation
outcome
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered) 
0.93 million tCO2e 
A.6. Expected
adaptation
outcome
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached) 
Indicate total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
140,000 
280,000 
1.05% 
2.11% 
A.7. Total financing (GCF
+ co-finance)
141,955,898 USD 
A.9. Project size
Medium (Upto USD 250 
million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding
requested
_ 42,793,000____ USD

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2 
A.10. Financial
instrument(s) requested
for the GCF funding
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
☒Grant1
12,793,000 USD 
☒Loan
30,000,000 USD 
☐Guarantee 
Enter number
☐Equity
    Enter number 
☐Results-based payment    Enter number
A.11. Implementation
period
7 years 
A.12. Total lifespan
25 years 
A.13. Expected date of
AE internal approval
This is the date that the 
Accredited Entity obtained/will 
obtain its own approval to 
implement the project/ 
programme, if available. 
11/22/2023 
A.14. ESS category
Refer to the AE’s safeguard policy 
and GCF ESS Standards to assess 
your FP category. 
I-2
A.15. Has this FP been
submitted as a CN
before?
Yes ☒    No ☐
A.16. Has
Readiness or PPF
support been used
to prepare this FP?
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included
in the entity work
programme?
Yes ☒    No ☐
A.18. Is this FP
included in the
country
programme?
Yes ☒    No ☐
A.19. Complementarity
and coherence
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF, 
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☒    No ☐
A.20. Executing Entity
information
If not the Accredited Entity, please indicate the full legal name of the Executing Entity(ies) and 
provide its country of registration and ownership type. Note that there can be more than one 
Executing Entity. Also indicate if an Executing Entity is the National Designated Authority. Refer 
to the definition of Executing Entity in the Accreditation Master Agreement.  
The Executing Entities to implement the RGIF project: 
1. Government of Rwanda (through MINECOFIN)
2. Name: Development Bank of Rwanda Plc (BRD)
Country of registration: Rwanda
Ownership type: Public Limited Company fully owned by the
Government of Rwanda
3. Name: FONERWA
Country of registration: Rwanda
Ownership type: Special organ of the Government of Rwanda
established under the Law establishing the National Fund for
Environment and determining its mission, organization and functioning
(Nº 39/2017 of 16/08/2017)
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3 
Provide an executive summary of the project/programme including: 
1.
Climate change problem
2.
Proposed interventions
3.
Climate impacts/benefits
Rwanda is among the highly vulnerable2 countries to climate change both in terms of mitigation and adaptation. 
Climate effect such as intense rainfalls, seasonal temperature shifts, droughts, and landslides have become 
increasingly common3 and extremely difficult to manage with serious consequences for agriculture, health and 
livelihoods: high soil erosion rates, increased livestock vulnerability to diseases, periodic floods, shifting agro-
climatic zones, development of new pests and diseases, etc. To tackle this challenge, Rwanda has set ambitious 
climate and development goals to achieve low-carbon emission while creating economic social impact and job 
creation.  
The Government of Rwanda is pursuing several measures for low-carbon and climate-resilient growth and 
development consistent with its national development plans and commitment under the Paris Agreement. The 
country’s updated Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) 2020 have identified climate adaptation and 
mitigation measures presented in the Green Rwanda action Plan. These measures include electricity generation, 
energy efficient buildings, climate resilient agriculture, Manufacturing industries, clean transportation, water 
conservation, waste management and soil management. The RGIF is specifically designed to mobilize the 
financing required for executing the transactions and management of pipeline projects ins some these priority 
sectors of the NDC and to contribute to the implementation and realization of the NDC targets.  
Furthermore, as the country looks towards what will be needed for Rwanda to address the unprecedented 
challenges created by Covid-19, the RGIF will play a critical role in progressing from near-term emergency aid 
relief to what will be needed in the medium-to-longer term to build resiliency and re-grow Rwanda’s developing 
economy. The role of catalytic, innovative finance capacity to support critical infrastructure and social 
investment and sustainable growth will be essential.  
The RGIF project aims to strengthen Rwanda’s ownership of climate finance and address market challenges to 
facilitate private investment in the low carbon sector by offering tailored financing products to target projects 
in priority sectors. Specifically, RGIF will be composed of two windows working in an integrated approach: 1) 
the Project Preparation Facility at the Rwanda Green Fund (FONERWA) offering grants and reimbursable grants 
to increase projects bankability and 2) the Credit Facility embedded within the Development Bank of Rwanda 
(BRD) offering direct loans for the eligible pipeline.  
Additionally, the activities for the RGIF programme will include strengthening the institutional capacity of the 
FONERWA and BRD to upgrade and become the co-executors of the RGIF and have the mandate, structure, 
functions, investment focus, financial instruments and systems, strategic and business plan, operational systems, 
and manuals, required staffing and capacity for making catalytic green investments.  
This will include for BRD as the manager of the RGIF Credit Facility, project origination and screening, credit 
analysis, deal structuring and credit approval (investment), risk analysis and management, portfolio 
management, loan monitoring and monitoring and reporting. And for FONERWA, this includes technical 
assistance to the market (project developers and local banks included) and advisory services for bringing the 
pipeline projects into financial close as well as investment and portfolio management.  
The expected reduction in carbon emissions based on current pipeline and very conservative estimates is about 
[0.92million] tonnes CO2eq over a 25-years lifetime across 4 target sectors in the near term: renewable energy, 
agriculture, green buildings and clean transportation. The programme will also ensure climate resilience 
livelihoods for 31,000 households and will ensure women have equal access to the facility Finally, RGIF 
programme will also enhance Rwanda's capacity to mobilize green investments and upgrade local capacity to 
provide green finance and support national green development.  
1 Grant value (USD 8,793,000) and reimbursable grant (4,000,000) 
2 World Bank Climate Change Knowledgeable Portal (climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org).  
3 Rwanda Water & Forestation Authority Interview & PST4 Rwanda Agriculture Strategic Plan 2018-2024

=== PAGE 9 ===
B
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4 
PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages)
Climate change problem: Describe the climate change problem the proposal is expected to address. 
Describe the mitigation needs (GHG emissions profile) and/or adaptation needs (climate hazards and 
associates risks based on impacts, exposure, and vulnerabilities) that the proposed interventions are 
expected to address. Also describe the most likely scenario (prevailing conditions or other alternative) that 
would remain or continue in the absence of the proposed interventions. Include baseline information. The 
methodologies used to derive such information, including the mitigation and adaptation needs, should be 
included in the feasibility study.  
Context: In describing the mitigation and/or adaptation needs, briefly describe the target region/area of the 
proposed interventions including information on the demographics, economy, topography, etc.  
Related projects/interventions: Also describe any recent or ongoing projects/interventions that are related 
to the proposal from other domestic or international sources of funding, such as the Global Environment 
Facility, Adaptation Fund, Climate Investment Funds, etc., and how they will be complemented by this 
project/programme (e.g. scaling up, replication, etc.). Please identify current gaps and barriers regarding 
recent or ongoing projects and elaborate further how this project/programme complements or addresses 
these.  
1.
Climate Rationale:
The climate change basis for the integrated RGIF programme is a focus on projects that provide mitigation
or adaptation benefits following the principles established in GCF board decision B.33/12. Climate change 
and associated impacts could have devastating implications on development in different climate-sensitive
sectors like agriculture, water resources, human health, energy, ecosystem and biodiversity.  It is,
therefore, imperative to understand the spatial and temporal variation of climate within any given zone
or region of Rwanda, and their relationship with other factors which is necessary to inform activities
related to climate change and the management of the natural resources, such as environmental planning,
land use planning, water resources planning, agriculture and irrigation.
2.
Climatology and historical climate of Rwanda

=== PAGE 10 ===
B
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5 
4 Ilunga, L., Mbaragijimana, C. and Muhire, I., (2004). Pluviometric seasons and rainfall origin in Rwanda. Geo-Eco-Trop, 28(1-2):61-68. 
5 Kizza, M., Rodhe, A., Xu, C.Y., Ntale, H.K. and Halldin, S., (2009). Temporal rainfall variability in the Lake Victoria basin in East Africa during the 
twentieth century. Theoretical and Applied Climatology,98:119-135. 
6 Muhire, I. and Ahmed, F., (2015). Spatio-temporal trend analysis of precipitation data over Rwanda. South African Geographical Journal, 97(1): 
50-68. 
Rwanda is a landlocked country with a challenging topography (Figure B.1.1) and structural development 
challenges such as lack of appropriate 
infrastructure, 
insufficient 
energy 
access, and an economy still dependent 
on 
rain-fed 
agriculture 
for 
both 
subsistence and exports. This makes the 
country highly vulnerable to climate 
change 
with 
impact 
on 
natural 
resources.  
Although Rwanda is located within the 
equatorial belt, its climate is not typical 
to that of the equatorial rainy type. The 
country’s climate is defined by humid 
conditions including rainy forest and 
Savannah types. The central and eastern 
part of the country is generally of semi-
arid type owing to its position in the 
rainy shadow of the western highlands. 
The rainfall 5is characterized by a large 
temporal and spatial variation due to 
varied topography and existence of large water bodies near and within the country. In general, two rainy 
seasons dominates during the periods March – May (long rainy season) and September – November (short 
rainy season)4,5 as shown by selected project sites in Figure B.1.2. The rainy seasons are alternate with 
long dry (June-July-August) and short dry seasons (Mid-December-January-February) throughout the 
year. The four seasons are largely controlled by the position and intensity of anticyclones such as 
Mascarenes, Saint Helena, Açores and Siberian. Spatial distribution of both observed and modelled 
climatological precipitation and temperature decreases and increases, respectively,  from the west to east 
of Rwanda, although the shows overestimation in the west and underestimation in the north-east region 
of the country (Figure B.1.3). The country’s average annual total precipitation can range from 700-
1500mm (Figure B.1.3a & d) and distributed differently across the four main climatic regions, namely, 
eastern plains, central plateau, highlands, and regions around Lake Kivu, 6 while temperatures range 
between 11o – 28oC across the climatic regions (Figure B.1.3 b, c, e & f).  
Figure B.1.1: Map of Rwanda showing elevation in meters and 
location some project sites

=== PAGE 11 ===
B
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6 
7 https://unfccc.int/climate-action/momentum-for-change/financing-for-climate-friendly-investment/rwanda-green-fund-fonerwa 
8 Ministry of Environment 2017.  
9 Source: Rwanda Strategic Program for Climate Resilience report (2017). 
Figure B.1.2:  Monthly climatology of precipitation, mean, minimum and maximum 
temperature for Gasabo, Musanze, Nyanza and Bugesera in Rwanda (1981 -2019) 
Temporal variability of the rainfall in some occasions has resulted in extreme events such as the floods of 
1997/98 El-Niño phenomena and frequent droughts that have far reaching socio-economic impacts to the 
country. During the historical climate, Rwanda observed decreasing trend in precipitation of about 1-
7mm/month/decade (Figure B.1.4a), which explains partly the cyclical droughts experienced in the 
country for the last 50 years7. The country also experienced periodic floods due to intense rainfall events. 
A general increasing trend in temperature (i.e., 0.05oC/decade and 0.35oC/decade with minimum and 
maximum temperature, respectively as shown in Figure B.1.4b & c) is observed over the entire country. 
These observed variability in precipitation and temperature contributes to the country’s vulnerability to 
climate change which result in environmental degradation as a result of soil erosion, landslides resulting 
in the loss of soil fertility in the North, Western, and Southern provinces, and several droughts in the 
Eastern Province. 
As the country is heavily dependent upon its natural resources including land, water, and forests 
(Rwanda’s economy depends primarily on a rain fed agriculture and the country is still water scarce with 
670 m³ of water per capita per year and 25% of the population are still unable to access safe drinking 
water8.) The cost of climate change to Rwanda has been estimated at more than $3 billion by 2030 and 
the country could lose 1% of its GDP each year due to climate change effects if not addressed9. According

=== PAGE 12 ===
B
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7 
10 https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/2021-09/15970-WB_Rwanda%20Country%20Profile-WEB.pdf 
11 Harris, I. et al. (2020) ‘Version 4 of the CRU TS monthly high-resolution gridded multivariate climate dataset’, Scientific data, 7(1), p. 
109. 
12 The three regional climate models (RCMs) participate in the Coordinated Regional Climate Downscaling Experiment (CORDEX, Giorgi 
et al., 2009) framework and were retrieved from the ESGF portal. These RCMs consist of the  Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological 
Institute, Rossby Centre (SMHI, Samuelsson et al., 2015), the Climate Limited-area Modelling Community (CCLM, Rockel, Will and 
Hense, 2008) and the Helmholtz-Zentrum  Geesthacht,  Climate  Service  Center,  Max  Planck  Institute  for Meteorology (REMO, Jacob 
et al., 2001). The RCMs were driven with initial and boundary conditions from the Max Planck’s Earth Systems Model (Giorgetta et al., 
2013) low resolution runs 
to the Climate Risk country profile for Rwanda10, natural hazards caused by droughts, floods, storms and 
landslides have caused hundreds of deaths during the 1900-2020 period.  
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure B.1.3: Spatial distribution of climatological means of annual total precipitation, mean minimum 
and maximum temperature  observed from CRU 11 (gridded observation) and modelled by three 
regional climate model (RCM)12 ensemble.

=== PAGE 13 ===
B
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8 
13 Brown, M.E. and Funk C.C., (2008). Food security under climate change. Science, 319:580-581. 
14 Hulme,M., (2001). Climatic perspectives on Sahelian desiccation: 1973-1998. Global Environmental Change, 
11:19–29. 
15 World Water Forum (WWF), (2006). Climate change impacts on East Africa: a review of the scientific 
literature. WWF International, Gland. 
16 IPCC, (2007). Climate change 2007: impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II, 
III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, UK. 
17 Eriksen, S., O’Brien, K. and Losentrater, L., (2008). Climate hange in the eastern and southern Africa: 
impacts, vulnerability and adaptation. Global Envirocnmental Change and Human Security, Report, 
2008:2.University of Oslo. From http://www.bvsde.paho.org/bvsacd/cd68/ClimAfrica.pdf, retrieved May 29, 
2014. 
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure B.1.4: Trends in precipitation, minimum and maximum temperature as observed in CRU for the period 
1976-2005. The stipplings indicate areas where the observed trends are statistically significant at 0.05 (95%) 
significance level.   
3.
Climate projection
A decline in mean annual total rainfall is projected for the mid-century (2041-2070) under both RCP4.5
and RCP8.5, especially in the western (i.e., the Lake Kivu) region (Figure B.1.5a & c). The decrease in
annual rainfall is expected to range between 5-200mm particularly in RCP8.5, although the signal show
slight increase in the central and southern region in RCP4.5. Recent studies, however, are not very clear
about the predicted precipitations over East Africa (EA); some suggest that local circulation effects may
result in a general decrease in precipitation13, while others predict an increase in precipitation (by 5%-
20% from December to February, and 5%-10% from June to August by 2050) in relation to the projected
increase in temperatures (Figure B.1.5b & d; and previous studies[ 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 ]). A general positive
temperature change is expected to range between 1o-4oC in the future with significant change around the
Lake Kivu and eastern regions of the country (Figure B.1.5b & d).

=== PAGE 14 ===
B
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure B.1.5. Projected change in mean annual total precipitation and temperature for the mid-century (2041-
2070) under RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 emission scenarios.  The change is relative to the baseline (1976-2005) and 
stipplings indicate areas where the projected change are statistically significant at 0.05 (95%) significance 
level.   
Further climate projection analysis shows that the number of rain days (prcptot; Figure B.1.6a & d) will 
likely decline but the contribution from very wet (r95ptot; Figure B.1.6b & e) and consecutive 1-day 
precipitation amount (rx1day; Figure B.1.6c & f) are projected to increase by 8% and 7mm, respectively, 
and above, especially in the eastern part of the country. This suggest the likelihood of increased flood 
events in flood-prone areas and regions where the change are statistically significant. Drought- and water 
stress- related indicators such as the consecutive dry days (cdd; Figure B.1.6g & j) and standardized 
precipitation index (spi; Figure B.1.6h & k) are projected to increase under the two RCPs particularly in 
RCP8.5. Statistically significant warm spell (wsdi; Figure B.1.6i & l) is expected in the entire country. 
Rwanda’s priority economic sectors, like agriculture, energy, health, infrastructure, etc, are highly climate-
sensitive. For instance, the country’s agriculture is largely rainfed, which makes it vulnerable to changes 
in projected rainfall.  Climate change-induced rising temperatures are making already dry areas drier. In 
dry regions, this means that as temperatures rise, water evaporates more quickly, increasing the risk of 
drought or extending drought periods over a larger extent of the country. Drought can cause serious 
implication on health, agriculture, economies, energy and the environment. Increased wet days and

=== PAGE 15 ===
B
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
maximum one day precipitation in the future is an indication of potential increase in flood events that 
could result in loss of human life, property and infrastructure damage, and crop destruction and livestock 
loss. The already stressed energy sector could be subjected to further pressure due to increase in warm 
spell resulting in increase in energy demand for domestic and industrial purpose (e.g., cooling, etc). The 
summation of these climate change impacts will likely increase vulnerability and jeopardizing national 
efforts to improve well-being of exposed population and ensure food and water security in Rwanda.   
(a)
(b)
(c) 
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)

=== PAGE 16 ===
B
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
18 The selected climate indices are defined by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) Expert Team on 
Sector-Specific Climate Indices (ET-SCI) and generated from daily precipitation and minimum and maximum 
surface temperature using the climpact tool (https://climpact-sci.org/indices/). These climate indices include 
annual rain days (prcptot), contributions from very wet days (r95ptot), consecutive 1-day precipitation amount 
(rx1day), consecutive dry days (cdd), standardized precipitation index (spi), and warm spell duration index 
(wsdi)   
19 Rwanda_Updated_NDC_May_2020 
Figure B.1.6. Projected change in some selected sector-specific climate indices18 for the mid-century (2041-2070) 
under RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 emission scenarios. The change is relative to the baseline (1976-2005) and stipplings 
indicate areas where the projected change are statistically significant at 0.05 (95%) significance level.   
Although climate model used projects a potential flood and drought risk and possible health risk as a 
result of increasing warm spell, these risks are, however, one of several possibilities. This is because 
climate projections explain different uncertainties ascribed partly to natural variability within the climate 
system, model formulation and accuracy, and future emission trajectory. However, such information is 
much needed to minimize maladaptation and for robust decision-making to adapt to the potential climate 
risk posed by climate change. Especially, the information will be useful within the context of the proposed 
GCF project to decide whether and how to adapt activities, systems, and sectors including agriculture, 
energy, transport, at national and community scales to a changing climate.  
4.
Rwanda’s NDCs targets and green growth objectives have identified priority investments needs for a total
amount of 5.7 billion19 USD by 2030 for mitigation      actions alone in several sectors including agriculture, 
energy, urbanization, and clean transportation. Rwanda’s NDC have also set ambitious goals for
investment in adaption targeting 5.3 billion USD by 2030 focusing on activities programmes including: 1)
sustainable intensification of agriculture, 2) integrated water resources management and planning, 3)
integrated land use and management, 4) efficient resilient transport systems, 5) ecotourism, conservation 
and payment of ecosystem services, 6) sustainable forest and agroforestry, etc. However, current
investment trajectories show a shortfall of investment to meet these goals, particularly from the private
sector. The overall objective of the RGIF is to enhance the country’s capacity to advance financial
innovation to accelerate climate mitigation measures with the focus on leveraging private investments in
low carbon markets.
5.
The investment criteria of the RGIF are based on selecting projects that achieve mitigation or adaptation
benefits in the following key sectors: energy sector, green buildings/green urbanization, clean
transportation, and climate smart agriculture. Several of these sectors have overlapping benefits- for
example in climate smart agriculture: efficient drip irrigation projects that use solar energy have both a
mitigation (avoided diesel emissions) and adaptation (increased water efficiency and drought resilience)
impacts. Similarly, green buildings/green urbanization have both a mitigation (reduced energy
consumption) and adaptation (improved resilience to storms) impacts. The sectors are described in more 
detail in the bullets below:
6.
Energy sector
The Government of Rwanda’s plan to mitigate GHG emissions in the energy sector focuses on a significant
increase in renewable power generation, a sharp decrease in the use of biomass as a primary energy
source, and a reduction of fossil fuel consumption in the transport sector (transport emissions are one of
the primary sources of air pollution in Rwanda). Additionally, Rwanda plans to invest in energy efficiency 
and renewable energy in industries as well as in commercial and residential buildings.

=== PAGE 17 ===
B
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
20 Third National Communication under the U.N.F.C.C.C Report, 2020 
21 Third National Communication under the U.N.F.C.C.C Report, 2020 
22 https://tradingeconomics.com/rwanda/urban-population-growth-annual-percent-wb-data.html 
23 https://www.climatechangenews.com/2020/05/21/rwanda-submits-tougher-emission-cutting-plan-un/ 
24 REMA 2015 
25 Third National Communication under the U.N.F.C.C.C Report, 2020 
26 Third National Communication under the U.N.F.C.C.C Report, 2020 
27 Third National Communication under the U.N.F.C.C.C Report, 2020 
28 Third National Communication under the U.N.F.C.C.C Report, 2020 
29 Third National Communication under the U.N.F.C.C.C Report, 2020 
30 Rwanda Green Building Minimum Compliance System, 16/04/2019 
31 Third National Communication under the U.N.F.C.C.C Report, 2020 
32 Third National Communication under the U.N.F.C.C.C Report, 2020 
Rwanda has been growing with an average 8% GDP growth rate for the last 10 years, which has resulted 
in higher demands for energy services. Energy and waste sectors are the major contributors to total GHG 
emissions in Rwanda. From 2006 to 2015, the sector has seen an annual increase of 4.2%20 estimated GHG 
emissions following the trend of both fuel consumption and GDP growth. Energy sub-sectors that 
contributed the most to GHG emissions include biomass21 (fuel wood and charcoal), and fossil fuel for 
road transportation and industries. This trend is projected to continue as the Rwanda population in urban 
areas is also increasing with 3.2% urban population growth in 201922 from a low baseline. Under a 
business-as-usual scenario, Rwanda’s emissions are forecast to more than double between 2015 and 
2030, rising from 5.3 million tonnes of CO2eq to 12.1 million tonnes, driven by a rise in fossil fuel use, 
increasing energy demand and road transport.23 The Rwanda’s transport sector for example, driven by 
increasing urbanization and population growth is expected to increase its emissions from 0.53 million 
tCO2eq in 2012 to 3.1 million tCO2eq in 203024.  
Additionally, regarding Energy Efficiency in buildings (heating, cooling, lighting, cooking, etc.), the 
Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA) projects an increase of almost six times from 2012 
CO2 emission of 2,183.00 GgCO2-eq.25 to 6,145.4026 GgCO2-eq. by 2050.  
7.
Electricity access
Under the electricity mitigation scenario, renewable power generation sources will largely come from
hydro and solar PV plants. Based on current mitigation plans, it is expected that hydropower will provide
42.01%27of the total energy mix in 2050. This will need significant investments in renewable energy
infrastructures in both near and medium terms especially in the off-grid subsector. As a result of the target 
mitigation measures, the country expects a cumulative emission reduction of 20,377.80 Gg CO2-eq.28 by
2050 compared to business as usual.
8.
Energy Efficiency and Green Cities
Energy efficiency measures in buildings such as efficient lighting, efficient (solar) heating systems, and
energy efficient cooling are expected to result to a cumulative GHG emissions reduction of 38,993.79 Gg
CO2-eq29 from 2012 to 2050. The new law30 setting up a minimum green compliance for new public and
commercial buildings in 2019 is an example of Rwanda’s emerging mitigation policy regarding energy
efficiency. Rwanda’s Green City project also focuses on energy efficiency with resiliency components such
as water autonomy, sustainable mobility, ecosystem services and zero-carbon buildings. Industrial sector
mitigation measures are projected to have a cumulative GHG reduction impact of approximately 884.75
Gg CO2-eq.31 by 2050 (compared to 2012 emissions for the sector estimated at 1,170.82 GgCO2-eq.32).
Rwanda’s extremely hilly topography has been a challenge with heavy floods affecting vulnerable
populations in major cities like Kigali. RGIF plans to offer co-financing of selected projects, with clear
investment criteria and environmental social risk policies to ensure that projects are adhering to best

=== PAGE 18 ===
B
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
33 https://gggi.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Annex-3-Rwanda-Green-Building-Minimum-Compliance-System-REVISED.pdf 
34 Third National Communication under the U.N.F.C.C.C Report, 2020 
35 Third National Communication under the U.N.F.C.C.C Report, 2020 
36 Third National Communication under the U.N.F.C.C.C Report, 2020 
37 Third National Communication under the U.N.F.C.C.C Report, 2020 
practices related to safety and resiliency. This would complement the existing resiliency guidelines that 
stakeholders like MOE, REMA and the Rwanda Housing Authority (RHA) are issuing for these new (yet to 
be developed) green city developments. Additionally, recent law requires new commercial buildings in 
Kigali to be built to efficient standards. The climate resiliency components of the green city are derived 
from the Rwandan Green Growth and Climate Resilience Strategy in “Program: Low Carbon Urban 
Systems” including designing high density cities with corridors for pedestrians and cyclists and green 
public spaces, which reduces the need for energy intensive transport, improves quality of life and reduces 
the risk of flooding. Not only will this reduce GHG emissions and oil dependency, but it will also reduce 
the burden of transport costs to citizens. It also has co- benefits, such as reduced urban sprawl. 
REMA and RHA are relying on utilizing resiliency criteria developed and published in Rwanda Green 
Building Compliance System (Government of Rwanda 2019) and in Rwanda Building Control Regulations 
(Rwanda Housing Authority 2012). Both documents describe the resiliency criteria regarding energy 
efficiency, water efficiency, environmental protection etc.  The resiliency criteria developed as part of the 
Rwanda Green Building Minimum Compliance systems 33 and was conceived as simple, effective and 
environmental performance-oriented indicators designed to promote energy & water efficiency, 
environmental protection, better Indoor Environmental Quality to building  occupants and green 
innovation. These indicators are mandatory in nature and would be applicable for new Category 4 & 5 
buildings as per Ministerial Order Determining Urban Planning and Building Regulations. 
Although the green building minimum compliance system is not mandatory for residential developments, 
willing building owners and real estate developers are encouraged to adopt as applicable on a voluntary 
basis the green building minimum compliance system to meet sustainable development targets. 
9.
Clean Transportation
Measures focused on promoting GHG mitigation in the transport sector include promotion of fuel
efficiency, construction of electric rail infrastructure, and adoption of electric vehicles - especially
motorcycles - which are expected to be the main sources of GHG emissions in Rwanda’s transport sector
by 2050. Investments in climate resilient transport infrastructure and the promotion of clean
transportation solutions are the current focus of Rwanda’s infrastructure strategy. In 2016, a law
governing the preservation of air quality and prevention of air pollution was adopted which mandates
emission testing for all vehicles and imposes a tax on petrol burning vehicles. In 2015, the total GHG
emission from the transport sector was estimated at 547.3534 Gg CO2-eq. Rwanda estimates that GHG
emissions from transport will continue increasing to 1,678.25 35  Gg CO2-eq. by 2050 (from 2012
baseline).
Additionally, energy from transport has been identified as one of the main sources of GHG emission from
the overall energy sector and mitigation efforts are part of the country's overall energy mitigation
activities. The national energy transport mitigation scenario forecasts expected CO2 emissions to increase 
from 447.60 GgCO2-eq in 2012 to 1,169.40 Gg CO2-eq in 205036. This indicates a cumulative GHG
emission reduction target of 8,690.40 Gg CO2-eq between 2012 and 205037 regarding transport sector
specific mitigation measures.
Implementing this suite of mitigation activities in the energy sector will require addressing structural
barriers to private investment. These barriers include high upfront capital costs, high financing costs, and
limited technical capacity and expertise. The RGIF will directly support energy mitigation measures by
providing financing solutions to projects that can achieve scale and impact and also attract co-investment

=== PAGE 19 ===
B
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
38 Rwanda National Institute of Statistics (NISR) 2015. 
39 Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), 2020 
40 Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), 2009. 
41 MIDIMAR 2015; REMA 2015.  
from the local financial market. The RGIF will utilize this approach to advancing Rwanda’s capacity to 
achieve its NDC energy mitigation targets. 
10. Agriculture
Agriculture provides about 33% of Rwanda’s GDP, 80% of its employment, and 45% of its export revenues 
(mostly tea and coffee)38. However, steep terrain, limited land, and a lack of modern technology pose
serious constraints for agricultural development. Overexploitation of land, high dependence on biomass
for household energy needs (used by 80% of the population), and increasing urbanization create
significant pressure on natural resources, notably land, water, and forests. Over 60% of households
cultivate less than 0.7 ha, and 30% cultivate less than 0.2 ha. Over 70% of cultivated land has slopes
greater than 10%39 which results in high levels of erosion and surface runoff into waterways. Erosion
causes loss of soil, nutrients, and organic matter that translates into annual economic losses of US$34
million40, or almost 2 % of GDP equivalent.
Rwanda’s dependence on traditional rain-fed agriculture makes it vulnerable to changes in rainfall and
climate factors are exacerbated by a loss of forest and vegetative cover and steep slopes. Increased
intensity of rainfall can cause flash floods and landslides which are exacerbated by erosion (caused by
agricultural practices on steep slopes and deforestation for fuel wood). A lack of adequate drainage also
has a significant impact on agricultural production (hence food security), infrastructure, and electricity
generation.
Rwanda is expecting a climate-related decrease in mean rainfall amounts and the number of rainy days in 
regions like the south-eastern lowlands and central plateau, which already have a limited water supply
(as shown in Figures B.1.5a&c and B.1.6a&d). A decline of 25mm and above rainfall amount from rainy
days is projected by mid-century (2041-2070) in most parts of the country with the western region
experiencing greater decline of more than 100mm . This scenario may result in a decline in water storage
and a shorter crop growing period. Additionally, the expected increase in the number of very wet days
and maximum consecutive 1-day rainfall (Figure B.1.6b, c, e & f) in the north-west highlands and south-
western regions might result in an increased number of flooding episodes, soil erosion and landslides
which might in turn lead to the destruction of existing infrastructure and impact other human activities.
Hence, there is a clear need to implement climate adaptation and mitigation measures in the agriculture
sector.
11. Agriculture mitigation and adaptation needs (cross cutting)
Climate mitigation and adaptation measures in Rwanda’s agriculture sector involve mineral fertilizers
replacement activities (currently the major source of GHG emissions is the use of fertilizers through urea
application), the development of agroforestry for sustainable agriculture and the promotion of climate
smart irrigation systems including solar irrigation in lands that are currently under some form of informal 
or peasant agriculture but that are significantly impacted by droughts such as the Eastern region of the
country. Specific adaptation measures include investments to promote IFSM, water-efficient irrigation,
rainwater harvesting, and crop-tree-livestock integration, etc.
Due to climate change impacts, such as droughts, floods, landslides, and windstorms41 will likely result
in significant consequences for livelihoods including food insecurity, loss of crops and loss of livestock.
Rwanda has committed itself to promote climate resilient agriculture to ensure sustainable production
and food security. Additionally, the country is facing a clear investment gap in terms of water storage
development ranging from small to large scale, technology which will make the country resilient to floods

=== PAGE 20 ===
B
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
42 https://cdkn.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/12/Rwanda-Green-Growth-Strategy-FINAL1.pdf 
43 Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), 2020 
44 https://cdkn.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/12/Rwanda-Green-Growth-Strategy-FINAL1.pdf 
45 Third National Communication under the U.N.F.C.C.C Report, 2020 
46 Third National Communication under the U.N.F.C.C.C Report, 2020 
47 Third National Communication under the U.N.F.C.C.C Report, 2020 
48 Third National Communication under the U.N.F.C.C.C Report, 2020 
49 See feasibility report in the annex. 
50
https://repository.lboro.ac.uk/articles/report/How_solar_household_systems_contribute_to_resilience/9484844/1
/files/17110064.pdf  
and drought. Over the last decade, Rwanda has experienced flooding events affecting mostly the Northern, 
Western, Southern and Central parts of the country. The Eastern part of the country is susceptible to 
droughts. Given climate change projections showing increased number consecutive dry days and intensity 
of drought (Figures B.1.6g, j, h & k), this situation is projected to get worse.42 Rwanda has been classified 
as a water scarce country with declining renewable water available per capita (from 3,228 m3/c/a in 
1962 to 670 m3/c/a in 2015) 43. This is mainly due to limited water infrastructure to conserve and 
efficiently use rainwater while the water demand is rapidly increasing due to population and economic 
growth. Projected increase in temperature and changes in rainfall patterns will result in floods and 
droughts, which will significantly reduce crop yields, negatively impact livelihoods, food security and 
export earnings44.  
To increase agriculture productivity, significant investment is needed in irrigation given Rwanda’s plans 
to increase irrigated areas from 48,508 ha to 102,284 ha by 2024. Rwanda is promoting investments in 
drip irrigation technologies, water efficient systems and closed greenhouse systems to achieve this goal 
and ensure national food security.  
Additionally, Rwanda plans to invest in measures to reduce soil erosion via a sharp increase in radical 
terracing and an increase in progressive terraces, as well as biological soil control measures to protect 
150,000 ha by 2024, catchments, flood controls and wetlands rehabilitation activities. 
12. In Rwanda, the crop sub-sector accounted for more than 67%45 of GHG emissions from the agriculture
sector in 2015. With a growth projection of 5% in a business-as-usual scenario, this sub-sector will see its
GHG emissions increase from 2,066.00 Gg CO2-eq.46 in 2012 to 8,354.00 Gg CO2-eq.47 in 2050. Rwanda
is targeting a reduction of GHG emissions from the crop sub-sector to at least 7,194.0 Gg CO2-eq.48 in
2050 under one of its medium mitigation options plans49.
RGIF interventions in this sector will support specific climate smart agriculture activities that will ensure
that national agriculture goals are achieved in a resilient way, and that sufficient financing is available to
fund the ambitious projects laid out in the country NDC targets. These RGIF interventions include
investment in solar irrigation development, water efficiency systems for irrigation, the promotion of solar
energy systems as an alternative to biomass or diesel in the agribusiness sector in Rwanda, etc.
13. The RGIF will support activities contributing to result areas on ‘Energy access and power generation’,
‘Low-emission transport’, ‘Buildings, cities, industries and appliances’, and Health and wellbeing, food and
water security’.
In terms of the technologies supported under RGIF, the solar technologies besides providing mitigation
benefits, do also provide adaptation co-benefits notably allowing communities to better resist global
shocks by helping to relieve energy burdens and provide clean, reliable, local energy.
Technologies like solar photovoltaics (gird tied and off grid) and solar water heaters can play a crucial
role in enhancing adaptive capacity, strengthening resilience, and reducing exposure or vulnerability to
climate change in several ways50:

=== PAGE 21 ===
B
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
51 https://repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/45098/1/S1901175_en.pdf  
52 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S2214629618308521  
53 https://www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2021/Aug/IRENA_Bracing_for_climate_impact_2021.pdf 
•
Supporting disaster risk awareness and management: Solar PV allows communities which are not
connected to power grids to have access to power for telecommunications and small health
infrastructure. In the advent of a climate hazard, solar power enables communities to have access
to early warning systems and take steps to minimize impact of the climate hazard51
•
Reduced Energy Costs: Solar PV and solar water heaters can also reduce energy costs for
households and businesses, providing financial savings that can be used to build adaptive capacity 
and resilience to climate change impacts.
•
Improved Access to Energy: Solar PV and solar water heaters can provide energy access to people
living in remote or underserved areas, enabling them to build resilience and adapt to the effects
of climate change.
•
Increased Water Availability: Solar water heaters can increase water availability by reducing the
need for traditional water heating methods that consume large amounts of energy and water.
Small hydro power (less than 15MW) also contribute to enhancing adaptive capacity, strengthening 
resilience, and reducing exposure to vulnerability in several ways: 
•
Energy Security: Hydroelectric power provides a reliable and consistent energy source. Unlike
solar or wind power, which are intermittent, hydropower can generate electricity consistently,
allowing for stable energy supply even during periods of high demand or when other sources of
energy are unavailable. This energy security enhances adaptive capacity and resilience by
ensuring a continuous power supply for critical services and infrastructure, such as hospitals,
water treatment plants, and communication networks.
•
Water Management: Hydroelectric power plants require the management of water resources,
including damming and reservoirs. This water management can contribute to enhancing adaptive
capacity and reducing vulnerability to water-related challenges, such as droughts and floods. By
regulating water flow, hydropower plants can help store water during periods of excess and
release it during dry spells, providing a more stable water supply for agriculture, drinking water,
and industrial use.
•
Flood Control: Hydropower plants with reservoirs can regulate water flow downstream, which
helps control and manage floods. By adjusting the release of water from the reservoirs, the impact
of flooding can be reduced, protecting communities and infrastructure located downstream. This
flood control mechanism enhances resilience by mitigating the negative effects of extreme
weather events, reducing vulnerability to flood-related disasters.
•
Revenue Generation: Hydropower plants often generate revenue through electricity sales. This
revenue can be used for social and environmental projects, such as investing in education,
healthcare, and environmental conservation. These investments can enhance adaptive capacity
by improving social welfare and supporting initiatives that build resilience, such as climate change 
adaptation programs and ecosystem restoration.
Both technologies also create jobs and promote local economic development, helping to build adaptive 
capacity and resilience in communities. 
14. The potential role of reliable, affordable, and sustainable modern energy services in strengthening
societies’ capacities to better adapt to climate change impacts has not been widely acknowledged in either 
policy or practice52. Table below provides some examples of energy-related adaptation interventions53.

=== PAGE 22 ===
B
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
Example of 
climate 
impacts 
Key risks 
Services provided 
through renewable 
energy 
Adaptation benefits 
Drought 
Water 
service 
disruption 
Water distribution, pumping, 
transport, 
supply 
and 
distribution efficiencies 
Increased 
reliability 
for 
human and industrial use 
Degraded 
water 
quality 
Wastewater 
treatment, 
water purification 
Reduction of waterborne 
disease, water recycling 
Water shortage for 
agricultural use 
Irrigation and pumping 
Maintenance or increase of 
crop yield 
Temperature 
variation  
Reduction in food 
production 
Access to water through 
irrigation 
Crop yield increase 
Increased food loss 
Food 
storage 
and 
refrigeration 
Reduction in food loss 
Degraded air quality 
Air 
filtration 
system, 
ventilators in hospitals 
Reduction 
in 
respiratory 
diseases 
Increased vector-
borne diseases 
Operation of health care 
facilities, refrigeration 
Reduction in disease 
rate 
Heat or cold waves 
Space cooling or 
heating, fans, heaters 
Heat or cold fatality 
reduction in vulnerable 
population 
Increase in heat 
related disease 
Water chillers, freezers, 
ice-making plants 
Alleviation of heat 
stress 
Natural 
disasters, 
Tropical 
storms, 
and floods 
Mass casualty caused 
by disaster 
Energy supply for medical 
services 
Continued operation of 
medical service 
Communication 
service 
disruption 
Television, radio, Internet, 
telephone 
Dissemination of 
information, 
communication 
Energy supply 
disruption 
Emergency energy service 
for residential, commercial 
and industrial buildings 
Energy recovery for 
disconnected facilities 
Based on the climatology and historical climate of Rwanda (refer to para.2) and the climate 
projections (refer to para 3), the targeted investment will contribute to the enhancing the adaptive 
capacity as follows: 
Result area 
Climate risks 
(Refer to para 3) 
Proposed 
intervention 
Adaptation benefit 
A decline in annual rainfall is 
projected with the western 
region more affected. 
Solar PV and 
hydro 
Access to energy for pumping 
facilities to alleviate water 
needs for agricultural and 
domestic needs.

=== PAGE 23 ===
B
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
Energy access 
and power 
generation 
A decline in the number of rainy 
days 
Increased number of dry days 
Access to energy for water 
treatment kit to reduce water 
borne diseases. 
Water management facilities 
through dams linked to hydro 
plants 
Increased number of very wet 
and consecutive days especially 
in the eastern part of the 
country 
hydro 
Flood management facilities 
through dams linked to hydro 
plants 
Increased mean temperature in 
the eastern and western parts 
of the country  
Solar PV and 
hydro 
Access to energy for pumping 
for irrigation to increase crop 
yield. 
Access to energy for food 
storage through refrigeration 
Support to power ventilation 
systems and cooling devices 
resulting to increased 
wellbeing. 
Health and 
wellbeing, food 
and water 
security 
A decline in annual rainfall is 
projected with the western 
region more affected. 
A decline in the number of rainy 
days 
Increased number of dry days 
Increased mean temperature in 
the eastern and western parts 
of the country 
Improved 
irrigation 
Access to energy for pumping 
facilities to alleviate water 
needs for agricultural. 
Increase food security. 
Increase economic resiliency 
of local population.

=== PAGE 24 ===
B
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
54 GCF categorizes co-benefits into six areas which are: environmental, social, economic, gender, adaptation (relevant for pure mitigation 
projects) and mitigation (relevant for pure adaptation projects). Further guidance is available in the funding proposal (FP) guidance note. 
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram)
Present the theory of change (ToC) that contains a goal statement and describes how the proposed project/programme will 
contribute towards the goal statement by using results chain links from activities, outputs, to outcomes. By referring to the sample 
ToC diagram template available in the guidance note, present a ToC diagram (approximately 1 page) which visually represents the 
same logic in the narrative description. The ToC diagram and narrative may include a wide range of co-benefits54 as applicable in 
the context of the project/programme.  
Note all co-benefits will need to be further elaborated in section D.3 (sustainable development potential) and correspondent co-
benefit indicators should be provided under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators).  
The theory of change should also include any relevant barriers (social, gender, fiscal, regulatory, technological, financial, 
ecological, institutional, etc.) that need to be addressed as well as risks and assumptions. Note that the assumptions can be 
elaborated further in sections E.3 (GCF outcome level: reduced reduced emissions and increased resilience) and E.5 
(project/programme specific indicators) for each relevant indicator, as appropriate. 
15. Rwanda has set ambitious goals for economic development and green growth (see section B.1).
However, Rwanda faces many local challenges that hold back investment in green sectors and hold
back growth of Rwanda’s green and resilient economic sectors. A tailored solution is therefore needed
to address specific market barriers, and support Rwanda’s green transition. The RGIF program has
been designed to meet the needs of the local market, and is based on feasibility analyses, market
studies and stakeholders input that have informed the ultimate RGIF program design.
16. Within the full set of cross cutting RGIF Investment criteria (as defined in section B.4 of this Funding
Proposal and in Annex 21, RGIF Operations Manual), a distinction is provided to differentiate between
projects that have demonstrated “climate” benefits vs projects that are “green” but not specifically
focused on climate benefits. The specific Investment Criteria that are designed to ensure climate-
specific benefits include the following:
•
The project matches with at least one of the eligible priority sectors or key interventions defined
for the RGIF, and which are aligned with Rwanda’s updated NDCs (where NDC’s are climate
specific goals).
•
The project must contribute to at least one of the climate change related outputs (mitigation or
adaptation) listed in the RGIF Log Frame.
Green-specific criteria for RGIF investment are highlighted in the following complimentary but distinct 
criteria: 
•
The project is not a “Category A” project, defined under the environmental and social risk
categories section of this document. Category A projects include activities with potential
significant adverse environmental and/or social risks and impacts that, individually or
cumulatively, are diverse, irreversible, or unprecedented. Category A projects are not eligible to
receive RGIF funding, either from the PPF or Credit Facility.
• 
17. Assumptions: Rwanda’s future economic growth and the prosperity of its people are intimately linked
to a successful transition to a green and resilient economy. For example, two major contributors to
Rwanda’s current GDP growth —agriculture and construction – are both areas that face increasing
climate vulnerabilities (see section B.1) and are also major opportunities for climate change mitigation,
through practices such as green urbanization/green buildings, and climate smart agriculture, including
increased use of water-efficient, solar-powered irrigation systems to improve agriculture yields. (More
info in section B.1). In order to recognize these climate and economic benefits, a large increase in
investment is needed in Rwanda. This investment need is estimated at USD10 billion of new
investment needed over a 10-year period. In the near-term sectors identified as part of the RGIF
design process, over $420million in investment opportunities/project pipeline have been identified.

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 
18. Barriers and Risks: To achieve these increased levels of investment, new interventions are needed 
to address the specific barriers and risks that hold back the local Rwandan market. Rwanda is a small 
country, with a small banking system and a limited group of local project developers. Many local 
developers in the green economy do not have long track records, which can limit the ability to raise 
equity or debt. While some international project developers can raise money internationally (in foreign 
currency), local Rwanda players struggle to raise financing, including in Rwandan francs, which further 
stymies the expansion of the local market. On the financing side, local banks often struggle to provide 
long-term finance (which is critical for certain green sectors). Lack of experience in green sectors at 
local commercial banks can lead to general risk aversion, high perception of risk and high collateral 
requirements. Furthermore, local banks often do not have deep expertise in project finance, and 
instead focus on short-term working capital or corporate finance. This, further limits access to finance 
for local green projects, which need affordable tailored financing solutions (including long-term debt) 
to make the economics work for end-customers.  
 
19. Project Activities: Based on the RGIF feasibility study and design work, the RGIF has been 
developed as a tailored solution to address the specific barriers of the Rwandan market. The RGIF 
takes an integrated program approach, offering both grants and financing support to eligible projects, 
across the typical project development timeline. Refer to section B.4 for the full integrated 
implementation framework.  
 
20. Grants (under the PPF managed by FONERWA) are used to address the following local market 
issues:  
a) Lack of perceived “bankability” of projects, and lack equity capital for nascent developers looking to 
scale up: the PPF will offer grants and reimbursable grants to cover early-stage project activities to 
move projects from feasibility to bankability, including paying for project-level technical studies, 
securing permits and lease agreements, financial modeling, and contract development, etc.  
High collateral requirements of local banks: the PPF will offer reimbursable grants to serve as 
partial collateral support. High collateral requirements (sometimes up to 150% of a project’s value) 
can significantly constrain the finances of developer companies and can limit their ability to grow 
their business and serve more customers. Partial collateral support from the PPF will allow 
developers to raise financing for more projects, and further grow their customer (beneficiary) base, 
while also further proving the viability of green projects in the local market. PPF will provide only 
partial collateral support (capped at 50% of the project needs) and will be in a “second position” to 
ensure that local developers have sufficient skin in the game.  The AE had discussions with the EE 
on credit enhancement options. It appeared from these discussions that the use of a guarantee will 
not be appropriate because the focus is not risk sharing concerns but comfort for investors with the 
collateral.   
In addition, a guarantee instrument would mean the Government of Rwanda pays a guarantee fee 
from the onset, which would result in charging a higher fee to the sub-projects to cover the entire 
instrument ‘s lifetime. Using a guarantee instrument would reduce the potential impacts, and make 
the project less viable, more prohibitive, and therefore not yield the intended results. As indicated 
above, the reimbursable grant will serve as a partial collateral support to select projects seeking 
loans from BRD or other financiers without sufficient collateral requirements. The need for these 
collateral arises due to the fact that debt is taken at development stage when the project have 
viability uncertainties. Developers will have skin the game by covering 50% of the development 
cost from their own resources. In case projects are deemed financially viable, they are eligible to 
debt for CAPEX and the collateral returned. At the end of the RGIF project lifespan of 7 years, 
whatever amount has not been recovered will be considered as written off. Whatever amount will 
be in the FONERWA account for the reimbursable grant account at the end of the project (7 years) 
will be returned to AfDB. Since the funds would be issued and reimbursed in local currency (RWF), 
the prevailing market rates would be used in converting the funds from RWF into USD. In case the

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 
 
55 https://www.climatepolicyinitiative.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/Solar-Securitization-for-Rwanda_Instrument-overview.pdf 
project are deemed not financially viable at development stage, the collateral is called and 50% of 
development risk is covered.The grants proceeds used as reimbursable grants will be recycled 
within the RGIF for the duration of the project. At the end of the project implementation period (7 
years) the collateral not call will be refunded to GCF in the USD equivalent of the local currency at 
that point in time to avoid any FX variations.  The conversion into reimbursable grant at facility level 
is to ensure sustainability of the project and maximize the impacts (by reusing the proceeds not 
called).  
b) Limited ability to pay from certain population segments, and challenging project economics, 
especially for “first of kind” projects: In select cases, the PPF will offer grant financing to bring down 
the upfront costs of projects, including project equipment, to enable projects economics to be 
affordable for vulnerable and low-income populations, such as rural solar home systems, and to help 
demonstrate the technical viability for priority “first of kind” projects.  
 
21. Debt financing (under the Credit Facility managed by BRD) are used the address the following local 
market issues:  
a) High risk perception/limited experience at commercial banks: Rwanda suffers from lack of project 
finance expertise at commercial banks, and unwillingness to be “first mover” or perform technical due 
diligence on green projects that are perceived as new or risky. The Credit Facility at BRD will provide 
direct financing to projects, including co-financing with commercial banks, to help be a first mover” 
and allow commercial banks to gain more first-hand exposure and experience with green sector 
projects. This can include the credit facility organizing debt syndicates with other commercial co-
financiers, as well as financing upfront projects as a bridge toward a debt refinance, either from a 
private debt placement or securitization. The solar securitization initiative under CPI’s Climate 
Finance lab is an example of how this can work in Rwanda, using BRD’s Credit Facility capital to 
bridge toward private sector securitization.55 
b) Lack of liquidity and lack of long-dated capital available from local commercial banks: Commercial 
banks in Rwanda often lack access to long-dated capital, and face liquidity constraints in general. 
This makes banks reluctant to provide long-tenor lending capital to projects, even when green 
projects are in need of long-dated capital to make project economics work. Additionally, RGIF Credit 
Facility as well the PPF will offer technical assistance on green project finance to project developers 
including women led projects to ensure projects bankability and successful implementation of the 
RGIF program. It will be delivered by both BRD and FONERWA regarding the Credit Facility and the 
PPF respectively: 
BRD and FONERWA will supervise the capacity building of the market regarding the PPF products: 
o Training of commercial banks relevant staff on the PPF products with the focus on the 
reimbursable grants provided as collateral to commercial banks financing of green projects in 
the priority sectors. 
o Training of SACCOs and Microfinances relevant staff on the PPF products with the focus on 
the reimbursable grants  
o Training of project developers in RGIF priority sectors including women developers on how 
to access RGIF PPF program. 
22. Theory of Change:    In order to achieve its sustainable development targets, the Rwandan 
government needs to create the appropriate conducive environment to leverage financing for climate 
projects. Achieving reduced GHG emissions in the electrification of households, energy efficiency in 
buildings and transport sector while also increasing the climate resilience of small farmers, requires 
derisking of the private investment through the creation of a bankable pipeline of projects eligible for

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 
financing. Strengthening local institutions to better support green investment while also providing 
concessional financing for green projects, increasing awareness on availability of climate finance 
together with an inclusive approach encouraging more women to access same will help align the socio 
economic development of Rwanda with the sustainable development goals  through specific activities 
undertaken by BRD and FONERWA. These activities will help remove or minimize existing market 
risks such as high collateral requirements, lack of liquidity, perceived lack of bankability of projects, 
lack of experience in the green sector.  The Program is designed in such a way that entrepreneurs 
wishing to engage in climate focused project are provided with a systemic pathway for project 
preparation and access to climate finance within a conducive and inclusive ecosystem. Besides the 
climate benefits, the program will also promote increased access to climate finance for women, will 
create jobs in the green economy and will result in other environmental benefits such as water savings 
and reduced use of fertilizers. The proposed approach- detailed in the ToC- is aligned with the GCF 
objectibes of mainstreaming climate risks and promote investment opportunities for sustainable 
development. 
 
Despite the strong demand for climate financing including from MSMEs and the establishment of 
FONERWA and BRD to support investment in climate projects, factors including lack of experience of 
the banking sector in climate finance, lack of capacity to demonstrate bankability of projects and high 
collateral requirements has not been conducive to the development of this market 
The RGIF program’s integrated approach, and dedicated financial tools will result in increased 
availability of local currency financing and affordable debt for local developers and . While the GCF 
Funding will be in USD, the Executing Entities, the Government of Rwanda as represented by 
MINECOFIN, will make the funds available to BRD in local currency via the Central Bank of Rwanda 
at an affordable cost. BRD will then lend the funds to local developers in Rwandan francs. The   Central 
Bank of Rwanda implements a hedging mechanism called the "Monetary Policy Rate (MPR) Corridor." 
The MPR Corridor is a framework used by the Central Bank to manage short-term interest rates in the 
country's financial system. The project will also result in more green finance capacity in the country, 
with dedicated programs at FONERWA and BRD (GoR owned institutions which also will serve as 
Executing Entities to the RGIF) resulting in local market capacity being strengthened. More bankable 
green projects (supported by the credit facility and the PPF) will also result in decreased risk perception 
of local financiers, and increased co-investments from commercial banks to the green sector.  Through 
the provision of grant support and collateral support in project development, project bankability will be 
assessed thereby providing the comfort required to BRD to support project implementation through 
the credit line on projects  focused on solar, hydro, green buildings, climate resilient agriculture and 
low carbon transport. Capacity building and awareness raising campaigns will also support ensuring 
that additional climate finance can be 22inimize22 to ensure continuity post GCF intervention while 
the gender dimension will be streamline across all project activities.These outcomes will result in the 
ability of local project developers to grow their businesses and expand their offerings to end 
beneficiaries and customers, including agricultural cooperatives, villages in need of electricity, and 
urban dwellers in need of efficient and resilient housing stock. Beyond the climate benefits, growth in 
these industries will also have direct economic impact, contributing to more economic activity and 
increased output in key growth sectors, including agriculture, construction, and energy.  
 
Figure B.2 (a).1: RGIF Theory of Change

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 
 
 
 
Impact Paradigm shiŌ
OUTCOMESAND Co-
BENEFITS
PROJECT ACTIVITIES
BARRIERS, RISKS
ASSUMPTIONS
IF the RGIF Credit Line and Project PreparaƟon Facility reduces market risks and leverages private investment for projects with
clear and inclusive climate beneﬁts, THEN GHG
emissions will be reduced from the energy, low emission infrastructure, e
-mobility and agriculture sectors while adaptaƟon capa city in the agricultural sector will be enhanced
BECAUSE by catalyzing private investment with improved ﬁnancial assessment and technical capacity, the bankability of low
-carbon and cl imate resilient projects with strong gender
focus will improve and accelerate green transiƟon while contribuƟng to meeƟng Rwanda’s NDC and SDG targets.
Outcome 1:
Reduced GHG
emissions through
the electriﬁcaƟon
of households
electriﬁed by
renewable energy
High IRs on lending due to high
risk percepƟon, limited
experience, risk averse local
banks and ﬁnancial insƟtuƟons
•
Energy, agriculture, transportaƟon and urban growth are criƟcal drivers of Rwanda economy and future levels of prosperity a
nd well-being.
•
There is a strong a government will to aƩract more climate funding to meet the NDC and SDG targets
•
The Government of Rwanda is encouraging more and more SMEs and local businesses to develop their capacity to prepare and imp
lement climate projects Increased access to
climate ﬁnance to women is also seen as a key requirement
•
There is strong appeƟte at grassroot level to have access to ﬁnance for environmentally friendly and climate resilient proj
ects
•
There is already an insƟtuƟonal backbone on which to build on to ensure access to climate ﬁnance becomes a key pillar of t
he development of Rwanda
Outcome 2:
Reduced GHG
emissions in
buildings through
energy eﬃciency
measures.
Outcome 4:
Reduced GHG
emissions in
the transport
sector
Component 1- Project PreparaƟon Facility (FONERWA)
– Grants to improve bankability
AcƟvity 1.1:Grants to support project bankability (60% of PPF porƞolio) including gender targets
AcƟvity 1.2:Collateral support (reimbursable grants
-40% of porƞolio) to de-risk project development
AcƟvity 1.3:Technical assistance and outreach to developers (including gender targets) on RGIF and
resource mobilizaƟon for P2
Lack of liquidity and lack of
long-dated capital
available from local
commercial banks
Lack of experience in
green sector and lack of
knowledge on climate
ﬁnance
High collateral
requirements of local banks
owing to lack of experience
in green funding
Limited ability
to pay for ﬁrst
Ɵme
developers
Lack of perceived
bankability of
projects and lack
of equity capital
for development
Component 2: Credit Facility (BRD)- Increase green sector projectsaccessingﬁnance through:
AcƟvity 2.1: Green Direct lending to eligible projects at compeƟƟve rates and monitoring of
porƞolio and capacity building for ﬁnancial insƟtuƟons
Component 3: RGIF Project Management
AcƟvity 3.1:RGIF launch and OperaƟonalisaƟon
Co- Beneﬁt 1:
Increased access to
climate ﬁnance for
women led SMEs and
businesses
Co- Beneﬁt 2:
Job creaƟon
in green
economy
PROJECT OUTPUTS
Outcome 3:
Increased climate
change resilience
of small
producers/farmer
s and MSMEs
Output 1 : Number of green sector
projects seeking ﬁnance increased
Output 2 : Number of green
sector projects accessing
ﬁnance increased
Output 3:
RGIF launched and
operaƟonalized
Co- Beneﬁt 3:
Water saved
and less use of
ferƟlizer

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 
     
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization 
Fill in the GCF results area table below to map each project/programme outcome identified in section B.2(a) to the contributing 
GCF results area(s) by referring to the description of eight results areas provided in the guidance note.  
Outcome 
number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation 
and access 
 
MRA 2 
Low-emission 
transport 
 
MRA 3 
Building, 
citiies, 
industries, 
appliances 
MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use 
ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities 
ARA 2 
Health, well-
being, food 
and water 
security 
ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment 
ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services 
Outcome 1 
Reduced 
GHG 
emissions 
through the 
electrification 
of households 
electrified by 
renewable 
energy 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Outcome 2 
Reduced 
GHG 
emissions in 
buildings 
through 
energy 
efficiency 
measures. 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Outcome 3 
Increased 
climate 
change 
resilience of 
small 
producers/far
mers and 
MSMEs 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
Outcome 4 
Reduced 
GHG 
emissions in 
the transport 
sector 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
 
If any co-benefits have been identified in section B.2(a), fill in the Co-benefit table below to map each co-benefit to the 
corresponding category as defined in the FP guidance note. 
Co-benefit 
number 
Co-benefit 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
Gender 
Adaptation 
Mitigation 
Co- benefit 1  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 
Increased 
access to 
climate finance 
for women led 
SMEs and 
businesses  
Co- Benefit 2: 
 Job creation 
in green 
economy  
 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Co- Benefit 3: 
 Job creation 
in green 
economy  
 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) 
Define the project/programme. Describe the proposed set of components, outputs and activities that will be 
undertaken by the project/programme to attain the intended outcomes elaborated in Section B.2 (a). 
Please also elaborate how the project/programme activities will address the barriers described in Section 
B.2.  
This section of the funding proposal should be consistent with sections C.2 (financing by component), E.5 
(project/programme results level) and E.6 (project/programme activities and deliverables). 
Referring to the feasibility study, describe why this set of interventions was selected instead of alternative 
solutions and how the project/programme can help unlock the needed support in a sustainable manner. 
Also identify trade-offs of the selected interventions, if applicable. 
For Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) proposals and projects/programmes with financial intermediation 
(loans or on-granting), describe the selection criteria of the sub-project and types. 
23. The overall cost of climate change to Rwanda’s economy has been estimated to be in excess of USD 
3 billion USD by 2030. Rwanda could lose over 1% of its GDP each year due to climate related losses 
by 2030 if business stays as usual. Hence the commitment of the Rwandan government to a climate 
resilient and sustainable development laid out in its various national policies including the Green 
Growth and Climate Resilience Strategy (GGCRS) launched in 2011. Aligned to the Government of 
Rwanda (GoR) overall national planning objectives and development goals, RGIF aims to address 
private sector investment demand in the Rwanda green sector, stimulate national green economic 
growth while supporting the implementation of the country’s climate plans. Current investment 
trajectories show a shortfall of investment to meet Rwanda green development goals, particularly from 
the private sector. The low carbon-sector in particular faced a substantial investment gap to drive any 
significant economic growth. Structural challenges and barriers remain regarding national green 
investments: high upfront capital needs to develop key projects, high financing costs, small-scale and 
distributed projects unable to secure financing both locally or internationally and existing local 
financing capacity too small to meet Rwanda’s investment needs to address climate change 
challenges. Additionally, local financial markets have limited green finance experience and expertise, 
and there is currently no cross-cutting program dedicated to scaling green finance in the country. (see 
section B.2 (a)). 
 
24. RGIF is specifically designed to support climate goals alongside development and job growth through 
the building of green development sectors needed to ensure economic recovery such as agriculture,

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 
renewable energy, transport, etc. and align with Rwanda’s national plans and sustainable 
development goals. As an example, agriculture and urban construction – two primary focus areas of 
the RGIF – are two of the most important drivers of Rwanda’s GDP. Investing in these sectors will 
serve as a driver for Rwanda’s GDP growth recovery through creation of more jobs and a more resilient 
and sustainable society.The Rwanda Green Investment Facility (RGIF) will utilize a blended finance 
approach to catalyze green investment and help drive Rwanda’s NDCs while supporting development 
goals. RGIF will directly finance measures designed to reduce the country’s economic burden and 
enable Rwanda’s economy to 26inimize climate impacts and grow and thrive. The RGIF mandate is 
to catalyze green and low-carbon private investment in Rwanda, with a focus on blended finance by 
providing financial instruments (grants, debt, credit enhancements e.g. guarantees) to projects that 
are commercially viable in the green sector. The RGIF will serve the following objectives:  
 
● Address local market gaps to facilitate the flow of private investment through local market-fit 
financial tools,  
● Strengthen Rwanda’s ownership of climate finance by empowering the country to create a first of 
its kind cross-cutting green finance support facility.  
● Build the green finance capacity of local banks through innovation, risk mitigation and deal 
arrangement.  
 
25. The RGIF is an initiative of the GoR to be implemented by two of the country’s leading green finance 
institutions: the Rwanda Green Fund (FONERWA) and the Development Bank of Rwanda (BRD). The 
RGIF program is the culmination of a multi-phased stakeholder input and design process that began 
in 2018, and has been supported by the GoR, UNDP, NDF, AfDB and the World Bank. The design 
process included a market study and pipeline analysis, feasibility study, structural design option 
analysis, capitalization outreach and structuring, and multiple rounds of stakeholder input and 
workshops, with participation from a wide range of stakeholders including GoR ministries and program 
staff, project developers, financiers, development partners and international experts on development 
finance, climate finance and green banking. The result of this feasibility and design work is an RGIF 
program design that is tailored to the local Rwanda context, offering targeted support across projects’ 
typical development lifecycles. Because the green sectors in Rwanda identified during the feasibility 
study are considered nascent or lacking track record (see section B.2), the RGIF program is designed 
to offer support at the front end of project’s development (i.e. supporting feasibility studies and 
technical needs to better prepare and structure projects to access finance) as well as targeted financial 
products, including direct lending to enable projects to scale and access commercial finance. Given 
the constraints on government budgets and sovereign debt, the RGIF program is specifically designed 
to be implemented in two phases to maximize leverage co-investment of commercial investors, both 
at the individual project live, as well as after projects reach their commercial operation date (COD), via 
refinancing and securitization techniques (see section B.2 (a)).  
During the feasibility study, no alternative forms of support for these sectors were identified. Based on 
the specific barriers holding back investment growth in the target sectors (high collateral requirements, 
high perception of risk, etc, outlined in B.2 (a)) it was determined that an integrated, two-pronged 
approach was necessary to provide both grant support and credit support, to enable these sectors to 
scale and attract further investment. In order to provide this full-spectrum of support to the market, an 
integrated program approach was necessary, and was achieved via a partnership arrangement 
between FONERWA (grant provider) and BRD (credit provider). This arrangement allows each entity 
to work together in a structured way, and it also leverages the strengths of the respective institutions. 
FONERWA has a strong track record of mobilizing grant capital and channeling resources to local 
projects and developers. BRD has a strong track record as a development financial institution, with 
strong underwriting capacities and credit teams, and experience managing credit lines and investment 
programs of development finance institutions. Working together, the two sister organizations will

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 
manage the following two integrated facilities under the RGIF program, to support the growth of key 
sectors of Rwanda’s green economy. 
 
26. Additionally, due to new economic circumstances related to the covid19 crisis, the RGIF capitalization 
strategy has to follow a two-phases approach in order to ensure a successful capitalization. Rwanda 
has been dedicated to manage the economic and health crisis due to the pandemic and has prioritized 
covid19 recovery investments. This has had an impact in its ability to mobilize resources with a major 
constraint on sovereign borrowing. The two-phased capitalization approach aims to address this 
sovereign constraint and launch the RGIF program as soon as possible to support the country’s green 
economy 
The two-phased capitalization approach consists in: 
• 
Capitalization initial Phase 1: securing initial seed loan and grant funding to launch the RGIF. The 
seed funding includes a small loan from the GCF to launch the Credit Facility and a grant from 
the GCF as well as other financiers (such as FCDO and The Danish International Development 
Agency) to support the launch of the Project Preparation Facility. This fundraising phase is 
expected to close by 2028. 
• 
Capitalization Phase 2: the second fundraising is scheduled for 2028 (when the GoR headroom 
with AFDB will be available) and consists in receiving an additional tranche from the GCF with 
funding from the AFDB as co-financier. This additional funding will help scale up RGIF market 
outreach.  
 
27. As detailed in Section B.4 (Implementation Arrangements), and Section C.2. (Financing by 
Component) the RGIF will be composed of two elements designed to work together in an integrated 
program to support investment in Rwanda’s green sector, supported by Project Management.  It 
should be noted that a developer will be able to benefit both from the PPF support and the CF. The 
overall project components include: 
Component 1: Grants to improve bankability 
o Implemented via a ‘Project Preparation Facility’ (PPF) managed by FONERWA (details 
below) 
Component 2: Credit to provide debt finance and drive co-investment 
o Implemented via a ‘Credit Facility’ managed Rwanda’s National Development Bank, BRD 
(details below) 
Component 3: RGIF Project Management 
 
28. Component 1. Grants to improve bankability: 
 
The Project Preparation Facility (PPF) managed by FONERWA, Rwanda’s existing Green Fund: the 
PPF of the RGIF is a dedicated facility that provides reimbursable and non-reimbursable grants to 
support early-stage project development and improve the bankability of eligible projects. The purpose 
of the PPF is to help projects transition “from feasibility to bankability” and assist projects to secure 
commercial finance through the finance arm of the RGIF and other financiers. With grant money often 
in limited supply, PPF funds are intended to provide “catalytic” funding at an early stage for 
transactions that may otherwise be too risky or complex to pursue. RGIF PPF will offer grants and 
reimbursable grants to selected priority sectors projects to support technical studies and other 
activities that contribute toward a specific project’s viability. The financing by component will be: Grants 
to support project bankability (60% of the PPF portfolio) and Reimbursable grants (40% of the PPF 
portfolio) to provide partial collateral support. The specific operations of the project selection,

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
 
 
investment committee, disbursement and triggers for the grant and partial collateral support are 
outlined in the RGIF Operations Manual (Annex 21). The project management costs will support the 
implementation of these activities at both FONERWA and BRD.  
Output 1: Increased number of green sector projects seeking finance:  
The PPF component of the RGIF is specifically designed to increase the bankability of projects. That 
is, projects will use grants and collateral support to then seek finance to implement their projects. This 
integrated approach is designed to increase the number of projects seeking finance. The RGIF is also 
expected that 60% of the PPF funding will be available to women led enterprises.  It will be 
implemented via the following activities: 
 
Activity 1.1. Grants to support project bankability (60% of the PPF portfolio) 
In response to the lack of perceived “bankability” of projects, for nascent developers looking to scale 
up, the PPF will offer grants early-stage project activities to move projects from feasibility to bankability, 
including paying for project-level technical studies and environmental studies, securing permits and 
lease agreements, financial modeling and legal contract development, etc. To implement this, the 
PPF, managed by FONERWA, will perform the following specific sub-activities: 
● Activity 1.1.1 Design and lauching of RFP process to support development of project pipeline 
including selection process for consultants and review of project submissions for eligibility criteria 
and awards of grant support. 
● Activity 1.1.2  Monitoring, Reporting and Verification of project disbursement againts results areas 
and support to FONERWA for managing grantees for pipeline development 
● Activity 1.1.3 Disburse grants to support project bankability (60% of Portfolio) for the 4 results 
areas 1) Clean energy, 2) low carbon building, 3) low carbon transport 4) climate resilient 
agriculture 
● Activity 1.1.4  Preparation of impact reports for steering committee and donors 
 
 
Activity 1.2 Reimbursable grants (40% of the PPF portfolio) to provide partial collateral support. 
In response to the high collateral requirements placed on projects by banks, the PPF will offer 
reimbursable grants to serve as partial collateral support for projects  that are seeking loans from 
financiers with collateral requirements. The PPF will provide only partial collateral support (capped at 
50% of the project needs) and will be in a “second position” to ensure that local developers have 
sufficient skin in the game. To implement this, the PPF, managed by FONERWA, will perform the 
following specific sub-activities: 
● Activity 1.2.1:  Conduct all necessary legal & administrative requirement to launch a reimbursable 
product including tracking and recovering mechanism.  
This activity will be performed during the first year. 
● Activity 1.2.2:  Issue RFP for projects that meet RGIF eligibility criteria across priority sectors for 
collateral support and review of project submissions for eligibility and award of partial collateral 
support 
● Activity 1.2.3: Manage and monitor collateral support (repayments follow-ups,) including project 
control & monitoringActivity  
 
● Activity 1.2.4: Disburse Collateral grants (40% of GCF portfolio) 
● Activity 1.2.5: Evaluate and report projects impact to the Steering Committee 
 
Activity 1.3      Technical assistance for capacity building,  outreach to project developers on 
RGIF offerings and establishing partnerships   
In order to raise awareness for the RGIF program and ensure that project developers are aware of the 
RGIF program offerings, FONERWA will conduct a series of technical assistance trainings and 
outreach to market participants. This will include performing a market awareness campaigns for project

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
 
 
developers in priority sectors and performing capacity building to target groups regarding the 
reimbursable grants as collateral products. The Credit Facility, managed by BRD and the PPF 
managed by FONERWA will also benefit from this training and will work closely with project developers 
to help them understand the program eligibility requirements, as well as with local financiers on how 
they can work with BRD to structure deals and take advantage of credit enhancing financial products 
to specifically increase the ability of projects to access finance.  In order to achieve maximum impact 
of the RGIF program, FONERWA and BRD will work to secure additional funding for the RGIF over 
time, to ensure its on-going operations and support provided to green sector project developers in 
Rwanda. This activity will also enable both institutions to establish partnerships with key development 
partners and donors. 
 
To implement this, the PPF, managed by FONERWA, will perform the following specific sub-activities: 
● Activity 1.3.1: Perform market awareness campaign for projects developers in priority sectors – PPF 
● Activity 1.3.2:  Perform capacity building for FONERWA and BRD and for targets groups regarding 
the reimbursable grants as collateral product 
● Activity 1.3.3:  Establish partnerships with key development partners and donors for fund mobilization 
for Phase 2 
 
Most of these activities will be performed the first two years. 
 
 
29. Component 2: Credit to provide debt finance and drive co-investment  
 
Output 2: Increased number of green sector projects accessing finance: The RGIF program’s 
Credit Facility (managed by BRD) will specifically focus on increasing the number of projects that 
actually access financing. This will be done by offering competitive financing rates to directly eligible 
projects, and through new staff and capacity building at BRD to originate and due diligence projects 
in the RGIF-eligible sectors (Capacity building at BRD will be supported through grants to BRD from 
GCF -as part of this Funding Proposal- and from FCDO and DANIDA). The Credit Facility managed 
by Rwanda’s National Development Bank, BRD: the Credit facility of the RGIF is a dedicated green 
finance facility that offers direct loans to priority green sectors projects. The Credit Facility will provide 
lending capital to projects based on the RGIF investment criteria and procedures outlined in the 
operations manual. It is also expected that at least 30% of the CF will be allocated to women led 
enterprises. This lending capital’s main activities are: 
Activity 2.1: Direct lending to project developers  
BRD will offer direct lending to projects, working with co-financiers (EIB, AFD, GCPF and AfDB). In 
this way, the RGIF will be able to offer direct lending products and provide needed support to projects, 
for example through offering technical underwriting capacity and deal arrangement, as well as direct 
credit support. This direct lending modality with co-financiers will further enable co-financiers to gain 
“hands on” experience financing projects in new sectors and under new regulatory regimes. The RGIF 
Credit Facility will offer loan products designed to mobilize additional investment and including grace 
periods and longer tenor. Longer tenors coupled with grace periods will help facilitate affordable “end-
user” prices  as compared to existing costs. The RGIF will evaluate the potential to offer longer tenors 
and grace periods for projects where necessary. The loan maturity will be between 5 to 10 years 
depending on the project needs and the credit risk assessment. The loans will be denominated in 
Rwandan Franc (FRW) including the total amount, interest charges and all applicable fees.  
Credit risk aspects – Direct project finance

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 
BRD will assume the full credit risk for all direct loans to SMEs and project developers. Credit risks will 
differ from the type of loans offered by BRD and will follow RGIF credit approval procedures as 
specified in the RGIF Operations Manual.  
• 
Senior loans: BRD will offer senior loans at interest rates that take into account at minimum BRD’s 
cost of funds including foreign exchange costs, operating costs and an appropriate credit risk margin 
based on a thorough credit assessment of the borrower. The senior loan rate to projects shall not 
exceed [11.2% p.a].  
 
Interest Rate: The interest rate is estimated to be at 11.2% and below is table justifying the margin and 
exhibiting the breakdown of arriving at the interest rate of 11.2% 
  
RGIF FINAL 
PRICING 
  
LENDER 
Projected  Draw 
Down 
Int rate 
LENDER 
0.75% 
TOTAL  
  
0.75% 
Swap Cost  
  
6% 
Cumulative Int. rate 
  
6.75% 
Average Cost of Risk 
  
2.0% 
Desired return profit margin 
  
0.4% 
Administration cost 
  
1.0% 
Service Fee and annual mgt 
fee 
  
1.0% 
TOTAL BRD MARGIN 
  
11.2% 
End beneficiary Int rate 
11.2% 
 
During the design of the facility, the GoR indicated that they were not in a position to take on the FX 
risk, hence the inclusion of the ‘Swap Cost’ in the above table. If the GoR was to bare the FX risk, 
BRD would be able to on-lend the facility to PFIs and still achieve a final beneficiary pricing at 
approximately 12%. In terms of repayment, it will be flexibled to include monthly, quarterly or semi-
annually depending on the Client’s cash flows and there will be no ticket size as the funds shall finance  
up to 70% of the eligible sub-project cost.  
Guarantees  to cover the risks of prospective projects aligned with sustainable development targets. 
The guarantee cover is to be provided by SIDA only. It should be noted that  the SIDA guarantee is 
intended to facilitate increased lending by the Guarantee beneficiary to SMEs in the eligible sectors in 
Rwanda, improving both the conditions of and increasing the quantity of these qualifying loans, 
thereby, stimulating electrification and the transitioning to a resilient and green economy in Rwanda. 
The SIDA guarantee will cover up to 50% of SME’s active in the eligible sectors and up to 70% for 
female borrowers of the guarantee beneficiary’s net losses. The SIDA Guarantee has a maximum 
guarantee amount per qualifying borrower of USD 1,500,000 for SME’s active in eligible projects.It 
should however be noted that projects benefitting from collateral support under Activity 1.2, will not be 
eligible to benefit from the SIDA guarantee. 
 
To implement this, the Credit Facility, managed by BRD, will perform the following specific sub-
activities:

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31 
 
 
 
56 Please note that the capacity building for BRD staff is that which is provided under Activity 1.3. 
● Activity 2.1.1:  Launch Request for Proposal (RFP) process to support development of a robust 
project pipeline for the Credit Facility and review of  RFP responses and project selection across 
priority sectors (investment due diligence, etc);  
● Activity 2.1.2: Perform capacity building and market awareness campaign for target financial 
institutions (commercial banks, microfinance, SACCOs, etc) 56 
● Activity 2.1.3: Manage and monitor project loans (include loan repayments follow-ups, project control, 
monitoring and reporting, etc) 
● Activity 2.1.4: Disburse credit to selected projects.  BRD will offer direct lending to projects in the 
senior position, with a target minimum of 30% of non RGIF funding in the deal, by working with 
sponsors/developers and co-financiers to structure projects that utilize RGIF financing but are able 
to access sufficient co-investment. With this product, BRD will make direct investments and originate 
syndications with local banks to finance specific green projects (mitigation & adaptation) in priority 
sectors offering longer tenor with grace period with commercial banks providing short term or 
medium-term tranches 
● Activity 2.1.5: Issue Bank Guarantees (from SIDA only) to selected projects 
● Activity 2.1.6: Evaluate and report loan portfolio to the Steering Committee 
 
These activities will be performed during the 7 years of the program.  
 
 
30. Component 3: RGIF Project Management 
In addition to the main components, the current Funding proposal also include a project management 
to launch RGIF and ensure its successful implementation and supervision.   
Output 3: RGIF Launch & Operationalization 
The two arms of the RGIF will work in tandem to expand financing capacity designed to fill local market 
gaps, attract public and private funding, while supporting national green growth objectives. Successful 
implementation of the RGIF Program is dependent on strong oversight, staffing and operational 
activities. In order to the launch and operationalize the RGIF, the following activities will be undertaken 
by the FONERWA and BRD: 
● Activity 3.1.1: Finalize all relevant administrative and internal documentation (credit procedures 
development, term sheet template, MRV dashboard, bank accounts, etc)  
● Activity  3.1.2: Design of RGIF final product – Credit Facility and Project Preparation Facility 
● Activity 3.1.3:  RGIF operational expenses (supported by FCDO and DANIDA) 
● Activity 3.1.4:  Project Management and Oversight 
● Activity 3.1.5: Develop market outreach & communication plan -Credit Facility & PPF (including a 
gender chapter)  
● Activity 3.1.6: Manage RGIF branding and communicate on RGIF initial impact (include RGIF website 
and online activities) 
 
31. Expected results and outcomes: As outlined in section E.5, the expected results of the RGIF 
program are increased access to finance for the eligible sectors of the RGIF program. Specifically, the 
RGIF program integrated approach (offering support across a project’s lifecycle, from development to 
term finance) will have the following expected outputs: 1)  The number and quality  of bankable projects 
able to apply for credit line for green projects is increased.  2) Awareness level on RGIF increased at 
all levels and partnership with development partners established. 3)  Number of women led SMEs and 
businesses having access to climate finance be at least 30% of portfolio 4) Demand for concessional

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
 
 
climate finance met through Credit facility 5) Increased capacity of financial institutions to support 
green investment 
Based on the project pipeline identified, the RGIF will direct support (grants and loans) to the sectors 
outlined below. These investments are limited to projects that meet the sector requirements and 
eligibility requirements of the RGIF and will have the following outcomes: i)  Increased number of 
households electrified through small, medium and large power suppliers, ii)  Increased number of 
energy efficient and resilient buildings. Iii)  Improved agri production during droughts ) Increased use 
of low-carbon transport and will also yield the following co-benefits: a) Strengthened institutional 
system for climate responsive planning. b) Increased access to climate finance for women led SMEs 
and businesses. c) Job creation in green economy. 
 
 
32. RGIF Market Focus 
The above outcomes are based on the eligibility criteria developed and priority sectors identified during 
the feasibility study and design phase of the RGIF. During the feasibility study and design, review of 
project documents and input from stakeholders and market participants identified barriers to 
implementation and strong investment needs across the project development lifecycle in the below 
sectors.The investment strategy and market focus for the RGIF is based on the RGIF design work, 
market assessment and pipeline analysis conducted by FONERWA and Coalition for Green Capital 
to inform the initial focus of the program (see attached summary as provided in Feasibility Study). 
Based on this market assessment, the RGIF will serve the green sector with a near term focus on 
renewable energy & biomass energy reduction, climate smart agriculture/irrigation & water efficient 
systems, energy efficiency in commercial buildings and clean transportation.  It should also be noted 
that under the PPF, funding for activities such as pilot testing, preliminary engineering design, 
prototype testing, project development and other technical assistance expenses will be funded under 
grants (both reimbursable and non-reimbursable). While the Credit facility will also finance some of 
these aspects, its main focus will be on providing credit lines and bank guarantees (from SIDA) to 
businesses that have reached a more advanced stage in the business life cycle. However, for 
businesses transitioning or expanding into the green sector, these technical assistance costs would 
be covered by both the PPF and the CF. 
RGIF has identified a strong pipeline of projects in various national priority (NST1) sectors with a 
strong potential for GDP growth and job creation in addition to climate change mitigation and 
adaptation.  
 
33. $420M project pipeline: More than $420M in financing needs have been identified for the next three 
years in terms of debt and equity as expressed by private sector developers and GoR planners: 
● Solar & mini hydro off-grid projects. Mini-hydro projects will be considered only with clear eligibility 
criteria to ensure climate rationale. 
● Climate Smart Agriculture: Solar PV to replace existing diesel-powered (costly & GHG-emitting) 
irrigation systems, other rural agriculture processes, etc. 
● Energy efficiency & green cities: RGIF to provide financing solutions to support green city 
development and the application of the new Energy Efficiency Law regarding commercial buildings. 
● And clean transportation.  
 
Once the RGIF has developed a track record and other sectors have matured, the facility can help 
unlock private investments in other priority sectors such as recycling, biomass & biogas, water, 
sanitation and ecological services for wetlands rehabilitation.  
 
34. Priority Sectors for the near term: 
The RGIF will invest across the following near-term priority sectors via one integrated facility. Building 
on this foundation, the RGIF will seek a proportionate distribution of resources across the near-term

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
 
 
 
57 https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-06/Rwanda_Updated_NDC_May_2020.pdf 
priority market sectors but be market-responsive and tailored to meet the actual needs and near-term 
project pipeline. The near-term focus sectors are climate smart agriculture, renewable energy green 
buildings and clean transportation. The exact portfolio mix will depend on numerous factors over the 
course of project implementation, including continuation of on-going regulatory enabling 
environments, quality of projects/developers submitted for financing, etc. It is assumed that the RGIF 
will allocate approximately 25% of its funds toward each of the four near-term priority sectors. The 
eligible sectors for the RGIF program are also based on priority sectors identified in Rwanda’s updated 
NDCs, as well as a project pipeline assessment conducted during the RGIF program design process, 
which consisted of an on-the-ground stakeholder consultation process, interviews and workshops, and 
desk review of available proposed business plans and feasibility studies of projects in key NDC-
aligned sectors in Rwanda. Eligibility Criteria for projects in each of the priority sectors are defined in 
Section B.4 of this Funding Proposal and in Annex 21, Operations Manual.  
 
35. Renewable Energy Systems: Current financially viable transactions in the pipeline include 4.96MW 
of small- and medium-size solar PV on-grid (with renegotiating PPA tariffs), 28.1 MW on-grid mini 
hydro meeting specific eligible criteria; 3.2 MW micro/mini- grid hydro (which environmental and 
climate impacts will need to be checked prior approval); 4,800 solar water heaters and pumps in over 
100 rural sites. Moreover, the GoR anticipates about 99.5MW through small RE (mostly hydro) plants 
to be part of the 2030 NDC57 targets at an estimated total cost of USD328M. And within the NDC 
framework, the GoR has also set a total RE target for 68MW mini-grids (solar & hydro) by 2030 at 
estimated total costs of USD 206M (including battery replacement). In pursuit of increasing the 
percentage of RE in its energy mix as a strategy for meeting the NDC targets, the GoR has just 
increased its off-grid territory target from 22% to 48%. All these developments will result in the need 
to invest in projects that will help achieve these national targets. The RGIF will support these goals by 
providing financing to a portion of early sage projects to be developed in Rwanda, and his does not 
include knock-on effects after the RGIF make first rounds investments to de-risk the sector to future 
investment.  
 
36. Climate Smart Agriculture/Irrigation:  RGIF will focus on supporting investments into climate smart 
irrigation projects with impacts on both mitigation and adaptation. RGIF will also include eligibility 
requirements in its lending procedures, to focus on projects that have a resiliency or efficiency 
component, compared to baseline. Irrigation projects identified in Rwanda are typically focused on 
either a) installing irrigation systems in areas that currently rely on rain-fed agriculture (which are 
susceptible to changing rainfall patterns under climate change), b) opening up areas of cultivable land 
that are currently fallow or engaged in low-yield, marginal agricultural activities, to irrigation/farming 
using efficient/resilient technologies (a green development goal of Rwanda), or c) replacing existing 
old/inefficient irrigations systems that run on diesel, with newer systems that run on solar and include 
water efficient technology (low flow rates, drip irrigation). Other projects in the pipeline involve new 
irrigation systems (using climate smart technologies) on currently cultivated land with currently low-
productivity and subsistence farming, which is primarily rain-fed. These projects replace existing or 
projected diesel-powered (costly & GHG-emitting) irrigation systems in remote rural areas. These 
projects will be using new water efficient technology, such as drip irrigation to adapt ongoing drought 
conditions in water scarce areas.  
 
 
37. Energy Efficiency in Commercial Buildings and Green cities: the green cities initiatives launched 
recently in Rwanda, and planned for the near future development, have energy efficiency and 
resiliency components that RGIF plans to support. While the government has set lofty targets for

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 
 
58 Green City Mid-Term Feasibility Report. 
59 Green City Mid-Term Feasibility Report.  
60 Kigali City Master Plan Report 
61 Kigali City; https://ktpress.rw/2016/03/kigali-city-planning-2-5-billion-special-bus-highway/ 
resiliency and energy efficiency in urban areas, there are no dedicated financing vehicles set up to 
finance these new activities. Furthermore, the nascency of the regulatory regimes and the perceived 
“newness” of related technologies and business models can have negative effects on the interest and 
risk tolerance of commercial financiers. This provides a strong value addition for RGIF and GCF, and 
a clear investment opportunity when these ambitious projects are brought to fruition. Current pipeline 
for the medium term includes estates with green and resilient features such as: a) Zero Carbon building 
using demand reduction coupled to onsite renewable electricity generation 58; b) water autonomy 
systems including a water treatment plant; c) waste management plants, d) adequate transport and 
mobility system with principles that feed into Urban Heat Island mitigation as they avoid the large 
waste heat output from conventional road vehicles59 (this will also reduce vehicle use and air quality 
pollution); and other resiliency features to protect against floods and landslides.  
 
 
38. Clean transportation: Rwanda’s transport sector is driven by increasing urbanization and population 
growth and has been identified as one of the drivers for the country’s growth. As one of the major 
sources of CO2eq emissions in the country, Rwanda has committed itself to reduce emission of short-
lived climate pollutants and pledge to promote new technologies to reduce transport emission and 
improve vehicle efficiency through vehicle and fuel quality regulations and taxations policies under its 
NDCs. The current National infrastructure strategy focuses on building climate resilient infrastructure 
and promoting clean transportation. A law governing the preservation of air quality and prevention of 
air pollution was adopted in 2016 and mandates emission testing for all vehicles and imposes a tax 
on petrol burning vehicles. These recent developments coupled with the rapid urbanization increase 
has laid out the market demand for electric automobiles in Rwanda.  According to the Fifth Integrated 
Household Living Conditions Survey 2016/17 (EICV5), 77% of people in Kigali use public transport 
regularly or often. Current trends indicate that public transit and moto use will grow from 32% to 35% 
between 2017 and 2050 while car use will grow from 16% to 43% during the same timeframe60. 
Projects currently in the pipeline include the development and distribution of electric motorcycles, the 
importation and assembling of electric vehicles, the introduction of electric bus for public transportation 
as part of the Kigali City Bus Rapid Transit scheme (total cost of the project estimated to be around 
$2.5bn in 10 years61). RGIF interventions will focus on supporting current projects in the pipeline that 
aim to switch from diesel powered motorcycles to electric powered motorcycles. This is supported by 
a strong enabling environment, with GoR plans to eliminate gas motorcycles in its taxi sector in favor 
of e-motos and diesel bus to electric buses. Feasibility studies to construct electric battery stations are 
currently ongoing. In the near-term, RGIF interventions will focus on projects that plan to reduce local 
air pollution and greenhouse gas emission by replacing petrol motorcycles and vehicles with zero 
emission electric or more efficient vehicles powered by clean energy using grid electricity or solar 
power energy.  
 
 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
Provide a description of the project/programme implementation structure, outlining legal, contractual, 
institutional and financial arrangements from and between the GCF, the Accredited Entity (AE) and/or the 
Executing Entity(ies) (EE) or any third parties (if applicable) and beneficiaries.

=== PAGE 40 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 
• 
Provide information on governance arrangements (supervisory boards, consultative groups among 
others) set to oversee and guide project implementation. Provide a composition of the decision-making 
body and oversight function, particularly for Enhanced Direct Access (EDA) proposals.  
• 
Provide information on the financial flows and implementation arrangements (legal and contractual) 
between the AE and the EE, between the EE or any third party and beneficiaries.  For Ees that will 
administer GCF funds, indicate if a Capacity Assessment has been carried out. Where applicable, 
summarize the results of the assessment. 
• 
Describe the experience and track record of the AE and Ees with respect to the activities (sector and 
country/region) that they are expected to undertake in the proposed project/programme.  
Provide a diagram(s) or organogram(s) that maps such arrangements including the governance structure, 
legal arrangements, and the flow and reflow of funds between entities. 
39. The RGIF project is an initiative of the Government of Rwanda (MINECOFIN), BRD and FONERWA  
which will act as the Executing Entities. The RGIF has two components: A Project Preparation Facility 
(PPF) with a grant component and reimbursable grant to support project preparation, and a Credit 
Facility to provide financing to target projects. The two windows are designed to work together in an 
integrated program to achieve its mission and objectives of the RGIF. The Government of Rwanda 
will implement these two components through two national institutions: The Development Bank of 
Rwanda (BRD) as one of the Executing Entities to implement the RGIF Credit Facility, and Rwanda’s 
Green Fund, FONERWA, to implement the grant component. According to the establishing documents 
for FONERWA and BRD, the former has legal personality and enjoys administrative and financial 
autonomy. Accordingly, FONERWA is a statutory entity of the Government which has been conferred 
with administrative and financial autonomy.  BRD is a Public Company limited by shares with about 
twenty (20) shareholders and is a separate and independent legal entity from the Republic of Rwanda. 
The African Development Bank and GCF have signed an Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA). The 
Bank’s role as the GCF accredited entity would be to appraise the project according to Bank’s rules 
and procedures for public sector operations; assist MINECOFIN, FONERWA and BRD in the 
preparation of the funding proposal to GCF; administer and manage the GCF proceeds and monitor 
and evaluate the project according to the Bank’s rules and procedures and carry out its obligations as 
per the AMA. The Bank will sign a project specific Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) with the GCF to 
receive in trust GCF reimbursable funds (for the loan to MINECOFIN), the reimbursable grants and 
non-reimbursable funds (for the grant to MINECOFIN) for the RGIF program. It is to be noted that the 
Rwanda Aid policy mentions that all ODA and climate finance is channeled through the Ministry of 
Finance (MINECONFIN) and on-granted to the specific institutions charged with implementation. The 
same applies for Sovereign debt.   
 
40. As FONERWA and BRD are to receive and manage GCF financing and in line with the AE’s policies, 
the Republic of Rwanda (via MINECOFIN) will enter into grant, reimbursable grant and loan 
agreements with each of these entities. These agreements will ensure the flow of funds from the 
Government to the Executing Entities. It will also ensure that the Government passes on the 
obligations to implement the Project in accordance with the Bank’s policies on Procurement, Financial 
Management, Disbursement, Environmental and Social Safeguards, as well as the provisions of the 
FAA to BRD and FONERWA.  
 
41. The Bank will report to GCF with the support of GCF funded consultants using the PPF and CF 
budgets. The reporting process is outlined in the RGIF Operations Manual (section 11), and costs 
outlined in the programme budget annex.. MINECOFIN will allocate the loan proceeds to BRD for the 
CF and the grant proceeds to FONERWA for the PPF.  These arrangements are consistent with 
Rwanda Aid policy and the same flow of funds goes with AFD, SIDA, EIB and other donors listed in 
the project.

=== PAGE 41 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
 
 
● The grant component of the RGIF will support project preparation, technical assistance, and project 
grants and will be implemented by FONERWA. Regarding the flow of funds, AfDB will sign a grant 
agreement with Rwanda’s Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (MINECOFIN) for the Project 
Preparation Facility (PPF) component of the RGIF through FONERWA. The GoR will sign grant and 
reimbursable agreements with FONERWA for the use of the proceeds. FONERWA will use grant 
funds to support pipeline development and then receive reimbursements from select projects (under 
the reimbursable collateral support program as part of the PPF) to help sustain the program (more in 
section B.6). Non-reimbursable funds will also be used for technical assistance and advisory services 
to projects without any repayment obligation. 
● The loan component for financing selected projects through the RGIF Credit Facility will be 
implemented by BRD as Executing Entity. Regarding the flow of funds for the credit facility, AfDB will 
sign the loan agreement with MINECOFIN as well. The GoR, through MINECOFIN, will then sign a 
loan agreement with BRD to implement the Credit Facility as a-GoR-owned entity.  
 
 
42. BRD and FONERWA will then sign agreements regarding the operationalization of the RGIF as an 
integrated program of the Government of Rwanda that comprises the PPF and the Credit Facility. The 
GoR (as represented by MINECOFIN) will be part of the agreement as the Executing Entity. 
Additionally, a percentage of the grant component will be used to fund operations costs of both 
FONERWA and BRD who will also act as Executing Entities to support RGIF project implementation. 
The total operations costs are detailed in the budget in annex 4.The RGIF project will be implemented 
in a two-phased approach over a 7 years period. The current Funding Proposal is intended to cover 
both capitalization phases, with the GCF providing an initial tranche of funds to support the launch of 
the RGIF programme and an additional tranche of funds in 2028 to scale-up the programme. The 
overall flow of funds is indicated in Figure B.4.2. 
● The first phase of capitalization consists of securing initial seed loan and grant funding to launch the 
RGIF. The seed funding includes a small loan to launch the Credit Facility and a grant to support the 
launch of the Project Preparation Facility. The initial capitalization will have the main objectives to 
build the RGIF project pipeline, provide adequate support to priority green projects to demonstrate 
RGIF impact potential with the main goal of leveraging additional funding support from various 
potential funders on phase 2. The GCF is expected to provide the seed funding as a first tranche 
during this phase alongside other development partners (ongoing discussions with NDF and other), 
which will also help mobilize further resources in phase 2. The first phase is expected to be closed 
by 2028.       
● The second capitalization phase  is scheduled for 2028 and will consist of a second tranche of funds 
from the GCF while raising additional funding from various partners including the AFDB and others. 
This second phase of the RGIF will also take advantage of lessons learned from phase 1 
implementation and seek to scale-up RGIF market outreach to support long-term project 
sustainability. The second tranche of the GCF funding is conditional on co-financing from the AFDB 
as per the term sheet (Annex 14). 
 
43. Figure B.4.1: implementation arrangement diagram between the AE and the RGIF managing 
entities

=== PAGE 42 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
 
 
 
 
AFDB will sign the Funded Activity Agreement with the GCF covering both phases to receive in trust 
GCF loans and grants for the RGIF. The AfDB will create an RGIF sub account under the GCF Special 
Account to receive the proceeds from the GCF. Upon signing the GCF loan and grants agreements 
with the GoR represented by MINECOFIN, AFDB will the allocate the funds to Government of Rwanda 
( GoR) in accordance with the loan and grant agreements between GoR and the AfDB.  The GoR 
represented by MINECOFIN would then on-grant/lend the grant funding to FONERWA for the PPF 
and the loan proceeds to BRD for the CF according to the provisions of their respective agreements. 
AfDB will not enter into any contractual agreement for this transfer. The signed grant and loan 
agreements with the GOR are the sole bases for the transfers.  AfDb will also enter in a Project 
Agreement between AfDB and FONERWA for the implementation of Components 1 and Component 
3 as well as a Project Agreement with BRD for the implementation of Components 2 and Component 
3. Additionally, AFDB will have the overall oversight of the implementation framework alongside the 
RGIF’s steering committee and will report to GCF as per the terms to be agreed under the 
Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA).

=== PAGE 43 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
 
 
 
 
44. Figure B.4.2: Flow of Reimbursable and Non-Reimbursable Funds 
 
 
A clear and integrated RGIF management and governance mechanism represented by a Steering 
Committee will be created to ensure an effective connection between the PPF at FONERWA and the 
Credit Facility at BRD. This should result in a robust pipeline of projects to feed both into RGIF Credit 
Facility and PPF.

=== PAGE 44 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45. Figure B.4.3: RGIF Implementation Framework 
 
 
RGIF Steering Committee 
The RGIF Steering Committee provides guidance to the entire RGIF program (both the PPF and the 
Credit Facility) and sets overall program strategy. The Steering Committee will be composed of 5 
representatives from FONERWA and BRD C-Level executives, relevant GoR institutions 
(MINECOFIN, REMA, etc) and or potentially development partners funding the RGIF. It will serve an 
advisory role only, not binding, and will not have any fiduciary duties. It is expected that MINECOFIN 
will chair the Steering Committee.  
The Steering Committee will provide strategic oversight and guidance for RGIF including proposing 
changes in the operations manual. These proposals would be ratified and implemented after board 
approval from both FONERWA and BRD. The steering committee’s tasks will also include: 
● Supervise the partnership between the two implementing institutions, facilitate and ensure effective 
coordination between BRD and FONERWA as well as project implementation. 
● Make decisions on issuing new Requests for Proposal or “funding windows” that solicit proposals in 
the RGIF’s priority sectors (e.g. mini-grids, climate smart agriculture, green cities, etc.).  
● Ensure that RGIF delivers its outputs and achieves its outcomes. The Steering Committee will 
approve the RGIF MRV framework and ensure its application by both FONERWA and BRD, and 
uniform reporting to donors and partners.  
● Review and supervise the project implementation performance, including financial management 
aspects.  
● Assess regular progress reports and metrics briefings from the RGIF program staff (PPF and Credit 
Facility) against set KPIs. For example, FONERWA and BRD staff will report to the Steering 
Committee on key metrics and KPIs, such as the number of projects that have applied for PPF funds,

=== PAGE 45 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
 
 
number that were approved, number of projects that have applied for Credit Facility funds, number 
that were eligible to move to next step, status of project pipeline, overall quality of projects presented, 
strategies to increase the quality of projects, strategies to increase market awareness, etc. 
● Review of the internal audit reports, the annual audited financial statements complemented by the 
operational and performance information reports, the auditor’s report, and remedial actions 
recommended in the auditor’s management letters.  
● Discuss and agree with BRD and FONERWA on changes needed in the operations manual and 
discuss/address all issues that might impede effective project implementation or compliance with 
agreed policies and procedures. 
The Steering Committee will meet on a regular basis, every 8 weeks, to discuss progress on 
implementation, review project progress and evaluations and help set high-level strategic direction of 
the RGIF programs.  
 
46. Figure B.4.4: RGIF Implementation RACI Matrix 
 
R= Responsible; A= Accountable; C=Consulted; I= Informed.  
 
47. RGIF Operations 
The operationalization of the integrated RGIF facilities composed of BRD and FONERWA will be 
achieved through an operating agreement/contract between FONERWA and BRD. Through this 
agreement, each institution commits to working together to implement the RGIF and to coordinate 
necessary actions to achieve the RGIF’s vision, mission and objectives.  
Some of these coordinated activities will include: 
● Working in close cooperation to create an integrated program and eligibility criteria to access RGIF 
investment support. This include identifying needs of priority sectors, where grants & finance are both 
needed as well as rolling out coordinated RFPs for sectors where both finance and grants are 
needed.  
● Providing clear and coordinated communications to project developers to explain the RGIF program 
and clarify both the grant and financing windows;  
● Working in collaboration through a Screening Committee to select projects eligible to the RGIF. This 
include applying consistent criteria so projects emerging from the PPF are a strong match for 
financing through the Credit Facility of the RGIF;  
● Working in collaboration to prepare RGIF Monitoring and Evaluation reports to be submitted to RGIF 
Steering Committee; and 
● Raising additional funding based on identified needs.

=== PAGE 46 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
 
 
48. RGIF Screening Committee  
The Screening committee will be responsible for the initial selection of all projects eligible to engage 
in the RGIF process for investment support. It will provide the first-level project screening for assessing 
project eligibility to the RGIF’s programs. The RGIF screening team will be composed of both 
FONERWA & BRD staff with appropriate skills and experience working in close cooperation to assess 
whether projects meet the high-level program eligibility criteria including: project type, size, green 
sector eligibility (definition of project as one of 4 eligible green project types, funding support or 
products requested, etc.), climate change objective (mitigation or adaptation) and other relevant 
criteria.  For instance, activities that use fossil fuels for power generation are excluded, as well as 
energy efficiency measures in the fossil fuel industry (investments that extend the lifetime of fossil fuel 
assets”. The RGIF eligibility criteria will be aligned to the RGIF mission and objectives as well as GCF 
investment criteria. They will also be aligned with BRD screening criteria to minimize burden on the 
key staff at BRD implementing the Credit Facility. A simple questionnaire will be used by the screening 
team to assess project eligibility for further appraisal by the PPF and/or the Credit Facility. Once a 
project is reviewed by the screening team, it will follow the following steps for further analysis and 
appraisal by the BRD Credit Facility or at the FONERWA PPF, depending on its needs. The second 
step appraisal will focus on more detailed eligibility criteria. Core elements of the RGIF eligibility criteria 
include: 
 
49. RGIF Eligibility & Investment Criteria 
The RGIF eligibility criteria are aligned to the RGIF mission and objectives as well as GCF investment 
criteria. They are also aligned with BRD screening criteria to minimize burden on the key staff at BRD 
implementing the Credit Facility. A project-level questionnaire, part of the project appraisal step, will 
be used by the screening team to assess project eligibility for the PPF and/or the Credit Facility.  
 
RGIF cross-cutting Investment Criteria and guidelines: The cross-cutting investment criteria and 
guidelines of the RGIF specify which projects are eligible to receive grants from the PPF at FONERWA 
as well as loans from the Credit Facility at BRD.  
The cross-cutting investment criteria for the RGIF are as follows:  
● The project matches with at least one of the eligible priority sectors or key interventions defined 
below, which are aligned with Rwanda’s updated NDCs.  
● Project must contribute to at least one of the climate change related outputs (mitigation or adaptation) 
listed in the RGIF Log Frame.  
● Projects must demonstrate financial viability (i.e. through a financial model, business plan, supporting 
documentation) including articulating a strategy for accessing private or commercial investment. This 
should include demonstrated capacity by the applying organization to deliver the project.  
● Project must provide an indication that it currently faces difficulty in securing access to finance from 
local or international financiers, and how the PPF grant funding or CF financing will help address this 
problem.  
● All activities using only fossil fuels for power generation are ineligible. Hybrid renewable energy 
projects connected to fossil fuel sources as well as improving energy efficiency of fossil fuel power 
plants will not be considered under the facility. 
● For the PPF: Project conforms to specific uses/activities of funds from the PPF (feasibility studies, 
technical studies, legal and contract support, partial collateral support). More detail in the PPF section 
eligibility below.  
● For the CF: Project conforms to specific financing modalities of CF (through direct lending, offering 
senior debt). More information in the CF section eligibility below. 
● Benefits from the project will be sustained after the lifetime of the project, including economic 
development, poverty reduction, skills development, etc.  
● The project offers good value for money.

=== PAGE 47 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
 
 
● The project targets a high number of beneficiaries with clear demonstration of gender and social 
inclusion; with a preference for projects with strong gender impacts (detailed in section on gender) 
and aligns with the RGIF gender targets set for the PPF and CF.  
● The project is not a “Category A” project, defined under the environmental and social risk categories 
section of this document. Category A projects include activities with potential significant adverse 
environmental and/or social risks and impacts that, individually or cumulatively, are diverse, 
irreversible, or unprecedented. Category A projects are not eligible to receive RGIF funding, either 
from the PPF or Credit Facility.  
● Project size must match the RGIF parameters.  
● Projects must conform with the conflict-of-interest policies referenced in the RGIF Operations Manual 
and COI policies at BRD and FONERWA.  
● Please note that under the PPF a reimbursable grant and it would follow the same eligibility criteria 
as other non-reimbursable grants. Specific criteria to be eligible for the PPF window include: 
o Project is in an emerging sub-sector (within RGIF priority sectors) or proof-of-concept (first time 
that the project has been done.  
o Project must provide an indication that it faces difficulty in securing access finance from local 
financiers.  
o Project conforms to specific use/activities of funds from the PPF (feasibility studies, technical 
studies, legal and contract support, partial collateral support.  
o Project aligns with FONERWA’s overall eligibility criteria, applied with equal weighting: 1) the 
project matches one of the FONERWA thematic windows (research and development in green 
technologies, or environmental and climate change mainstreaming); 2) benefits from the project 
will be sustained after the lifetime of the project activity; 3) the project offers good value for money 
and activities are carefully designed to deliver results (a. Economy: The right inputs have been 
identified to deliver the required outputs and will be procured cost effectively. b. Efficiency: 
Operational costs are appropriate given the benefits. The benefits exceed the costs. c. 
Effectiveness: The project achieves one, or more, of FONERWA’s core objectives); 4) 
stakeholders, particularly local communities, have been consulted and there is a plan in place to 
communicate and consult with stakeholders throughout the lifetime of the project. 5. The project 
can be linked with national and local strategies related to climate change and environmental 
management. The project builds on existing activities. 6. The project conforms to existing 
legislation. In particular, there is no involvement or complicity in corruption.  
● Specific criteria for the Credit Facility window include: 
o Align to BRD general lending criteria: a) company’s organization, business strategy, ownership 
and governance structure, b) a feasibility study for the project (technical and financial) including 
its business plan; c) company past years financial performance, d) adequate technical capacity 
in the field of the project for which finance is being sought; e) capacity to manage the project; f) 
adequate market share to ensure a good turn-over level and project profitability. 
o Project must demonstrate potential for mobilizing private investment. 
o The RGIF Credit Facility may only provide up to 70% of a total deal size—therefore to reach 
financial close, the project must have a matching 30% (including equity, debt, or both) from other 
capital providers. BRD will work closely with commercial banks to structure transactions where 
commercial banks can participate and will report on its progress toward the goal of mobilizing co-
investment. BRD may forgo the 70% matching requirement only in cases where commercial co-
investment is anticipated on the back end of the project (e.g. a transaction especially targeting a 
refinance via a portfolio securitization whereby a co-financier provides take-out financing. 
o Project must provide bankable cash flow and financing projections through the expected maturity 
of the loan.  
 
50. Eligible Sectors and Project Types

=== PAGE 48 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
 
 
The eligible sectors for the RGIF program are based on priority sectors as identified in Rwanda’s 
updated NDCs, as well as a project pipeline assessment conducted during the RGIF program design 
process, which consisted of an on-the-ground stakeholder consultation process, interviews and 
workshops, and desk review of available proposed business plans and feasibility studies of projects 
in key NDC-aligned sectors in Rwanda.  
 
The NDC-aligned eligible sectors for the RGIF program are:  
● Energy Sector 
o Projects that supply off-grid communities with renewable energy mini-grids, including for 
domestic or SME productive use, as an alternative to diesel, biomass or lack of electricity 
o Projects focused on biomass replacement through renewable energy technologies, including 
promotion of clean cooking technologies 
o On-grid renewable energy projects, including solar PV, small-scale hydro and wind projects 
● Transport sector 
o Projects that promote the use of smart mobility technologies, including electric mobility (electric 
buses) and electric moto-taxis with reduced carbon footprint. 
● Agriculture sector 
o Climate smart agriculture projects, including solar-powered efficient irrigation projects, and 
projects that increase resilience to climate impacts.  
● Construction and industrial sectors 
o Development of green and resilient development projects, including energy efficiency, on-site 
renewable generation and climate resilience (e.g. flooding and landslide resilience) in residential 
and commercial building developments.  
o Development of climate-resilient construction materials,   
o Projects that deploy energy efficient technologies 
o Use of climate smart production practices (e.g. energy efficient measures) in industrial processes.  
 
51. Environmental and Social Risk Categories: 
World Bank/IFC guidelines define Environmental & Social Risk Category for projects (A, B or C), and 
these definitions are the same as those utilized by the Green Climate Fund and the RGIF. Only 
projects that fall under Category B or C are eligible for funding from the RGIF program. Category A 
projects are not eligible to receive funding from the RGIF. Please refer to annex 6 for more details.  
 
52. Mitigation & Adaptation Eligibility Criteria for RGIF-funded Projects 
● The climate change eligibility criteria for RGIF-funded projects limit eligibility to projects that have 
direct impact on climate change mitigation or adaptation. For RGIF-funded projects to be eligible for 
funding, they must be aligned with Rwanda’s National Environment and Climate Change Policy, 
Rwanda’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) and address the specific outcomes of the 
RGIF program.  
● Green project types: projects must achieve a quantifiable climate mitigation or climate adaptation 
impact in one of the selected priority sectors: renewable energy and biomass energy reduction, 
climate smart agriculture/irrigation & water efficient systems, energy efficiency in buildings and clean 
transportation. The RGIF will target a minimum of 30% of programme investment in projects that are 
either adaptation or cross-cutting.  
● Projects must have measurable outcomes with objectives aligned with RGIF’s own Theory of Change 
on either climate change mitigation or adaptation.  
Mitigation projects

=== PAGE 49 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
 
 
Eligible RGIF-funded projects in the mitigation category include projects that reduce emissions through 
measures including increased low-emission energy access and power generation, use of energy efficient 
building practices or industrial processes and increased use of low-emission transportation. 
All RGIF-funded projects are required to demonstrate and calculate a reasonable emissions “baseline” 
or counterfactual for the proposed project activity. This can include, for example, use of diesel or grid 
electricity with higher levels of GHG emissions compared to the proposed project, use of transportation 
technology, etc.  
 
Adaptation projects 
Eligible RGIF-funded projects in the adaptation category include Climate smart agriculture projects, 
including solar-powered efficient irrigation projects, and projects that increase resilience to climate 
impacts patriculaly on the prolonged effects of droughts in the long term as detailed in section B.1.These 
eligibility criteria are further detailed in the RGIF Operations Manual, annex 21.  
53. RGIF Project Preparation Component executed by FONERWA 
The Project Preparation component (PPF) of the RGIF is a dedicated unit with FONERWA, that provides 
reimbursable and non-reimbursable grants to support early-stage project development and potential 
direct funding to RGIF eligible projects. The purpose of the PPF is to help projects transition “from 
feasibility to bankability” and assist projects to secure commercial finance through the finance arm of the 
RGIF. With grant money often in limited supply, PPF funds are intended to provide “catalytic” funding at 
an early stage for transactions that may otherwise be too risky or complex to pursue. Project preparation 
grants are intended to support feasibility studies, technical studies, legal and contract support, business 
plan refinement, financial modeling and other activities that contribute toward a specific project’s viability. 
PPF support will prioritize early-stage, high-impact, innovative projects and businesses that have a high 
probability of successful completion based on developer track record and sound business plans. That is, 
PPF grants shall be aligned with the early-stage maturity of the targeted businesses, and the grants 
should be used to make these projects bankable.  
The PPF itself will be a team within FONERWA Business Development Division, led by a Program 
Director with an experienced staff and budget in place to execute the mandate of the PPF, in coordination 
with the broader RGIF program. The PPF Team will be in charge of the overall leadership of the Unit, 
pipeline development and origination, project screening and appraisal as well as portfolio management. 
The detailed operating costs of the PPF team is described in the RGIF Budget in Annex 4 and expected 
to be funded by the GCF and by internal resources. The PPF team will comprise on a of: 
● A PPF Program Director who will be responsible for the overall management and execution of the 
PPF activities within FONERWA. The Director will coordinate all RGIF/PPF activities at FONERWA 
with other relevant divisions including the executive office, investment committee, communication 
division and monitoring and evaluation division. The Director will also coordinate activities with 
external parties including the Credit Facility at BRD and the RGIF Steering Committee. He will report 
to FONERWA Executive Management as well as to the RGIF Steering Committee.  
● An Outreach and Pipeline Specialist in charge of project screening, appraisal and pipeline 
development. The Specialist is a member of the RGIF Project Screening Unit alongside BRD staff 
and reports to the PPF Program Director. The Outreach and pipeline Specialist will handle the first 
initial customer relationship of the RGIF as well as all administrative tasks related to the PPF 
screening process.  
● A Credit Risk & Collateral Specialist responsible for the overall risk management of the grant as 
collateral product. The Specialist leads on issues related to risk on the collateral support program, 
including initial due diligence, KYC and default risk. Develops and implements risk procedures for 
processing and administration of the collateral support product.

=== PAGE 50 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
 
 
● A dedicated Impact Monitoring & Reporting Specialist responsible for the preparation of the reports 
to the Steering Committee that will be submitted to both AFDB and the GCF. He will report to the 
PPF Program Director as well as to FONERWA Head of Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) 
● A dedicated RGIF Gender consultant (working for both the PPF & the Credit Facility) will ensure that 
all the transactions are aligned with RGIF Gender policies and actions plan as described in annex 8. 
 
Other FONERWA staff and consultants will be called to support RGIF implementation. This will include: 
● Support on ESS to ensure that all the transactions are aligned with RGIF ESMS policies and actions 
plan as described in the annex 6. 
● Support on procurement to execute all the RGIF procurement related activities as per the RGIF 
procurement plan in annex 10.  
After succeeding the screening test, an eligible project will be reviewed and appraised by the PPF team 
before submission to FONERWA’s investment committee for a final decision. The review process at the 
PPF will follow an efficient protocol and consist of a commercial viability analysis, assessment of climate 
change impacts, and risk assessment. Appraisal criteria will include (but not be limited to): projects that 
are economically feasible but unable to access commercial financing support; co-financing potential and 
or the ability to crowd in commercial funding with the support of the RGIF; climate change mitigation 
impact or adaptation goals, projects that are aligned with the GCF eligibility criteria, etc.  
FONERWA’s current investment committee will serve as the investment committee for all projects going 
through the PPF process. A designated BRD Credit executive will be invited to be part of the FONERWA 
investment committee decision regarding PPF projects. This integrated approach will ensure that a 
project which has received support from the PPF meets the eligibility criteria for further support from the 
Credit Facility.  
Table B.4. 1: PPF Functions within FONERWA 
FONERWA Division  
RGIF/PPF Functions 
Business Development Division with a full-time 
dedicated staff and supported by consultants 
Acting as the RGIF project preparation unit with a 
Program Director in charge of the leadership, 
overall management and coordination with other 
FONERWA divisions regarding the PPF activities. 
The PPF Program Director will also be responsible 
for the overall reporting of RGIF activities to the 
Steering Committee, AFDB and the GCF, with 
dedicated ESS staff at FONERWA and BRD 
supporting on technical approach, data gathering, 
etc. 
Consultants or consultancy firms will also support 
the PPF. The firms/ consultants would provide 
measurable 
deliverables 
and 
would 
be 
compensated on that basis.  
Investment Committee 
FONERWA’s current investment committee will 
serve as the investment committee for all projects 
going through the PPF process.

=== PAGE 51 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
 
 
Monitoring, Evaluation & Reporting Division 
Collect data and prepare quarterly progress 
reports which will be reviewed by the RGIF 
Steering Committee. The report to the RGIF 
Steering committee will be on a quarterly basis. 
Communication Division 
Provide appropriate communications to support 
pipeline development across the various priority 
sectors 
Legal Division 
Provide all necessary legal services to support 
operation of the PPF 
 
BRD and FONERWA have coordinated closely on the design of PPF investment policies and the 
procedures manual to guide the PPF team toward projects and developers that have strong track 
records, solid business models, and high likelihood of being able to secure commercial financing from 
the RGIF Credit Facility and co-financiers. This close collaboration will continue, once a project starts 
the PPF application process, to help avoid unintended outcomes in which projects receive PPF grants 
but fail to reach financial close.  
 
54. RGIF Credit Component executed by BRD 
The Credit Facility of the RGIF will be executed by BRD and will offer specific lending products designed 
to serve the RGIF and address local market gaps while crowding in more private investments. It will offer 
direct lending to project developers across the country and the  funds shall finance  up to 70% of the 
eligible sub-project cost.  
The Credit Facility will be supported by a dedicated and skilled staff operating under BRD Investment 
Division. The RGIF Credit Facility team will be represented by a Program Director in charge of the overall 
leadership, management of the facility and coordination of the Credit Facility activities both inside and 
outside the bank. The detailed operating costs of the Credit Facility team is described in the RGIF Budget 
in Annex 4 and expected to be funded by the GCF and  and by internal resources . The RGIF Credit 
Facility team will comprise: 
● A Program Director who will be responsible for the overall management and execution of the RGIF 
activities within BRD. The Director will coordinate all RGIF activities at BRD with other relevant 
divisions including the executive office, credit department, investment committee, strategy division, 
legal department and monitoring and evaluation division. The Director will also coordinate activities 
with external parties including the PPF at FONERWA and the RGIF Steering Committee. He or she 
will report to BRD executive management as well as to the RGIF Steering Committee. 
● A Climate Finance Specialist, in the BRD investment Division, in charge of project screening and 
appraisal. The Climate Finance Specialist will be members of the RGIF Project Screening Unit 
alongside FONERWA staff and report to the Program Director. They will handle the first initial 
customer relationship of the RGIF as well as all administrative tasks related to the RGIF screening 
process.  
● A  Monitoring & Evaluation Specialist to be responsible of the preparation of the MRV reports to the 
Steering Committee, AFDB and the GCF. The Specialist will manage all aspects of MRV, creating 
quarterly and annual reports for the Steering Committee and tracking KPIs to inform program 
implementation. He or She will be responsible for data collection, compilation, analysis and 
presentation in regular monitoring deliverables to the RGIF Programme Steering Committee. They 
will also ensure that all project level data is of high quality, available in a timely manner and integrated 
into BRD’s regular organizational M&E processes (e.g. MEL dashboard, reporting tools).  
● A dedicated RGIF Gender Staff (working for both the Credit Facility & the PPF) will ensure that all 
the transactions are aligned with RGIF Gender policies and actions plan as described in annex 8.

=== PAGE 52 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
 
 
 
 Otherstaff and consultants will be called to support RGIF implementation. This will include: 
● A Credit Risk Management Specialist  to be responsible for the credit risk appraisal of RGIF 
transactions as per the BRD credit risk procedures in the RGIF Operations Manual. The Specialist 
will work closely with the RGIF full-time staff including the Program Director. 
● Support on ESS to ensure that all the transactions are aligned with RGIF ESMS policies and actions 
plan as described in the annex 6. 
● Support on procurement to execute all the RGIF procurement related activities as per the RGIF 
procurement plan in annex 10  
Once a project passes the screening eligibility test, it will be reviewed and appraised by dedicated 
investment officers from BRD investment division. These investment officers will be responsible for 
project review, appraisal, and preparation for submission to the credit investment committee following 
BRD investments guidelines as well as credit procedures. In addition to the normal BRD appraisal 
process, the review will include specific RGIF investment criteria including inability to access to 
commercial finance, the ability to crowd-in/leverage private funding, and climate change mitigation 
impact or adaptation goals, etc.  
BRD’s investment committee will play the role of RGIF Credit Facility investment committee applying 
BRD credit procedures to RGIF project final credit decisions. It’s worth noting that the RGIF operation 
manual is a combination of BRD current credit procedures updated to include specific RGIF pre-defined 
investment criteria including gender and climate impact, alignment to national climate policies, catalytic 
potential, paradigm shift potential, etc.  
 
Table B.4.2: RGIF Credit Facility Functions within BRD 
BRD Division/Department 
RGIF/Credit Facility Functions 
BRD Investment Division with a full-time 
dedicated staff and supported by consultants 
Acting as the RGIF Credit Facility unit with a 
Program Director in charge of the leadership, 
overall management and coordination with other 
BRD divisions regarding the CF activities. The 
Credit Facility Program Director will also be 
responsible for the overall reporting of RGIF 
activities to the Steering Committee, AFDB and the 
GCF. 
Consultants or consultancy firms will also support 
the CF. The firms/ consultants would provide 
measurable 
deliverables 
and 
would 
be 
compensated on that basis. 
Credit & other Risk Department  
Provide credit and other risk assessment of RGIF 
projects based on the RGIF manual of procedures 
in compliance with GCF guidance. RGIF ESG Risk 
management policies and procedures as well as 
environmental and gender policies are derived from 
FONERWA strong policies and align to GCF 
guidance. They will be integrated to BRD as needed 
to ensure alignment with the RGIF mission and 
objectives.

=== PAGE 53 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
 
 
Investment Committee 
BRD’s current investment committee will serve as 
the investment committee for all projects going 
through the RGIF process 
Monitoring, Evaluation & Reporting Division 
Collect data and prepare quarterly progress reports 
which will be submitted to the RGIF Steering 
Committee. An integrated monitoring & evaluation 
framework will be defined for the RGIF. Clear 
monitoring and reporting guidelines will be defined 
and integrated within each institution MRV 
frameworks to follow with specific KPIs to report to 
the Steering Committee. Those KPIs will focus 
specifically on metrics including green investment 
and private investment “leverage” as well as RGIF 
implementation efficiency. The report to the RGIF 
Steering committee will be on a quarterly basis.  
Communication Division 
Provide appropriate communications to support 
project pipeline development across the various 
priority sectors.  
Legal Division 
Provide all necessary legal services to support 
operation of the Credit Facility. 
 
55. Implementing Parties Overview 
 
● AFDB as Accredited Entity 
The African Development Bank Group (AfDB) is the premier pan-African development institution 
promoting economic growth and social progress across the continent. It is composed of three institutions, 
namely 1). The African Development Bank (AfDB) which was established in 1964, 2). The African 
Development Fund (ADF) which was established in 1972 and 3) the Nigeria Trust Fund (NTF) which was 
established in 1976. Currently, there are 81 members - made up of 54 independent African countries 
(regional members) and 27 non-African countries (non-regional members). 
The AfDB is currently focusing on five development priorities within the framework of its Ten-Year 
Strategy (2013–2022) aimed at promoting inclusive and green growth. The five development priorities 
are usually referred to as the “High 5s”, and are (i) Light Up and Power Africa, (ii) Feed Africa, (iii) 
Industrialize Africa, (iv) Integrate Africa, and (v) Improve the Quality of Life for the People of Africa. 
Before the GCF became operational in 2015, AfDB was already assisting Regional Member Countries 
(RMCs) to mobilize financial resources from international financing mechanisms such as the Global 
Environment Fund (GEF) and the Climate Investment Funds (CIFs). It is an implementing agency for 
several climate funds and manages other relevant financing instruments such as the Africa Water Facility 
(AWF), the ClimDev-Africa Special Fund (CDSF) the Sustainable Energy Fund for Africa (SEFA) and the 
Africa Climate Change Fund (ACCF). The AfDB has committed to having climate finance constitute 40% 
of approved operations and to double its commitment to climate finance to US$ 25 billion for 2020-2025. 
AfDB is an Accredited Entity (AE) of the GCF and the Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA) between 
the two institutions is effective. The AfDB was accredited as an International Entity to handle large size 
(> $250 million) funded activities with High risk (Category A/I-1) Intermediation. As the new funding 
mechanism on the AfDB climate finance platform, the AfDB is supporting RMCs to mobilize GCF

=== PAGE 54 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
 
 
resources at scale towards the implementation of their NDCs. To date, AfDB has mobilized over $180 
million from GCF for 5 funding proposals covering 13 RMCs in Africa.  
The AfDB is well placed to serve as the Accredited Entity for the RCGIF. In addition, the AfDB is currently 
in a partnership with the Climate Investment Funds (CIF), to conduct a study on the creation of national 
climate change funds and Green Banks across 6 countries in Africa. AfDB understands that locally-based 
Green Banks are powerful tools to address market needs, understand local risk and drive private 
investment and can be paired with grant programs and strong enabling environments and policies. 
The AfDB has a track record for establishing and/or capitalizing financial institutions. Examples are 
below: 
• 
Facility for Energy Inclusion (FEI) is a $ 500 million Debt Fund with a focus on providing senior and 
mezzanine debt financing to small-scale renewable energy projects. It operates through 2 windows; 
1. FEI Off-Grid Fund (“OGEF”) - a $ 100 million fund to support innovative off-grid energy access 
companies through corporate loans, secured loans and securitized receivables transactions. The 
OGEF window provides 1-5-year debt for working capital, inventory, receivables and consumer 
finance. The AfDB allocated $10 million equity and $20 million debt for OGEF from the $100 million 
total approved for FEI. 2. FEI On-Grid fund window is a $ 400 million fund to support small-scale 
renewable energy IPPs, mini-grids and captive power projects. It provides long-term debt through 
project finance transactions. The AfDB allocated $40 m equity and $30 m debt for this window. 
• 
Evolution II Fund is a second-generation closed-ended private equity (PE) fund. The fund has a target 
size of $ 250 million and the Bank provided equity investment of $ 20 million for the second close. 
Evolution II will invest in small and medium-sized projects in two key segments (i) clean and 
sustainable energy and (ii) resource efficiency. The average investment ticket will be between USD 
10-25 million with an energy generation capacity of between 5-150 MW per project. 
AfDB also played key roles in the establishment and capitalization of the African Renewable Energy 
Fund. The AfDB played the leading role in establishing the African Renewable Energy Fund (AREF) and 
providing $65 million as an anchor investment to mobilize additional investments from institutional 
investors to capitalize AREF. AREF is a joint initiative by the AfDB and the African Biofuel and Renewable 
Energy Company (ABREC) and includes investor groups such as West African Development Bank 
(BOAD), Ecowas Bank for Investment and Development (EBID), Nederlandse Financierings-
Maatschappij voor Ontwikkelingslanden N.V. (FMO) and Calvert Investments. It is being managed by 
Berkeley Energy Africa Limited (Berkeley Energy). AREF targets investments in grid-connected 
development stage renewable energy projects including small hydro, wind, geothermal, solar, biomass 
and waste gas between 5MW and 50 MW and a commitment per project of between US $10 million and 
US $30 million. It also has the capacity to source further funding from co-investors where necessary for 
a larger investment. 
For recent single country financial instruments such as the RGIF, the AfDB provided the financial 
resources and support to capitalize the Ghana Incentive-Based Risk-Sharing System for Agricultural 
Lending (GIRSAL). GIRSAL is created to mobilize critical financing for activities in the agricultural sector 
that are usually perceived as risky by using credit guarantees to address the risk of default. Apart from 
the Credit Guarantee Scheme, it also has Agriculture Insurance Facility (AIF), Technical Assistance 
Facility and a Digital Finance Platform for comprehensive financial solutions to address risks and access 
to credit in the Ghanaian agricultural sector. GIRSAL is coordinated by a Secretariat with key national 
institutions      such as the Ministry      of Food and Agriculture, Ministry of Finance and the Bank of 
Ghana and is aligned with the Ghana Shared Growth and Development Agenda II. AfDB is also the 
Accredited entity for the AFAWA project approved by the GCF that complements the GIRSAL with 
gender and climate finance dimensions.

=== PAGE 55 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
 
 
This project is consistent with the AfDB Country Strategy Paper 2017 – 2021 (CSP 2017-21) which is 
the strategic upstream document between GoR and AfDB for prioritizing interventions in the country 
within the 5 years implementation period. Building on the CSP 2012-16 which provided the strategic 
basis for AfDB’s support for improving energy and transport infrastructure, promoting enterprise growth, 
the current CSP 2017-2021 has been designed to innovate and scale-up AfDB support to accelerate 
Rwanda’s economic transformation towards realizing its ambition of becoming and sustaining its status 
as a middle-income country in Africa. The CSP 2017-2021 focuses greater attention on partnership 
arrangements between the GoR, the AfDB, the private sector, civil society and other Development 
Partners with a view to mobilizing co-financing and increasing private investment for financing 
transformative projects and programmes in the country. Financial operations and support for the country 
within the CSP 2017-2021 period is      prioritized around two complementary pillars of (1) Investing in 
energy and water infrastructure to enable inclusive and green growth; and (2) Developing skills to 
promote high value-added economic activities and economic transformation. AfDB’s active portfolio in 
the country is over $500 million ranging from financing for energy, transport and water infrastructure, 
human development, agriculture and financial sector.  
56. FONERWA Profile 
Established by the Government of Rwanda in 2012, FONERWA is a cross-sectoral financing mechanism 
that aims to mobilize financial resources to promote a Rwanda green economy. FONERWA invests 
largely through grants to support both in climate mitigation and adaptation projects from the public and 
the private sector in Rwanda. As a national basket fund, FONERWA is both an instrument to facilitate 
direct access to international environment and climate finance, as well as to streamline and rationalize 
external aid and domestic finance. Since its operationalization in 2013, FONERWA has successfully 
mobilized USD 188 million and supported 38 projects including the Gicumbi project fully funded by the 
Green Climate Fund. Other key impacts include: 
• 
Contributed in protecting 21,964 ha from soil erosion 
• 
Increased forest and agro forest coverage by 42,838 ha 
• 
Protected 27,889 watersheds and water bodies 
• 
Avoided 93,604 tons of CO2eq emissions 
• 
Supported 112,295 Rwandans in coping with the effects of climate change 
• 
Created over 114,858 green jobs 
As Rwanda has committed itself to an environmentally sustainable, climate resilient and green economy, 
the task however remains large; Rwanda is one of the most vulnerable countries to climate change. 
Extreme weather events, compounded by the country's topography, cause severe impacts like floods, 
landslides, soil erosion and droughts. This trend, likely to increase in frequency, poses a severe threat 
to food security, health and economic growth.  
The recently updated NDC submitted in May 2020 has demonstrated Rwanda’s great ambition and 
commitment towards climate action, with a committed emission reduction of 38% by 2030. This will need 
a total investment of USD 11 billion with USD 5.7 billion for mitigation and USD 5.3 billion for adaptation. 
A full engagement of the public and private sector along with the civil society will be paramount to 
achieving these ambitious targets.  
FONERWA as the dedicated Rwanda green fund, plays a central role in this ecosystem and plans to 
support and empower the Rwanda private sector to develop and implement new green technologies. 
Hence the urgent need to implement the RGIF project preparation facility (PPF). Additionally, by 
implementing the RGIF PPF, FONERWA will leverage its past experience in providing grants as well as 
its current programs targeting the private sector such as the green incubation and acceleration programs. 
This demonstrated capacity to engage the Rwanda private sector on green issues will contribute to RGIF

=== PAGE 56 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
 
 
 
62 FRW `000: 262,206,204 (2019) 
project pipeline development. Furthermore, there are many other benefits of using FONERWA as an 
implementing entity. These benefits include: 
• 
As an established national climate fund, FONERWA has a strong mandate and government 
ownership. This will be critical to execute the PPF as a grant facility.  
• 
FONERWA has a strong financial management and fiduciary capacity with operational processes 
and systems including FRIMS and Monitoring and Evaluation systems. Additionally, FONERWA is 
regularly audited, including by external auditors.  
• 
FONERWA Staff has knowledge and experience of the Rwanda green sectors with various skills 
including safeguards staff (environment and social) and a team of international technical assistance 
consultants, funded by KfW, DFID and SIDA. 
• 
FONERWA has a strong gender plan and its program are gender sensitive 
• 
FONERWA has a strong focus on value for money, to maximize impact of funding and will leverage 
additional resources for climate change adaptation and mitigation starting domestically as previously 
done through funded projects (undertaken by implementing partners).  
Furthermore, leveraging from its experience, FONERWA as a Executing Entity of RGIF PPF will also 
expand its capacity to deliver high quality projects, diversity its experience and enhance its ability to 
develop innovative solutions to address the local low carbon market gaps. 
Finally, by relying on an existing strong organizational structure, the RGIF project will ensure a successful 
implementation while saving on operating costs.  
 
 
57. BRD Profile 
With over 52 years of existence, the Development Bank of Rwanda (BRD), with a total asset of approx. 
US$273 million62 , offers short, medium and long-term investment loans to projects in the priority sectors 
of the Rwandan economy including the green economy. In its strategic plan (2018-2024), the BRD has 
an expanded and refocused mandate as a typical national development finance institution, and its 
strategic direction is appropriately aligned with the Rwanda National Strategy for Transformation (NST1) 
and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  
BRD is a reputable financial institution with a demonstrated track-record and adequate management. 
Based on 2019 financial statements (unqualified opinion by the auditor), BRD has total assets of RWF 
261.2bln FY19 and RWF 236.5bln FY18; equity of RWF 68.4bln FY19 and 63.6bln FY18; and Net income 
of RWF 1.2bln FY19 and RWF 0.16bln FY18; resulting in a RoA of 046% FY19 and 0.07% FY18, and 
RoE of 1.75% FY19 and 0.25% FY18. 
BRD offers a variety of guarantee funds to cover the risks of prospective projects aligned with sustainable 
development. Several of these guarantee funds are channeled and managed by the Business 
Development Fund (BDF) while a few others are granted and managed by other international partners. 
BRD also provides leasing facilities to already existing clients with projects in the priority sectors.  BRD 
invests in 7 Priority Sectors. These Include Agriculture, Education, Social Infrastructure, Renewable 
Energy, Export and Manufacturing, Housing and Digital Economy. 
Furthermore, BRD offers advisory services and capacity building to its clients faced with challenges of 
limited skills in terms of compiling their business ideas into bankable business plans and management 
skills during and after project implementation.

=== PAGE 57 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
 
 
BRD has invested heavily in building robust systems and processes, has well motivated and experienced 
staff, and strong networks with retail banks in Rwanda as well as other development partners; this has 
been crucial for the Bank to attract and successfully coordinate the roll-out of the different funds and 
enable them to meet their objectives.  
BRD has an extensive track record in management of other funds on behalf of key partners such as 
Ministry of Education (Student Loans and Bursary Scheme), the World Bank Group (Renewable Energy 
Fund, Rwanda Housing Fund, and the Socio-Economic Inclusion of Refugees and Host Communities 
Project in Rwanda), and KfW (Export Growth Fund), to mention but a few. The specialized fund 
management service enables BRD to provide direct lending and/or through on-lending to partner 
financial institutions (PFIs) including MFIs and Commercial Banks. 
With this proven track record, BRD has been identified by FONERWA as the implementing partners for 
the Rwanda Green Investment Facility (RGIF) project particularly to support project preparation and 
project financing by using a blended      approach to leverage private and public investments for an initial 
target of $50M. 
BRD will manage the RGIF – Financing Facility (FF) by providing targeted financial products to green 
projects in the priority sectors to address local market gaps. The financing facility will have different 
financial products – such as direct debt (senior and subordinate)– to directly support commercially viable 
green projects (public and private).  
In managing the RGIF credit facility, BRD will specifically undertake key activities including – project 
pipeline development, credit and risk analysis – and portfolio management (mainly credit disbursements, 
repayments management, credit default management, investment monitoring, performance evaluation 
and reporting including green impacts reporting). 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Explain why the project/programme requires GCF funding to address mitigation or adaptation measures, i.e. Why is the 
project/programme not currently being financed by public and/or private sector? Which market failure is being addressed with GCF 
funding? Are there any other domestic or international sources of financing?  
Explain why the proposed financial instruments were selected in light of the proposed activities and the overall financing package. 
i.e. What is the coherence between activities financed by grants and those financed by reimbursable funds? How were co-
financing amounts and prices determined? How does the concessionality of the GCF financing compare to that of the co-
financing? If applicable, provide a short market read on the prevailing of the pricing and/or financial markets for similar 
projects/programmes. 
Justify why the level of concessionality of the GCF financial instrument(s) is the minimum required to make the investment viable. 
Additionally, how does the financial structure and the proposed pricing fit with the concept of minimum concessionality? Who 
benefits from concessionality?  
In your answer, please consider the risk sharing structure between the public and private sectors, the barriers to investment and 
the indebtedness of the recipient. Please reference relevant annexes, such as the feasibility study, economic analysis or financial 
analysis when appropriate. 
58. Market failures being addressed by GCF funding 
 
Lack of current investment flows: There are myriad reasons why the target green sectors are not being 
financed currently by the public and private financiers, including the following locally specific 
challenges and market failures: 
Risk perception and lack of track record: Green sectors and green project developers in Rwanda 
generally have limited track records. This is in part due to the relatively small market, and previously 
limited opportunities for developers to complete a first round of initial projects and subsequently scale 
up. This is also due to previously unclear regulatory frameworks and enabling environments. New 
rules and regulations in Rwanda have been clarified in a number of key sectors, including increased

=== PAGE 58 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
 
 
 
63 “The role of capital costs in decarbonizing the electricity sector” Environmental Research Letters https://neon.energy/Hirth-Steckel-2016-
Capital- Costs.pdf 
clarity on the land concession process for mini-grids, new PPP frameworks for solar irrigation, new 
green city master plans and building development frameworks, and new energy efficiency laws for 
commercial buildings.  
High cost of capital, negatively affecting project economics: High risk perception, as well as prevailing 
high interest rates across the country, result in high cost of capital for green projects, or outright inability 
to access finance. Prevailing interest rates are high in Rwanda, especially for new sectors and 
technologies. Current lending rates form commercial banks for green projects are usually around 
16+% and the GCF concessionality allows the lending rate to be reduced to 11.2% (see para.29) 
thereby providing more comfort to investors. Furthermore, high costs of capital have a 
disproportionately negative effect on green projects.63 Higher cost of capital and shorter tenors make 
project-level economics challenging for the end-users/beneficiaries (e.g. higher cost of electricity 
required in order to be able to cover higher debt service requirements). Therefore, it is critical that GCF 
concessionality is used to enable projects that otherwise struggle to access finance, and to enable 
projects that have beneficial economics to end beneficiaries (individuals and businesses benefitting 
from the new green technology).  
Small size of projects limits access to finance: non-utility-scale green projects are often “distributed” 
or “embedded”, and are small in size: for example, mini-grids, SWH, energy efficiency upgrades, 
irrigation PV and pumping equipment, etc. The small size of these projects makes them difficult to 
finance by the local commercial banks. Small and large projects can have similar loan processing and 
underwriting costs (i.e. staff review time) which incentivizes commercial banks to seek out large 
projects to maximize their revenue on a per-project basis.  
Lack of equity capital: Rwanda’s green sector is small and nascent, with few well-financed international 
development companies operating in the smaller distributed green sectors such as energy efficiency, 
irrigation and non-utility scale energy, including PV and SWH. The local financial system is also small, 
meaning that local project developers can also struggle to raise sufficient equity capital. This lack of 
available equity constrains local project developers: capital that would go towards things like feasibility 
studies, environmental studies, engineering studies, site control and lease agreements, legal reviews 
and contract negotiation, etc. is often in short supply. This makes it more challenging for project 
developers to bring robust, well-structured projects to commercial banks to seek financing.  
Constraints on sovereign borrowing: Rwanda’s debt to GDP ratio is constrained, due to high levels of 
debt obligations. Rwanda has invested heavily in its development in recent years, including in sectors 
such as large-scale construction, which has consumed a significant amount of sovereign debt. The 
Covid-19 economic crisis has further constrained Rwanda’s economic situation, with decreased tax 
revenues, and local industries (e.g. tourism, airlines and conventions/events) hit hard by the slowdown 
of international travel. These industries have required support during the economic crisis, which has 
further constrained Rwanda’s borrowing abilities. These constraints result in less availability of 
sovereign finance for green projects, and in particular for small distributed projects, or green projects 
in the private sector.  
59. Availability of other international and domestic sources of capital: 
GCF capital is the key “anchor” to the RGIF program design, and is critical to the RGIF capitalization. 
There is no other obvious alternative to GCF funding that has      emerged to date. GCF capital brings 
a number of benefits to help address the market failures listed above. The key benefits that GCF 
capital brings are:

=== PAGE 59 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
 
 
 
64 Once RGIF is established, NDF intends to consider further support of the Facility and will evaluate its potential investment 
against NDF’s strategic objectives as well as an assessment of the investment rational. Any NDF commitment is also 
subject to NDF Board approval. 
 
- 
Affordable cost of funds: GCF’s concessional capital will help bring down the cost of funds of the 
RGIF Credit Facility, providing a direct benefit to project developers, to project-level economics, and 
to end beneficiaries.  
- 
Longer tenor better matched to project needs: GCF long-dated and patient capital is critical to the 
RGIF Credit Facility. Longer amortization will allow for more affordable project economics for end 
users, as up-front project costs can be amortized over a longer term. 
- 
Grants to bridge gaps in equity and to support early-stage developers: GCF grants will be critical to 
offering “integrated” support to the market via the RGIF program. That is, projects will be able access 
grants financing to cover early-stage feasibility costs and support collateral requirements, thereby 
allowing them to then move on and seek financing from the Credit Facility and other financiers.  
- 
Dedicated funding and mission: GCF’s capital is the anchor to support the creation of this dedicated 
program to finance green projects. GCF support will provide seed funding to help launch the program. 
This type of dedicated program focused on funding across the project development cycle, and 
available to a suite of projects in the green sector is the first-of-its-kind in Rwanda. Having this 
dedicated and institutionally focused implementation arrangement will send a clear signal to market 
actors, and will help build dedicated sector expertise necessary to scale nascent green sectors in 
Rwanda. 
The specific financial products (direct lending in both senior and subordinate position and grants to 
support feasibility stage and collateral support) were designed based on the specific constraints in the 
market, to avoid risk, lower the cost of funding, and increase access to finance, enabling more green 
projects to be developed.  
60. The RGIF approach ensures cost-effectiveness and efficiency via an integrated approach designed to 
meet multiple needs – blended financing will be offered at a reasonable cost and a long tenor to 
support green projects. Rather than crowding out private and other public investment, the RGIF 
structure works specifically to crowd in commercial banks through direct co-investment. While 
operating under the principle of minimum concessionality, the GCF’s concessional pricing is critical 
for the entire structure to work, as hedging costs will inevitably raise the all-in cost of financing to the 
projects. The concessionality of the program, supported by GCF funding, is designed to benefit end 
beneficiaries. The RGIF will report on and be judged by its ability to finance new projects that struggle 
to access finance, and its impact on target beneficiaries. The GCF’s capital will be a key enabler of 
the market transformation, and as BRD learn from the experience implementing the RGIF Credit 
Facility, the green financing market will gain efficiency, track record, and lower risk perception. 
61. Other sources of capital: GCF will help leverage other domestic and international sources of funding. 
Initial GCF funding will not only help launch the RGIF but will provide the necessary support for the 
RGIF to start and demonstrate its track record to attract additional funding in the 2nd phase of 
capitalization. 
62. International capital: GCF funding is helping mobilize funding from the AfDB, SIDA, EIB, AFD, FCDO, 
RESPONSIBILITY (Danish International Development Agency) and NDF64.  
63. AfDB plans to provide USD 10 million in financing, via a sovereign loan in the 2nd tranche of 
capitalization once the GoR headroom is available. This will help scale-up RGIF Credit Facility support 
to the market. Furthermore, RGIF is expected to mobilize at least $10 million from Rwanda developing 
partners for the 2nd tranche depending on the outcome of ongoing discussions. This includes partners 
such as NDF with which the GoR has already engaged into RGIF capitalization discussions.

=== PAGE 60 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
 
 
 
65 “Solar Securitization for Rwanda.” Climate Policy Intiative.https://www.climatepolicyinitiative.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/Solar-
Securitization-for-Rwanda_Instrument-overview.pdf 
64. Domestic capital: The RGIF, on the “green bank” model, is specifically designed to mobilize co-
investment of commercial financiers at the project level. The RGIF’s focus on green finance expertise 
and patient capital base will enable the Credit Facility to co-invest with local commercial banks in 
projects, either in a senior or subordinate position. The RGIF Credit Facility will help structure and 
underwrite projects directly, enabling commercial banks to ``piggyback” on project finance and provide 
co-financing. This can take the form of a direct co-investment, or RGIF organizing a debt syndicate 
whereby commercial co-investors supply co-finance to a project. The RGIF will also seek to directly 
engage international and domestic capital markets (e.g. RSSB, Rwanda’s public pension fund). For 
example, the RGIF could work to provide bridge financing to finance a group or smaller projects, which 
can be bundled and refinanced by institutional investors, either via a private placement or 
securitization. The solar securitization framework has already been put forward in Rwanda via the CPI 
Climate Lab, and is a strong example of a financing approach that is standing ready to be supported 
using RGIF program funds.65  
 
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Explain how the project/programme will successfully exit once implementation is completed, including how results and benefits will 
continue beyond the project/programme period and how the contribution to paradigm shift will be maintained.  
Include information pertaining to the longer-term ownership, project/programme exit strategy, operations and maintenance of 
investments (e.g. key infrastructure, assets, contractual arrangements). In case of private sector, please describe the GCF’s 
financial exit strategy through Initial Public Offerings, trade sales, etc. 
Provide information on additional actions to be undertaken by public and private sector or civil society as part of the 
project/programme to ensure sustainability of the results attained. 
65. The RGIF will be based on the Green Bank model and, as noted above, be structured as a blended 
debt facility in the form of a self-sustaining two-part initiative within FONERWA and BRD. The credit 
facility of the RGIF will be designed to be financially break-even and structured to complete repayment 
of GCF debt funding and the initial capitalization as provided by one or more Development Finance 
Institutions as per loan agreements where financial returns are sufficient to meet operating costs to 
cover expected portfolio losses.  
To be a self-sustaining, long-lived catalytic financing operation, the credit facility of the RGIF will draw 
operating revenue from the following identified sources. See the integrated RGIF Financial Model for 
full detail on the points noted below:  
- 
To initiate operations, the RGIF credit facility will request grant funding as detailed in the budget 
annex 4.  
- 
The interest earned by the RGIF on its lending activity will be returned to funders at the loan rates 
determined in the term sheet.  
- 
To sustain operations over time, the RGIF Credit Facility will cover its operating costs (overhead and 
risk premium) by adding a spread to the blended cost of the RGIF credit facility. The RGIF will not 
generate profit over and above covering operating expenses. 
 
66. The Project Preparation Facility of the RGIF, which will provide grants for technical and feasibility 
studies and grants to support the bankability of market demonstration projects will require ongoing 
support from development partners to sustain operations and grant capacity. Grant funding sources 
will include the following: 
- 
An initial grant from the GCF through this Funding Proposal for $12.79illion in 2 phases: $7.52 million 
for the initial phase 1 and $5.27 million on phase 2 during year 5. This grant from the GCF will be 
used to provide a mixture of non-reimbursable and reimbursable RGIF project grants through the 
PPF (and to cover PPF operating expenses as well as BRD operating expenses). Reimbursed grant

=== PAGE 61 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
 
 
 
 
funds received by the PPF will be recycled to provide additional project support in subsequent rounds 
of activity by the RGIF. 
- 
Grant funds from development partners will be secured to sustain the operations for the RGIF PPF 
and related grant programs for the 2 phases. Initial outreach is underway to the FCDO, Danish 
International Development Agency, and other development partners to support the launch of RGIF 
during phase 1. The viability of this model is based upon long-standing engagement of development 
partners in supporting sustainable development initiatives and green goals in Rwanda. The 
Government of Rwanda has a proven track record of securing this type of grant support for projects 
within the mandate of the RGIF. Subsequent support is expected to follow during phase 2 once RGIF 
has established its own track record.  
- 
To initiate operations, the RGIF Project Preparation Facility will request grant funding to support 
operational costs as detailed in the budget annex 4. This budget supports the early years of 
operational expenses including one-time start-up period design and administration and legal costs, 
gender planning, financial product design, marketing and pipeline development support, monitoring 
reporting and verification, etc. 
- 
To cover the costs incurred by AFDB in its role as the AE to supervise RGIF implementation (internal 
project management & monitoring, legal documentation, etc., a management fee of 4.2% of the total 
funds mobilized from the GCF (via the AE fee) .  
 
67. The RGIF program is expected to create a lasting impact on the sectors it is targeting, by helping 
developers create track record of successful construction and deployment of green technologies and 
business models. Through the investment made by the RGIF, project developers will be able to better 
scale their businesses, thereby building their own capacity, and creating a portfolio of projects that 
have been financed by banks, and whose performance the banks can analyze in the future to better 
understand the market. Capacity building at the banks, coupled with real-world experience doing deals 
in the green sector, will create higher levels of experience and expertise in these sectors. As risk 
perception is generally higher with “new” sectors or technologies, this increased experience and track 
record will ultimately help lower risk perceptions and bring down the cost of borrowing that currently 
holds back projects or negatively affects project economics. That is, after the GCF funding has been 
spent and the GCF’s exits,” the RGIF will have a lasting effect on the market dynamics through 
demonstration effects. In addition, the RGIF is a program itself, which can grow and raise additional 
capital from other partners as it matures. That is, after the additional capacity and experience has 
been built at FONERWA and BRD, these institutions will be better equipped to raise additional capital 
from other sources beyond the GCF, and to provide the kind of private sector catalytic support that is 
needed to truly scale target green sectors in Rwanda.After demonstrating initial success, the RGIF 
will seek to grow its funding base and corresponding portfolio. Following the initial round of 
investments, it is also envisaged that commercial banks would become more familiar with the nature 
of the risks for these types of projects and be interested in participating in new subsequent innovative 
projects, with other financial instruments for adaptation and mitigation projects. In addition, the AfDB 
would like to raise the possibility of continued capitalization of the RGIF (and supporting DFIs) to 
support additional rounds of continued financing.

=== PAGE 62 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + 
v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
42,793,000 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) Senior loans at 
Phase 1 
(ii)Senior loans at 
Phase 2 
10,000,0000 
20,000,000 
40 years 
40 years 
10 years 
10years 
0 % 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(iii) Equity 
Enter amount 
 
 
Enter % equity 
return 
(iv) Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) Reimbursable 
grants at launch 
Reimbursable 
grants in Phase 2 
2,285,716 
1,714,284 
 
 
 
(vi) Grants at 
launch 
Grants in Phase 2 
5,237,371 
3,555,629  
 
 
 
(vii) Results-
based payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
99,162,898 
Options 
Name of 
institution 
Financial 
instrumen
t 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
African 
Development 
Bank 
Senior 
Loans 
 
10,000,000 
million USD 
($)  
40 years 
5 years 
0,75% 
Options 
EIB 
Senior 
Loans 
 
20,000,000 
million USD 
($)  
40 years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
AFD 
Senior 
Loans 
 
20,000,000 
million USD 
($) 
 
 
Options 
Global Climate 
Patrnership Fund 
(responsAbility) 
Senior 
Loans 
 
15,000,000 
million USD 
($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
FCDO 
Grant 
 
8,755,740 
million USD 
($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
 
DANIDA 
Grant 
5,407,158 
million USD 
($) 
 
 
 
SIDA 
Guarant
ee 
20,000,000 
million USD 
($) 
 
 
 
(c) Total 
financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
141,955,898 
million USD ($)  
(d) Other 
financing 
Please also explain other contributions such as in-kind contributions including tax exemptions and 
contributions of assets.

=== PAGE 63 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
 
 
 
 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 words, 
approximately 
0.5 page) 
Please also include parallel financing associated with this project or programme (refer to the co-
financing policy).  
AE co-financing: 
The Government of Rwanda as EE has submitted a request to the AE to use 
USD 10 million of the country’s allocation for 2023/2024 as co-financing for the 
RGIF capitalization (i.e. AfDB co-financing). The current headroom constraint is 
due to other urgent commitments such as the need to fund critical COVID-19 
response.   
Co-financing:  
a) Grant support from the FCDO and the Danish International Development 
Agency of USD 8,755,740 and USD 5,407,158 respectively in the first phase 
of the project implementation to cover support to project bankability and on 
operational costs throughout the project duration. 
b) In terms of co-financing in Phase1 , it is expected that EIB (USD 
20,000,000), AFD (USD 20,000,000) and Global Climate Partnership Fund 
(managed by responsibility) -USD 15,000,000) will be providing Loans to 
support the Credit Facility Portfolio throughout the project duration. 
c) Advanced discussions are ongoing with SIDA for the provision of a 
Guarantee line  of USD 20,000,000 in Phase1 to support the Credit Facility 
Portfolio  
The summary of the capital inflows including co-financing is as follows66: 
Capital Inflows including Co-finance 
Non-Reimbursable Funds 
for the PPF (including 
operations budget) 
First-Phase 
Second 
Phase 
Total 
GCF 
          
7,524,000 
                 
5,269,000 
                 
12,793,000  
Co-Finance 
  
  
  
FCDO 
          
8,755,740 
                       
-  
          
8,755,740 
Danish International 
Development Agency 
          
5,407,158  
                       
-  
          
5,407,158  
Total grants raised 
 
21,686,898 
5,269,000 
26,955,898 
Reimbursable Funds for 
the Credit Facility 
  
  
  
GCF 
        
10,000,000  
               
20,000,000  
                 
30,000,000  
AFDB 
                        
-  
               
10,000,000  
                 
10,000,000  
EIB 
          
20,000,000  
                 
                 
20,000,000  
AFD 
          
20,000,000  
                
                 
20,000,000  
Global Climate Partnership 
Fund (responsAbility) 
          
15,000,000  
                
                 
15,000,000  
 
66 Please note that co-finaning from FCDO, DANIDA (both grants) and EIB, AFD, Global Climate Partnership Fund (credit 
facility)and SIDA (bank guarantee) will be available from year 1 and for the whole project duration.

=== PAGE 64 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
 
 
 
 
Total loans raised 
       
65,000,000  
              
30,000,000  
                 
95,000,000  
SIDA (Guarantee Line) 
        
20,000,000  
                       
-  
                 
20,000,000  
Total Loans and Bank 
Guarantees Raised 
       
85,000,000  
              
30,000,000  
               
115,000,000  
Grand Total 
        
106,686,898  
               
35,269,000  
               
141,955,898  
 
 
C.2. Financing by component  
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component and output as outlined in section B.3. above and disaggregate 
by source of financing. More than one co-financing institution can fund a single component or output. Provide the 
summarised cost estimates in the table below and the detailed budget plan as annex 4. 
 
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
Options 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
Options 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Options 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name of 
Institutions 
1.Grants to 
improve 
bankability 
Output 1: 
Increased 
number of 
green sector 
projects 
seeking 
finance 
23,629,450 
      
11,083,200 
Grants and 
reimbursabl
e grants 
including 
for 
operations 
costs 
 
12,546,250 
Grants 
including 
for 
operations 
costs 
FCDO and 
DIDA 
Click here to 
enter text. 
Enter 
amount 
Enter 
amount 
Choose an 
item. 
Enter 
amount 
Choose an 
item. 
Click here to 
enter text. 
2. Credit to 
provide debt 
finance and 
drive co-
investment 
Output 2: 
Increased 
number of 
green sector 
projects 
accessing 
finance      
116,179,80
0 
      
31,179,800 
Senior 
loans & 
grants for 
operations 
costs 
      
85,000,000 
Senior 
loans & 
grants for 
operations 
costs 
AfDB + 
EIB+AFD+ 
GCPF for 
loans and 
SIDA for 
guarantee   
Click here to 
enter text. 
Enter 
amount 
Enter 
amount 
Choose an 
item. 
Enter 
amount 
Choose an 
item. 
Click 
here to 
enter 
text. 
3. Project 
Management 
Output 3: RGIF 
Launch & 
Operationalizat
ion 
 
 
2,146,648 
 
530,000 
 
 
Grants 
 
 
1,616,648 
 
 
Grants 
 
 
FCDO and 
DANIDA 
 
 
Indicative total cost (USD) 
141,955,89
8 
42,793,000 
99,162,898 
 
This table should match the one presented in the term sheet and be consistent with information presented in other 
annexes including the detailed budget plan and implementation timetable.  
 
In case of a multi-country/region programme, specify indicative requested GCF funding amount for each country in annex 
17, if available.

=== PAGE 65 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
 
 
 
 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
If the project/programme is expected to support capacity building and technology development/transfer, please provide a 
brief description of these activities and quantify the total requested GCF funding amount for these activities, to the extent 
possible. 
68. Capacity building is key to ensure the sustainability of the outcomes to be achieved under the 
project. To ensure a successful implementation of the RGIF project BRD and FONERWA 
institutional capacity will need to be strengthened and budget provision is made under the 
Project components to ensure resources are allocated for capacity building and awareness. 
Under Component 1, resources are allocated for Technical assistance for capacity building,  
outreach to project developers regarding the PPF products: 
o Training of commercial banks relevant staff on the PPF products with the focus on the 
reimbursable grants provided as collateral to commercial banks financing of green 
projects in the priority sectors (Activity 1.3.2). 
o Training of project developers in RGIF priority sectors including women developers on 
how to access RGIF PPF program.(Activity 1.3.1 and Activity 3.1.5) 
In order to raise awareness for the RGIF program and ensure that project developers are aware 
of the RGIF program offerings a series of technical assistance trainings and outreach to market 
participants will be conducted. This will include performing a market awareness campaigns for 
project developers in priority sectors and performing capacity building to target groups 
regarding the reimbursable grants as collateral products. The Credit Facility, managed by BRD 
and the PPF managed by FONERWA will also benefit from this training and will work closely 
with project developers to help them understand the program eligibility requirements, as well 
as with local financiers on how they can work with BRD to structure deals and take advantage 
of credit enhancing financial products to specifically increase the ability of projects to access 
finance.  In order to achieve maximum impact of the RGIF program, FONERWA and BRD will 
work to secure additional funding for the RGIF over time, to ensure its on-going operations and 
support provided to green sector project developers in Rwanda. 
 
Under Component 2, BRD will oversee capacity building activities for target financial 
institutions (commercial banks, microfinance, SACCOs, etc – Activity 2.1.2) as well as to its 
clients faced with challenges of limited skills in terms of compiling their business ideas into 
bankable business plans and management skills during and after project implementation. 
Increased capacity within these institutions will create higher levels of experience and expertise 
in the green funding 
Under Component 3, support is provided for the hiring of a Gender specialist who will provide 
advisory support and inputs on awareness and capacity building activities related to gender 
(Activity 3.1.5). The following support on capacity building and awareness is envisaged under 
Component 3: 
o Training of RGIF steering Committee on gender program specifics will be provided   
o Perform market awareness campaign for women led projects developers in RGIF 
priority sectors & women potential beneficiaries of RGIF programs and of the existence 
of a code of conduct related to SEAH 
o Make RGIF beneficiaries aware of the existence of a code of conduct related to SEAH 
and gender equal labour conditions among the selected companies

=== PAGE 66 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
 
 
 
 
o Provide capacity building of women developers involved in RGIF priority sectors to 
increase their access to the RGIF programs including financial management and 
development of viable business plans  
o Outreach workshops on the importance of a gender-mainstreamed approach for 
FONERWA and BRD including workshop on the importance to develop a gender-
responsive institutional framework (e.g Environmental and Social Governance and 
gender-responsive Corporate Social Responsibility aspects, corporate gender 
strategy and gender action plan) 
 
BRD and FONERWA will benefit from institutional capacity building  (Activity 1.3.2) in green-
sector project preparation and direct project financing.  the RGIF programme will include 
strengthening the institutional capacity of the FONERWA and BRD to upgrade and become 
the co-executors of the RGIF and have the mandate, structure, functions, investment focus, 
financial instruments and systems, strategic and business plan, operational systems and 
manuals, required staffing and capacity for making catalytic green investments.

=== PAGE 67 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
 
 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Describe the potential of the project/programme to contribute to the achievement of the Fund’s objectives and result 
areas. As applicable, describe the envisaged project/programme impact for mitigation and/or adaptation. Provide the 
impact for mitigation by elaborating on how the project/programme contributes to low-emission sustainable 
development pathways. Provide the impact for adaptation by elaborating on how the project/programme contributes 
to increased climate-resilient sustainable development. Calculations should be provided as an annex. This should be 
consistent with section E.2 reporting GCF’s core indicators.  
69. RGIF interventions will focus on projects in target sectors that mitigate or adapt to climate change 
while creating social impact and economic opportunities. The near-term focus sectors (described in 
Section B.1 and B.3) are climate smart agriculture, renewable energy green buildings and clean 
transportation. The exact portfolio mix will depend on numerous factors over the course of project 
implementation, including continuation of on-going regulatory enabling environments, quality of 
projects/developers submitted for financing, etc. For the purposes of the impact calculations here, it is 
assumed that the RGIF will allocate approximately 25% of its funds toward each of the four near-term 
priority sectors. The calculations are for the total program impact and include RGIF investment as well 
as assumption on co-investment (to arrive at total project value by sector). Details of the impact 
calculations and methodology can be found in Annex 22 (a & b). 
 
70. RGIF Renewable Energy Sector impact potential 
RGIF interventions in the renewable energy sector will focus on supporting the development of the off-
grid market including mini grids, and small grid tied mini hydro. RGIF plans to bring down the cost of 
feasibility work through its project preparation window while also providing partial collateral support to 
help project developers access to the RGIF credit facility and other available local financing. These 
interventions in the near term are estimated to result in the installation of a total capacity of  15.15 MW 
from solar PV and hydro power sources. This will result in a total avoided CO2eq emissions of  
881,085tCO2eq. Additionally, it is expected that RGIF interventions in the near and medium term in 
the Solar PV and hydro mini-grids markets, will lead to 305,423 households having direct access to 
electricity. This will also enable the reation of 14,486 direct job years created (of which 32% are 
women) by the lifetime of the RGIF project. (Please refer to the the annex 22b).  
Table D.1.1: Expected Carbon Equivalent Emission Reduction by RGIF Activities in the 
renewable energy sector (by 2050, not including Solar Hot Waters impacts). 
 
Metric 
Solar PV 
Outcome 
Hydro mini-
grids 
Outcome 
Total Capacity Installed (kW) 
4970  
  
10,180 
Avoided CO2e emissions 
(tCO2e) 
61,569  
  
540,372 
Households electrified 
8,114 
  
297,309 
Total employment (job-years) 
5,566 
       
14,486 
Total employment (job-years, 
female) 
       
1,781 
  
2,854

=== PAGE 68 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
 
 
 
 
71. RGIF Agriculture Sector impact potential 
Current portfolio projects in the agriculture sector include solar productive use of energy for agricultural 
purposes such as dryers, milling, as well as efficiency drip irrigation projects that aimed at 
strengthening resilience to droughts by investing in catchment rehabilitation and water infrastructure 
development (water harvesting and storage, marshland development to offer better flood 
protection/groundwater recharge, etc.) Other projects in the pipeline also involve switching from 
irrigation pumps powered by diesel to solar powered pumps, and the promotion of climate resilient 
seed varieties. RGIF interventions in the solar and efficient irrigation sector is expected to result in a 
tCO2eq emissions reduction of 44,553 tCO2eq from using solar power for irrigation. This assumes a 
total irrigated area of 12,425 for the next 25 years. Most of these projects aim to improve Rwanda’s 
agricultural productivity by promoting efficient and sustainable use of water, land, labor and energy, 
including regions that have been deeply affected by climate change such as the Eastern region. It is 
worth noting that these projects do not involve deforestation but rather focus on already cultivated and 
cultivable land, primarily used by low-income and subsistence farmers or by cooperatives or 
businesses using diesel powered systems for irrigation. Additionally, RGIF interventions to scale-up 
projects with new irrigation techniques such as drip systems could help save around 9,247 ML per 
year for the next 25 years with the potential to create 4,757 direct jobs years of which 18.2% for 
women. In terms of beneficiaries, according to the 2020 Agricultural household Survey67, the average 
household farm is 0.4 heactares with nearly 90% of households owning their land. Based from this it 
is estimated that 31,000 households will benefit from access to climate resilient agriculture. With an 
average household size in Rwanda being 4.5 and the with females representing 52.5% of the 
agricultural population,it is estimated that approximately 140,000 people will benefit from the RGIF 
support with 73,500 females and 66,500 males. It is assumed that the losses in production avoided 
through the use of climate smart agriculture can enable 2x mores people to improve their food security 
(indirect beneficiaries), i.e. 280,000 people. 
 
Table D.1.2: Expected Carbon Equivalent Emission Reduction by RGIF Activities in the 
Agriculture sector (by 2050). 
Metric 
Outcome  
Total Area Irrigated (ha) 
12,425 
Water savings from drip system (ML/year) 
9,247 
Annual fertilizer savings (kg) 
78,810 
Total reduction in CO2e emissions (tCO2e) 
44,553 
Total employment (job-years) 
4,757 
Total employment (job-years, female) 
856 
 
 
 
72. Green Building Sector impact potential 
As the real estate sector has been a major driver for economic growth contributing more than 7% to 
the national GDP in the past, Rwanda has been promoting the development of green cities and more 
sustainable energy and water efficiency in buildings for its urbanization. RGIF interventions in this 
sector will focus on increasing the use of energy efficient alternative technologies as well as efficient 
equipment, onsite renewable electricity generation and water autonomy systems. Other potential RGIF 
interventions include waste management systems and other resiliency features to protect against 
floods and landslides. The expected impact is based on projects with current building plan 
 
67 https://www.statistics.gov.rw/file/11834/download?token=WTgsKLbz

=== PAGE 69 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
 
 
 
 
assumptions that indicate a 50% reduction in emissions from the baseline, and a 50% reduction in 
embodied energy of building materials, from the baseline as well as grid emissions factors. Near term 
RGIF interventions could result in the production of at 621 dwellings with improved efficiency with a 
total reduction of emission estimated at 27,257  tCO2eq with a total of 11,635MWh of energy savings 
from the green buildings. Beyond emissions reduction benefits and water savings, RGIF interventions 
in the near term could lead to expand access to resilient housing and create 11,893 job years including 
2,141 women job years.  
Table D.1.3: Expected Carbon Equivalent Emission Reduction by RGIF Activities in the 
Green buildings sector (by 2050). 
Metric 
Outcomes 
Dwellings with improved efficiency 
           
621 
Individuals with improved adaptive capacity from climate 
change 
  
2,796 
Avoided CO2e emissions (tCO2e) 
  
27,257 
Total employment (job-years) 
  
11,893 
Total employment (job-years, female) 
  
2,141 
 
 
73. Clean Transport Sector impact potential 
Regarding clean transportation projects, the GoR’s interest in replacing diesel 9m buses in Rwanda 
to electric technology could reduce carbon emissions by around 137,230 tCO2eq per year and the 
RGIF project pipeline targets conversion of 388 busses currently registered in Rwanda. Additional 
CO2 emissions reductions could be achieved by using solar electricity instead of the grid. Through the 
shift from diesel to electric busses, some 1220 jobs years will be created of which 98 are for women. 
Table D.1.4: Expected Carbon Equivalent Emission Reduction by RGIF Activities in the 
Clean Transport Sector (by 2050). 
Metric 
Outcome 
Total Vehicles Electrified 
  
388 
Liters of fuel offset 
  
207,741,792 
 Net CO2e emissions avoided (tCO2e) 
137,230 
Total job years created 
1,220 
Female share of employment (job years) 
98 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Paradigm shift potential is defined as ‘degree to which the proposed activity can catalyse impact beyond a 
one-off project or programme investment’. In this section, elaborate on the contribution to paradigm shift 
and how the proposed project/programme aims to contribute towards it based on the theory of change 
described in section B2(a). Also describe how and to what extent the project/programme will be able to 
promote or contribute to paradigm shift through the below.  
• 
Potential for scaling up and replication  
• 
Potential for knowledge sharing and learning 
• 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment 
• 
Contribution to the regulatory framework and policies

=== PAGE 70 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
 
 
 
 
• 
Overall contribution to climate-resilient development pathways consistent with relevant national climate 
change adaptation strategies and plans  
 
74. The RGIF will address market constraints, playing a catalytic role with a blended finance approach, to 
increase green and climate related investment as a key driver of Rwanda’s sustainable development 
goals. The RGIF will be the first application of the Green Bank model in a central African nation and 
will offer a significant demonstration of a country-driven climate finance initiative with broad replicability 
across the region.  
To this end, the African Development Bank (the Accredited Entity underpinning the RGIF loan 
application to the GCF), is already exploring replication of this model in more than six additional 
African countries through their study on application of the Green Bank model in Africa ( this study 
was conducted in partnership with the Climate Investment Funds). The six countries involved in this 
study include Tunisia, Ghana, Zambia, Uganda, Benin and Mozambique. Consequently, through this 
partnership, the RGIF has particular potential to support scaling of an innovative approach to climate 
finance across Africa and to encourage a paradigm shift to help achieve the high levels of private 
investment required to achieve Paris climate commitments. 
The RGIF will help build local green financial market capacity through innovation designed to spur 
new investment in the low carbon sector and allow more developers to access project finance. It will 
contribute to an improved investment environment by offering financial products such as  debt, grants 
to help reduce collateral requirements, being a first mover/risk absorber for low-carbon markets with 
limited track record and high risks (real and perceived) related to technology, regulation, etc. As more 
projects are developed (and financed by the private sector) the RGIF will help create an improved 
environment for future project development. 
The RGIF program also has a high potential to operate at the leading edge of investment challenges 
in new sectors, applying market lessons in the initial target markets, to further scale-up and address 
other green sectors suffering from similar barriers. This is a common element in other international 
Green Bank programs which often demonstrate the profitability of low-carbon investments to 
accelerate market development across several sectors to improve the risk-return profile and attract 
new private investment. 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Describe the wider benefits and priorities of the project/programme in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals and provide 
the potential in terms of:  
• 
Environmental co-benefits  
• 
Social co-benefits including health co-benefit 
• 
Economic co-benefits 
• 
Gender-sensitive development benefit 
 
75. RGIF objectives are aligned with Rwanda’s development goals as well as the following United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): goal 1. No Poverty – End poverty, in all forms, everywhere; 
goal 5. Gender Equality – Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls; goal 7. 
Affordable and Clean Energy – Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy 
for all; goal 8. Industry Innovation and Infrastructure - Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive 
and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation; goal 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities 
- Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable; goal 13: Climate Action 
- Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts by regulating emissions and promoting 
developments in renewable energy; and goal 17: Partnerships for the Goals - Strengthen the means 
of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development.

=== PAGE 71 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
 
 
 
 
76. Through the provision of grant support and collateral support in project development, project 
bankability will be assessed thereby providing the comfort required to BRD to support project 
implementation through the credit line on projects  focused on solar, hydro, green buildings, climate 
resilient agriculture and low carbon transport. Capacity building and awareness raising campaigns will 
also support ensuring that additional climate finance can be mobilised to ensure continuity post GCF 
intervention while the gender dimension will be streamline across all project activities.These outcomes 
will result in the ability of local project developers to grow their businesses and expand their offerings 
to end beneficiaries and customers, including agricultural cooperatives, villages in need of electricity, 
and urban dwellers in need of efficient and resilient housing stock. Beyond the climate benefits, growth 
in these industries will also have direct economic impact, contributing to more economic activity and 
increased output in key growth sectors, including agriculture, construction, and energy. 
 
77. These RGIF investments are limited to projects that meet the sector requirements and eligibility 
requirements of the RGIF and will have the following outcomes: i) Increased number of small, medium 
and large low-emission power suppliers, ii) Lower energy intensity of buildings, cities, industries and 
appliances, iii)  Improved agri production during droughts ) Increased use of low-carbon transport and 
will also yield the following co-benefits: a) Strengthened institutional system for climate responsive 
planning. b) Increased access to climate finance for women led SMEs and businesses. c) Job creation 
in green economy. 
 
78. More specifically, RGIF project is expected to deliver socio-economic and environmental benefits in 
various regions of Rwanda targeting a large spectrum of beneficiaries with a clear effort to impact 
women in particular. Targeted beneficiaries of the RGIF project fall into two categories: 
● RGIF direct beneficiaries: Rwandan green businesses will gain increased access to affordable 
finance to scale-up their activities, enhance their ability to contribute to Rwanda’s NDC targets, and 
gain experience working with local financial institutions. Green developers in Rwanda currently lack 
the financial resources to develop and expand their businesses, and the RGIF is designed to enable 
such businesses to grow and reach their potential to address the country’s climate threats while also 
supporting low carbon economic growth. The RGIF is specifically designed to support investments 
in NDC priority sectors as well as sectors that are drivers of Rwanda’s economic recovery and 
sustainable long-term growth. These sectors include agriculture, urbanization, energy and transport. 
RGIF direct beneficiaries also include local financial institutions which will build capacity and gain 
knowledge and experience specific to the green sector. BRD and FONERWA will also benefit from 
institutional capacity building in green-sector project preparation and direct project financing. 
 
● RGIF Indirect beneficiaries A diverse array of participants across numerous sectors such as 
agriculture, green cities, rural households, business and industry and others will benefit from the 
activities of the RGIF. These benefits will be highly significant for those that are the most vulnerable 
due to the impacts of climate change through projects in the agriculture, energy and urbanization 
sectors. RGIF investments in these priority sectors will impact Rwanda in several ways: 
• 
Social benefits: The RGIF is expected to have an impact on more than 983,953 direct project 
beneficiaries. Supporting the development of mini-grids will provide electricity access to at least  
983,952  families in rural areas. With an average of 5 people per family, 4,519,275 people will be 
impacted. Additionally, it is expected that at least 3,800people will benefit from the development 
of 1,964 green and resilient housing units through the Kigali Green City project. 
 
• 
Economic benefits: It is expected that projects financed through the RGIF will create at least 
1,106,203  (from near term priority sectors) job years and fuel economic growth to support 
Rwanda’s 
post 
Covid 
recovery. 
Two 
of 
the 
RGIF’s 
priority 
sectors 
(green 
urbanization/construction and more efficient agriculture) are major drivers of Rwanda’s GDP 
growth as highlighted in the national development plan (NST1). Urban construction has been one

=== PAGE 72 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
 
 
 
 
of the fastest growing sectors of the economy in recent years. The agriculture sector is the largest 
employer in Rwanda. Consequently, RGIF investments in green building construction and climate 
smart agriculture are forecast to have significant impacts on economic growth and jobs.  
 
• 
Environmental benefits: The RGIF will only invest in projects that can achieve real emissions 
reductions while ensuring climate change resilience and minimizing indirect environmental 
impacts. Clear and specific eligibility criteria will be defined for the RGIF to serve these outcomes. 
On water conservation, for example, the amount of water saved per year will be calculated based 
on a specific methodology developed by the RGIF in coordination with REMA and other relevant 
parties. Investments in efficient water use is critical for Rwanda’s climate resilience considering 
the increasing water demand (from various sectors). For example, one of the projects in the RGIF 
pipeline 68  estimates water savings of 20-50% from drip irrigation (depending on crop) as 
compared to baseline furrow sprinklers. These figures and flow rates result in estimations of 
44,487ML water saved/year for efficient irrigation projects.  
 
• 
Gender equality benefits: Women constitute 52%69 of Rwanda’s population with an even greater 
majority of women living in rural areas and working in the agriculture sector. RGIF will prioritize 
funding for women-led enterprises and companies that offer products or services that benefit the 
most to women, especially women who are the most vulnerable to climate change. The RGIF will 
place a specific focus on target sectors where gender equality is poorly addressed such as in 
climate smart agriculture, shift away from biomass for cooking, and rural energy access through 
mini-grids. 
Women are most likely the primary beneficiaries of projects in these priority sectors. Additionally, 
women-owned businesses in the RGIF pipeline have been identified and prioritized in the RGIF 
criteria and in the project pipeline development process. RGIF will target to have an investment 
portfolio of at least 30% of projects with a strong gender-responsive component.  
 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Describe the scale and intensity of vulnerability of the country and beneficiary groups and elaborate how 
the project/programme addresses the issue (e.g. the level of exposure to climate risks for beneficiary 
country and groups, overall income level, etc.). Describe how the project/programme addresses the 
following needs:  
• 
Vulnerability of the country and/or specific vulnerable groups, including gender aspects (for adaptation 
only) 
• 
Economic and social development level of the country and the affected population 
• 
Absence of alternative sources of financing (e.g. fiscal or balance of payments gap that prevents 
government from addressing the needs of the country; and lack of depth and history in the local capital 
market) 
• 
Need for strengthening institutions and implementation capacity 
 
79. Rwanda is a small, low-income country with significant needs in terms of economic development and 
is, according to the ND-GAIN Country Index70, among the most vulnerable countries (rank 151) to 
climate change. The RGIF is well positioned to address both Rwanda’s economic development and 
climate-related investment needs.  
The electricity and agriculture sectors, for example, are characterized by poor supply and poor 
productivity and they have a significant impact on the national economy. Approximately 70% of 
Rwandans lack access to electricity, with 88% lacking access in rural areas and 28% in urban areas. 
 
68 Source: Netafim, in partnership with NAEB, RAB, MOE, and RDB).  
69 EICV5_Main_Indicators report (National Statistics: www.statistics.gov.rw/publication/eicv-5-main-indicators-report-201617). 
70 https://gain.nd.edu/our-work/country-index/rankings/

=== PAGE 73 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, 70% of the population works in agriculture with low incomes, and constitute the most 
vulnerable segment of the population given dependence on rainfall and climate variability. Severe 
climate-related effects in Rwanda’s agriculture sector also pose a threat to food security according to 
the Government of Rwanda. Hence, there is an urgent need to improve productivity, protect from 
climate-related food shortages, and to connect rural communities to more diverse economic 
opportunities.  
80. The RGIF projects pipeline focuses on serving these sectors which currently suffer from chronic under 
investment due to market barriers that impede investment in low-carbon, climate resilient development 
projects. These barriers include lack of developer track record, high perception of risk, high borrowing 
costs (negatively impacting project economics), high collateral requirements, and lack of early-stage 
risk capital to perform feasibility and proper project structuring to get to bankability. The lack of the 
financial market capacity to provide appropriate financing solutions for these projects have scaled 
back and deter private investments making the sectors even more unattractive.  
Additionally, as the country is recovering from the global pandemic, the private sector will play an 
important role in spurring economic growth and supporting the country’s development trajectory. Public 
investment, the main driver of Rwanda growth in the past, will not be sufficient to fully develop the 
critical green sector. Consequently, addressing the major constraints to private investments in general 
and with a specific focus on the green sector will be essential for Rwanda’s susta RGIF investment 
support will help overcome these barriers, and provide appropriate financing to support these projects 
and scaling up low carbon markets in Rwanda. This will result in direct benefit impacts to recipients 
including increased access to clean energy, increased access to climate smart agriculture equipment, 
and increased access to housing that is energy efficient and climate resilient. (See previous sections 
for discussion of specific impacts).inable economic development.  
RGIF investment support will help overcome these barriers, and provide appropriate financing to 
support these projects and scaling up low carbon markets in Rwanda. This will result in direct benefit 
impacts to recipients including increased access to clean energy, increased access to climate smart 
agriculture equipment, and increased access to housing that is energy efficient and climate resilient. 
(See previous sections for discussion of specific impacts).

=== PAGE 74 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
 
 
 
 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Please describe how the beneficiary country takes ownership of and implements the funded project/programme. Describe the 
following:  
• 
Existing national climate strategy 
• 
Existing GCF country programme 
• 
Relevance to and alignment with existing policies such as Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), Nationally Appropriate 
Mitigation Actions (NAMAs), and National Adaptation Plans (NAPs) 
• 
NDCs, NAMAs, and NAPs 
• 
Capacity of Accredited Entities or Executing Entities to deliver 
• 
Role of National Designated Authority 
• 
Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders, including indigenous peoples, women and other 
vulnerable groups  
• 
 
81. The RGIF project is an initiative from the Rwandan Ministry of Environment (MoE), the Rwanda Green 
Fund (FONERWA) and the Rwandan Development Bank (BRD), both institutions owned by the GoR, 
to mobilize resources to support the country achieve its NDC targets. The RGIF is being designed in 
partnership with the AfDB, supported by international development partners including UNDP, NDF 
AFD, EIB, SIDA, etc..  
The project is being designed in coordination with Rwanda Environment Management Authority 
(REMA) and has secured a Letter of No Objection from REMA, the NDA to the GCF. FONERWA is a 
government special organ supervised by the MoE with the mandate to scale up climate finance in 
Rwanda. The RGIF is being designed to complement FONERWA’s current grants program, and its 
existing “private sector facility strategy.” The RGIF aims to catalyse private investments in Rwanda, 
with a unique and specific focus on finance, and unlocking and expanding private investment in the 
local green sectors. 
The establishment of the RGIF is aligned to the Government of Rwanda (GoR) overall national 
planning objectives and development goals, including Rwanda NDCs and its national development 
plan, the National Strategy for Transformation (NST-1). 
RGIF will support investment in sectors that are specifically targeted in NST-1 and NDC plans and 
address private sector investment demand in the green sector and stimulate green economic growth. 
For example, NST-1 calls for scaling up electricity generation and improving quality, affordability and 
reliability. It also calls for increased productivity and resilience in the agriculture sector (a major driver 
of Rwanda’s economy.) This will require climate smart agriculture and efficient irrigation. The NST-1 
calls for the acceleration of sustainable urbanization from 18.4% (2016/17) to 35% by 2024.71 This 
will require urban housing that has access to reliable energy and is built in a climate resilience 
manner (which is a challenge in a naturally hilly country like Rwanda). 
Many of these sectors are already significant drivers of Rwanda’s GDP growth, and are poised to 
take an even more important role as national trends continue, such as: increasing urbanization, 
growing needs for higher agricultural productivity, growing energy needs from industry as “Made in 
Rwanda” initiatives proliferate, etc.  
Other key stakeholders engaged during the design of the RGIF include project developers, commercial 
banks, the national development bank, the national pension funds (RSSB), the Sovereign Fund 
(Agaciro Development Fund), the Ministry of Finance (MINECOFIN), Rwanda Development Board 
(RDB), REG, Ministry of Infrastructure, the World Bank, etc.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Describe how the financial structure is adequate and reasonable in order to achieve the proposal’s 
objectives, including addressing existing bottlenecks and/or barriers, and providing the minimum 
concessionality to ensure the project is viable without crowding out private and other public investments. 
Refer to section B.5 on the justification of GCF funding requested as necessary.  
 
 
71 http://www.minecofin.gov.rw/fileadmin/user_upload/NST1_7YGP_Final.pdf

=== PAGE 75 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
 
 
 
 
Please describe the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed project/programme, taking into account 
the total financing and mitigation/ adaptation outcome the project/programme aims to achieve, and explain 
how this compares to an appropriate benchmark. 
 
Please specify the expected economic rate of return based on a comparison of the scenarios with and 
without the project/programme.  
 
IPlease specify the expected financial rate of return with and without the Fund’s support to illustrate the 
need for GCF funding to illustrate overall cost effectiveness. 
 
Please explain how best available technologies and practices have been considered and applied. If 
applicable, specify the innovations/modifications/adjustments that are made based on industry best 
practices. 
 
82. Impact Potential 
The climate and economic impact potential of the RGIF is significant and depends on the different 
priority sectors as illustrated below.  
Table D.6.1: RGIF Overall Impact Potential 
  
CO2 Emissions 
reduction 
Expected 
Number of jobs 
expected 
Number of 
Women jobs 
expected 
Renewable energy sector 
540,372 
 14,486  
 4,635  
Climate Smart Agriculture 
 44,553  
 4,757  
 856 
Green Buildings 
27,257  
11,893 
 2,141 
Clean Transport 
 314,249  
 1,169 
94 
Lifetime impact (25 years) 
926,432 
32,304 
7,726 
 
These summary impact metrics are based on the assumption that the RGIF will seek a proportionate 
distribution of resources across the near-term priority market sectors, but also be market-responsive 
and tailored to meet the actual needs and near-term project pipeline. The near-term focus sectors are 
climate smart agriculture, renewable energy green buildings and clean transportation. The exact 
portfolio mix will depend on numerous factors over the course of project implementation, including 
continuation of on-going regulatory enabling environments, quality of projects/developers submitted for 
financing, etc. It is assumed that the RGIF will allocate approximately 25% of its funds toward each of 
the four near-term priority sectors.  
 
Table D.6.2: RGIF Overall Impact Potential -Summary  
Portfolio summary metrics 
 Total  
Total tCO2e avoided 
926,432  
Average annual tCO2e avoided 
 37,057  
Cost of emissions avoided ($RGIF Invested/tCO2e) 
 $153 
Cost of emissions avoided ($GCF Invested/tCO2e) 
 $46 
Total employment (job-years) 
 32,304 
Total employment (job-years, female) 
7,726  
Households electrified 
 305,423  
Renewable electricity generation capacity deployed (kW) 
 15,150

=== PAGE 76 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
 
 
 
 
 
83. Paradigm Shift 
Globally, estimates of the investment required to achieve a low-carbon transition range from USD 1.6 
trillion to USD 3.8 trillion annually between 2016 and 2050, for supply-side energy system investments 
alone (IPCC 2018), while the Global Commission on Adaptation (GCA 2019) estimates adaptation 
costs of USD 180 billion annually from 2020 to 2030. However, Climate finance flows reached a record 
high of only USD 612 billion in 2017, driven particularly by renewable energy capacity additions in 
China, the U.S., and India, as well as increased public commitments to land use and energy efficiency. 
This was followed by an 11% drop in 2018 to USD 546 billion72.  
The existing international climate finance system will not be able to fill this investment shortfall alone.73 
Not only does more public capital have to flow into climate investment, but that public capital has to 
achieve far greater leverage from the private sector. Given that the institutional and financial designs 
of most DFIs are appropriately designed to minimize risk-taking and maintain high credit ratings, 
changes of this magnitude and speed will be hard to achieve. The Green Bank/Climate Finance Facility 
model being demonstrated by the RGIF is specifically designed to provide specialized intermediation 
and risk mitigation mechanisms, and to offer tailored solutions to fill existing gaps in country-specific 
low carbon markets. 
As noted above in Section D.2, the RGIF will be the first application of the Green Bank model in a 
central African nation and will offer a significant demonstration of a country-driven climate finance 
initiative with broad replicability across the region. The RGIF will demonstrate the Green Bank/Climate 
Finance Facility model which is designed to increase climate investment through using public funds to 
unlock and mobilize private climate investment both in Rwanda and more broadly. This will contribute 
to a paradigm shift in developing countries and among Development Financial Institutions. The 
demonstration effect of the RGIF will be magnified by the above-noted African Development Bank/ 
Climate Investment Funds project which is engaging more than six additional African countries in 
exploring the Green Bank / Climate Finance Facility model through their study on application of the 
Green Bank model in Africa. The six countries directly involved in this study with a view towards project 
development include Tunisia, Ghana, Zambia, Uganda, Benin and Mozambique. An in-person multi-
country Green Bank workshop to advance projects in these countries is anticipated (post-Covid) in mid-
2021, hosted by Kenya.  
 
84. Sustainable Development 
As noted in Section D.3 (below), the RGIF is specifically positioned to support Rwanda’s sustainable 
development, job growth and economic recovery from the impact of Covid-19 through the re-building 
of green development sectors such as agriculture, renewable energy, transport, etc. and an overall 
interface with Rwanda’s national plans and sustainable development goals. Indeed, agriculture and 
urban construction – two primary focus areas of the RGIF – are two of the most important drivers of 
Rwanda’s GDP. Investing in these sectors will place sustainable development at the center of 
Rwanda’s GDP growth recovery through creation of more jobs and a more resilient and sustainable 
society. 
 
 
85. Needs of Recipients 
 
72 Climate Policy Initiative 
73 According to the IEA methodology, the “Current Policy” scenario already accounts for these commitments. Under this assumption, the annual 
gap between the Current Pathway and the Meet NDC scenario is $364 billion. So even in the most favorable case, this collective pledge only fills 
12.6% of the gap between Current and NDC scenarios or only 4.2% of the gap between the Current and Two Degree scenarios.

=== PAGE 77 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
 
 
 
 
In addressing the unprecedented challenges created by Covid-19, the RGIF will play a critical role in 
progressing from near-term emergency aid relief to longer term efforts to build resiliency and re-grow 
Rwanda’s developing economy. The role of catalytic, innovative finance capacity to support critical 
infrastructure and social investment will be absolutely essential. As the world deploys existing public 
funds to meet urgent needs in the near term, catalyzing investment and mobilizing public and private 
resources will become critical in the stage that is to follow.  
In terms of specific needs within Rwanda, as a landlocked country and an economy still dependent on 
rainfed agriculture for both subsistence and exports, the country is highly vulnerable to climate change 
both in terms of mitigation and adaptation. Cyclical droughts, periodic floods due to intense rainfalls, 
seasonal temperature shifts (with an average temperature increase of 1.4°C74 for the last 50 years) 
and landslides have become increasingly common75 and extremely difficult to manage with serious 
consequences for agriculture, health and livelihoods (high soil erosion rates, increased livestock 
vulnerability to diseases, shifting agro-climatic zones, development of new pests and diseases, etc.) 
Overall, the cost of climate change to Rwanda’s economy is estimated to be in excess of USD 3 billion 
USD by 2030. Rwanda could lose over 1% of its GDP each year due to climate related losses by 2030. 
The RGIF will directly finance measures designed to reduce this economic burden and enable 
Rwanda’s economy to minimize climate impacts and grow and thrive. 
 
To tackle this challenge, the country has set ambitious climate and development goals to achieve low-
carbon emission while creating economic social impact and job creation. In energy, for example, 
Rwanda’s NDCs target the production of 71.7MW of renewable energy through small hydro power 
plants and 120MWp solar and hydro mini-grids for rural communities by 2030 with $895.5M total 
investment needed. However, current investment trajectories show a shortfall of investment to meet 
these goals, particularly from the private sector. The low carbon-sector in particular faced a substantial 
investment gap to drive any significant economic growth. Structural challenges and barriers remain 
regarding national green investments: high upfront capital needs to develop key projects, high financing 
costs, small-scale and distributed projects unable to secure financing, limited green finance experience, 
and existing local financing capacity too small to meet Rwanda’s investment needs to address climate 
change challenges.  
 
86. Country ownership 
The RGIF is a partnership initiative of the Rwanda Ministry of Environment executed by FONERWA, 
the nation’s Green Fund, alongside the Development Bank of Rwanda (BRD). As such it is an entirely 
country-driven and country-owned initiative. The RGIF has been developed with the additional support 
of the Rwanda office of the UNDP and the Nordic Development Fund. The RGIF is fully aligned with 
the Government of Rwanda’s overall national planning objectives and development goals, and is 
designed to address private sector investment demand in the green sector, stimulate green economic 
growth while supporting the implementation of the country’s national climate plans. 
 
87. Efficiency & Effectiveness 
As indicated through the description provided in this section, the RGIF offers an effective and efficient 
approach to scaling up private climate investment in Rwanda by working with two existing and well 
positioned institutions (FONERWA and BRD). In terms of efficiency, the RGIF’s institutional framework 
will intentionally build on the capacity of these two central existing institutions to create new and 
essential climate finance tools, expertise and programmatic capability to support national climate goals. 
This is an inherently efficient approach utilizing existing resources and institutions vs creating these 
anew. In terms of effectiveness, the RGIF will build on the established track record of FONERWA in 
 
74 Rwanda NDC detailed implementation plan, 2017 
75 Rwanda Water & Forestation Authority Interview & PST4 Rwanda Agriculture Strategic Plan 2018-2024

=== PAGE 78 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
 
 
 
 
supporting and expanding the green sector and the established financing capacity of Rwanda’s national 
Development Bank.

=== PAGE 79 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework to which the project/programme 
contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus 
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross-cutting proposals, select both. 
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
This section of the logical framework is meant to help a project/programme monitor and assess how it contributes to the paradigm shift described in section D.2 above by applying 
three assessment dimensions - scale, replicability, and sustainability.  
 
Accordingly, for each assessment dimension (see the definition per assessment in the accompanying guidance note), describe the current state (baseline) and the potential scenario 
(target) and rate the current state (baseline) by using the three-point-scale rating (low, medium, and high) provided in the guidance note. Also describe how the project/programme 
will contribute to that shift/ transformation under respective assessment dimensions (scale, replicability and sustainability). In doing so, please refer to section B.2(a) (theory of 
change).        
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Scale 
Rwanda low market 
structural challenges 
include small-scale and 
distributed projects 
unable to secure 
financing locally. The 
lack of equity capital for 
nascent developers 
looking to scale up has 
been a barrier for 
Low 
The RGIF has the mandate to scale up 
climate finance and increase private 
investments in low-carbon and climate-
resilient projects76. The RGIF will directly 
providing financing solutions to projects 
that can achieve scale and impact while 
also attracting co-investment from the 
local financial market. Investing in 
projects with a great potential to scale up 
will help support RGIF program 
Describe key applicable outputs and or 
resulting outcomes relevant to increasing 
(scaling up) quantifiable results within the 
scope of the intervention. 
RGIF aims to scale and contribute to the 
project outcomes including: 
- Increased number of small, medium 
and large low-emission power 
suppliers  
 
76 OECD (2016) “Green Investment Banks: Scaling up Private Investment in Low-carbon, Climate-resilient Infrastructure.” http://www.oecd.org/ environment/cc/green-investmentbanks-
9789264245129-en.htm

=== PAGE 80 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
 
 
 
 
 
growth, project 
development and green 
investments.  
 
sustainability. Additionally, further funding 
in 2025 will be dedicated to scale up 
RGIF market outreach. This will will help 
build a dedicated sector expertise 
necessary to scale nascent green sectors 
in Rwanda.  
At least 40% of the total portfolio for both 
the PPF and the CF will be dedicated to 
scalable projects. 
- Increased Energy Efficiency of 
buildings, cities, industries and 
appliances  
- Increased use of low-carbon transport, 
etc 
As well as the following outputs:    
- Increased number of green sector 
projects seeking finance 
- Increased numbers of loans/finance to 
green sector projects  
- Increased level of investment from 
commercial banks and institutional 
Replicability 
The RGIF will be the 
first application of the 
Green Bank/Climate 
Finance Facility model 
in a central African 
nation with the mission 
to address markets 
constraints and increase 
green investments. The 
current baseline in 
Africa having been 
implemented by DBSA. 
Rwanda low carbon 
markets as well as 
those of several regions 
in Africa have limited 
finance access both 
domestically and 
internationally. This 
challenge spans across 
most of the priority 
Medium 
The RGIF will address market 
constraints, playing a catalytic role with a 
blended finance approach, to increase 
green and climate related investment as 
a key driver of Rwanda’s sustainable 
development goals. This will offer a 
significant demonstration of a country-
driven climate finance initiative with 
broad replicability across the region. It 
will contribute to a paradigm shift in 
developing countries and among 
Development Financial Institutions. 
Furthermore the demonstration effect of 
the RGIF will be magnified by the African 
Development Bank/ Climate Investment 
Funds project which is engaging more 
than six additional African countries in 
exploring the Green Bank / Climate 
Finance Facility model through their 
study on application of the Green Bank 
model in Africa. 
Describe key applicable outputs and 
resulting outcomes that will be replicated 
to other sectors, markets, geographical 
regions, or countries. 
RGIF implementation will expand both 
institutions green finance capacity and 
result to the following outcome or output:  
- Strengthened institutional and 
regulatory systems for climate-
responsive planning and 
development (Long-term 
sustainability of the RGIF, including 
sustained efforts to support viable 
green sectors projects) 
- Increased level of investment from 
commercial banks and institutional 
investors as the RGIF demonstrate 
its ability to be sustainable.

=== PAGE 81 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
 
 
 
 
 
sectors except 
renewable energies.  
Sustainability 
The RGIF 
implementation will be 
the first initiative of its 
kind in Rwanda so there 
is no baseline available. 
It faces the risk that it 
will be unable to 
generate sufficient 
revenues, to support its 
operating expenses and 
ensure its sustainability 
in the future. 
High 
The RGIF is structured as a blended debt 
facility in the form of a self-sustaining 
two-part initiative within FONERWA and 
BRD. It builds on both BRD and 
FONERWA existing success and track 
record to ensure a successful 
implementation and sustainability. The 
RGIF Credit Facility is based on an 
integrated financial model that provides 
returns to the facility to ensure its 
sustainability. Furthermore, the PPF will 
provide 40% of its grant funding, as 
‘reimbursable grants’ to project 
developers. This will allow for the return 
and recycling of grant funds and ensure 
the program sustainability. Finally, the 
financial model and business plan is 
structured to generate sufficient revenues 
through management fees on loans to 
support the operating expenses of the 
RGIF.  
Describe key applicable outputs and 
resulting outcomes that will be sustained 
beyond the project/programme period. 
  
RGIF implementation will expand both 
institutions green finance capacity and 
result to the following outcome or output:  
- Strengthened institutional and 
regulatory systems for climate-
responsive planning and 
development (Long-term 
sustainability of the RGIF, including 
sustained efforts to support viable 
green sectors projects) 
- Increased level of investment from 
commercial banks and institutional 
investors as the RGIF demonstrate 
its ability to be sustainable.

=== PAGE 82 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
 
 
 
 
 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and or supplementary) indicators may be selected as 
applicable for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable to measure any given 
project/programme outcomes, project/programme-specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators).  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final77 
All mitigation result 
areas 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Through yearly 
monitoring (Via APR) 
mid term evaluation and 
terminal evaluation. 
Appropriate methology 
to be used as per 
assumptions of each 
result areas   
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
52,152 tCO2 
 
 
222,426 tCO2 
at end of 
program 
 
926,432 tCO2 
at end of 
lifetime  
 
 
Based on estimation of 
GHG emissions using CDM 
methodologie 
 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access 
 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
 
 
 
Project monitoring and 
completion reports, 
competed by 
FONERWA and BRD 
(for review by AfDB) 
audited by independent 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
23,312 tCO2 
95,383 tCO2 at 
end of program 
 
584,925 tCO2 
at end of 
lifetime 
Externalities and factors 
outside project 
management's control that 
may impact  the outcomes 
Data sources and 
methodologies applied for 
estimating baseline and 
targets 
RGIF model is a first of its 
kind program in Rwanda, so 
baselines on a similar 
facility are not available.  
 
77 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the 
target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.

=== PAGE 83 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
 
 
 
 
 
third-party verifier on a 
yearly basis  
Regular reporting from 
RGIF team, reported to 
AfDB to GCF as agreed 
in the AMA 
Per attached Annex 22a, 
assumption of 25% of 
annual RGIF mobilized 
investment directed toward 
clean energy projects.  
 
The methodology used to 
compute the GHG 
emissions is the AMS-I.L- 
Electrification of rural 
communities using 
renewable energy (version 
04) 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access 
 
Supplementary 1.3: 
Installed renewable 
energy capacity 
Project monitoring and 
completion reports, 
competed by 
FONERWA and BRD 
(for review by AfDB) 
audited by independent 
third-party verifier 
Regular reporting from 
RGIF team, reported to 
AfDB to GCF as agreed 
in the AMA 
0 
5.19 MW of PV 
and mini hydro 
installed (1.7 
MW of PV off 
grid and 3.49 
MW of hydro) 
15.15 MW of 
PV and mini 
hydro installed 
(4.98MW of PV 
off gridand 
10.18 MW of 
hydro) 
The pipeline of project is 
indicative and subject to the 
actual bankability of the 
projects soliciting funding, 
the final installed capacity 
might differ 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access 
 
Supplementary 1.4: 
Renewable energy 
generated 
Project monitoring and 
completion reports, 
competed by 
FONERWA and BRD 
(for review by AfDB) 
audited yearly by 
independent third-party 
verifier 
0 
18,932 MWh 
(584MWh of 
PV off grid and 
18,932 MWh of 
hydro) 
55,220 MWh 
(1,704MWh of 
PV off grid and 
53,516 MWh of 
hydro) 
The pipeline of project is 
indicative and subject to the 
actual bankability of the 
projects soliciting funding, 
the final installed capacity 
might differ

=== PAGE 84 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
 
 
 
 
 
Regular reporting from 
RGIF team, reported to 
AfDB to GCF as agreed 
in the AMA 
MRA2 Low-emission 
transport 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Project monitoring and 
completion reports, 
competed by 
FONERWA and BRD 
(for review by AfDB) 
audited yearly by 
independent third-party 
verifier 
Regular reporting from 
RGIF team, reported to 
AfDB to GCF as agreed 
in the AMA 
0 
27,755tCo2 
  
122,598 tCO2 
at end of 
program 
 
314,249 tCO2 
at end of 
lifetime 
 
Per attached impact model, 
assumption of 25% of RGIF 
mobilized financing directed 
toward clean transport 
projects. See model for full 
list of assumptions 
The methodology used to 
compute the GHG 
emissions is the AMS-III.C.: 
Emission reductions by 
electric and hybrid vehicles, 
Version 16. 
MRA2 Low-emission 
transport 
Supplementary 1.5 
Improved low-emission 
vehicle fuel economy 
Project monitoring and 
completion reports, 
competed by 
FONERWA and BRD 
(for review by AfDB) 
audited yearly by 
independent third-party 
verifier 
Regular reporting from 
RGIF team, reported to 
AfDB to GCF as agreed 
in the AMA 
0 
0.2.1L/Km 
0.63L/Km 
Per attached impact model, 
assumption of 25% of RGIF 
mobilized financing directed 
toward clean transport 
projects. See model for full 
list of assumptions 
The methodology used to 
compute the GHG 
emissions is the AMS-III.C.: 
Emission reductions by 
electric and hybrid vehicles, 
Version 16.

=== PAGE 85 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
 
 
 
 
 
MRA3 Buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances 
 
Core 1: GHG emissions 
reduced, avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
Project monitoring and 
completion reports, 
competed by 
FONERWA and BRD 
(for review by AfDB) 
audited yearly by 
independent third-party 
verifier 
Regular reporting from 
RGIF team, reported to 
AfDB to GCF as agreed 
in the AMA 
0 
1,086 tCo2 
4,445                  
t CO2e at end 
of program 
 
27,257 tCO2 at 
end of lifetime 
 
RGIF model is a first of its 
kind program in Rwanda, so 
baselines on a similar 
facility are not available.  
Per attached impact model, 
assumption of 25% of RGIF 
mobilized financing directed 
towards green buildings 
The EDGE APP 
(edgebuildings.com) has 
been used to compute the 
GHG emissions 
MRA3 Buildings, 
cities, industries and 
appliances 
 
Supplementary 1.1: 
Annual energy savings 
Project monitoring and 
completion reports, 
competed by 
FONERWA and BRD 
(for review by AfDB) 
audited yearly by 
independent third-party 
verifier 
Regular reporting from 
RGIF team, reported to 
AfDB to GCF as agreed 
in the AMA 
0 
2,844 MWh 
11,635 MWh 
RGIF model is a first of its 
kind program in Rwanda, so 
baselines on a similar 
facility are not available.  
Per attached impact model, 
assumption of 25% of RGIF 
mobilized financing directed 
towards green buildings 
The EDGE APP 
(edgebuildings.com) has 
been used to compute the 
GHG emissions 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
Project monitoring and 
completion reports, 
competed by 
FONERWA and BRD 
0 
40,000 direct 
beneficiaries of 
which 21,000 
140,000 direct 
beneficiaries of 
which 73,500 
Per attached impact model, 
assumption of 25% of RGIF 
mobilized financing directed 
toward climate smart

=== PAGE 86 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
 
 
 
 
 
(for review by AfDB) 
audited yearly  by 
independent third-party 
verifier 
Regular reporting from 
RGIF team, reported to 
AfDB to GCF as agreed 
in the AMA 
females and 
19,000 males 
 
 
 
 
 
80,000 indirect 
beneficiaries of 
which 42,000 
females and 
38,000 males 
females and 
66,500 males 
 
 
 
 
280,000 
indirect 
beneficiaries of 
which 147,000 
females and 
133,000 males 
agriculture projects. See 
model for full list of 
assumptions 
The number of direct 
beneficiaries is based on 
the assumption that all the 
beneficiaries will be 
agricultural households with 
1 household occupying 0.4 
ha and consisting of 4.5 
occupants with 53% being 
female (please refer to para 
71 for the detailed 
estimation of the number of 
beneficiaries) 
It is assumed that the 
losses in production 
avoided through the use of 
climate smart agriculture 
can enable 2x mores 
people to improve their food 
security (indirect 
beneficiaries) 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
Supplementary 2.1: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting 
improved and/or new 
climate-resilient 
livelihood options 
Project monitoring and 
completion reports, 
competed by 
FONERWA and BRD 
(for review by AfDB) 
audited yearly  by 
independent third-party 
verifier 
0 
40,000 direct 
beneficiaries of 
which 21,000 
females and 
19,000 males 
80,000 indirect 
beneficiaries of 
which 42,000 
140,000 direct 
beneficiaries of 
which 73,500 
females and 
66,500 males 
280,000 
indirect 
beneficiaries of 
Per attached impact model, 
assumption of 25% of RGIF 
mobilized financing directed 
toward climate smart 
agriculture projects. See 
model for full list of 
assumptions

=== PAGE 87 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
 
 
 
 
 
Regular reporting from 
RGIF team, reported to 
AfDB to GCF as agreed 
in the AMA 
females and 
38,000 males 
 
 
 
 
which 147,000 
females and 
133,000 males 
 
 
 
 
 
The number of direct 
beneficiaries is based on 
the assumption that all the 
beneficiaries will be 
agricultural households with 
1 household occupying 0.4 
ha and consisting of 4.5 
occupants with 53% being 
female

=== PAGE 88 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome against the 
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis-à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the 
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section. 
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for current 
state (baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
Core Indicator 5: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission climate-
resilient development 
pathways in a country-
driven manner 
While RGIF and 
FONERWA have a track 
record of implementing 
climate projects, their 
capacity needs to be 
strengthened to cope 
with an increasing 
demand and higher 
complexity projects.The 
increasing need for 
climate finance coupled 
with the variety of 
funding mechanisms 
available means that 
BRD and FONERWA 
need to further build 
their capacity to be able 
to leverage blended 
finance and properly 
assess the bankability of 
climate projects before 
providing credit facility to 
developers.  
low 
The expected outcome 
an increase in the 
climate finance 
leveraged and managed 
by the two institutions 
with a corresponding 
increase in bankable 
projects being submitted 
for approval thereby 
contributing to assist the 
country in its NDC goals 
 
The RGIF’s institutional 
framework will 
intentionally build on the 
capacity of these two 
central existing 
institutions to create new 
and essential climate 
finance tools, expertise 
and programmatic 
capability to support 
national climate goals. 
This expertise will be 
extended to the rest of 
the market as 
commercials banks will 
co-finance green 
projects.   
National level (one 
country) 
Core indicator 7: Degree 
to which GCF 
Investments contribute 
There are constaints to 
increase climate 
low 
The RGIF will help build 
local green financial 
The RGIF will contribute 
to an improved 
National level (one 
country)

=== PAGE 89 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
 
 
 
 
 
to market 
development/transforma
tion at the sectoral, 
local, or national level 
investments across 
several sectors and to 
improve the risk-return 
profile and attract new 
private investment due 
to lack of capacity to 
formulate new financial 
tools. MSMEs and 
project developers also 
face challenges in 
accessing climate 
finance which 
sometimes come with 
high collateral 
requirement.  
market capacity through 
innovation designed to 
spur new investment in 
the low carbon sector 
and allow more 
developers to access 
project finance. It plans 
to invest 25% of initial 
capital in each of the 
four near-term target 
sectors.  The exact 
portfolio mix will depend 
on numerous factors 
over the course of 
project implementation, 
including continuation of 
on-going regulatory 
enabling environments, 
quality of 
projects/developers 
submitted for financing, 
etc. It will contribute to 
an improved investment 
environment by offering 
financial products such 
as debt, grants to help 
reduce collateral 
requirements, being a 
first mover/risk absorber 
for low-carbon markets 
with limited track record 
and high risks (real and 
perceived) related to 
technology, regulation, 
etc. This will result in 
more project 
investment environment 
by offering financial 
products such as debt, 
grants to help reduce 
collateral requirements, 
being a first mover/risk 
absorber for low-carbon 
markets with limited 
track record and high 
risks (real and 
perceived) related to 
technology, regulation, 
etc. This will result in 
more project 
development. As more 
projects are developed 
and financed by the 
private sector the RGIF 
will help create an 
improved environment 
that will help accelerate 
market development.

=== PAGE 90 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85 
 
 
 
 
 
development. As more 
projects are developed 
and financed by the 
private sector the RGIF 
will help create an 
improved environment 
that will help accelerate 
market development. 
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards 
 
 
 
 
There is a lack of 
experience in green 
sector and lack of 
knowledge on climate 
finance within the 
various development 
sectors resulting from 
capacity gaps to 
understand and properly 
de-risk climate projects. 
As  such, financial 
institutions tend to lend 
with high interest rates 
 
low 
BRD and FONERWA 
will benefit from 
institutional capacity 
building in green-sector 
project preparation and 
direct project financing.  
the RGIF programme 
will include 
strengthening the 
institutional capacity of 
the FONERWA and 
BRD to upgrade and 
become the co-
executors of the RGIF 
and have the mandate, 
structure, functions, 
investment focus, 
financial instruments 
and systems, strategic 
and business plan, 
operational systems and 
manuals, required 
staffing and capacity for 
making catalytic green 
investments. 
RGIF indirect 
beneficiaries include 
local financial institutions 
which will build capacity 
and gain knowledge and 
experience specific to 
the green sector as they 
co-finance projects 
alongside the RGIF.  
The initial phases will 
act as blueprint for other 
project developers and 
through lessons learnt, 
general understanding 
of climate finance will 
increase, leading in 
higher demand for such 
financial products. 
Finally, RGIF 
programme will also 
enhance Rwanda's 
capacity to mobilize 
green investments and 
upgrade local capacity 
to provide green finance 
National level (one 
country)

=== PAGE 91 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86 
 
 
 
 
 
and support national 
green development.

=== PAGE 92 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) 
This section should list out project/programme-specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1-E.4). List down tailored indicators 
to monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (outcomes/outputs).  AEs have the freedom to decide against which outcomes they would like to set 
project/programme specific indicators. If any co-benefits are identified in sections B.2(a)(b), and D.3, AEs are encouraged to add and monitor co-benefit indicators under the 
“Project/programme co-benefit indicators” section in table below. Add rows as needed. 
Please number each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numbering for outputs under this section should 
correspond to the output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan). 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
 
Project/programme 
specific Indicator 
 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
 
 
Sources of information and 
methods used to collect and 
report data/information to 
measure progress against 
targets 
The starting point or 
current value of the 
indicators before 
the implementation 
of the project 
The estimated 
value of the 
indicator at the 
mid-point of the 
implementation 
The estimated 
value of the 
indicator at the 
completion of the 
implementation 
Externalities and factors 
outside project 
management's control that 
may impact on the 
Component 
 
Data sources and 
methodologies applied for 
estimating baseline and 
targets 
Outcome 1 
1. Reduced GHG 
emissions through the 
electrification of 
households electrified 
by renewable energy 
Number of 
households having 
access to clean RE  
 
 
Project monitoring and 
completion reports 
 
 
0 
100,000 
305,423 
Based on review of 
commissioning reports 
certifying the number of 
connections made to 
connect households to 
RE sources. 
It is assumed that 
developers will not have 
any issues connecting the 
households  to the RE 
systems

=== PAGE 93 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88 
 
 
 
 
 
Outcome 2 
Reduced GHG 
emissions in buildings 
through energy 
efficiency measures. 
Number of low carbon 
households 
constructed 
 
Project monitoring and 
completion reports 
0 
213 
621 
Based on review of 
project completion reports 
of energy efficient 
household submitted by 
the promoter. 
It is assumed that the 
construction will not face 
delays. 
Outcome 3 
Increased climate 
change resilience of 
small producers/farmers 
and MSMEs 
hectares of land 
irrigated 
Project monitoring and 
completion reports 
 
0 
4,000ha 
12,425ha 
Based on review of 
project completion reports 
submitted by installers of 
drip irrigation system 
confirming the area under 
cultivation being 
connected to drip 
irrigation systems  
Outcome 4 
Reduced GHG 
emissions in the 
transport sector 
Number of electric 
busses and ebikes on 
the road 
Project monitoring and 
completion reports 
 
 
0 
213 buses 
600 ebikes 
372 buses 
1050 ebikes 
 
Based on review of 
project completion reports 
on the number of electic 
busses delivered for 
urban transport. It is 
assumed that the 
charging infrastructure 
will be also available for 
the ebusses  
Output 1 
Number of green sector 
projects seeking 
finance increased 
Amount of funding 
invested in supporting 
project development 
through either grant or 
collateral support 
covering the four GCF 
results areas equally. 
Quarterly monitoring 
reports tracking 
expenditure 
0 
10.5m 
18.4m 
Assuming the grant 
support is capped at 
USD100,000 and the 
collateral support capped 
at USD 300,000 and the 
co-financing from FCDO 
and DANIDA is made 
available throughout the 
project duration

=== PAGE 94 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 2 
Number of green sector 
projects accessing 
finance increased 
Amount of debt 
funding made 
available to project 
developers  covering 
the four GCF results 
areas equally 
Quarterly monitoring 
reports tracking 
expenditure 
0 
41.4m 
95m 
Assuming that the 
maximum ticket size us 
USD10m and that the co-
financing from EIB, AfDB, 
AFD and GCPF is 
available throughout the 
duration of the project. 
Output 3 
RGIF launched and 
operationalised 
Number of outreach 
sessions aimed at 
project developers  in 
RGIF priority sectors 
to increase 
awareness on the 
availability of RGIF 
support 
Reporting to Steering 
Committee including 
overall project progress 
and status of outreach 
activities 
0 
8 
14 
Market outreach & 
communication plan is 
available from the first 
year and 2 outreach 
activities are conducted 
annually with a focus on 
gender  
Project/programme co-benefit indicators 
Co- Benefit 1: 
Increased access to 
climate finance for 
women led SMEs and 
businesses  
 
Percentage of 
women benefitting 
from RGIF  
Training reports and  
Project monitoring and 
completion reports 
 
30% of PPF 
beneficiaries  
women led SMEs 
and businesses  
 
10% of CF 
beneficiaries are  
women led SMEs 
and businesses 
40% of PPF 
beneficiaries  
women led 
SMEs and 
businesses  
 
15% of CF 
beneficiaries 
are  women led 
SMEs and 
businesses  
 
60% of PPF 
beneficiaries  
women led 
SMEs and 
businesses  
 
30% of CF 
beneficiaries 
are  women led 
SMEs and 
businesses 
Gender component is 
streamlined in the project 
design and 
implementation at all 
stages and disaggregated 
data is collected in the 
quarterly and annual 
reporting to track 
percentage of investment 
benefitting from RGIF 
resources. 
Co- Benefit 2: 
 Job creation in green 
economy  
 
Number of green jobs 
years created 
Project monitoring and 
completion reports 
 
0 
10,000 
 
 
32,355 
Estimation will be based 
on governmental sources 
e.g.  Rwanda National 
Labour Force Survey 
Thematic Report, the  
National Institute of 
Statistics of Rwanda or

=== PAGE 95 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other sources including 
ILO, IRENA (for %  
employment per MW per 
technology) 
Co- Benefit 3: 
Water saved and less 
use of fertilizer 
 
Volume of water and 
quantity amount of 
fertlizers reduced 
Project monitoring and 
completion reports 
 
0 
25,000 ML of 
water saved 
 
200,000 kg of 
fertilizers 
saved 
 
 
65,000 ML of 
water saved 
 
551,670 kg of 
fertilizers 
saved 
 
Estimation of volume 
saved to be conducted 
based on FAO estimates 
of water use for different 
types of agriculture or 
from surveys farmers to 
assess reduction in water 
use and savings on 
fertlisers used

=== PAGE 96 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91 
 
 
 
 
 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5 implementation timetable. Add rows as 
needed. 
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of activities to the related outputs provided above in section E.5. Similarly, please number sub-activities as 
shown below to associate to the related activity. 
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
1.1. Activity 1.1.  Grants to support 
project bankability (60% of the 
PPF portfolio) 
In response to the lack of perceived 
“bankability” of projects, and lack 
equity capital for nascent developers 
looking to scale up, the PPF will offer 
grants early-stage project activities to 
move projects from feasibility to 
bankability, including paying for 
project-level technical studies and 
environmental studies, securing 
permits and lease agreements, 
financial modeling and legal contract 
development, etc.  To implement this, 
the PPF, managed by FONERWA, will 
issue an RFP for projects applying for 
PPF support to bring selected projects 
to feasibility and bankability work 
across all RGIF-eligible sectors. 
1.1.1 Design and lauching of RFP 
process to support development of 
project pipeline including selection 
process for consultants and review of 
project submissions for eligibility 
criteria and awards of grant support. 
 
1.1.2 Monitor pipeline of projects 
 
1.1.3 Disburse grants to support 
project bankability (60% of Portfolio) 
 
1.1.4  Preparation of impact reports 
for streering committee and donors 
1.1.1 Finalised RFPs for development 
support to pipeline. Development of 
necessary tools, checklists, 
guidelines, PF standards, screening 
tools, underwriting process 
 
1.1.2 Monitoring reports on pipeline 
projects 
 
1.1.3 Monitoring reports on grant 
disbursement 
 
1.1.4  Impact reports delivered to SC 
1.2.   Activity 1.2  Reimbursable grants 
(40% of the PPF portfolio) to 
provide partial collateral support 
In response to the high collateral 
requirements placed on projects by 
banks, the PPF will offer reimbursable 
grants to serve as partial collateral 
support for projects that are seeking 
loans from BRD or other financiers with 
collateral requirements. The PPF will 
provide only partial collateral support 
(capped at 50% of the project needs) 
and will be in a “second position” to 
1.2.1:  Conduct all necessary legal & 
administrative requirement to launch a 
reimbursable product including 
tracking and recovering mechanism 
 
1.2.2:  Issue RFP for projects that 
meet RGIF eligibility criteria across 
priority sectors for collateral support 
and review of project submissions for 
eligibility and award of partial 
collateral support 
 
1.2.1:  Strategy report for 
reimbursable product  
 
1.2.2:  RFP for projects eligible for 
collateral support launched. . 
Development of necessary tools, 
checklists, guidelines, PF standards, 
screening tools, underwriting process 
 
1.2.3: Monitoring reports on status of 
collateral

=== PAGE 97 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92 
 
 
 
 
 
ensure that local developers have 
sufficient skin in the      game.  
 
1.2.3: Manage and monitor collateral 
support (repayments follow-ups) 
including project control & monitoring 
 
1.2.4: Disburse Collateral grants (40% 
of GCF portfolio) 
 
1.2.5: Evaluate and report projects 
impact to the Steering Committee 
1.2.4: Disbursement reports 
 
1.2.5: Evaluation reports 
1.3. Activity 1.3 Technical assistance 
for capacity building, outreach to 
developers on RGIF offerings and 
establishing partnerships 
In order to raise awareness for the 
RGIF program and ensure that project 
developers are aware of the RGIF 
program offerings, FONERWA will 
conduct a series of technical 
assistance trainings and outreach to 
market participants. This will include 
performing a market awareness 
campaigns for project developers in 
priority sectors and performing 
capacity building to target groups 
regarding the reimbursable grants as 
collateral products. The Credit Facility, 
managed by BRD and the PPF 
managed by FONERWA will also 
benefit from this training and will work 
closely with project developers to help 
them understand the program 
eligibility requirements, as well as with 
local financiers on how they can work 
with BRD to structure deals and take 
advantage of credit enhancing 
financial products to specifically 
increase the ability of projects to 
access finance.  In order to achieve 
maximum impact of the RGIF 
program, FONERWA and BRD will 
1.3.1: Perform market awareness 
campaign for projects developers in 
priority sectors – PPF 
 
 1.3.2:  Perform capacity building for 
FONERWA and BRD and for targets 
groups regarding the reimbursable 
grants as collateral product 
 
1.3.3:  Establish partnerships with key 
development partners and donors for 
fund mobilization for Phase 2      
1.3.1: Activity reports on awareness 
campaigns 
 
 1.3.2:  Capacity builing reports 
 
1.3.3:  Signed partnership reports

=== PAGE 98 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93 
 
 
 
 
 
work to secure additional funding for 
the RGIF over time, to ensure its on-
going operations and support provided 
to green sector project developers in 
Rwanda. This activity will also enable 
both institutions to establish 
partnerships with key development 
partners and donors. 
2.1.  Activity 2.1: Direct lending to 
project developers 
BRD will offer direct lending to 
projects, working with commercial 
financiers (equity sponsors and 
banks) as co-financiers. In this way, 
the RGIF will be able to offer direct 
lending products and provide needed 
support to projects, for example 
through offering technical underwriting 
capacity and deal arrangement, as 
well as direct credit support in the 
form of lending with commercial co-
financiers in a senior position (for 
projects with limited track record and 
higher perception of risk). This direct 
lending modality with co-financiers will 
further enable co-financiers      to gain 
“hands on” experience financing 
projects in new sectors and under new 
regulatory regimes.  
 2.1.1:  Launch Request for Proposal 
(RFP) process to support 
development of a robust project 
pipeline for the Credit Facility and 
review of  RFP responses and project 
selection across priority sectors 
(investment due diligence, etc);  
 
2.1.2: Perform capacity building and 
market awareness campaign for target 
financial institutions (commercial 
banks, microfinance, SACCOs, etc)  
 
2.1.3: Manage and monitor project 
loans (include loan repayments follow-
ups, project control, monitoring and 
reporting, etc) 
 
2.1.4: Disburse credit to selected 
projects.  BRD will offer direct lending 
to projects in the senior position, with 
a target minimum of 30% of non RGIF 
funding in the deal, by working with 
sponsors/developers and co-
financiers to structure projects that 
utilize RGIF financing but are able to 
access sufficient co-investment. With 
this product, BRD will make direct 
 2.1.1:  RFP document for project 
pipeline of CF. Development of 
necessary tools, checklists, 
guidelines, PF standards, screening 
tools, underwriting process 
 
2.1.2: Capacity Assessment reports  
 
2.1.3: Loan Monitoring reports 
 
2.1.4: Statements confirming lending 
 
2.1.5: Reports on Bank guarantee 
 
2.1.6: Evaluation report for loans

=== PAGE 99 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94 
 
 
 
 
 
investments and originate 
syndications with local banks to 
finance specific green projects 
(mitigation & adaptation) in priority 
sectors offering longer tenor with 
grace period with commercial banks 
providing short term or medium-term 
tranche 
 
2.1.5: Issue Bank Guarantees (from 
SIDA) to selected projects 
 
2.1.6: Evaluate and report loan 
portfolio to the Steering Committee 
3.1.  Activity 3.1 RGIF launch and 
Operationalisation 
The two arms of the RGIF will work in 
tandem to expand financing capacity 
designed to fill local market gaps, 
attract public and private funding, 
while supporting national green 
growth objectives. Successful 
implementation of the RGIF Program 
is dependent on strong oversight, 
staffing and operational activities.  
3.1.1: Finalize all relevant 
administrative and internal 
documentation (credit procedures 
development, term sheet template, 
MRV dashboard, bank accounts, etc) 
  
 3.1.2: RGIF product final design - 
Credit Facility and Project Preparation 
Facility 
 
3.1.3:  RGIF operational expenses 
(supported by FCDO and DANIDA) 
 
3.1.4:  Project Management and 
Oversight 
 
3.1.5: Develop market outreach & 
communication plan -Credit Facility & 
PPF (including a gender chapter)  
 
3.1.6: Manage RGIF branding and 
communicate on RGIF initial impact 
3.1.1: Finalised admin and internal 
documentation (credit procedures 
development, term sheet template, 
MRV dashboard, bank accounts, etc) 
  
 3.1.2: RGIF product final design 
document 
 
3.1.3:  Operational expenses 
 
3.1.4:  Staffing costs  
 
3.1.5: Communication plan  for Credit 
Facility & PPF (including a gender 
chapter) and workshop reports 
 
3.1.7: Website and social media 
presence

=== PAGE 100 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 95 
 
 
 
 
 
(include RGIF website and online 
activities)

=== PAGE 101 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 96 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Besides the arrangements (e.g. annual performance reports) laid out in Accreditation Master Agreement (AMA), please give a 
summary of the project/programme specific arrangements for monitoring, reporting and evaluation including a description of the 
monitoring and reporting system that will be used to assess the climate results of the proposed activity. Please also summarize 
the types of interim and final evaluations. Describe Accredited Entity (AE) project reporting relationships, including to the National 
Designated Authority (NDA)/Focal Point and between AE and Executing Entity (EE) as relevant, identifying reporting obligations 
from the EE to the AE. This should relate to the frequency of reporting on project indicators, implementation challenges and 
financial status. Please note that interim and final evaluations are expected to embed an assessment of project/programme’s 
contributions to a paradigm shift and enabling environment using a three-point scale rating. Refer to the guidance note for the 
summary requirements and factor in additional evaluation /assessment activities under this section accordingly.  
 
88. In its role as AE, the AfDB will oversee and supervise the implementation of this project in accordance 
with the agreement signed between AfDB and the GCF and as detailed in the implementation 
arrangements and in accordance with the GCF’s evaluation criteria as per the GCF Evaluation Policy. 
   
89. M&E plan 
 
The project includes monitoring and evaluation systems to track progress towards the planned 
outcomes over the project duration. A monitoring and Evaluation Plan (the M&EPlan) has been 
prepared for the project – Annex 11. AfDB will will require adherence with the M&E Plan and the 
relevant monitoring and evaluation systems described in this Funding Proposal as per the 
implementation arrangements outlied in section B.4 
 
90. Primary Responsibility for Monitoring & Evaluation  
The primary responsibility for day-to-day data collection, project monitoring, and implementation of 
monitoring and evaluation processes will rest will FONERWA and BRD and will be conducted with 
the resources provided under the relevant activities in Components 1-3  and will report to the RGIF 
steering Committee and donors including the development of necessary MRV tools. The 
implementation and monitoring of each stage of the project will be guided and managed by a 
defined RGIF M&E Framework based on both FONERWA’s and BRD’s M&E systems as well as in 
line with the GCF’s Evaluation Policy. It will also include a clear additive focus on climate mitigation 
and adaptation impact.  
FONERWA’s M&E unit will be responsible for the monitoring, reporting and evaluation of all PPF 
projects following the M&E policies and procedures as described in the RGIF operations manual. 
The BRD Strategy Department (in charge of BRD M&E) will be responsible for the monitoring and 
reporting of all projects supported by the RGIF Credit Facility. In this capacity, BRD will collect data 
and reports from project developers and assess progress towards the RGIF’s expected outcomes. 
Reports will be provided to the RGIF Steering Committee quarterly. In addition to field visits and 
interviews with final beneficiaries to be conducted by BRD and FONERWA, projects that received 
RGIF investment support are expected to submit yearly action plans and regular progress reports on 
a quarterly basis to both BRD and FONERWA. Achievement of RGIF project objectives will be 
measured through specific indicators for each window of project support (PPF or/and the Credit 
Facility), and project types (priority sectors) as detailed in the RGIF manual of procedures (please 
see Annex 21). These indicators will comply with GCF policies and guidance, include climate 
mitigation and adaptation metrics in line with the results areas in the FP, and indicate private

=== PAGE 102 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 97 
 
 
 
 
 
investment leverage.   BRD and FONERWA will also apply standard management tools such as work 
plans to monitor progress and financial reporting, as well as action plans for gender, stakeholder 
engagement, and environmental and social safeguards. In terms of the tracking of the mitigation and 
adaptation benefits, the relevant CDM methodologies used for the results areas are to be applied as 
detailed in Annex22a, 22b and 22c of the Funding Proposal. Any third party monitoring project impact 
will be required to use this approach.  
In terms of reporting,  there will be a two-line reporting procedure. First, project feedback to AfDB 
from the Project Management Unit and Steering Committee, and the AfDB will conduct a annual 
supervision. Secondly, reporting of AfDB to GCF will comply with the relevant GCF policies (as 
specified under the AMA) in reporting and evaluation arrangements for this framework. The AfDB will 
provide the annual performance report (APR) to the GCF during the five-year implementation period. 
In addition, following the arrangement under the AMA and the FAA, inception report, mid-term and 
final evaluation reports, and financial information reports (semi-annually throughout the life of the 
loan) will be submitted. 
 
In addition to quarterly reports, the M&E teams at FONERWA and BRD will conduct biannual impact 
reviews of both the PPF and the Credit Facility to submit to the RGIF Steering Committee. The bi-
annual reviews will identify challenges in implementation, delays, and risks and recommend actions 
to be taken to ensure successful implementation of the RGIF. The respective BRD and FONERWA 
M&E Teams will conduct regular supervision missions including an annual review of portfolios of 
projects, assessments of project progress against initial target and expected impact. Additionally, 
they will monitor the performance of the portfolio with regard to interest service, principal repayment, 
disbursements, or grants repayments (as the PPF will offer reimbursable grants) etc.  
.  
91. Periodic Reports to AE 
The MnE teams in BRD and FONERWA will support the development and submission an Annual 
Performance Report (APR) to the AfDB, by January 31 each year of implementation, consolidating 
information from all project progress, including a narrative report on implementation progress based 
on the logical framework submitted in this Funding Proposal and considerations on the ongoing 
performance of the project against the GCF’s investment framework criteria. This narrative report will 
include updates on the indicators described in the GCF’s Results Management Framework, and a 
report on safeguards,that includes updates on any specific grievances recived, including any SEAH-
specific grievances; gender; and co-benefits indicators.  
The Technical Executing Entities (BRD and FONERWA) will also be required to support the AfDB in 
any new reporting requirements put forward by GCF during the project implementation phase.  BRD 
and FONERWA will also be required to submit to the AE quarterly financial reports that consolidate 
all financial information in view of reporting to GCF. 
 
92. AfDB support in  Monitoring and Evaluation  
AfDB will provide support in the launcing of the project (inception workshop and will provde necessary 
support for the overall implementation Start-up. Yearly supervision missions will be conducted  
including briefing and discussing with operational focal points on project progress and will duly 
provide a copy of all reports submitted to GCF to the NDA and Government partners. 
AfDB will arrange and contract for independent interim and final evaluations that will be conducted 
at end of Phase1 (year 4) and at the end of year 7. AfDB will, in collaboration with the BRD, 
FONERWA and MINECOFIN, prepare a formal management response to the findings of the 
independent evaluations, and will provide the evaluation reports and the management response to 
the GCF. 
The interim evaluation will take place at the mid-point of project implementation starting mid year 4 
around the end of Phase 1. This mid-term evaluation will evaluate progress towards the achievement

=== PAGE 103 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 98 
 
 
 
 
 
of outcomes and will suggest corrective actions if needed. The findings of the interim evaluation and 
responses in the management response will be incorporated as recommendations for enhanced 
implementation during the second half of the project. 
The final evaluation will be submitted six months after the project’s completion date. It will aim at 
identifying project outcomes, their sustainability, and future actions needed to assure continuity of 
these outcomes. 
Within three months of the project’s completion date, BRD and FONERWA will prepare the Project 
Completion Report for the AE’s review and revision, and AfDB will submit the final report to the GCF.  
 
 
 
 
Table E.7.1: RGIF Monitoring Plan 
Data/Source 
Collection 
Tool 
Frequenc
y 
Indicator 
Inception 
Workshop 
Focus 
groups 
One time 
project 
inception  
Notes of Meeting of 
inception workshop 
including key points 
of review of FP and 
proposed 
recommendations 
for implementation  
Monitoring of 
pipeline of 
project in PPF 
v/s indicators 
in project 
result 
framework  
Document 
review 
Quarterly  
 Report on 
disbursement and 
alignment with gcf 
result area 
(including mitigation 
and adaptation 
result 
measurement)w, 
Project impacts and 
progress of project 
pipeline and 
ensuring that 
gender, E&S, 
financial terms , etc. 
are aligned with 
donor requirements 
Monitoring of 
collateral 
support 
(repayment 
follow ups) 
Document 
review 
Quarterly 
Report on status of 
use of collateral 
support including 
alignment of project 
with donor 
requirements

=== PAGE 104 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 99 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Monitoring of 
credit 
disbursement 
to selected 
projects  for all 
four results 
areas (see 
annex 11) 
Document 
review 
Quarterly  
Report on status of 
loans vs gcf result 
area, Project 
impacts and 
progress of project 
pipeline and 
ensuring that 
gender, E&S, 
financial terms , etc. 
are aligned with 
donor requirements 
Reporting to 
Steering 
Committee  
Document 
review 
Bi-annual  
Report analyzing 
progress in the 
delivery of RGIF 
outputs, financial 
implementation and 
identifying corrective 
actions and 
reporting of invested 
projects

=== PAGE 105 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 100 
 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
Please describe financial, technical, operational, macroeconomic/political, money laundering/terrorist financing (ML/TF), sanctions, 
prohibited practices, and other risks that might prevent the project/programme objectives from being achieved. Also describe the 
proposed risk mitigation measures. Insert additional rows if necessary.  
 
For probability: High has significant probability, Medium has moderate probability, Low has negligible probability 
For impact: High has significant impact, Medium has moderate impact, Low has negligible impact 
Prohibited practices include abuse, conflict of interest, corruption, retaliation against whistleblowers or witnesses, as well as fraudulent, 
coercive, collusive, and obstructive practices 
1/ RGIF facility-level risk mitigation measures: 
Selected Risk Factor 1     RGIF Performance Risk – facility level 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Please describe the risk to the best of your knowledge at this point in time.  
Risk: Risks associated with the financial performance and capacity to execute transactions within the RGIF. For 
the RGIF, Performance Risk is defined as the risk that the facility as a whole and/or the component parts will 
not deliver on its mandate and outcomes as intended. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Please describe how the identified risk will be mitigated or managed. Do the mitigation measures lower the probability of risk 
occurring? If so, to what level?  
The Credit Facility of the RGIF will be located within BRD, with dedicated and skilled staff operating under BRD 
investment division. The Credit Facility of the RGIF will be located within BRD, with dedicated and skilled staff 
operating under BRD investment division. The key element of managing performance risk for the RGIF will be 
to build on BRD’s existing success and track record, and to add expanded green finance capacity with strong 
fund management, leadership, origination, market outreach, and reporting and metrics capacity.  
BRD’s investment committee will play the role of RGIF Credit Facility investment committee. The RGIF will 
utilize strong investment criteria and a skilled fund management team, with capacity focused on financing 
commercially viable projects. Within BRD, RGIF governance will be designed using international best practices 
that allow for independence of investment decision making and avoidance of investment decisions based on 
political considerations. The RGIF is based on an integrated financial model that takes advantage of the blended 
capital stack to offer financial products/investments that simultaneously drive the market and provide returns to 
the facility to ensure its sustainability.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
Project Pipeline & Bankability 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
The RGIF faces the risk of not being able to meet its mandate and target goals due to an inadequate pipeline 
of bankable projects.  
Ensuring that projects are able to move from feasibility to bankability, and that there is a robust pipeline of 
projects for RGIF investment. Given the nascent and underdeveloped nature of the target green sector

=== PAGE 106 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 101 
 
 
 
 
projects in Rwanda, there is a risk that despite grants and support provided, project sponsors will still struggle 
to properly structure their projects in a bankable way, to be able to access commercial finance.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Through its Project Preparation Facility, the RGIF will support development of bankable projects in priority 
sectors by providing project preparation assistance and grants and also (reimbursable) grants to compliment 
project development as needed. RGIF will build on FONERWA’s past experience of supporting feasibility 
studies for key local green projects such as the Kigali Green City, the electric motorcycles, etc. The purpose of 
the PPF is to help projects transition “from feasibility to bankability” and assist projects to secure commercial 
finance through the finance arm of the RGIF. PPF support will prioritize early-stage, high-impact, innovative 
projects and businesses that have a high probability of successful completion based on developer track record 
and sound business plans. Through this support to project developers, the PPF will help ensure that projects 
are able to move from feasibility to bankability, and that there is a robust pipeline of projects for RGIF investment. 
The RGIF will also work closely with market actors and local commercial banks to address market gaps, build 
project pipelines and catalyze more private investments. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
Financial Sustainability Risk 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Ensuring the financial sustainability of the RGIF over time, including both its credit facility and activities of the 
PPF.  The RGIF faces the risk that it will be unable to meet the requirement of its financial model and 
business plan to generate sufficient revenues through management fees on loans to support the operating 
expenses of the RGIF.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Two complementary measures will be used to ensure the financial sustainability of the RGIF. On the project 
development side, projects will be carefully vetted for viability and bankability at the front end of the PPF process 
to ensure a high rate of success. Where the PPF provides grant funding, it will be offered as ‘reimbursable 
grants’ wherever possible to allow for the return and recycling of grant funds. In addition, a diverse array of 
grant funds from several development partners will be engaged in the PPF to make this funding source more 
robust. Secondly, on the financing side of the RGIF, the financial model and business plan will be structured to 
generate sufficient revenues through management fees on loans to support the operating expenses of the 
RGIF. It will take several years to generate adequate deal flow to achieve financial sustainability, but this is a 
proven model for Green Bank operation.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4             Co-Finance Risk 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
The RGIF faces the risk that its program will not reach the size intended, and with less operating capital will 
be unable to extend financing to as many projects and will have a decreased impact on the growth of the local 
market. 
Mitigation Measure(s)

=== PAGE 107 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 102 
 
 
 
 
If AfDB does not provide senior loans to the project in year 5, the potential risk and impact to the RGIF is that 
the program will not reach the size intended, and with less operating capital will be unable to extend financing 
to as many projects and will have a decreased impact on the growth of the local market. To mitigate this potential 
risk, the RGIF (FONERWA and BRD) will work with other potential DFI partners that can support the RGIF. For 
example, the Agence France de Development has indicated strong interest in capitalizing the RGIF as have 
other development partners and IFIs such as KfW and others.  Additionally, EIB (which has just launched its 
new “climate bank” program) is increasing its appetite for climate transactions. The RGIF will proactively work 
with these capital providers to seek to raise additional funds to expand the RGIF’s financing capacity.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
Forex Risk 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Forex 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Ensuring that the RGIF can provide affordable financing and avoid expensive forex costs.  
The RGIF faces the risk of high cost of capital due to foreign exchange costs.  
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The RGIF will provide financing in local currency (Rwandan Francs). MINECOFIN has been exploring to take 
the currency risk for the RGIF and pass funds onto BRD in local currency (Rwandan francs). Further details on 
the pricing are provided in the term sheet (annex 14). Additionally, BRD will provide direct financing to the 
project developers with a capped spread to ensure affordable costs. Pricing is yet to be finalised as it will be 
subject to the overall cost of funds. The goal will be to keep costs low and pass savings onto end 
beneficiaries/borrowers to ensure effective and affordable financing.  
 
2/RGIF project-level risk mitigation measures 
Policy Risk 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Legal 
Low 
Low 
Description 
Ensuring that policies and regulations do not impact the bankability and long-term success of projects. The 
RGIF RGIF faces risks related to changing national policies and the enabling environment for other priority 
investment sectors. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The RGIF is embedded directly in Rwanda’s market with strong relationships with government agencies. It is 
designed to work closely with policy makers across relevant sectors and agencies within the Government of 
Rwanda to understand and improve the enabling environment across relevant sectors for RGIF projects. 
While Rwanda has a very stable policy environment with an extremely low index corruption, to reduce policy-
related risks to individual projects and priority sectors, the RGIF will work closely with policy makers across 
relevant sectors and agencies within the Government of Rwanda to understand and improve the enabling 
environment across relevant sectors for RGIF projects. This is one of the key benefits of the Green Bank model 
where dedicated catalytic finance capacity is embedded directly in the market and strong relationship to 
government, to provide feedback on policies or regulations that are increasing risk or inhibiting investment.

=== PAGE 108 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 103 
 
 
 
 
Project Viability Risk 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
The RGIF faces risk related to the viability of projects selected as eligible for the program.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The RGIF will reduce project risk through the in-depth work of its Project Preparation Facility (PPF) to strengthen 
the bankability of projects. The PPF will work closely with project developers and commercial banks to address 
project vulnerabilities, improve structuring, permitting, contractual agreements, etc. and to improve bankability.  
 
Financial Risk 
Category 
Category 
Category 
Credit 
Credit 
Credit 
Description 
The RGIF faces risk related to the bankability and financial success of projects. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The RGIF will address financial risk of projects through offering tailored financial projects specifically designed 
to close market gaps and address financing barriers to improve bankability and transaction success (e.g. credit 
enhancement products such as debt).

=== PAGE 109 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 104 
 
 
 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
Provide the environmental and social risk category assigned to the proposal as a result of screening and the rationale for 
assigning such category. Present also the environmental and social assessment and management instruments developed for the 
proposal (for example, Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), Environment and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF), Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), 
environmental and social audits, etc.). Provide a summary of the main outcomes of these instruments. Present the key 
environmental and social risks and impacts and the measures on how the project/programme will avoid, minimize and mitigate 
negative impacts at each stage (e.g. preparation, implementation and operation), in accordance with GCF’s Environmental and 
Social Safeguard (ESS) standards. If the proposed project or programme involves investments through financial intermediations, 
describe the due diligence and management plans by the Executing Entities (EEs) and the oversight and supervision 
arrangements. Describe the capacity of the EEs to implement the ESMP and ESMF and arrangements for compliance monitoring, 
supervision and reporting. Include a description of the project/programme-level grievance redress mechanism, a summary of the 
extent of multi-stakeholder consultations undertaken for the project/programme, the plan of the Accredited Entity (AE) and EEs to 
continue to engage the stakeholders throughout project implementation, and the manner and timing of disclosure of the applicable 
safeguards reports following the requirements of the GCF Information Disclosure Policy and Environmental and Social Policy. 
 
Describe any potential impacts on indigenous peoples and the measures to address these impacts including the development of 
an Indigenous Peoples Plan and the process for meaningful consultation leading to free, prior and informed consent, pursuant to 
the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy.  
 
Attach the appropriate assessment and management instruments or other applicable studies, depending on the environmental and 
social risk category as annex 6.  
 
93. For projects supported under the RGIF program, the preparation of ESS studies will have to adhere 
to Rwandan laws and regulations as well as the ESS policies, guidelines, and standards of the AfDB. 
For this proposal, only the sub-projects at the category B level (according to the GCF criteria) will be 
considered. Category B (I-2) projects involve activities with potential mild adverse environmental and 
social risks and impacts that, individually or cumulatively, are few, generally site-specific, largely 
reversible and readily addressed through mitigation measures. 
 
94. In order to assess the Environmental and Social viability of the proposed investments, an 
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), Annex 6, has been developed with the 
purpose of setting out management requirements, policies and guidelines for environmental, 
occupational health and safety, as well as social issues present throughout the project's life cycle. This 
manual provides practical guidance on environmental and social policies to support RGIF investment 
decisions. RGIF commitment to the environment is set out and is intertwined with the Environmental 
Policy of BRD and FONERWA. It is important to note that both FONERWA and BRD have adequate 
E&S capacity to assess and finance projects meeting set RGIF safeguard standards. The two 
institutions have permanent E&S specialists overseeing the implementation of E&S assessment 
procedures as well as the performance of financed projects when it comes to implementing approved 
E&S mitigation measures. The two implementing institutions have fully fledged E&S screening 
procedures, E&S risk categorization systems, monitoring procedures and clear guidance set in place 
to manage risk categories of financed projects. Risk categorization is benchmarked on the National 
E&S regulation which is in line with IFCs E&S risk categorization (i.e., Category A: High risk, Category 
B: Medium risk and Category C: Low risk projects). 
 
95. The 2 institutions ensure stakeholder engagement is given high consideration to promote the 
involvement of project beneficiaries in the project design and social risks such as complaints 
associated to financed projects are effectively managed by creating comprehensive Grievance 
Redress Mechanisms which are crucial in ensuring that affected communities are given an avenue to 
submit their grievances and get assisted accordingly and in transparency to achieve a sustainable 
development with a positive socio-economic impact. The ESMS is a safeguard tool that was developed

=== PAGE 110 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 105 
 
 
 
 
to provide clarity on the following crucial aspects contributing to the successful implementation of 
RGIF: (i) Objective and Scope of RGIF ESMS, (ii) E&S organizational competencies of both 
FONERWA and BRD, (iii) RGIF components, activities and expected outputs, (iv) E&S commitment 
of both FONERWA and BRD, (v) E&S assessment and management procedures, (vi) Complaint 
resolution procedures and stakeholder engagement, (vii) Monitoring, reporting and review of the RGIF 
ESMS, and (viii) Disclosure procedures. 
 
96. The implementing partners of the Fund and the Project Management Units (BRD and FONERWA) will 
follow this ESMS to ensure the environmental and social risks and impacts are fully assessed and 
mitigation measures are in place prior loan approval and implementation of the relevant project 
activities.The ESMS manual provides a policy and practical framework that integrates environmental 
and social risk management and reporting into the RGIF business processes. It is a set of actions and 
procedures that are implemented concurrently with the Fund’s broader risk management procedures. 
The Manual ensures that the Fund’s activities are in compliance with its environmental and social 
standards. It helps the Fund to avoid and manage investments with potential environmental and social 
risks by conducting environmental and social due diligence prior to deal completion and adequate 
supervision of activities during the term of the investment. 
 
97. The ESMS demonstrates that Rwanda possesses strong policies, laws and procedures in place that 
set out guidelines for the compliance with E&S requirements, Climate Change, land management and 
expropriations as well as Occupational Health and Safety. They provide for humans’ wellbeing, 
judicious use, and preservation of natural resources as well as the institutional framework for E&S 
management. The constitution, the supreme law of the country, policies on various socio-economic 
sectors, including ratified international conventions are in place to provide for the compliance with E&S 
requirements. The ESMS is also compliant with the Bank’s Integrated Safeguards System (ISS) which 
is designed to promote the sustainability of project outcomes by protecting the environment and people 
from the potentially adverse impacts of projects 
 
98. The implementation and management of the RGIF ESMS will follow the approved operational and 
management structures and procedures stipulated in FONERWA and BRD’s governance and 
operational manuals. The execution of the RGIF ESMS will be across FONERWA and BRD’s 
operations with the support of the E&S Safeguards team. The environment and social assessment 
and management procedures will be undertaken in accordance with national and international 
safeguards requirements. Screening of investments will commence right at the project inception phase 
as soon as the specific sub project details are known including nature and scope, proposed location 
and area among other parameters. Screening is expected to happen concurrently with the project 
specific feasibility studies so that any potential impacts identified through screening are immediately 
incorporated into the feasibility study hence ensuring adequate consideration of environmental and 
social aspects at the project design phase. 
 
99. The classification of each project under the appropriate environmental and social risk category will be 
based on the screening results, and projects will be categorized as per their risks and impacts 
magnitude. In line with the Rwanda Ministerial Order N0 001/2019 of 15/04/2019 establishing the lists 
of projects, activities and works that must undergo E&S assessment, as well as the provisions of IFC’s 
standards on Environmental and Social Risks, each proposed project’s E&S screening will result in 
one of the 3 risk categories. During the screening process, some activities will be deemed ineligible 
and rejected. Such activities involve the significant conversion or degradation of critical natural 
habitats; those that will significantly damage non-replicable cultural property or involve production or 
activities involving harmful or exploitative forms of forced labour/harmful child labour. The screening 
process could result in any of the following determination:

=== PAGE 111 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 106 
 
 
 
 
• 
Full ESIA 
• 
A stand-alone ESMP (Partial ESIA) or 
• 
No further environmental study for low-risk projects. 
 
100. The RGIF program is focused on supporting projects in green sectors, and only category B or C 
project are not likely to have significant impacts on the environment. However, the construction of 
RGIF-eligible green projects including renewable energy generation, mini-grids and climate-smart 
irrigation (full list in eligibility criteria above) have the potential to lead to adverse environmental and 
social impacts. The adverse impacts associated with the project are considered to be moderate to low 
in nature. However, the construction of RGIF-eligible green projects including renewable energy 
generation, mini-grids and climate-smart irrigation (full list in eligibility criteria above) have the potential 
to lead to adverse environmental and social impacts. The adverse impacts associated with the project 
are considered to be moderate to low in nature. However, the specific adverse impacts for each 
investment will be distinguished during the preparation of the specific ESIA or ESMP based on the 
sub project investment environmental category once the screening process is complete. Mitigation 
measures must be defined for significant impacts (i.e., those with major, moderate or minor rating). 
The mitigation measures, including responsibilities and monitoring requirements must be summarized 
in the project specific ESMP. 
 
101. RGIF will require that every recipient of funds develop an Emergency Preparedness and Response 
Procedure based on the identified HSE risks associated with the various proposed projects. The EPRP 
will cover all potential emergency situations (environmental and safety) which may occur for various 
projects as well as make provision for disaster management in terms of severe storms, flooding, 
earthquakes, and fires amongst others. 
 
 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
Provide a summary of the gender assessment and project/programme-level gender action plan that is aligned with the objectives 
of GCF’s Gender Policy. Confirm a gender assessment and action plan exists describing the process used to develop both 
documents. Provide information on the key findings (who is vulnerable and why) and key recommendations (how to address the 
vulnerability identified) of the gender assessment. Indicate if stakeholder consultations have taken place and describe the key 
inputs integrated into the action plan, including: how addressing the vulnerability will ensure equal participation and benefits from 
funds investment; key gender-related results to be expected from the project/programme with targets; implementation 
arrangements that the AE has put in place to ensure activities are implemented and expected outcomes will be achieved, 
monitored and evaluated. 
 
Provide the full gender assessment and project-level gender action plan as annex 8.  
102. Women constitute 51.5%78 of Rwanda’s population with an even greater majority of women living in 
rural—and more climate-vulnerable – parts of the country. Major priority sectors such as energy, 
agriculture, water and sanitation are characterized by poor supply and productivity, lack of basic 
infrastructure and reliable service affecting the majority of people in rural areas. In the energy sector 
for example, approximately 70% of Rwandans lack access to electricity, with 88% lacking access in 
rural areas and 28% in urban areas. Furthermore, 70% of the general population works in agriculture, 
and 82% of women work in agriculture,79 which are typically subsistence or low wage occupations. 
They constitute the most vulnerable segment of the population given climate variability and 
dependence on rainfall for crop production. The urban sector which also lacks appropriate climate 
resilient infrastructure is also impacted by climate variabilities as Rwanda is very hilly which contributes 
 
78 EICV5_Main_Indicators report (National Statistics: www.statistics.gov.rw/publication/eicv-5-main-indicators-report-201617). 
79 http://riverapublications.com/article/agricultural-transformation-in-rwanda-can-gendered-market-participation-explain-the-persistence-of-
subsistence-farming#:~:text=The%20sector%20involves%2082%20percent,employer%20of%20women%20in%20Rwanda.

=== PAGE 112 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 107 
 
 
 
 
to high localized population densities (Rwanda is one of the most densely populated nations in the 
world according to the World Bank) and vulnerability to landslides in urban (and rural) areas. Investing 
to address structural challenges in national priority sectors such as energy, green cities, agriculture, 
water and sanitation, etc while empowering women who are the most vulnerable, has the potential to 
make a significant impact on the Rwanda economy. The RGIF has the mandate to scale up climate 
finance and increase private investments in low-carbon and climate-resilient projects80, and is well 
positioned to address both Rwanda’s economic development and climate-related investment needs 
while empowering women. Indeed, as outlined below, women are most likely the primary beneficiaries 
of projects in RGIF priority sectors.  
 
103. The RGIF will place a specific focus on target sectors where gender equality is poorly addressed 
such as in climate smart agriculture, shifting away from biomass for cooking, and rural energy access 
through min-grids targeting at least 30% of its total investment portfolio. The RGIF project pipeline and 
eligibility criteria focus on serving these sectors which currently suffer from chronic under investment 
due to market barriers that impede investment in low-carbon, climate resilient development projects. 
RGIF investment support will help overcome these barriers and provide appropriate financing to 
support these projects and scaling up low carbon markets in Rwanda. A strong focus on women 
component will result in direct benefit impacts to recipients, targeting at least 40% of women led or 
related businesses. These benefits include increased access to clean energy, increased access to 
climate smart agriculture equipment, and increased access to housing that is energy efficient and 
climate resilient.  
 
104. The RGIF will operate in accordance with Rwanda’s recognition that gender equality and fulfilment 
of human rights are interlinked - and a prerequisite for sustainable development and inclusive 
economic growth. In addition, the RGIF will be aligned with the GCF’s Gender policy and support its 
the three main objectives as noted below including:  
a) To support climate change interventions and innovations through a comprehensive gender 
approach, applied both within the institution and by its network of partners, including accredited 
entities (AEs), national designated authorities (NDAs) and focal points, and delivery partners for 
activities under the GCF Readiness and Preparatory Support Programme;  
b) To promote climate investments that:  
(i) Advance gender equality through climate change mitigation and adaptation actions; and  
(ii) Minimize social, gender-related and climate-related risks in all climate change actions; and  
c) To contribute to reducing the gender gap of climate change-exacerbated social, economic and 
environmental vulnerabilities and exclusions through GCF climate investments that mainstream 
gender equality issues.  
 
105. To achieve these goals, the RGIF will build on FONERWA’s current Gender Strategy and Action Plan 
crafted to ensure that gender mainstreaming supports successful institutional and organizational 
transformation, and gender equity across all programmatic interventions for environmental 
conservation and climate change mitigation and adaptation. Specifically, RGIF through its own Gender 
Action Plan (annex 8) is committed to promoting gender equality at the project level. Focusing on 
addressing specific challenges related to women empowerment to address climate change will not 
only benefit the country’s development goals but will contribute to national economic recovery. It is 
worth noting that RGIF gender interventions leverages FONERWA Gender Strategy and contributes 
to achieve the goals of Rwanda’s National Gender Policy (2011) and the above noted goals of the 
GCFs Gender Policy. The FONERWA Gender Strategy and Action Plan on which RGIF Gender Action 
 
80 OECD (2016) “Green Investment Banks: Scaling up Private Investment in Low-carbon, Climate-resilient Infrastructure.” 
http://www.oecd.org/ environment/cc/green-investmentbanks-9789264245129-en.htm

=== PAGE 113 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 108 
 
 
 
 
Plan has built on has qualified for enrolment in the national Gender Seal Certification Programme, 
being implemented by the Rwandan Gender Monitoring Office (GMO); to support Gold Status on 
gender equality in decision making bodies, gender-sensitive communication, bridging pay gaps, 
challenging gender stereotypes in work division, and creating work-life balances for both men and 
women, strengthening our gender-sensitive working environment with effective reporting mechanism 
for any forms of sexist behavior or communication etc. 
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Describe the project/programme’s financial management including the financial monitoring systems, financial 
accounting, auditing, and disbursement structure and methods. Refer to section B.4 on implementation arrangements 
as necessary.  
Articulate any procurement issues that may require attention, e.g. procurement implementation arrangements and the 
role of the AE under the respective proposal, articulation of procurement risk assessment undertaken and how that 
will be managed by the AE or the implementing agency. Provide a detailed procurement plan as annex 10.   
106. As the Accredited Entity, AfDB conducted an assessment of FONERWA and BRD’s financial 
management (FM) systems and concluded that the capacities of both Executing Entities (EEs) are 
adequate to implement the RGIF and the overall fiduciary risk is moderate. The RGIF shall make use 
of the Country’s Public Financial Management systems as well as the AfDB’s Rules and Procedures. 
The Chief Budget Managers of FONERWA and BRD, will each retain the fiduciary responsibility for 
the grant (Reimbursable and non-reimbursable) and loan resources respectively.  The RGIF Steering 
Committee (PSC) will provide policy and implementation oversight including approval of the Project 
plans and Budgets.  The AfDB will have the overall oversight of the implementation framework 
including FM and will report to GCF as per the terms of AMA.   Each EE will designate fiduciary staff 
within their institutions to execute the day-to-day financial management functions.  The EEs will 
institute adequate Internal control systems to ensure RGIF resources are used for the intended 
purpose and in accordance with the Financing Agreements, the Grant/Reimbursable grant/ Loan 
Agreements and EE Agreements.  
 
107. Funds Flow - RGIF funds (Loan and grant) will be received by the AfDB in trust from the GCF and 
placed in an RGIF sub account under the GCF Special Account. The AfDB would then allocate the 
funds to Rwanda in accordance with the financing agreements between GoR and the AfDB. The GoR, 
represented by MINECOFIN, would then on-grant/lend the relevant funding to FONERWA or BRD as 
applicable according to the provisions of their respective agreements. All disbursements under RGIF 
will follow the AfDB’s Disbursement Rules and Procedures as laid out in the Disbursement Handbook 
and the Special Account (SA) method shall be used.  However, other methods of disbursement namely 
Direct Payment method, Reimbursement method and Reimbursement Guarantee method could be 
used on need basis and upon approval by the AfDB.  Three (3) RGIF dedicated special bank accounts, 
namely the reimbursable grant SA, the non-reimbursable grant SA and Loan SA will be opened in the 
National Bank of Rwanda (BNR) as a pre-condition for the use of the SA method.  The disbursement 
of the reimbursable grant and the Loan funds will be made in tranches after fulfilling the disbursement 
triggers as stated in the financing and the respective agreements.  Disbursement of the Non-
reimbursable grant to FONERWA will be based on approved workplans and budgets covering a period 
of six (6) months and replenishment will be made in accordance with the Bank’s Disbursement 
Guidelines on the use of the SA.  As FONERWA will manage the totality of the PPF grant, the portion 
of the grant to finance operational and project management costs in relation to the CF will be advanced 
by FONERWA to BRD based on approved work plan and budgets. The Bank will issue a disbursement 
letter, which will provide specific guidelines on key disbursement procedures and practices. As part of 
the quarterly financial performance reporting, each EE will prepare unaudited Interim Financial 
Reports (IFRs) for submission to the RGIF Steering Committee and the AfDB and the IFRs will be

=== PAGE 114 ===
G 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 109 
 
 
 
 
shared within 45 days following the end of the quarter.   In addition, annual Project specific financial 
statements (PFS) will be prepared by each EE in accordance with EE’s applicable accounting 
standards with the year end of June 30.  The PFS will be subject to an independent audit by the Office 
of the Auditor General for State Finances (OAG) or a private audit firm based on the Bank’s audit 
terms of reference.  The audited Project Financial Statements, complete with the management letter, 
shall be submitted to the AfDB no later than six (6) months following the end of each financial year.  
 
108. Procurement Arrangements 
Procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), and the acquisition of consulting services, 
financed by the Bank for the project, will be carried out in accordance with the “Procurement Policy for 
Bank Group Funded Operations”, dated October 2015 and following the provisions stated in the 
Financing Agreement. Specifically, Procurement would be carried out following the Bank Procurement 
Methods and Procedures (BPP), using the relevant Bank Standard or Model Solicitation Documents 
(SDs) as appropriate. 
 
Assessment of procurement risks at the sector, and project levels and of procurement capacity at the 
Executing Agencies, were undertaken for the project and the output have informed the decisions on 
the procurement regimes being used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under 
the project. The overall project risk for procurement at the time of appraisal is rated Moderate and 
appropriate mitigation measures have been included in the project to reduce the perceived risk to a 
low level. 
 
. AfDB will monitor the compliance of the project with the applicable procurement requirements during 
the project monitoring and supervision phase. 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure 
for all information and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and 
programme funding proposals will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in 
confidence is one of the exceptions, but this exception should not be applied broadly to an entire document if the 
document contains specific, segregable portions that can be disclosed without prejudice or harm.  
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information. 
☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its 
annexes, may be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its 
annexes, may not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. 
Accordingly, the accredited entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding 
proposal, including all annexes: 
• 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, 
together with an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for 
confidentiality under the accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
• 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing 
confidential information.

=== PAGE 115 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 110 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
 
81 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects.  
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☐ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☒ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☐ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☒ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting-projects)81 
☐ 
Annex X 
Other references

=== PAGE 116 ===
No-objection letter(s) issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)
Page 116

=== PAGE 117 ===
Page 117

=== PAGE 118 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Rwanda Green Investment Facility 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or private) 
Private 
Accredited entity 
African Development Bank (AfDB) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category I-2 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
Rwanda 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
 N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
 N/A 
Explanation on language 
 N/A 
Link to disclosure 
 N/A 
Other link(s) 
 
Remarks 
  N/A 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
 N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
 N/A 
Explanation on language 
 N/A 
Link to disclosure 
 N/A 
Other link(s) 
 N/A 
Remarks 
 N/A 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Thursday, September 21, 2023 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English 
Explanation on language 
 English is an official language of Rwanda. As per country 
officials, disclosure in English only  is sufficient.  
Link to disclosure 
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/rwanda-rwanda-
green-investment-facility-development-support-project-p-
rw-h00-005  
 
Other link(s) 
Disclosure on the country website: 
  - https://greenfund.rw/guidelines 
 
- https://greenfund.rw/sites/default/files/2022-
07/Environmental%20and%20Social%20Management%20
Systems%20%28ESMS%29%20for%20Rwanda%20Green
%20Investment%20Facility%20%28RGIF%29_0.pdf 
Page 118

=== PAGE 119 ===
Development Bank of Rwanda (Executing Entity):  
- https://www.brd.rw/ 
- https://www.brd.rw/wp-
content/uploads/2023/09/RGIF-Environmental-and-
Social-Management-System.pdf 
 
Remarks 
An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I-
2 project is contained in the “RGIF Environmental and Social 
Management System”. 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
 N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
 N/A 
Explanation on language 
 N/A 
Link to disclosure 
 N/A 
Other link(s) 
 N/A 
Remarks 
 N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Thursday, September 21, 2023  
Place 
African Development Bank Group  
Street No. KN 67&KN 30 
BPR-PCD towers, 9th and 10th floor; 
Nyarugenge District, P.O. Box 7329, Kigali, Rwanda 
 
FONERWA 
Career Centre Building,  
5Th Floor, KG 541 St,  
Kigali, Rwanda 
 
BRD 
KN 3 Avenue (former Boulevard de la Revolution) 
Kigali, Rwanda 
 
 
Depending on location of project to be implemented, public 
access to the documents to be made available at offices of 
relevant govt agencies. 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
Tuesday, November 28, 2023 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  
Monday, October 23, 2023 
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above. 
 
 
________ 
 
Page 119

=== PAGE 120 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.12 
Page 120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP221 
Proposal name: 
Rwanda Green Investment Facility (RGIF) 
Accredited entity: 
African Development Bank 
Country/(ies): 
Rwanda 
Project/programme size: 
Medium 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Overview 
 
1. 
Rwanda has identified several climate adaptation and mitigation sectors in which it 
intends to pursue the interventions reflected in its 2020 nationally determined contribution 
(NDC) and Green Rwanda Action Plan. These sectors include electricity generation, 
transportation, energy-efficient buildings and climate-resilient agriculture, among others. The 
Rwanda Green Investment Facility (RGIF) is proposed to mobilize the finance required to 
develop investable projects in these sectors and subsequently to finance their implementation.  
2. 
The RGIF is a two-part programme consisting of a Project Preparation Facility (PPF) and 
Credit Facility) that is to be funded and deployed in two phases. The PPF is intended to provide 
reimbursable and non-reimbursable grants to support early-stage project development. The 
Credit Facility will directly lend finance to climate sector projects alongside other private 
lenders. The RGIF also includes a technical assistance component that will raise market 
awareness among project developers and local financial institutions. 
3. 
The RGIF will be implemented by two government-owned finance institutions: the 
Rwanda Green Fund (FONERWA) and the Development Bank of Rwanda (BRD). The African 
Development Bank (AfDB) will act as the accredited entity.  
4. 
The total programme size is USD 141,995,898, consisting of USD 95.0 million in loans, 
USD 20.0 million in guarantees and USD 26,995,898 in grants. The GCF portion is 42,793,000, 
consisting of USD 30 million in senior loans and USD 12,793,000 in grants (of which USD 
4,000,000 is reimbursable grants). The GCF portion represents approximately 30 per cent of the 
total programme size.1 The remaining funds are expected to be contributed by development 
partners including USD 10 million from the AfDB, as the accredited entity, into the Credit 
Facility. 
5. 
The programme will be financed and operated across two phases. Phase 1 will include 
start-up and the initial deployment of the funds under both the PPF and Credit Facility. Phase 1 
is expected to terminate by the end of 2027. Phase 2 is projected to start in 2028 and should 
represent a scaling up of the RGIF. GCF funding will be split between the two phases. From the 
total USD 30 million of loan funding by GCF, USD 10.0 million will be provided in Phase 1 and 
the remainder in Phase 2. 57 per cent of GCF reimbursable and 60 per cent of GCF non-
reimbursable grant will be provided in Phase 1, with the remaining allocation reserved for 
 
1 USD 2,1million from total grant proceeds will be allocated to cover project management costs for the 
operationalization of the RGIF programme.

=== PAGE 121 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.12 
Page 121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phase 2. Most of the co-financing will be obtained for Phase 1, with only the AfDB USD 10 
million investment currently earmarked for Phase 2.2 
6. 
The PPF component will be implemented by FONERWA. It will provide both 
reimbursable and non-reimbursable grants for early-stage project development and support 
project bankability. A total of 60 per cent will be traditional, non-reimbursable grants  used to 
fund project-level development activities, including legal costs, environmental studies, 
engineering and financial modelling. The remaining 40 per cent will comprise reimbursable 
grants that will be used as partial collateral support to help project developers meet collateral 
requirements required by lenders. The use of grant funding to reduce the project developer’s 
lending risk is an innovative approach and intended to provide some of the benefits of a 
guarantee but at a lower cost to the developer.   
7. 
The Credit Facility will be implemented by BRD. It will provide direct lending to climate 
projects that meet the RGIF’s sectoral criteria and other criteria intended to ensure both the 
financial and climate sustainability of the funded projects. The Credit Facility will offer 
concessionality in the form of tenor length and a lower cost of capital to overcome some of the 
barriers faced by climate-friendly projects in Rwanda. Loan eligibility will be capped at 70 per 
cent, thus requiring that at least 30 per cent of project funding comes from other sources. BRD 
will bear the credit risk of its loans.  
8. 
Additionally, RGIF includes USD 20 million in guarantees to be provided by the Swedish 
International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida). This will be utilized to partially cover 
credit risk of BRD third-party lenders.  
9. 
The RGIF will also provide technical support to eligible projects in areas such as 
underwriting and deal structuring to build greater market capacity and know-how. The 
programme also envisions strengthening the institutional capacity of FONERWA and BRD.  
10. 
The independent Technical Advisory Panel (independent TAP) also observes that the 
RGIF programme is aligned with a green bank approach because it addresses investment 
barriers to climate mitigation and adaptation by strategically using limited public funds to 
leverage far greater private investment.  
1.2 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
             Scale: Medium 
11. 
The RGIF intends to support projects in target sectors that mitigate or adapt to climate 
change. The near-term focus sectors are climate-smart agriculture, renewable energy, green 
buildings and clean transportation. The proposal does not mandate any specific allocation to 
each of these sectors, but instead will have a flexible approach to origination and portfolio 
construction. The final composition of the RGIF’s portfolio will depend on market factors. This 
uncertainty, albeit normal for facilities such as this, makes it difficult to evaluate its impact 
potential with any degree of specificity.  
12. 
The funding proposal projects that the RGIF will reduce Rwanda’s annual greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions by 0.92 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2 eq) over the 
programme lifetime (25 years), based on an indicative pipeline of over USD 420million in 
investment opportunities. However, these impact estimates are grounded on the current 
pipeline and make assumptions about the nature of future projects and the availability of co-
finance. From the independent TAP’s review of the pipeline and discussions with the accredited 
entity, the independent TAP does not put much stock on the specific projections of impacts. 
 
2 Approximately USD 65 million in cofinance is expected from AfDB and other development partners in the Credit 
Facility; with USD 14,162,898 in grant contributions for the PPF from the third-party development partners. USD 20 
million in guarantees will also be provided by Sida to support direct lending under the Credit Facility.

=== PAGE 122 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.12 
Page 122 
 
 
 
 
 
 
They are simply best guesses; however, the overall climate impact of the RGIF should be 
beneficial.    
13. 
One area of concern is the lack of smaller and medium sized projects in the current RGIF 
pipeline. Much of the pipeline consists of larger projects that, arguably, are already linked to the 
local and international banking system. It is recommended that the project sponsors make a 
concerted effort to bring new developers and smaller projects into the pipeline. To that end, the 
independent TAP does commend the RGIF’s plans to launch a request for proposal process to 
support development of a more robust project pipeline for the Credit Facility.  
14. 
Notwithstanding the above, the funding proposal, along with reviews of supporting 
documents such as Rwanda’s NDC, make clear that the RGIF is responsive to the mitigation and 
adaptation goals of Rwanda. For instance, RGIF interventions in the renewable energy sector 
will focus on supporting the development of the off-grid market, including mini grids and small-
grid-tied mini hydro. The RGIF will aim to reduce the cost of feasibility work through its PPF 
window while also providing partial collateral to help project developers access the RGIF Credit 
Facility and other available local financing. The funding proposal makes a credible case that, 
firstly, there is a demand in Rwanda for additional installed solar and hydro capacity and, 
secondly, that the RGIF can address the barriers to development of these resources (a lack of 
early-stage project development and a lack of accessible construction finance).  
15. 
In the agricultural sector, the RGIF will support solar energy for powering processes 
such as dryers and milling, as well as efficient drip irrigation projects that could strengthen 
resilience to droughts. In the built environment sector, the programme will focus on increasing 
the use of energy-efficient technologies, renewable onsite electricity generation and water 
autonomy systems. There is high potential for impact on the building sector in Rwanda, as new 
construction and rehabbing of existing real estate forms a significant part of the Rwandan 
economy. Near-term RGIF interventions could work to ensure that more of the building boom 
underway is increasingly aligned with green building standards to both reduce emissions and 
generate energy and water savings.  The independent TAP would encourage project sponsors 
and GCF to consider incorporating international green building standards, such as the 
International Finance Corporation’s EDGE certification, into RGIF funded projects to increase 
the level of ambition. The funding proposal also credibly makes the case that the transportation 
sector in Rwanda is primed for transition away from fossil fuels towards electric technology 
that could reduce carbon emissions.  
16. 
The independent TAP has also assessed that the two implementing entities have 
commendable track records in deploying grant capital, in the case of FONERWA, and in credit 
operations, in the case of BRD. Additionally, the independent TAP views the RGIF investment 
criteria as sufficiently robust to screen for climate and financial eligibility.  
17. 
In terms of needs, the independent TAP notes that Rwanda is a small country, with a 
small banking system and a limited number of local project developers. Many local developers 
struggle to access financing, which hinders climate-friendly development on the scale sought by 
Rwanda. The funding proposal credibly details the specific barriers to finance that the RGIF 
seeks to address. In summary, early-stage capital is not readily available for greenfield projects 
and, even when projects are able to advance, they still struggle to access follow-on capital due to 
a high perception of risk and high collateral requirements. The RGIF offers an integrated 
approach, offering both grants and financing support to eligible projects, across the typical 
project development timeline. 
18. 
The independent TAP assesses that providing grant capital to cover early-stage project 
activities to move development from feasibility to bankability is a well-tested means of building 
a nascent green economy. Similar programmes in the region, including the U.S. Africa Clean 
Energy Finance (US-ACEF) Initiative, have demonstrated that relatively low-cost interventions,

=== PAGE 123 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.12 
Page 123 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such as funding project-level technical studies, legal work, financial modelling and so on, can 
make a large impact in converting conceptual projects to bankable projects.  
19. 
A critical aspect of a successful PPF is having a clear line of sight to the next round of 
financing. The development work funded by a PPF should be aligned with the demands of 
follow-on capital. The integrated approach offered by the proposal allows for a regular 
communication and standards building between the PPF and Credit Facility elements. 
Moreover, the RGIF includes a steering committee consisting of BRD and FONERWA 
representatives, as well as other members when coordination and overall programme strategy 
is required. However, since the RGIF Steering Committee will serve an advisory role only, the 
independent TAP strongly recommends that the implementing entities also establish a robust 
and regular communication process between themselves at a working level. It will be important 
for FONERWA to have a realistic knowledge of potential project bankability when making grant 
decisions. This assessment should be informed by, and grounded on, the views of BRD and 
commercial lenders as a source of next-round finance. The independent TAP anticipates this will 
be an evolving discussion as the economic realities of Rwanda adjust.  
20. 
Similarly, to meet legal, financial and engineering standards, the PPF works need to be 
aligned with the expectations of the Credit Facility and the market more broadly. A PPF not 
tethered to the expectations of follow-on financiers will fail to make best use of its grant funding 
and will not create commercial value in the early-stage projects. The independent TAP strongly 
recommends that the RGIF process include input from commercial lenders familiar with the 
Rwandan market. One possible path is to establish a working group to facilitate communication 
between the PPF and the Credit Facility, which includes private sector representatives. The goal 
is to incorporate real market information into the grant-making process and avoid the risk of a 
closed public-to-public information loop. 
21. 
The RGIF Steering Committee has the potential to include representatives from 
development partners who are co-funding the RGIF. The independent TAP would encourage 
that project sponsors invite and include members of other RGIF funders to broaden the 
diversity of experience on the committee. 
22. 
The independent TAP also notes an innovative feature of the PPF involving the provision 
of reimbursable grants to serve as partial collateral support. Collateral requirements are a 
barrier to finance in markets like Rwanda where developers have limited balance sheets, so the 
RGIF intends to offer partial collateral support (capped at 50 per cent). The credit enhancement 
of partial collateral support should in practice be akin to a guarantee without the additional 
cost. Cost efficiency is important in a high interest rate environment such as Rwanda. 
Additionally, the reimbursable nature of the grant can permit regular recycling of the funds 
within the RGIF throughout the programme tenure. 
23. 
The independent TAP commends the 50 per cent limit on collateral support as it should 
prove sufficient to allow developers to raise financing for more projects while ensuring that 
developers have “skin in the game.” As with all financial products, a lack of skin in the game by 
one party risks misaligned interests in the future, which may lead to conflict and inertia. It is 
thus an important feature of the RGIF to require at-risk capital from its partners. The success of 
this collateral will depend on the PPF maintaining high screening standards in terms of the 
likelihood of success of the underlying projects.  
24. 
The independent TAP further observes that there is some risk of over-concentration and 
subsidization if the partial collateral support is solely used to support projects that are receiving 
Credit Facility finance through BRD. The independent TAP recommends that the RGIF seeks to 
build a portfolio of reimbursable grants that also support loans from non-BRD sources in 
addition to BRD’s Credit Facility.

=== PAGE 124 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.12 
Page 124 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25. 
The Credit Facility is intended to provide direct co-finance to climate-friendly projects in 
Rwanda. The co-finance nature of this facility is critical, as the goal of the RGIF is not limited to 
funding-worthy projects but is also to educate and shape the commercial landscape so that local 
banks gain first-hand experience in the relevant sectors. A barrier to climate finance in Rwanda 
is the lack of expertise and familiarity at commercial banks. By requiring that at least 30 per 
cent of project funding comes from non-RGIF sources, the programme can crowd in other 
market participants. Additionally, the RGIF’s remit includes conducting market-making 
activities, such as organizing debt syndicates with other commercial co-financiers, as well as 
securitizations where appropriate. The funding proposal provides as an interesting example the 
solar securitization initiative under the Climate Policy Initiative (CPI) Global Innovation Lab for 
Climate Finance, which would apply the successful Brazilian Green Fundo de Investimento em 
Direitos Creditórios (FIDC) model to the Rwandan context by using BRD’s Credit Facility capital 
as a bridge towards private sector securitization.  The independent TAP commends the RGIF 
sponsors for their intention to act as market-makers and contributors of “sweat equity” to 
advance eligible projects.  
26. 
The Credit Facility is also designed to provide a level of concessionality for climate 
projects in the form of discounted interest rates and long-dated tenors. To prevent market 
distortion, the RGIF Credit Facility will only be available to those projects that could not 
otherwise access commercial finance. The project sponsors include a lack of access to other 
finance as an investment criterion and have a due-diligence process for such claims. This 
introduces some project management risk, as any claim that other financing is not available 
incorporates a degree of subjectivity. It will be important for the RGIF to maintain high diligence 
standards when screening for this investment criterion. The independent TAP recommends that 
the GCF Secretariat work with the accredited entity to develop reporting requirements and 
standards to mitigate the risk of the proposed Credit Facility being used by more sophisticated 
market participants with an undetermined need for concessionality.  
27. 
The independent TAP also notes with approval that funding under the Credit Facility 
will be in local currency. While GCF funds will be in United States dollars, the Government of 
Rwanda, represented by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (MINECOFIN), will 
make the funds available to BRD in local currency via the Central Bank of Rwanda. BRD will then 
lend the funds to local developers in Rwandan francs.  
28. 
The RGIF has the potential to engender positive climate impacts. Integrated 
programmes that provide capital for project development, with a line of sight to follow-on 
credit, have been instrumental in helping jurisdictions achieve their climate goals in a manner 
that is both financially sustainable and enables other sources of finance. While the independent 
TAP has questions about some of the projections presented in the funding proposal, these 
questions concern the potential scale of impact and not whether the RGIF can have a positive 
climate change impact in Rwanda, which seems clear. The RGIF will provide financing and 
investment opportunities for renewable energy, green buildings, sustainable agriculture and 
transport and, in turn, help to reduce Rwanda’s dependence on fossil fuels and mitigate the 
effects of climate change.  
29. 
Importantly, the funding proposal intends that the RGIF will act as a market-maker 
within the existing financial landscape. This essential role is key to advancing potential climate 
projects that are outside the scope of public-sector budgets but require de-risking and 
securitization to attract private investment. This market-making function is a typical remit of 
green banks. In addition to providing financial resources, green bank principles suggest that an 
institution’s most valuable asset is its willingness and ability to contribute the “sweat equity” 
that private parties are often unwilling to provide. Sweat equity in this case involves the time 
and human capacity required to arrange investment opportunities and to structure transactions

=== PAGE 125 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.12 
Page 125 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that would otherwise not be of interest to the market because of the perceived effort needed to 
reach financial close.  
30. 
In addition, the RGIF will build the capacity of project developers and local financial 
institutions and will create hands-on experience in green lending. Both BRD and FONERWA are 
public institutions that will benefit from the climate finance tools, expertise and programmatic 
capability needed to support national climate goals.  
31. 
Overall, the independent TAP regards the RGIF’s impact potential as medium.  
1.3 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high 
32. 
Rwanda faces several barriers to climate finance due to the small size of its local 
financial sector, lack of long-term financing and lack of relevant expertise. The RGIF is intended 
to address these market constraints by taking a blended finance approach to increase climate-
related investment in key sectors to achieve Rwanda’s sustainable development goals.  
33. 
The RGIF is not a one-off project but instead is designed to be a catalyst across the local 
economy by providing customized financial and non-financial products to assist projects in 
achieving bankability and growth. The RGIF is expected to contribute to a paradigm shift in 
Rwanda by expanding the number of bankable climate projects in Rwanda and by 
demonstrating their commercial viability. If successful, the RGIF will help reduce market 
misperceptions of climate projects by expanding the direct experience of local financial 
institutions and by enlarging the project developer community so that more climate-friendly 
projects can reach fruition in a timely manner. As more projects are developed (and financed by 
the private sector), the RGIF will help create an improved environment for future project 
development. 
34. 
The independent TAP notes that the RGIF incorporates many green bank principles, and 
the funding proposal claims that it will be the first application of the green bank model in a 
central African nation. Although, in the view of the independent TAP, the RGIF is not strictly a 
green bank, it does model many of the attributes of green bank activities that can be broadly 
replicated across the region.3  
35. 
The paradigm shift potential of green banks rests on their ability to address investment 
barriers by strategically using limited public funds to leverage far greater private investment. A 
green bank is typically designed to achieve this in a sustainable manner, by supporting 
environmental sustainability but also remaining financially sustainable as an institution. Those 
institutions that expect periodic infusions of public funds are not truly green banks and have 
limited paradigm shift potential. The financial returns sought by green banks may be more 
modest than those of purely commercial entities, but they should be sufficient to secure the 
financial health, credit rating and longevity of the green bank itself. The investment discipline 
generated by requiring the investment to be returned will help the RGIF Credit Facility to 
become a trusted partner for other sources of co-finance.  
36. 
The RGIF is designed as a self-sustaining programme that can expand and secure 
additional capital from various partners as it matures. By demonstrating the profitability of low-
carbon investments across the target sectors, RGIF will help to further scale up and address 
other green sectors suffering from similar barriers. Following the development of increased 
capacity and experience at FONERWA and BRD, these institutions will be better prepared to 
secure extra funding from sources beyond GCF. This will enable them to offer the necessary 
 
3 To this end, the AfDB claims in the funding proposal that it is exploring replication of green bank models in more 
than six other African countries.

=== PAGE 126 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.12 
Page 126 
 
 
 
 
 
 
catalytic support to the private sector, thereby facilitating the significant expansion of green 
sectors in Rwanda. 
37. 
The independent TAP notes positively that most of the requested GCF funding is in the 
form of a loan facility which requires payback of the principal and interest, albeit highly 
concessional interest. This pragmatic approach is in line with green bank best practices and an 
indication that the project sponsors intend to establish a useful entity.  
38. 
The RGIF also has the potential to drive policy innovation and ambition by 
demonstrating what is possible in Rwanda and providing policymakers with a tool to further 
accelerate mitigation and adaptation ambitions. An increase in the number of bankable projects 
will not only lead to significant climate impacts but should also provide a broader catalytic 
effect by driving finance into ‘hard to reach’ sectors such as climate adaptation projects. 
39. 
The independent TAP also observes positively that the RGIF, like other green bank 
efforts, will be well positioned to develop and disperse market knowledge in the local financial 
sector, as well as driving cross-sector collaboration in project development. Lastly, the RGIF can 
also function as a trusted partner to cross-border capital providers. One of the impediments to 
attracting finance to developing markets from international private sources is a perception of 
the country’s levels of risk. These risks can be mitigated by a local co-finance partner that 
understands local political and economic realities.  
40. 
Similarly, the RGIF can function as a trusted partner to both domestic and international 
investors in terms of the green or climate credibility of transactions. More investors are looking 
for assets with sustainability at their core, while still generating an appropriate risk-adjusted 
return. Programmes that maintain high impact standards and enforce high-quality screening, 
oversight and reporting can improve the attractiveness of co-investments in their markets. 
When the RGIF is part of the transaction, co-investors will perceive the project’s climate 
attributes as credible, which will reduce the perceived environmental impact risk.  
41. 
Overall, the independent TAP rates the potential for the RGIF to effect paradigm shift as 
medium to high.  
1.4 
Sustainable development potential  
           Scale: Medium to high 
42. 
The RGIF objectives are aligned with Rwanda’s development goals along with the 
following United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): 1 – No poverty, 5 – Gender 
equality, 7 – Affordable and clean energy, 8 – Industry innovation and infrastructure, 11 – 
Sustainable cities and communities, 13 – Climate action, and 17 – Partnerships for the goals.  
43. 
Under the RGIF, climate-friendly projects and businesses in Rwanda will have greater 
access to affordable finance. The integrated supply of early-stage development capital and 
growth financing should increase the overall number, scale and speed to market of green 
projects in the agriculture, urbanization, energy and transportation sectors. The independent 
TAP notes that developers in Rwanda currently lack the financial resources to develop and grow 
their businesses, and the RGIF is designed to enable such businesses to expand while supporting 
low-carbon economic growth. In this way, the RGIF can contribute to Rwanda’s NDC targets 
while also supporting the country’s economic recovery and long-term growth. Other direct 
beneficiaries of the RGIF include local financial institutions, which will build capacity and gain 
experience specific to the climate sector. BRD and FONERWA will also benefit from institutional 
capacity-building. 
44. 
The RGIF proposal credibly demonstrated its potential to contribute to the sustainable 
development of Rwanda beyond mitigation and adaptation impacts, including the following:

=== PAGE 127 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.12 
Page 127 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45. 
Economic co-benefits: Many of the RGIF’s priority sectors are already significant drivers 
of Rwanda’s gross domestic product (GDP) growth. Beyond the climate benefits, growth in these 
sectors will have direct economic impact, contributing to more economic activity and increased 
output in key growth sectors, including agriculture, construction and energy. For instance, 
urban construction has been one of the fastest-growing sectors of the economy in recent years, 
and the agriculture sector is the largest employer in Rwanda. Consequently, RGIF investments 
in green building construction and climate-smart agriculture are forecast to have significant 
impacts on economic growth and jobs.  
46. 
Social co-benefits: Supporting the development of mini grids could provide electricity to 
over a million people in rural areas. RGIF finance can support projects that will improve access 
to clean and affordable energy, improving the quality of life and economic opportunities of 
Rwandans.  
47. 
Gender co-benefits: Women make up 52 per cent of Rwanda’s population, with a greater 
percentage in rural areas and in the agriculture sector. The programme policies prioritize 
funding women-led companies and those whose outputs can benefit women who are vulnerable 
to climate change. For this reason, the RGIF places a specific focus on target sectors such as 
climate-smart agriculture and rural energy access, where women are most likely the primary 
beneficiaries of projects. A RGIF target will be to have at least 30 per cent of projects in its 
investment portfolio with a strong gender-responsive component.  
48. 
Environmental co-benefits: A target sector for the RGIF is renewable energy and energy-
efficiency projects, which will help reduce emissions by reducing Rwanda’s reliance on GHG-
intensive energy sources like biomass and fossil fuels. The RGIF will screen projects to identify 
whether they can achieve real emission reductions while minimizing indirect environmental 
impacts.  
49. 
Overall, the independent TAP rates the sustainable development potential of the RGIF as 
medium to high.  
1.5 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
        Scale: High 
50. 
Rwanda is highly exposed to the impacts of climate change. It has experienced more 
frequent and more intense climate hazards. These changing conditions are expected to impair 
agricultural productivity, food availability, water resources, human health, ecosystems and 
energy production. The funding proposal highlighted that Rwanda is one of the African 
countries that are most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change.  
51. 
The country is a least developed country with low economic development, making the 
finance of mitigation and adaptation interventions challenging. Notwithstanding its economic 
status, Rwanda has committed to reducing its GHG emissions by 38 per cent by 2030. The RGIF 
is expected to contribute to this goal by improving access to finance for mitigation and 
adaptation projects in renewable energy, efficient buildings, clean transportation and 
sustainable agriculture. The RGIF programme has been designed with the needs of the local 
market in mind, based on feasibility analyses, market studies and stakeholders’ input, which the 
independent TAP has been able to assess.  
52. 
The independent TAP notes that the climate finance needs of Rwanda are substantial 
and unlikely to be met by public finance alone. Consequently, addressing the major constraints 
to private investments will be essential for Rwanda’s sustainable growth. According to the CPI 
report The State of Climate Finance in Africa: Climate Finance Needs of African Countries (2022), 
Rwanda’s climate financing needs to meet its NDC are estimated to be USD 10.6 billion between 
2020 and 2030. From an annual climate finance need of USD 1.67 billion, Rwanda managed to

=== PAGE 128 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.12 
Page 128 
 
 
 
 
 
 
secure only USD 717 million in 2020, meeting 42 per cent of its needs. The RGIF will focus on 
sectors which suffer from underinvestment due to market barriers. The identified barriers 
include lack of a developer track record, funders’ high perception of risk, high borrowing costs 
and collateral requirements, and a lack of early-stage risk capital to drive the projects to 
bankability. The RGIF will seek to address these barriers by providing financing solutions for 
climate projects and by enhancing capacity across the finance, development and public sectors.  
53. 
RGIF investment will result in direct benefits to recipients, including increased access to 
clean energy, increased access to climate-smart agriculture equipment and increased access to 
energy-efficient and climate-resilient housing. For instance, the electricity and agriculture 
sectors in Rwanda are characterized by poor supply and poor productivity. According to the 
RGIF funding proposal, approximately 70 per cent of Rwandans lack access to electricity, with 
88 per cent lacking access in rural areas and 28 per cent lacking access in urban areas. 
Furthermore, 70 per cent of the population works in agriculture on a low income, constituting 
the most vulnerable segment of the population, given their dependence on rainfall and resulting 
exposure to greater climate variability.  
54. 
Overall, the independent TAP rates the needs of the recipient as high.  
1.6 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high 
55. 
The RGIF project is an initiative of the Government of Rwanda (represented by 
MINECOFIN), BRD and FONERWA. BRD and FONERWA are both national public institutions 
with green financing mandates and they will serve as the RGIF’s implementing partners. The 
independent TAP has assessed that there is substantial political support and intention on the 
part of the Rwandan public sector to establish the RGIF to facilitate its climate goals. The 
Government of Rwanda has also provided a no-objection letter.  
56. 
The independent TAP has assessed that the establishment of the RGIF aligns with 
Rwanda's overall national planning objectives and development goals, including Rwanda’s NDC 
and its national development plan, the National Strategy for Transformation. For instance, 
Rwanda’s updated NDC identifies renewable electricity generation, climate-smart agriculture, 
clean transportation and green buildings as priority sectors for mitigation and adaptation 
interventions. The RGIF is specifically designed to mobilize finance for these sectors and thus 
will contribute to the implementation and realization of Rwanda’s NDC targets.  
57. 
The RGIF was designed by Rwandan public entities in partnership with the AfDB and 
has received support and co-finance commitments from international development partners 
including the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Nordic Development Fund 
(NDF), The Agence Française de Développement (AFD), the European Investment Bank (EIB) 
and Sida, among others. The Government of Rwanda is not providing any additional co-finance 
but will intermediate the GCF loan and in such a manner to partially absorb the foreign 
exchange risk.  
58. 
The INDEPENDENT TAP has also assessed that a broad array of other key stakeholders 
were engaged during the design of the RGIF, including project developers, commercial banks, 
the national development bank, the national pension funds, the Sovereign Fund (Agaciro 
Development Fund), and Rwanda Development Board (RDB), among others.   
59. 
We note also that FONERWA is a public entity with the mandate to scale up climate 
finance in Rwanda. The RGIF is being designed to complement FONERWA’s current grants 
programme and its existing private sector facility strategy.

=== PAGE 129 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.12 
Page 129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60. 
The independent TAP considers the RGIF to be aligned with host country priorities and 
assesses involvement on the part of Rwanda to be significant. Overall, the independent TAP 
rates country ownership of the funding proposal as medium to high.  
1.7 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
           Scale: Medium to high 
61. 
The establishment of the RGIF aligns with GCF’s Private Sector Strategy. Specifically, it 
will help to build the capacity of public institutions in Rwanda for climate finance and will 
mobilize private sector finance at scale by de-risking investments from commercial institutions. 
In the view of the independent TAP, the RGIF offers an effective and efficient approach to scaling 
up private climate investment in Rwanda by incorporating green bank principles and working 
with two existing and well positioned institutions (FONERWA and BRD). The programme will 
build on the demonstrated capacity of these institutions to create new climate finance tools and 
market capacity in support of Rwanda’s climate goals.  
62. 
As noted earlier in this assessment, the provision of early-stage capital in markets like 
Rwanda is one of the more effective and efficient manners to build up development capacity and 
a pipeline of investable opportunities. As in many markets, the general lack of funding is often 
not the material barrier to climate action. A more nuanced approach recognizes that the main 
barriers are typically a lack of a specific type of funding (early-stage capital) and the 
commensurate lack of bankable projects. The independent TAP commends the effort to address 
this barrier through development capital and an innovative partial-collateral instrument. 
Moreover, the integrated approach that links development capital with a credit facility has the 
potential to be effective in moving projects from concept to development and construction and 
ultimately to operation.  
63. 
On the credit side, the programme should be able to materially increase the available 
finance in Rwanda for climate projects, both by offering direct lending to eligible projects and by 
mobilizing local financial institutions. The blended finance nature of the Credit Facility can help 
mitigate barriers such as tenor, high perceived risks and cost of capital. BRD will work closely 
with commercial banks to structure transactions and will report on its progress towards the 
goal of mobilizing co-investment. The independent TAP further notes that RGIF features, such as 
a 70 per cent cap on concessional capital from the programme, and conditions designed to avoid 
market distortions, provide reassurance that the programme is reasonably well designed and 
adapted for the Rwandan context. Both the grant and credit components will focus only on 
projects that are not yet bankable without credit enhancement, or financial or development 
support.  
64. 
The Credit Facility also intends to use GCF concessionality to offer highly competitive 
financing rates directly to eligible projects. The funding proposal and the feasibility study 
adequately map the interest rate environment in Rwanda and justify the discounted rates that 
the RGIF intends to inject into the market. The accredited entity informed the independent TAP 
that GCF’s concessionality will be passed on to end-borrowers in a transparent manner. 
However, the mechanism by which this will be ensured is unclear. The independent TAP 
strongly recommends that the GCF Secretariat works with the project sponsors to establish a 
mechanism (to be captured in the funded activity agreement) that makes it obligatory for BRD 
to provide evidence that the GCF concessional terms are substantially passed on to the final 
loanees. Such evidence could include calculations of what BRD would have charged its loan 
clients if it had funded these loans from its own balance sheet or using objectively verifiable 
market benchmarks. 
65. 
Related to this, the independent TAP observes the existence of deployment risk that 
could trap GCF concessionality in BRD or Government of Rwanda treasury operations. Earlier in

=== PAGE 130 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.12 
Page 130 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this assessment, the independent TAP noted its concern over the uncertain nature of the RGIF 
pipeline and whether the envisaged deployment pace was realistic. A slow deployment can lead 
to some unintended consequences if it is not carefully guarded against. First, there is the risk 
that highly concessional GCF money ends up parked in public treasuries, earning passive 
returns far in excess of the concessional pricing. This scenario can lead to an unwillingness to 
pass on concessionality to end users of the finance in a timely manner. Alternatively, the 
independent TAP has sometimes observed initial slow deployment because market 
overestimation has led to late efforts to accelerate deployment to focus on large and arguably 
fully commercial investments. The independent TAP raises these points so that the sponsors 
and the GCF Secretariat can be alert to deployment problems before they deteriorate.  
66. 
We assess that the RGIF eligibility criteria are aligned with the objectives of the GCF 
investment criteria. We note positively that the selection criteria screen projects based on their 
commercial viability, to avoid scenarios where projects receive grant funding from the PPF but 
are unable to progress beyond that stage to access financing from the Credit Facility or other 
commercial sources. Under the RGIF, projects must demonstrate financial viability (for example, 
through a financial model, business plan and supporting documentation), including articulating 
a strategy for accessing private or commercial investment. This is an important screening 
criterion to maintain an efficient and effective programme.  
67. 
The RGIF intends to generate co-financing at the programme level by working with 
funding partners (such as AfDB, Sida, EIB, AFD, the Foreign, Commonwealth & Development 
Office (FCDO) of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, responsAbility, the 
Danish International Development Agency (DANIDA) and NDF). Project-level co-financing will 
be generated by requiring at least 30 per cent of capital to come from a non-RGIF source. In this 
way, the RGIF can crowd in local market participants through concessional co-finance (which 
has a longer tenor and lower costs) and deal arrangement activities. The co-financed direct 
lending approach will also enable other capital providers to gain direct experience in financing 
climate projects.  
68. 
The independent TAP notes positively that RGIF loans will be denominated in local 
currency. 
69. 
In the view of the independent TAP, the RGIF is well designed overall and has a well-
defined mandate that can facilitate risk-taking investments in support of climate interventions 
in Rwanda. The independent TAP also views favourably the amount of co-finance and the 
variety of co-finance partners that the RGIF is attracting in Phase 1 of its programme. The 
independent TAP is disappointed that AfDB, as the accredited entity, is not participating in 
Phase 1 but instead has delayed its contribution to 2028 or beyond. The AfDB has explained that 
it plans to provide USD 10 million in financing through a sovereign loan in the second tranche of 
funding once it has room in its Rwandan allocation (i.e. headroom). A Phase 1 participation 
would have better aligned the interests of GCF with the accredited entity, but it appears 
infeasible at the moment.  
70. 
The independent TAP notes that, in addition to financing new mitigation and adaptation 
projects, the Credit Facility also intends to refinance existing loans to projects in the relevant 
sectors. The independent TAP has raised concerns about the likelihood of limited concessional 
finance being used to fund projects that are already operational and have successfully accessed 
funding in public and/or private markets. The potential climate impacts (and co-benefits) 
associated with these projects are locked in prior to any re-financing by the RGIF. The 
independent TAP does not view such refinancing as optimally efficient from a catalysing climate 
impact standpoint. The independent TAP understands that the taking out of expensive or short-
term debt could arguably improve the financial sustainability of climate projects; however, the 
risk of non-additional financing is significant.

=== PAGE 131 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.12 
Page 131 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71. 
Overall, the independent TAP rates the efficiency and effectiveness of this programme as 
medium to high.   
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
72. 
The RGIF programme is very much in line with green bank principles that have proven 
effective in providing critical climate mitigation and adaptation financing. The independent TAP 
believes that the RGIF can open the door for public and private capital for projects that would 
not have succeeded without these interventions. The RGIF will do this by providing financing 
and other assistance to project developers, which can help to reduce the cost and risks (real and 
perceived) of investments in climate change mitigation and adaptation. Like other successful 
green bank efforts, the RGIF will seek to deploy not only its own capital, but also drive private 
investment, which can help to further accelerate the transition to a more sustainable economy.  
73. 
There are, however, a few areas of concern that the INDEPENDENT TAP raises in this 
assessment and hopes that the project sponsors will be attuned to going forward. In particular, 
the independent TAP is concerned by the reputational and impact risks associated with 
refinancing projects that have already accessed sufficient funding. The independent TAP asks 
that the programme sponsors and GCF Secretariat work together to curtail this risk prior to the 
closing of this transaction.  
74. 
With the above in mind, the independent TAP endorses this funding proposal subject to 
the inclusion of a covenant in the FAA as follows: 
(a) 
The Accredited Entity shall ensure that no GCF Proceeds are used (whether through the 
PPF or Credit Facility) to refinance or otherwise support RGIF sub-projects which are  or 
will be fully funded by way of legally-binding commitments from other sources, except 
in cases where the Accredited Entity demonstrates, in a form and substance satisfactory 
to the GCF Secretariat, acting reasonably, that extenuating circumstances exist which 
make the proposed refinancing in question necessary to prevent the failure  of a sub-
project that would otherwise be able to receive funding from RGIF. The limitations set 
out in this paragraph shall not apply to other co-financing which is made available 
through RGIF.

=== PAGE 132 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.12 
Page 132 
 
 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP221) 
Proposal name: 
The Rwanda Green Investment Facility (RGIF) 
Accredited entity: 
African Development Bank 
Country/(ies): 
Rwanda 
Project/Programme size: 
Medium 
 
Impact potential 
Thank you for the assessment of the Impact potential of the proposal. Kindly note that the 
GHG emission reduction is 0.92million over the project lifetime and not annually.  The point 
of ensuring that smaller projects are integrated into the pipeline is well noted as is the 
importance of strengthening the technical synergies between BRD and FONERWA to ensure 
increased impact. 
 
Paradigm shift potential 
The paradigm shift potential is well captured in the assessment. 
 
 
Sustainable development potential 
Thank you for highlighting the alignment of the programme with some key SDGs and several 
benefits that the programme will yield. 
 
Needs of the recipient 
Thank you for the emphasis on the need to leverage private finance to help Rwanda meet the 
NDC goals. RGIF will certainly help to address some barriers to meet the level of private 
financing required. 
 
 
Country ownership 
The observation from ITAP is well noted.

=== PAGE 133 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.12 
Page 133 
 
 
 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
Thank you for highlighting the innovativeness of the RGIF approach. The observations on the 
need to ensure the end borrowers are able to benefit from the concessionality and the risk 
related to slow disbursement are also duly noted. It should also be noted that AfDB’s 
participation is only possible in Phase 2 as the AE’s headroom will only be available then.  
 
 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
Thank you for highlighting the RGIF’s alignment with green bank principles and its catalytic 
role in supporting climate finance. The proposal of the covenant to ensure there is no 
refinancing is also noted.

=== PAGE 134 ===
1 | P a g e
The Rwanda Green Investment Facility (RGIF). 
Gender Assessment Report & Gender Action Plan 
African Development Bank 
September 2023 
Gender documentation for FP221

=== PAGE 135 ===
2 | P a g e  
 
Part 1: Gender Assessment Report 
Executive Summary 
Women constitute 51.5%1 of Rwanda’s population with an even greater majority of women living in rural—
and more climate-vulnerable – parts of the country. Rwanda is a small, low-income country with significant 
needs in terms of economic development and is, according to the ND-GAIN Country Index2, among the 
most vulnerable countries (rank 151) to climate change. Major priority sectors such as energy, agriculture, 
water and sanitation are characterized by poor supply and productivity, lack of basic infrastructure and 
reliable service affecting the majority of people in rural areas. In the energy sector for example, 
approximately 70% of Rwandans lack access to electricity, with 88% lacking access in rural areas and 28% 
in urban areas. Furthermore, 70% of the general population works in agriculture, and 82% of women work 
in agriculture,3 which are typically subsistence or low wage occupations. They constitute the most 
vulnerable segment of the population given climate variability and dependence on rainfall for crop 
production. The urban sector which also lacks appropriate climate resilient infrastructure is also impacted 
by climate variabilities as Rwanda is very hilly which contributes to high localized population densities 
(Rwanda is one of the most densely populated nations in the world according to the World Bank) and 
vulnerability to landslides in urban (and rural) areas. Investing to address structural challenges in national 
priority sectors such as energy, green cities, agriculture, water and sanitation, etc while empowering 
women who are the most vulnerable, has the potential to make a significant impact on the Rwanda 
economy. The RGIF has the mandate to scale up climate finance and increase private investments in low-
carbon and climate-resilient projects4,  and is well positioned to address both Rwanda’s economic 
development and climate-related investment needs while empowering women. Indeed, as outlined 
below, women are most likely the primary beneficiaries of projects in RGIF priority sectors.  
The RGIF will place a specific focus on target sectors where gender equality is poorly addressed such as in 
climate smart agriculture, shifting away from biomass for cooking, and rural energy access through min-
grids. Additionally, women-owned businesses in the RGIF pipeline have been identified and prioritized in 
the RGIF criteria and in the project pipeline development process. The RGIF project pipeline and eligibility 
criteria focus on serving these sectors which currently suffer from chronic under investment due to market 
barriers that impede investment in low-carbon, climate resilient development projects.  
RGIF investment support will help overcome these barriers, and provide appropriate financing to support 
these projects and scaling up low carbon markets in Rwanda. This will result in direct benefit impacts to 
recipients, targeting at least 50% of women. These benefits include increased access to clean energy, 
increased access to climate smart agriculture equipment, and increased access to housing that is energy 
efficient and climate resilient. Focusing on addressing specific challenges related to women empowerment 
to address climate change will not only benefit the country’s development goals but will contribute to 
national economic recovery.  
 
1 EICV5_Main_Indicators report (National Statistics: www.statistics.gov.rw/publication/eicv-5-main-indicators-report-201617). 
2 https://gain.nd.edu/our-work/country-index/rankings/ 
3 http://riverapublications.com/article/agricultural-transformation-in-rwanda-can-gendered-market-participation-explain-the-persistence-of-
subsistence-farming#:~:text=The%20sector%20involves%2082%20percent,employer%20of%20women%20in%20Rwanda. 
4 OECD (2016) “Green Investment Banks: Scaling up Private Investment in Low-carbon, Climate-resilient Infrastructure.” http://www.oecd.org/ 
environment/cc/green-investmentbanks-9789264245129-en.htm

=== PAGE 136 ===
3 | P a g e  
 
The relevant national level stakeholders were consulted, to inform the assessment on the prevailing 
challenges, barriers, or good practices of women in the RGIF priority sectors especially in Agriculture and 
Energy. The outcomes of the consultations informed the information that is described in the Gender 
Assessment report.  
From the national level, there is a National Gender Machinery (NGM), the leading mechanism for the 
coordination of stakeholders operating in the field of gender equality promotion and women’s 
empowerment across different sectors. The NGM comprises of the Ministry of Gender and Family 
Promotion (MIGEPROF), Gender Monitoring Office (GMO), the National Women’s Council and the Rwanda 
Women Parliamentary Forum. 
• 
Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion (MIGEPROF): with a leading role for the NGM, 
MIGEPROF has the mandate to oversee the implementation of the National Gender Policy and 
provide guidance for gender mainstreaming across sectors.  
• 
Gender Monitoring Office (GMO): GMO is an independent organ monitoring and evaluating 
compliance of various institutions on gender indicators on a permanent basis.  
• 
National Women’s Council (NWC): NWC was established to serve as a forum for women at all 
governance levels.  NWC carries out advocacy for the most vulnerable women, mobilizes women 
to know and claim their rights, including participation in the civic life, and builds the capacity of its 
grass-root levels. The woman elected as a representative of the National Women’s Council at 
District level becomes a member of the District Council.  
• 
Rwanda Women Parliamentarian Forum (FFRP) lobbies and advocates for legislation to support 
gender equality and women’s empowerment 
Rwanda Gender Dynamics Overview 
Health, Poverty & Life expectancy 
Women constitute the majority of the population in Rwanda (51.5%5 as of 2018), and their overall situation 
including education, employment, health, life expectancy has been improving for the last twenty years, 
due in part to various initiatives from the GoR to promote and implement women-friendly policies and 
reforms. The maternal mortality ratio for example has significantly decreased from 1,0716 maternal death 
per 100,000 live births in 2000 to 2107 deaths in 2014/20158. This significant decrease of the maternal 
mortality ratio is the result of the country’s efforts to strengthen women’s access to better care by 
reducing gender barriers to receiving essential health services.  
In Rwanda, social protection policies and programmes have been targeting female poverty reduction 
through more participation in productive economic activities. These programmes include Vision 2020 
Umurenge Program (VUP), Ubudehe, One cup of milk per child program, and One Cow per Poor Family 
(Known as GIRINKA), the Genocide Survivors Support and Assistance Fund (FARG), etc. These programmes 
have provided direct cash support, opportunities for employment as well as facilitation in accessing 
 
5 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
6 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
7 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
8 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019

=== PAGE 137 ===
4 | P a g e  
 
financial services. 64.4% of females benefited from the direct support scheme from the GoR compared to 
35.6% of males in 2016/2017 according to the 2019 National Gender Statistics Report.  
Despite this, women remain the most vulnerable group in Rwanda, especially those living in rural areas. In 
2016/2017, 17.8% of households headed by women were in extreme poverty (down from 26% in 
2010/2011), most of them living in rural areas compared to 15% of households headed by men. The overall 
poverty rate among households headed by women was around 39.5% in 2016/2017 a sharp decrease from 
47% in 2010/2011 but still behind households headed by men estimated around 37.8% in 2016/2017.9  
Education & Skills 
Girls’ education in Rwanda has been improving for the last twenty years thanks to clear policies and 
initiatives from the government. This includes the 2008 girls’ education policy, initiatives to increase 
women participation in science and technology and various programs ensuring that girls have access to 
meaningful learning opportunities (the introduction of twelve years basic education programme (12 YBE), 
measures set in place for quality assurance in the education sector, etc.). Girls’ enrolment at primary 
education level was 1,244,36110 in 2018 representing 49.7% of the total children enrolled down to 2014 
where it was representing 50.8% (with a gender parity index of 0.98%11, meaning there was 98 girls’ 
students for every 100 boys’ students).  
This trend has been observed in many education sectors. In Technical and Vocational Education Training 
(TVET) for example, despite many government initiatives to increase girls’ enrolment, girls were still 
lagging behind representing 43.8% of the total children enrolled in TVET in 2018. Another example is 
computer literacy skill which is low in Rwanda in general but much lower among women aged 15-30 years 
compared to men of the same age (10.7% compared to 13.8%). In tertiary education, girls’ enrolment still 
lags behind with a decreasing trend of the numbers of girls enrolled from 2014 to 2018 at 39,146 to 38,041. 
Yet at the same time, boys’ enrollment had increased from 47,857 to 51,119.  
Moreover, in tertiary education fields such as Sciences, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) 
women’s enrollment is even farther behind when compare to men’s. In sciences for example, women 
enrollment was 40.7 %12, in engineering, manufacturing and construction only 29.1%13 were women. 
These inequalities in access to tertiary education have been affecting women’s chances for better 
employment opportunities. Numerous studies have demonstrated that girls’ enrollment in tertiary 
education, especially in STEM fields would yield significant contribution in social and economic national 
transformation. 
Women Status and Household Headship 
Rwanda’s constitution14 of 2003 revised in 2015 prohibits any form of discrimination and emphasizes the 
principle of equality and non-discrimination to all citizens. It guarantees equal rights for women and men 
and has provided the foundation to promote and advance gender responsive legislation in multiple areas 
including inheritance, land and property rights, women participation in politics, etc. The constitution 
 
9 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
10 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
11 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
12 MINEDUC, Education Statistics, 2017 
13 MINEDUC, Education Statistics, 2017 
14 Article 16 of the constitution.

=== PAGE 138 ===
5 | P a g e  
 
provides for example, a minimum 30% women representation in all decision-making public organs in 
Rwanda. Women’s representation in the Rwanda Government reached 50%15 in 2018 up from 36.8%16 in 
2014. Additionally, the law nº32/201617 governing persons and family states that spouses (female and 
male) jointly provide management of the household including moral and material support to the household 
as well as its maintenance. It is worth noting that despite these laws, social and cultural norms, gender 
stereotypes and roles still prevail and limit full participation of women in leadership especially at the 
lowest level of governance and in families. In Rwanda, according to the culture and tradition, a man is 
considered the head of the household. In 2018, as per the 2019 National Gender Statistics Report, 25% of 
total households were reported to be permanently headed by women while 69% of the total households 
were headed by a man. According to the same report, but with data from 2015, 20% of women declared 
that they decided for themselves on how their earnings are used. Which is basically the same percentage 
of men, 19% of them declared that they were deciding alone on how their earnings (cash) are used. 68% 
of women declared that they were making joint decisions with their husbands, compared to 78% of men 
declaring the same regarding men’s earnings. 96%18 of married men were involved in decisions regarding 
major household purchases compared to only 73%19 of women. 26%20 of women declared that such 
decisions were usually made by the husband alone.  
In general, in most vulnerable communities with less educated people, women lack the bargaining power, 
knowledge and means to exercise their rights. Additionally, while more married women are exercising 
greater decision-making power over their cash earnings as well as their land held jointly with their 
husbands, some women still experience challenges in exercising their decision power over their cash 
earnings. 12%21 of women declared that their husbands had the decision power regarding their earnings 
well as only 2% of men stated that their wives are deciding on their earnings. Regarding land ownership 
for example, women still experience challenges in accessing land and controlling the land to which they 
do have access. Most of the time and especially within low-income families and in rural areas, women lack 
negotiating capacity to exercise decision-making over land. These challenges are limiting their capacity to 
use their land for more economic empowerment or to access to more economic opportunities.  
Gender-based violence 
Gender-based violence (GBV) is still a widespread problem in Rwanda, with women remaining the primary 
people affected. However, innovative national strategies and policies have been initiated by the 
government to eliminate GBV and promote gender equality at all levels. GBV in Rwanda is a complex issue 
rooted in patriarchy, which itself is enshrined in our cultural/religious notions, and various social 
conditions creating unequal gender norms and power relations. In the fight against GBV, prevention 
remains the best medicine. Sensitization should start from a young age within families and in schools, 
ensuring that parents and educational specialists promote values of gender equality while challenging 
derogating gender norms.  
 
15 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
16 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
17 Of August, 28, 2016 
18 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
19 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
20 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
21 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019

=== PAGE 139 ===
6 | P a g e  
 
Part of the problem of GBV is that many survivors fail to report their cases, and sometimes, it is simply out 
of ignorance. Efforts have been made by the authorities to encourage the victims to report through 
initiatives such as the Isange one stop centres, where victims are supported medically, psychologically and 
offered legal aid. Many Rwandans are believers practicing their faith within organized religious structures, 
hence why the government has been working closely with these entities that offer a perfect platform to 
promote gender equality and fight GBV.22 
Women participation in the Economy 
The Rwanda government has committed itself to the promotion of gender equality and women’s 
empowerment which has resulted in significant positive strides both socially and economically. In 2017, 
the World Economic Forum ranked Rwanda as the fourth best country in closing gender gaps; 
economically, Rwandan women’s labor force participation rate is one of the highest in the world (86%)23 
(albeit mostly in the agriculture sector) with a lower wage gap between women and men than in many 
industrialized countries (88 cents per dollar)24. Additionally, 24.6% of the land is owned solely by women 
while 59.925% of land is co-owned by women and men. All these progresses have helped reduce the gender 
gap in Rwanda economy, but many discrepancies still exist especially regarding the quality of employment 
for women.  
Women represent 55.2% of the total workforce in Rwanda. 87.6% of these women are women working in 
informal agriculture activities, which reflects Rwanda’s still primarily agricultural labor force. Additionally, 
the participation of women in the workforce is much lower in urban areas (53.5%) compared to 66.3% in 
rural areas. They are also more likely to be involved in informal cross border trade (when compare to most 
countries in East Africa26) than men. In 2018, more than twice the women in Rwanda were involved in 
informal cross border trade than men (752,679 women compared to 326,987 men). 
Despite efforts to create more off-farms jobs, women are still lagging behind in manufacturing and services 
sectors compared to men. Additionally, regarding the employment status in the economy, men are more 
likely to have an employee status than a woman (69.2% for men compared to 67.8% for women, as of 
2018). The percentage of women employed in dependent jobs was around 7.4% compared to 1.7% for 
men in 2018 according to the 2019 National Gender Statistics Report.  
Women economic empowerment remains a challenge in Rwanda particularly in the private sector where 
their participation is still low (only 36.6% of people employed were female in 201827) despite gaining more 
leadership positions in private sector organizations. Rwanda Private Sector Federation partnered with the 
United Nations to eliminate gaps in the private sector, and this has resulted in more women representation 
in decision-making boards. According to the 2019 National Gender Statistics Report, 30% of women held 
presidential positions and 70% vice-president positions on various chambers of the private sector. But a 
lot of efforts need to be done for women to create more sustainable and middle size companies. According 
to the same report, women are more likely to create micro enterprises than men. Out of 63 large 
companies in Rwanda (with more than 100 employees), only 16 were owned by women. This is due to 
 
22 World Bank blog, 2018. 
23 UNDP Gender Equality Strategy Report for Rwanda, 2019-2022. 
24 UNDP Gender Equality Strategy Report for Rwanda, 2019-2022. 
25 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
26 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
27 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019

=== PAGE 140 ===
7 | P a g e  
 
many factors including cultural norms, women family’s obligation, limited opportunities and access to 
finance compared to men. Limited access to finance for example is a great challenge for women in Rwanda, 
where there is a clear gender gap regarding formal financial inclusion (63% for women against 74% for 
men). Both in terms of accessing credit and having formal savings that can be leveraged for more economic 
opportunities. It is worth noting that a clear gender gap is observed through formal savings where men 
are more likely to have savings than women. In 2016/2017, only 11% of women saved in banks compared 
to 15% of men and 38% of women had a formal savings product from a non-bank financial institution 
(SACCOs, mobile money) compared to 51% of men.  
Focus on RGIF priority sectors: Agriculture and Energy 
Agriculture sector gender assessment and opportunities for RGIF 
Rwanda’s agriculture sector employs the majority of Rwandan workers, a majority of whom are women 
involved mostly in traditional rain-fed and subsistence agriculture. The GoR have implemented various 
programs to support women empowerment in the sector, offering agriculture extension services for both 
crop production and livestock development. These programs have benefited women. In crop production 
for example, 90.7% of women-led households received extensions services compared to 88.4% of men 
headed households. Regarding livestock, while both women and men received equal support regarding 
livestock extensions services, it is worth noting that women-headed households have benefited more from 
the Girinka Program which consisted in providing reared cows to 1 million households in Rwanda. 18.6% 
of women headed households has been impacted compared to 11.4%. 
However, it is worth noting that men are more likely to be involved in market or business oriented 
agricultural activities compared to women (47% vs 34.3%)28. Only 3.2% of women households involved in 
agriculture activities managed to get contract farming compared to 4.6% for men headed agricultural 
households. Additionally, women-owned land is less likely to be used in land consolidated schemes (only 
11%29 of land owned by women was used in land consolidation schemes in compared to 15.9%30 for men’s 
land) than men’s land. This affects women’s economic productivity and puts them in a difficult position to 
better exploit their land and increase their financial revenues. Consequently, women often lack the 
necessary revenue to be able to get access to financial support from commercial banks or SACCOs. RGIF 
investments in the sector should target to build women capacity to be more involved in business-related 
agricultural activities.  
In Rwanda, women constitute the majority of people working in agriculture and living in rural areas and 
are therefore more likely to be more vulnerable to climate change effects in the sector. According to the 
Government of Rwanda, severe climate-related effects in Rwanda’s agriculture sector pose a threat to 
food security. This affects more women as they are more involved in subsistence agriculture relying mostly 
on rainfall. Indeed, women headed households’ land are less likely to be irrigated than men’s lands. In 
2016/2017, only 3.5% of women headed households’ land was irrigated compared to 7% for men owned 
land. Additionally, according to the 2019 National Gender Statistics Report, only 62.5% of women headed 
households cultivated land is protected against soil erosion in Rwanda compared to 70.2% of land 
cultivated by men. It is worth noting that the percentage of land protected against soil erosion has 
 
28 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
29 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
30 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019

=== PAGE 141 ===
8 | P a g e  
 
decreased for both men owned land and women owned land from 2014 to 2017. But the decrease was 
more significant for women owned land from 71.5% protected in 2013/2014 to 62.5% three years later. 
The percentage of land owned by men protected against soil erosion went from 72.9% in 2013/2014 to 
70.2% in 2016/2017. With regards to this, RGIF investments efforts in the agriculture sector would target 
projects that aim to reduce women vulnerability in climate change and increase women owned land 
protection against climate change related impacts. Specifically, RGIF will have clear investment criteria 
that aim to prioritize female led cooperatives in the agriculture sector. As women constitute the most 
vulnerable workforce in the agriculture sector, investing in women cooperatives projects that fills other 
RGIF investment criteria is a key strategy that will contribute to women empowerment, especially in rural 
areas. Additionally, RGIF will prioritize projects with gender-sensitive interventions that improve 
agricultural productivity and increase food security. As women and children are the most food insecure 
in Rwanda. RGIF gender-sensitive approaches in the agriculture sector have the potential to strengthen 
women’s participation in leadership and decision-making while increasing their involvement in more 
business and formal agricultural activities and revenue management. Moreover, by targeting investments 
in solar irrigation of female owned lands for example, RGIF will reduce the current gap where female 
owned lands are less likely to be irrigated and benefit from the government’s extension services.  
Energy sector gender assessment and opportunities for RGIF 
Energy demand in Rwanda as in most countries in East Africa is driven by household consumption. With 
the main source of primary energy for residential use being biomass, mostly used for cooking. In most 
Rwandan households, women are in charge of cooking using charcoal or wood as a source of energy 
especially in rural areas with consequences to their health. Despite a persistent reliance on biomass as the 
primary source of energy, women have recently increased their use of alternative solutions to biomass as 
a source of energy. In 2016/2017, 0.9%31 of female headed households used gas and biogas, a net increase 
from only 0.1% three years before. This is the result of the government efforts to promote clean cooking 
technologies including biogas as well as solar panels for lighting. 
Regarding access to electricity, only 20%32 of women headed households had access to electricity as a 
source for lighting compared to 29%33 for men headed households in 2016/2017. Efforts from the GoR to 
promote the use of solar panels as a source of electricity in rural areas have contributed to women headed 
households’ electricity access increasing to 20% access by 2017. Particularly, 4.5%34 of women headed 
households were using solar panels compared to only 1%35 three years before. However, it is worth noting 
that 7%36 of female headed households were still using firewood for lighting compared to 2%37 for male 
headed households. 
It should be noted that women headed households were less impacted by the GoR solar campaign as the 
percentage of male headed households using solar panels increased even more from 2% in 2013/2014 to 
8.5% in 2016/2017. Due to their general low level average income (compared to men) women have less 
 
31 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
32 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
33 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
34 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
35 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
36 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019 
37 National Gender Statistics Report, 2019

=== PAGE 142 ===
9 | P a g e  
 
access to electricity and have fewer options for investing in alternative renewable energies or energy 
efficient solutions.  
Other challenges faced by women in the renewable energy sector include difficulty to access to finance, 
not enough women entrepreneurs, as well as lack of expertise and skill. Few women attend tertiary 
education and STEM fields in particular.  
RGIF activities in the energy sector will aim to increase women access to more renewable sources of 
energies for cooking, lighting and productive use of energies. Specifically, RGIF will target investments in 
projects that have a clear goal of increasing women access to renewable energy and clean cooking 
technologies. RGIF’s PPF for example will focus on providing grant support for women led businesses in 
the renewable energy sector with the potential to scale. The support will ensure that these women-led 
businesses become bankable and attract more private investments to grow and provide more solutions to 
increase women access to renewable energies. This means specifically prioritizing investment support into 
solar projects for productive use, as well as biogas and efficient stove projects as an alternative to biomass. 
For women in rural areas, this will have an impact both on women’ health and their workload as they will 
save time from collecting firewood in the forest. This time saved could be used for more productive 
economic activities that could increase their annual income. Investing with this gender strategic approach 
will result in a triple impact on climate, economic and health for women, especially those who are the 
most vulnerable. 
Conclusion 
Through specific investment criteria defined in the RGIF operations manual, RGIF will prioritize funding for 
women-led enterprises in all priority sectors. A special attention is paid in mitigating the sexual 
exploitation, sexual abuse and sexual harassment (SEAH) risks and unequal gender labour conditions  this 
project could entail. An addendum to the ESMP is dedicated to SEAH risk assessment and mitigation 
measures. Additional gender-related measures to mitigate SEAH risks and gender unequal labour 
conditions are proposed in the gender action plan below. 
RGIF will focus on companies that offer products or services that benefit more to women especially women 
who are the most vulnerable to climate change. This could mean investing in projects with the potential 
to close the gap regarding female owned land challenges in agriculture (soil erosion, lack of irrigation, etc.) 
as well as energy projects providing clean cooking alternatives and productive uses. Finally, RGIF will invest 
in projects with the high potential of creating jobs for women as well as increasing women skills 
development.

=== PAGE 143 ===
10 | P a g e  
 
Part 2: Gender and Social Inclusion Action Plan 
 
The RGIF will focus on target sectors where gender equality is poorly addressed such as in climate smart agriculture, shifting away from biomass 
for cooking, and rural energy access through min-grids targeting at least 40% of its total investment portfolio. The RGIF project pipeline and 
eligibility criteria focus on serving these sectors which currently suffer from chronic under investment due to market barriers that impede 
investment in low-carbon, climate resilient development projects. RGIF investment support will help overcome these barriers, and provide 
appropriate financing to support these projects and scaling up low carbon markets in Rwanda. A strong focus on women component will result in 
direct benefit impacts to recipients, targeting at least 40% of women led or related businesses described as follows: 
- 
Companies that are led by women, including women as founders, chief executives or representing at least 30% of the senior leadership or 
30% of the Board or Investment Capacity  
- 
Companies where the shared of women ownership is at least 51% 
- 
Companies where women represent at least 40% of the workforce; 
- 
Companies that propose a product or a service that disproportionately benefit women, especially the most vulnerable to climate change; 
- 
The project targets a high number of beneficiaries with clear demonstration of gender and social inclusion. 
The RGIF benefits will include increased access to clean energy, increased access to climate smart agriculture equipment, and increased access to 
housing that is energy efficient and climate resilient.  
The RGIF will operate in accordance with Rwanda’s recognition that gender equality and fulfilment of human rights are interlinked - and a 
prerequisite for sustainable development and inclusive economic growth. In addition, the RGIF will be aligned with the GCF’s Gender policy and 
support its the three main objectives as noted below including:  
a) To support climate change interventions and innovations through a comprehensive gender approach, applied both within the institution 
and by its network of partners, including accredited entities (AEs), national designated authorities (NDAs) and focal points, and delivery 
partners for activities under the GCF Readiness and Preparatory Support Programme;  
b) To promote climate investments that:  
(i)  Advance gender equality through climate change mitigation and adaptation actions; and  
(ii) Minimize social, gender-related and climate-related risks in all climate change actions; and  
c) To contribute to reducing the gender gap of climate change-exacerbated social, economic and environmental vulnerabilities and exclusions 
through GCF climate investments that mainstream gender equality issues.

=== PAGE 144 ===
11 | P a g e  
 
To achieve these goals, the RGIF will build on FONERWA’s current Gender Strategy and Action Plan crafted to ensure that gender mainstreaming 
supports successful institutional and organisational transformation, and gender equity across all programmatic interventions for environmental 
conservation and climate change mitigation and adaptation. Specifically, RGIF through its own Gender Action Plan below is committed to promoting 
gender equality at both the project levels and at the participating financial institutions part of the on-lending program. Focusing on addressing 
specific challenges related to women empowerment to address climate change will not only benefit the country’s development goals but will 
contribute to national economic recovery.

=== PAGE 145 ===
12 | P a g e  
 
 
Activities 
Indicators 
Baseline 
Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities  
Budget 
(USD) 
Comment 
Activity 1.1.1 Define 
specific gender 
sensitive eligible 
criteria per RGIF 
priority sectors for 
the PPF and Credit 
Facility in RGIF 
detailed manual of 
procedures 
Specific gender related 
investment criteria defined in 
the RGIF operations manual.  
Eligibility criteria will include: 
female led business, 
percentage of female in the 
company leadership, number 
of jobs created for women by 
the project, number of women 
beneficiaries of the project, 
development and application 
of a code of conduct regarding 
SEAH and labour conditions 
for women and men  
 
No manual of 
procedures 
 
No gender 
sensitive criteria 
for the credit 
facility eligibility 
BRD and 
FONERWA 
have a 
gender-
sensitive 
manual of 
operations,  
 
with gender 
sensitive 
criteria for the 
RGIF credit 
facility 
selection  
 
By mid-2024 
Gender 
Specialist, BRD 
& FONERWA 
 
Project 
Under the 
USD 504,000 
allocated 
under 
Component 
3, Activity 
3.1.5 of 
project 
budget. 
Budget Note 
PM7 and 
PM8 
 
 
Portfolio Credit line: 
proportion of the investment 
going to Female-led 
businesses. 
• 
FONERWA: 
30% as per 
internal track 
record. 
• 
BRD: 10% as 
per BRD track 
record 
>40% of the 
RGIF 
investment 
By 2027 
BRD and 
FONERWA 
management 
 
M&E Specialist, 
Gender 
Specialist 
Project 
Activity 1.1.2 
Develop a code of 
conduct including 
SEAH considerations 
and concrete 
mitigating measures 
to enhance gender 
Code of conduct including 
SEAH considerations and 
labour conditions in 
FONERWA and BRD 
No code of 
conduct including 
SEAH in FONERWA 
and BRD 
Code of 
conduct 
including 
SEAH 
considerations 
and concrete 
measures to 
By mid-2024 
Gender 
Specialist, BRD 
& FONERWA 
Project 
Ibid

=== PAGE 146 ===
13 | P a g e  
 
equal labour 
conditions 
enhance equal 
employment 
opportunities 
and labour 
conditions 
Activity 1.1.3 
Develop investment 
criteria requiring 
that companies 
apply a code of 
conduct related to 
SEAH and gender 
equal labour 
conditions that 
include gender-
responsive grievance 
redress mechanism 
Code of conduct including 
SEAH considerations and 
labour conditions in the 
companies selected  
 
NB: In the case the applying 
companies do not neither 
have a code of conduct 
including SEAH considerations 
and nor a code on equal 
labour conditions, this will be 
included in their training and 
made compulsory before they 
get the funding. 
TBD 
100% 
By 2027 
Gender 
Specialist, BRD 
& FONERWA 
Project 
Ibid 
 
 
 
Activities 
Indicators 
Baseline 
Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities  
Costs (USD) 
Comment 
Outcome 2: Increased women awareness of the RGIF program (beneficiaries, women developers, etc.) 
Output 2.1 RGIF Communication plan & Outreach Campaign – Gender chapter 
Activity 2.1.1 
Include a gender 
chapter in the 
RGIF market 
outreach & 
communication 
plan -Credit 
Facility 
A clear market outreach & 
communication gender 
chapter  
0 
1 gender chapter 
in the credit 
facility  
By mid-2024 
Gender 
Specialist and 
BRD 
Project 
 
Under the USD 504,000 
allocated under the 
Component 3, Activity 
3.1.5 of project budget. 
Budget Note PM7 and 
PM8 
 
Activity 2.1.2 
Include a gender 
chapter in the 
A clear market outreach & 
communication gender 
chapter  
0 
1 gender chapter 
in the PPF  
By mid-2024 
Gender 
Specialist and 
FONERWA, 
Project

=== PAGE 147 ===
14 | P a g e  
 
market outreach 
& communication 
plan -PPF  
Gender Focal 
point of 
FONERWA 
Activity 2.1.3 
Create and update 
a data base of 
companies & 
projects led by 
women in RGIF 
priority sectors (in 
link with activity 
1.1.2) 
Number of women in the 
database of which FHH 
0 
100% of FHH  data 
collected for the 
RGIF priority 
sectors  
By mid-2024 
Gender 
Specialist, BRD 
& FONERWA 
Project 
Activity 2.1.4 
Perform market 
awareness 
campaign for 
women led 
projects 
developers in RGIF 
priority sectors & 
women potential 
beneficiaries of 
RGIF programs 
and of the 
existence of a 
code of conduct 
related to SEAH 
Number of women-led 
projects developers (WLPD) 
in RGIF Sectors reached of 
which % of FHH 
 
Number of WLPD aware of 
RGIF programs of which FHH 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
0 
100% of WLPD 
FHH censed in the 
RGIF priority 
sectors 
 
 
Number of WLPD, 
which FHH, to be 
determined by 
the database 
(Acrivity 2.1.3) 
 
By 2025 
BRD & 
FONERWA 
management, 
Gender 
Specialists, 
Gender Focal 
points of BRD 
and FONERWA 
42,000  
 
 
Under the Component 3, 
Activity 3.1.5 of project 
budget- Budget note 
PM9 
 
Activity 2.1.5 
Make RGIF 
beneficiaries 
aware of the 
existence of a 
code of conduct 
related to SEAH 
Number of women and men 
beneficiaries aware of the 
code of conduct, of the 
grievance redress 
mechanism. They know the 
process to complain and are 
ensured that they will 
0 
100% RGIF 
programs' 
beneficiaries  
By mid-2024 
BRD & 
FONERWA 
management, 
Gender 
Specialist, 
Gender Focal 
points

=== PAGE 148 ===
15 | P a g e  
 
and gender equal 
labour conditions 
among the 
selected 
companies 
remain safe and secure 
without risk of contempt or 
reprisals 
 
Activities 
Indicators 
Baseline 
Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities  
Costs (USD) 
Comment 
Outcome 3: Increased access by women-led projects in RGIF priority sectors 
Output 3.1 Training program targeting women developers to increase their access to RGIF programs 
Activity 3.1.1 
Train RGIF 
Screening 
committee and 
gender specialists 
on the gender 
program specifics 
Number of RGIF Screening 
committee staff and gender 
specialists trained  
 
0 
100% of the RGIF 
Screening 
committee and 
100% of gender 
specialists 
By mid-2024 
BRD & 
FONERWA 
management, 
Gender 
Specialists, 
Gender Focal 
points of BRD 
and FONERWA 
42,000  
 
Under the  Component 
3, Activity 3.1.5 of 
project budget- Budget 
note PM9 
 
Activity 3.1.2 
Provide capacity 
building of women 
developers 
involved in RGIF 
priority sectors to 
increase their 
access to the RGIF 
programs 
including financial 
management and 
development of 
viable business 
plans 
Number of Women-led 
enterprises (WLE) trained on 
RGIF programs 
opportunities, of which FHH 
  
% of eligible WLE trained 
who applied, of which FHH 
 
% of WLE who applied to 
receive RGIF support, of 
which FHH  
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
100% women-led 
enterprises in 
RGIF priority 
sectors trained, 
FHH is TBD 
 
60% WLE eligible 
in the RGIF 
investment  
Portfolio applied  
for FONERWA and 
30% for Credit 
line  
By 2025 
BRD & 
FONERWA, 
Gender 
Specialists, 
Gender Focal 
points of BRD 
and FONERWA 
Activities 
Indicators 
Baseline 
Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities  
Costs (USD) 
Comment 
Outcome 4: Increased financing support to women led projects in RGIF priority sectors targeting at least 40% of the total RGIF's portfolio 
Output 4.1 Direct financing to women led projects by the Credit Facility at BRD (Phase 1 & 2)

=== PAGE 149 ===
16 | P a g e  
 
Activity 4.1.1 
Design and 
support launch 
Request for 
Proposal (RFP) 
process to support 
development of a 
robust women led 
project pipeline 
for the Credit 
Facility, review of 
the RFP responses, 
and project 
selection 
Number of RFP 
launched targeting 
women-led projects 
developers (WLPD) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
1 RFP launched and 
exclusively reached 
WLPD (100%) 
 
At least 30% of the total 
of the CF is allocated to 
women led enterprises 
(WLE) 
By mid-
2024 
BRD management, 
Gender Specialist 
 
Project 
Under the 
USD 
504,000 
allocated 
under 
Component 
3, Activity 
3.1.5 of 
project 
budget. 
Budget 
Note PM7 
and PM8 
 
Activity 4.1.2 
Disburse loans to 
women led 
projects 
% of women 
beneficiaries (direct & 
indirect) of which FHH: 
women led business, 
women job creation, 
women access to clean 
energy, women access 
to smart agriculture 
technologies, etc. 
 
 
10% 
estimated 
on average 
but to be 
refined in 
the baseline 
study 
30% 
By 2025 
BRD, M&E Specialist, 
Gender Specialist 
28,500,000 
 
Output 4.2 Grants support to women led projects by the PPF 
 
Activity 4.2.1 
Design and launch 
Request for 
Proposal (RFP) 
process to support 
development of a 
robust women led 
project pipeline, 
review of the RFP 
responses, and 
Number of RFP for 
women-led projects 
launched by the PPF 
  
Target: 100% of the 
RFP launched and at 
least 60% of PPF is 
allocated to women led 
enterprises (WLE) 
0 
 
% of total 
PPF 
allocated to 
women led 
enterprises 
1 RFP for the PPF 
reaching 100% WLPD 
 
60% of total PPF 
allocated to WLE 
 
 
 
By mid-
2024 
FONERWA 
management, 
Gender Specialist 
Project 
Under the 
USD 
504,000 
allocated 
under 
Component 
3, Activity 
3.1.5 of 
project 
budget.

=== PAGE 150 ===
17 | P a g e  
 
project selection 
(including 
selection scoring 
criteria that 
prioritize projects 
with gender 
equality 
attributes) 
Note PM7 
and PM8 
Activity 4.2.2 
Disburse grants to 
women led 
projects and 
enterprises  
% of women-led 
enterprises and 
projects benefitting 
from grants and 
collateral support in 
clean energy, smart 
agriculture 
technologies, 
transport, and any 
other RGIF priority 
sectors.  
         
  
 
 
         0 
 
60% of the beneficiaries 
of grants and collateral 
support are WLE and 
WLPD 
 
 
 
 
By 2025 
FONERWA, M&E 
Specialist, Gender 
Specialist  
11,085,750 
 
Activities 
Indicators 
Baseline 
Targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities  
Costs (USD) 
Comment 
Outcome 5: Project management 
Output 5.1 Knowledge product generation 
Activity 5.1.1 
Conduct several 
gender studies: 
- a gender 
assessment 
including a gender 
audit of FONERWA 
and BRD to fine-
tune the activities 
scheduled in this 
gender action plan 
Number of gender 
assessment and audit 
developed 
 
 
Number of gender 
study developped on 
the RGIF priority 
sectors 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
0 
1 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
By mid-
2024 
Gender Specialists, 
M&E Specialist, BRD 
& FONERWA 
management (in 
particular for the 
gender 
assessment/audit) 
Project 
  
Under the 
USD 
504,000 
allocated 
under 
Component 
3, Activity 
3.1.5 of 
project 
budget. 
Budget

=== PAGE 151 ===
18 | P a g e  
 
and assess their 
institutional 
gender capacities 
and awareness 
- a gender study 
on the RGIF 
priority sectors in 
Rwanda 38 
Note PM7 
and PM8 
Activity 5.1.2 
Outreach 
workshops on the 
importance of a 
gender-
mainstreamed 
approach for 
FONERWA and 
BRD including 
workshop on the 
importance to 
develop a gender-
responsive 
institutional 
framework (e.g 
Environmental 
and Social 
Governance and 
gender-responsive 
Corporate Social 
Responsibility 
aspects, corporate 
gender strategy 
and gender action 
plans) 
Number of workshops 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Number of participants 
(men, women, FHH) 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
100% of 
FONERWA 
and BRD 
staff 
 
 
TBD (>1/year) 
 
 
By mid-
2024 
BRD & FONERWA 
management, 
Gender Specialists, 
Gender Focal Points 
42,000  
 
Under the 
Component 
3, Activity 
3.1.5 of 
project 
budget- 
Budget 
note PM9 
 
 
38 based on the existing literature, available statistics and community / field analysis.

=== PAGE 152 ===
19 | P a g e
Activity 5.1.3 
Recruit gender 
specialists to 
manage the 
implementation, 
monitoring, 
evaluation and 
reporting of the 
activities of this 
gender action plan 
towards the 
AfDB/GCF. 
Number of gender 
specialist (international 
or national to be 
discussed with 
FONERWA/BRD gender 
focal points) 
0 
2 
Early 2024 
then for all 
the project 
duration 
BRD & FONERWA 
36,000/year 
Total budget allocated for Gender 
40,131,750 
Total Project costs 
141,955,898 
% allocated to gender 
28.3 
__________
