=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 23.6.20320
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (32-bit) 23.6.20320
creationDate: D:20231002180544+09'00'
modDate: D:20231002193713+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
23 – 26 October 2023 
Tbilisi, Georgia 
Provisional agenda item 12 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
2 October 2023 
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum IX 
Funding proposal package for FP218 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled "Building climate resilience in the landscapes of Kigoma 
region, Tanzania"; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
163 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
164 
Secretariat’s assessment 
167 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
194 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
216 
Gender documentation 
221

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
Country(ies): 
Accredited Entity: 
Date of first submission: 
Date of current submission 
Building climate resilience in the landscapes of Kigoma 
region, Tanzania 
Tanzania 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
2020/01/23 
2023/09/27 
Version number 
V.007
1 The project title has been changed from “Climate Resilient Development in Refugee Camps and Host Communities 
in Kigoma Region, Tanzania” to “Building Climate Resilience in the Landscapes of Kigoma Region, Tanzania. Both 
titles refer to the same project.

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 1 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Project 
A.2. Public or 
private sector 
Public 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals, 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the 
Simplified Approval Process and REDD+. 
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets 
below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co-
financers’ contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 
100% for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively. 
 
GCF  
contribution 
Co-financers’ 
contribution2 
Mitigation total 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Energy generation and access 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Low-emission transport 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Forestry and land use 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Adaptation total 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities 
10 % 
Enter number % 
☒  Health and well-being, and food and water security 
30 % 
32 % 
☐  Infrastructure and built environment 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☒  Ecosystems and ecosystem services 
60 % 
68 % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered) 
n/a 
A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached) 
Total beneficiaries: 1,281,857 
 
Direct:  570,341  
 
Indirect: 711,516    
1.3% of the 
population of 
Tanzania (Direct 
beneficiaries) 
 
1.6% of the 
population of 
Tanzania 
(Indirect 
beneficiaries) 
 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance3)  
23,618,646 USD  
A.9. Project size 
Small (Upto USD 50 million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
19,007,353 USD 
 
For multi-country proposals, 
please fill out annex 17. 
 
 
 
2 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition 
to the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or 
programme described in the funding proposal. 
3 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2 
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
Mark all that apply and provide total amounts. The sum of all total amounts should be consistent 
with A.8.  
☒  Grant 
$ 19,007,353  
 
☐  Loan 
Enter number 
☐  Guarantee 
Enter number 
☐  Equity  
 
    Enter number 
☐  Results-based payment    Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
5 years 
A.12. Total lifespan 
Up to 20 years 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
 
11/23/2021 
 
A.14. ESS category  
 
B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania acting through its Vice President’s 
Office (VPO) and United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) 
 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
Kigoma is a region with a population of ~2.3 million people 4 that spans ~37,000 km2 in the north-western corner of 
Tanzania. It is currently hosting ~250,000 refugees from neighbouring countries, the majority of whom are living in the 
refugee camps of Nduta and Nyarugusu. These settlements — which were rapidly established in response to critical 
humanitarian needs — have added to the population pressures on the surrounding degraded agro-ecological 
landscapes5.   
 
4 Statistics received via personal communication with the Kigoma Regional Secretariat, March 2020.  
5 The presence of the refugee population has also contributed to reduced forest cover, largely as a result of re-establishing 
and expanding the Nduta and Mtendeli camps in October 2015 and January 2016, respectively. However, the rate of forest 
loss in these areas is less than the average rate of loss in the Kigoma region. To isolate the additional effect — or lack

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3 
 
Approximately 90% of the host community6 population in the areas adjacent to the refugee camps and a substantial 
number of refugees are engaged in small-scale agriculture. As a result, they rely heavily on the goods and services 
provided by the region’s ecosystems. Climate and non-climate drivers have degraded and are further degrading these 
ecosystems. For example, between 2011 and 2018, Kigoma lost ~5.3% of its tree cover (~108,000 ha of forest), a 
proportion of which is attributable to climate impacts such as increased fire incidence, rainfall intensity and flooding, as 
well as rising temperatures and hazards such as erosion, long term land degradation and the destruction of water 
resources. During community consultations host communities directly attributed some of these impacts to climate 
change and further highlighted climate change as a significant threat to natural resources and their livelihoods. Other 
development drivers of degradation include demand for fuelwood, increased by refugee presence, and agricultural 
expansion that is partly attributable to reduced yields from climate factors. Moreover, the enforcement of established 
guidelines and village bylaws intended to protect water resources and mitigate flood impacts remained a challenge. 
Community consultations highlighted that even for villages where Village Land Use Plans had been developed, village-
level environmental committees did not have the capacity to enforce community guidelines and their ability to raise 
awareness among community members on land degradation was constrained. These development factors, together 
with climate change impacts such as increases in the intensity and frequency of unmanaged wildfires, flooding, erosion, 
and disease, are placing considerable pressure on the region’s natural resources. Projected climate change impacts 
will further increase the intensity of this pressure.  
 
Historical climate trends for the country show that temperatures are rising and rainfall is becoming more erratic and 
intense, with Tanzania’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) highlighting the severity of climate-related disasters 
and the impacts associated with rainfall variability, droughts and floods. In Kigoma, despite precipitation having 
increased over the long-term (an average of +7.9 mm per year since 1954), rainfall has become increasingly variable 
since 2000. There have also been changes to the rainfall profile, including more prolonged dry spells and more intense 
rainfall events. Both host communities and refugee camps reported an increased susceptibility of water resourc es to 
heightened rainfall variability. For example, since 2000, flood events have occurred at a higher frequency and intensity, 
with associated greater negative impacts on infrastructure and livelihoods than in the past. In particular, there has been 
an increase in the occurrence of large magnitude flood events by 7.6% for the 1:10-year flood event and an increase 
by 7% for the 1:100-year flood event. Host communities reported exacerbated flood impacts in areas along the 
Nyangwa River as well as in some zones of the former Mtendeli camp and Nyarugusu camp, as well as marshland 
areas developing in Nduta. In all three camps areas the main issue is storm water, not river flooding – causing gully 
erosion. Additionally, for the same period there was an increase in the average number of dry months7 per year – a 
metric which correlates with drought events. Prior to 1999, the number of wet and dry months in a year were almost 
equal; in recent times, the dry months exceed the wet months by eight times. Mean annual temperatures in Kigoma 
have also increased over this period, rising by 0.18°C per decade since 2000. This increase in temperature has led to 
increased evaporation and evapotranspiration of surface water resources. These drying trends have threatened local 
livelihoods which rely on rainfall and ecosystem goods and services in the region.  
 
The above-mentioned changes have exacerbated the existing environmental degradation and had profoundly negative 
impacts on agricultural outputs, incidence of pests and diseases, forest resources, surface- and groundwater 
availability, soil erosion and soil fertility. For example, as a result of the impacts of climate variability in the last 20 years, 
farmers in Kigoma region now harvest 40 to 53% less maize – a staple food critical for the region’s food security8. 
Projections show that maize yields are expected to decrease by a further 17% because of climate change, with other 
crops being similarly affected9. For other crops like beans and cassava, years with abnormal rainfall patterns have also 
been associated with poor crop yields, and the increasing unpredictability and unreliability of rains has made planning 
for agricultural activities difficult. Reduced yields and harvest uncertainty drive further environmental degradation by 
farmers, through clearing of fertile forest land for agricultural expansion or as they are forced by necessity to engage in 
alternative livelihood activities, like charcoal production.  
 
 
thereof — of the refugees on the ecosystems surrounding the camps relative to host communities and rural populations in 
Tanzania, a control site ~85km south of Nyarugusu was selected for comparative purposes. Despite having similar physical 
and climatic conditions, the forest loss around the counterfactual control site was found to be significantly greater than in the 
area surrounding the refugee camps. 
6 The Tanzania local communities living within 10-15km of the camps. For clarity in the project, the host community includes 
various groups such as farmers, agropastoralists, and other groups engaged in various livelihood activities. For shorthand, 
the term host communities refer to all these groups including agropastoralists that are not formally settled in villages. 
7 SPEI (drought index) values 
8 Mwakaje AEG Yanda PZ, Mung’ong’o CG, & Kangalawe RYM. 2013. The cost of climate change on smallholder farmers’ 
adaptation and mitigation: The case of Kasulu district. International Journal of Applied Agricultural Research, 8(1): 83–101. 
Declines in harvest corresponds to times when variable rainfall was perceived. 
9 Agrawala S, Moehner A, Hemp A, Van AM, Smith J, Meena H,& Mwaipopo OU. 2003. Development and climate change in 
Tanzania: Focus on Mount Kilimanjaro. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4 
 
The proposed project responds to the climate change impacts affecting an already vulnerable and degraded landscape, 
whilst considering the complex needs of host communities and refugees in an environment where climate, 
humanitarian, and development approaches to problems and solutions intersect. Proposed interventions will be 
implemented in the districts of Kibondo, Kasulu and Kakonko, which host the refugee camps of Nduta, Nyarugusu, and 
the former camp of Mtendeli respectively. The outcomes of these interventions are designed to address the unique 
climate adaptation needs of host communities and refugees using an integrated landscape-level approach and 
promoting gender mainstreaming.  
 
The project will contribute to shifting the paradigm from a baseline of 1) addressing refugee and host community needs 
separately and not recognizing that they are part of the same integrated socio-ecological landscape; 2) fragmented 
sectoral responses focused on small projects and initiatives on forestry and cookstoves, climate smart agriculture, 
livelihoods, and financial inclusion without integration; and 3) promoting initiatives that are not informed by projected 
climate impacts. Instead, the project will promote 1) inclusive solutions to adaptation needs of host com munities and 
refugees through adaptation solutions at the landscape level; 2) integrated interventions across sectors that are 
designed to be mutually reinforcing; and 3) implementation of activities that are informed by projected climate impacts 
where the people and landscape would be better able to cope with, and adapt to, climate shocks.  
 
Moreover, the project has significant strategic contributions to environmental and social issues in the region by 
enhancing ecosystem services provision that impact a broader biodiverse landscape, minimizing resource conflict and 
promoting peaceful coexistence, lessening exposure of women and girls to gender-based violence while collecting 
fuelwood, and increasing the protection space for refugees. In addition, the project will have mitigation co-benefits 
through sequestration of 762,073 million tCO2e and emission reductions of 3.2 million tCO2e over 20 years.  
 
All project interventions will be informed by comprehensively assessing and planning for land use, forestry, cooking 
energy requirements (fuelwood) and livelihood interventions that are relevant to host communities and refugees. These 
actions will complement the estimated US$ 45 million of development investments in the region that are addressing 
non-climate baseline drivers of degradation and vulnerability.  
 
To address the climate adaptation needs of the targeted beneficiaries, the project builds on bottom-up approaches, 
anchors to local governance processes, and promotes adaptive management in implementation. These project 
approaches will also help to manage the risks associated with the potentially variable movement of people and an 
evolving policy environment. Ultimately, the project will contribute to: i) enhancing the resilience of individuals and 
households to the impacts of climate change, particularly in terms of food security and livelihoods; and ii) disrupting the 
patterns of degradation of critical ecosystems and the services they provide. The project strategy is to ensure that the 
landscape and ecosystem of the Kigoma region can continue to support its residents, including refugees, and host 
communities, including agro-pastoralist groups that pass through the region as it faces challenges of climate change. 
The project directly contributes to GCF adaptation results areas on most vulnerable people, communities and regions 
and ecosystems and ecosystem services in the target host community and refugee areas. It will also have indirect 
impacts and benefits to the broader landscape by supporting increased ecosystem functions and services and policy 
interventions in Output 4. 
 
The project will be executed by the Government of Tanzania, acting through its Vice President’s Office (VPO) and the 
UN High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) in collaboration and coordination with key Tanzanian government 
agencies, including at the local level. This includes, the District Councils, the President’s Office Regional 
Administration and Local Government, Ministry of Home Affairs, National Environmental Management Council, 
Tanzania Forest Service, and other relevant agencies, local government authorities, humanitarian and development 
partners, and NGOs working in the region, promoting an approach that is participatory, gender-responsive and 
socially inclusive.

=== PAGE 9 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5 
 
 
 
10 The World Bank. 2019. Tanzania Mainland Poverty Assessment. Available at: 
https://www.nbs.go.tz/nbs/takwimu/hbs/Tanzania_Mainland_Poverty_Assessment_Report.pdf 
11 The World Bank. 2019. Tanzania Mainland Poverty Assessment. Available at: 
https://www.nbs.go.tz/nbs/takwimu/hbs/Tanzania_Mainland_Poverty_Assessment_Report.pdf 
12 Enabel. 2009. Support to Income Generating Activities for Coast and Kigoma Regions. Available at: 
http://www.diplomatie.be/oda/11768_PROGDESCR_Technisch_en_Financieel_Dossier.pdf 
13 Kigoma regional secretariat 
14 Enabel. 2009. Support to Income Generating Activities for Coast and Kigoma Regions. Available at: 
http://www.diplomatie.be/oda/11768_PROGDESCR_Technisch_en_Financieel_Dossier.pdf 
15 Worldometer. 2020. Tanzania Population. Available at: https://www.worldometers.info/world-population/tanzania-
population/ 
16  Government of Tanzania and UNHCR Tanzania Refugee Situation Statistical Report as of September 2021. 
17 Ibid 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
 
Kigoma Region Context 
 
Kigoma is one of the poorest regions in the country, with more than 32% of its population living below the poverty line, 
compared with ~26% nationally10. In some districts within Kigoma, the poverty rate exceeds 50% — including Kibondo 
district11. The region is characterised by generally low levels of economic development and its economy only contributes 
3% to the national GDP12. Moreover, ~34% of the population of ~2.3 million people 13 is unemployed or underemployed14. 
This underdevelopment is compounded by the region’s relatively high population growth rate of 4.8% — higher than in 
the rest of the country (at ~3%15).  The average size of households in Kigoma (seven members) is also much higher 
than in the rest of Tanzania (4.8 members). Contributing to population pressure in the region is the influx of refugees 
into Tanzania from neighbouring countries as a result of civil unrest and conflict. Most of Tanzania’s current refugees 
are hosted in the Kigoma region, which is home to a population of ~250,000 refugees (as of September 2021 16) 
accounting for ~10% of the region’s total population. In 2021, most of these refugees (~206,000) were accommodated 
in three UNHCR camps, namely: i) Mtendeli in Kakonko District, with a population of ~18,000; ii) Nduta in Kibondo 
District, with a population of ~60,000; and iii) Nyarugusu, in Kasulu District, with a population of ~128,00017.    In January 
2022, UNHCR and the Government of Tanzania completed a camp consolidation exercise to close Mtendeli refugee 
camp. The majority of Mtendeli refugees, with the exception of those opting for voluntary repatriation, were relocated in 
Nduta camp in Kibondo district. As part of the decommissioning process, UNHCR will embark on camp rehabilitation to 
facilitate environmental restoration.  
 
The presence of these refugees, the rising population of the region, as well as the continual subdivis ion of land within 
families have resulted in over-intensive agricultural practises which are placing increasing pressure on limited natural 
resources. These camps, and their host communities are the target of this project (Figure 1).

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Map location of project sites

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7 
 
 
 
18 Pienaar et al. 2015. Evidence for climate-induced range shift in Brachystegia (miombo) woodland. South African Journal 
of Science 111. 
19 FAO. 2018. Sustainable Management of Miombo Woodlands: Food Security, Nutrition, and Wood Energy. Available at: 
http://www.fao.org/3/i8852en/I8852EN.pdf.  
20 Ibid. 
Ecosystem and ecosystem services 
 
Kigoma Region is part of the Lake Tanganyika basin, a global biodiversity hotspot. To the east of the project sites are 
Moyowosi and Kigosi Game Reserves that have floodplain and wetland ecosystems that support large populations of 
buffalo, topi, hartebeest, kudu, waterbucks, and various bird species. A Ramsar site of international importance, the 
Malagarasi-Moyowosi wetland system, is located towards the south of Moyowosi game reserve. Further south in the 
region, Gombe National Park is home to the chimpanzee conservation program of the Jane Goodall Institute. 
 
The project areas of Kakonko, Kibondo, and Kasulu Districts are characterized by a mosaic landscape or land area with 
patches of land cover types and land uses. In the project areas, these patches range from miombo forests, agricultural 
areas for maize, beans, and other crops, rangelands, woodlots for fuelwood, and built up areas for human settlements 
(Figure 2). At the landscape level, multiple ecosystem services are provided include provisioning services such as food 
from crops and fodder for livestock, wood fuel, non-timber forest products such as honey and mushrooms, fresh water; 
regulating services such as climate regulation, flood control, erosion control, water purification; cultural services such 
as wildlife viewing and recreation; and supporting services such as oxygen production, biogeochemical cycling, and 
others.  
 
Patches of forest nested within the mosaic landscapes are mainly composed of miombo woodlands dominated by the 
genus Brachystegia. Characteristics of these forests include high endemism particularly for bird species and biodiversity 
as the woodlands provide food and cover for mammals such as elephants, wild dogs, and antelopes. These 
characteristics reflect high conservation value of miombo ecosystems in the face of climate change.  One study found 
evidence of retraction of the range of miombo woodlands in Southern Africa in part due to temperature and precipitation 
changes and estimate that these ecosystems in Zimbabwe and Mozambique would retract by 30.6% and 47.5% 
respectively by 205018. Potential increase of fire incidence under climate change can also negatively impact these 
woodlands, although miombo woodlands have high regenerative capacity if undisturbed and not encroached upon. The 
practice of setting fires to promote regeneration of grass is prevalent in each of the host areas. Fire events predominantly 
occur between June and September –– the later part of the dry season to the early part of the wet season –– when 
temperatures are higher, and vegetation is starting to lose moisture. The risk of uncontrolled fires is expected to be 
exacerbated under climate change conditions when longer dry spells and warmer temperatures are expected. These 
forests provide services that are critical to communities including source of fruits, honey, mushrooms, medicinal plants 
and other foraged forest products, energy and fodder, microclimate modification, carbon sequestration, pest control, 
biodiversity, regulate hydrological cycles, maintain soil fertility, provision of timber for tools, erosion control, and othe r 
important services19. Wild foods provide supplementary income of up to 42% in a household and support to nutrition. 
These forests also act as reserves in lean times, as consumption of wild foods can increase up to 30% of calorie intake 
during droughts20. As such, these ecosystems are critically important to livelihoods, household economies, and culture 
of communities in East and Southern Africa. 
 
Protection of miombo woodlands through community-based forest management and planting of diverse native species 
support structure and functions of these forests and make them more resilient to disturbances. Without these 
interventions, these ecosystems are more vulnerable to unsustainable fuelwood harvesting, agricultural conversion, 
disturbance from grazing animals, unsustainable charcoal production and other factors contributing to their degradation 
that are expected to be intensified by climate change. Degraded landscapes are more vulnerable to forest succession 
or the replacement of one dominant plant community by another. Tanzania’s National Communication to the UNFCCC 
also refer to observed transition of miombo woodlands into closed woodlands and evergreen forests. 
 
Enhancing ecosystem services in mosaic landscapes are important in supporting resilience of both environment and 
people to climate shocks and other disturbances. The presence of native forests in close proximity to agricultural land, 
for example, has the potential to provide bee pollination services, particularly from Miombo woodlands, and support 
natural insect pest control and seed dispersal from birds in the forest, thereby increasing crop quality and yields. 
Heterogenous land cover helps enhance resilience by maintaining high diversity of different functional groups and 
patches of native vegetation may enhance dispersal of beneficial organisms such as pollinating birds and insects by

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 
 
21 Tscharntke, et al. 2005. Landscape perspectives on agricultural intensification and biodiversity—ecosystem service 
management. Ecological Letters 8: 857-874 as cited in Turner and Gardner. 2015. Landscape Ecology in Theory and 
Practice. Pattern and Process. 2nd Ed. Springer, USA. 
22 World Bank 2012. Using Forests to Enhance Resilience to Climate Change. What do we know about how forests can 
contribute to adaptation? Working Paper. Available at: 
http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/753061468341334437/pdf/807830WP0PROFO0Box0379820B00PUBLIC0.pdf.  
providing steppingstones across the landscape 21. Native and planted forests in the landscape can also support 
landscape connectivity that is important for different species. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Schematic mapping of mosaic landscape with multiple land uses depicted in top (aerial) and side (linear) views. 
 
Preserving and restoring native forest landscapes under community management regimes yield benefits in flood control 
and erosion reduction not only at the immediate intervention areas, but more broadly at the basin level. One of the 
threats to the biodiversity and health of Lake Tanganyika, home to hundreds of endemic aquatic life, is increased 
sediment and nutrient runoff. Increasing forest cover through planting of native species, afforestation, and agroforestry 
activities support water regulation and increased infiltration to groundwater supply in addition to providing carbon 
storage and cooling microclimate conditions amid projected temperature rise.  
 
The project’s approach to adaptation is adopting ecosystem-based approaches that support ecosystem functions and 
services. The interventions in degraded areas within and around refugee camps, as illustrated in Figure 1, are expected 
to support the broader resilience of both ecosystems and communities.  Having locally led land management systems 
and climate smart agricultural improvements can reduce some of the drivers of deforestation while at the same time 
improving the condition of the forest and soils22. Managing forests for climate change impacts also safeguard forest-
based climate resilient livelihoods, such as beekeeping, further encouraging sustainable forest use.

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 
 
23 FAO. 2016. Rapid Agriculture Needs Assessment in response to the “El - Niño” effects in the United Republic of Tanzania 
24 Seeds that produce higher yields than conventional seeds. 
25 Kibondo District Council, 2017, p. 11. 
26 Kigoma regional secretariat 
27 Ibid 
 
Agricultural practises and land-use change 
 
In Kigoma region, agriculture is the primary economic activity and accounts for ~80% of the total economic output. 
Agricultural production in Kigoma is dominated by small-scale, subsistence farmers practising low-input farming, with 
average farm sizes ranging between 0.2 and 2 ha.  Uptake of agricultural technology in Kigoma is low, with 62% of all 
cultivation done by hand23. Most farmers use traditional farming technologies such as hand hoes and bush knives, 
which limit agricultural efficiency and result in low yields. Seed quality is generally also poor and there is limited 
availability of improved seeds24. Agro-inputs, such as fertilisers and agrochemicals, are not widely used by farmers 
because they are generally not affordable and input distribution networks are not well developed. Crops grown in 
Kigoma are varied, with the commonest being maize, cassava, beans, rice, banana and groundnuts. Other crops 
produced in the region include peas, coffee, sugar cane, cotton and tobacco. Agriculture is the primary livelihood activity 
in Kasulu district — where Nyarugusu refugee camp is situated — which is a major food-producing area for the region. 
The main crops produced in the district are maize, cassava, sorghum, cabbage, beans and tomatoes 25. In the project 
target districts (Kibondo, Kakonko, Kasulu), agroforestry is not widely practised, and few examples of on-farm tree 
planting were observed, mainly involving banana trees, some small-scale fuelwood plantations on farms, and natural 
elephant grass (magugu) planted in the areas around the camps. 
 
Besides the small-scale agriculture practiced by host communities, agro-pastoral Sukuma people are also present in 
the project target area. They pass through the Kigoma region from the north in search of grazing land. Most of the 
Sukuma people are subsistence farmers and cattle herders. Some agro-pastoralist practices have been perceived to 
result in environmental degradation such as land clearing for agriculture including in village and national forest reserves 
and setting fires to trigger regeneration for pasture and getting rid of tse tse flies.  One of the challenges related to 
community land use planning and enforcement undertaken by local authorities to date is the exclusion of (agro) pastoral 
communities such as the Sukuma, who are generally not part of the community planning and awareness raising 
processes due to their transient lifestyle and not being part of the local communities’ social fabric. 
 
Farming activities are also taking place within the camps.  Refugees grow crops (mainly vegetables) individually around 
their homes in the form of kitchen gardens and in buffer zones; or as groups at the farm training centres (FTC) and 
community gardens. The harvested crops contribute to meeting household food and nutrition needs and complement 
the food rations provided by the World Food Programme. Crops are consumed by the household and/or (partially) sold 
to meet basic household needs. Sale takes places directly among households or in the small scattered markets in the 
camps. Refugees are also farming outside the camp through a range of informally negotiated land lease/land use or 
share cropping arrangements. Under these types of arrangements, refugees may pay some money or provide another 
form of payment (e.g. sharing of harvest) to host community landowners in exchange for land to cultivate. In some 
cases, refugees work on host community gardens and in return are given access to some land to cultivate. These 
agreements are generally on a seasonal/annual basis and are normally renegotiated after the harvesting period. In rare 
cases, host community landowners avail their idle land to refugees to cultivate for free. In addition, Burundian refugees 
are regularly engaged as casual agriculture laborers on agriculture plots owned and/or managed by both host 
communities and Congolese refugees. It is important to underline that these arrangements are informal and thus do not 
confer any tenure rights to the refugees.  
 
Food security is a growing concern in Tanzania and while Kigoma currently has a surplus food supply, demand is 
increasing for food in other regions within the country as well as in neighbouring countries. Total grain equivalent for 
human consumption produced in Kigoma is ~1.5 million tonnes, with a required grain equivalent of only ~550,000 
tonnes26, resulting in a total food surplus of nearly 950,000 tonnes 27. However, future climate change conditions — in 
combination with developmental challenges such as high population growth — will strongly affect the food situation in 
Kigoma in the future.  
 
The resilience and sustainability of the agricultural sector in Kigoma is strongly affected by changes in food prices, 
which is primarily the result of fluctuations in regional demand for staple crops. Political instability in neighbouring 
countries decreases their agricultural productivity and results in food shortages, which are often augmented with 
supplies from Tanzania. As Kigoma is the agricultural heartland of western Tanzania, shortages in neighbouring

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 
 
28 Enabel. 2009. Support to Income Generating Activities for Coast and Kigoma Regions. Available at: 
http://www.diplomatie.be/oda/11768_PROGDESCR_Technisch_en_Financieel_Dossier.pdf 
29 WFP. 2016. Market Assessment: Nyarugusu refugee camp, United Republic of Tanzania. Available at: 
https://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/ena/wfp286682.pdf?iframe 
30 Arndt, C. et al., 2012. Climate change, agriculture and food security in Tanzania. The World Bank. 
31 FAO.2017. Monthly report on food price trends. Available at: http://www.fao.org/3/a-i6829e.pdf 
32 WFP. 2016. Market Assessment: Nyarugusu refugee camp, United Republic of Tanzania. Available at: 
https://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/ena/wfp286682.pdf?iframe 
33 WFP. 2016. Market Assessment: Nyarugusu refugee camp, United Republic of Tanzania. Available at: 
https://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/ena/wfp286682.pdf?iframe 
34 WFP. 2016. Market Assessment: Nyarugusu refugee camp, United Republic of Tanzania. Available at: 
https://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/ena/wfp286682.pdf?iframe 
35 FAO and UNHCR. 2018. Cost–benefit analysis of forestry interventions for supplying wood fuel in a refugee situation in 
the United Republic of Tanzania, by A. Gianvenuti & V.G. Vyamana. Rome, Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United 
Nations (FAO) and United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Available at: 
http://www.fao.org/3/ca0164en/CA0164EN.pdf 
36 Kangalawe et al. 2017. Climate change and variability impacts on agricultural production and livelihood systems in 
Western Tanzania. Climate and Development, vol.9: 3. 
37 Ibid  
38 Ibid  
39 de Bruin N & Becker P. 2019. Encampment and cash-based transfer: concord and controversy in the World Food 
Programme’s pilot project in Nyarugusu refugee camp in Tanzania. Journal of Immigrant & Refugee Studies, 17(4):492–
508. 
countries are increasing demand for commodities from Kigoma 28. For example, conflict in Burundi has resulted in an 
annual food deficit in the country of approximately 350,000–450,000 tonnes, most of which is being augmented by 
imports of maize, cassava and beans from Tanzania — particularly from Kasulu district in Kigoma29. Compounding 
these existing socio-political factors, climate change is resulting in reduced crop yields in Southern and East Africa, 
influencing the demand for crops grown in Tanzania, and exacerbating the challenge of price fluctuations in Kigoma 
and impacting food security in the region30,31,32. For example, the occurrence of two consecutive droughts in Southern 
Africa from 2014–15 and 2015-16 — exacerbated by a particularly severe ENSO cycle during the period — 
resulted in a significant reduction in the supply of white maize from the region33. Consequently, global stocks of maize 
decreased, demand for maize from Tanzania increased and prices in the country rose. By July 2016, Tanzania’s 
wholesale white maize price rose to 32% above the five-year average — 10% higher than in June of the same year34.  
 
Increases in the price of crops result in reduced purchasing power of low-income households, inhibiting their ability to 
buy a greater variety of food, and contributing to malnutrition — particularly among children of 15 years and younger. 
Although there is a regional food surplus, these excess crops are not well distributed and are not nutritionally diverse. 
Moreover, farmers often rely on underdeveloped markets and weak institutions to support their livelihoods, and higher 
food prices — in combination with the reduced agricultural productivity of soils in the region — result in the increased 
need for farmers to expand their cultivated area or to over-rely on other resources such as wood from natural forests.   
 
Expansion of agriculture has been cited as among the leading causes of degradation in the region35. This is observed 
as farm productivity declines, particularly for maize. Vegetable production, for example, has expanded to valleys that 
are more soil moisture rich and near streams and waterways for ease of irrigation36. Inadequate land-use planning 
results in communities competing for productive land and natural resources. The increasing reliance on these resources 
is driving land-use change in Kigoma region such as the conversion of forests to farmland. The trends are projected to 
accelerate under future climate change conditions if crop productivity within farms do not improve. Conversion of land 
to permanent agriculture reduces the area available for grazing livestock and results in increased competition between 
farmers.  To supplement incomes, farmers and livestock keepers may also resort to selling charcoal and fuelwood in 
lean times, resulting the deterioration of miombo forests.  
 
As regional prices rise, those within refugee camps are also directly affected. In refugee camps, food supply is 
influenced by market conditions outside of the camps and prices within the camps are already higher than in surrounding 
areas37. The limitations within the current markets in the camps and in the districts where they are hosted often result 
in market distortions within the camps. Most refugees do not produce their own food and rely on food aid and trade with 
outside producers. The fluctuation of food prices in the region increases prices for basic goods within camps even 
further and places pressure on aid agencies tasked with the provision of food aid in the camps. Refugee agencies rely 
largely on commodities produced within the region and the rise of prices has adverse consequences for the already 
limited budgets of these organisations38. As prices rise in the region, the purchasing power of refugees is reduced more 
significantly than in surrounding areas, leading to an even greater reliance of food aid 39. Therefore, limited access of

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 
 
40 Kigoma regional secretariat 
41 UNICEF. 2014. Conflict Analysis Summary: Burundi. Available at: 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Burundi-UNICEF_AID1.pdf 
42 From consultation with UNHCR Environment Officers, December 2018. 
43 Ibid. 
44 Massomo SMS. 2019. Vegetable pest management and pesticide use in Kigoma, Tanzania: Challenges and way forward. 
Huria Journal, 26: 195–227. 
refugees to markets outside of the camps inhibits them from purchasing a wider selection of, and possibly less 
expensive, food40.  
 
For many of the refugees in Tanzania, several drivers of conflict in their countries of origin remain present, including 
continued regional instability, persistent ethnic tensions and an enduring culture of violence within communities 41. 
Moreover, the insecure environment in these countries is being exacerbated by chronic poverty, malnutrition, low levels 
of development and young populations. In addition, environmental drivers of conflict are prevalent in the region, often 
related to scarcity of natural resources — particularly land. With agriculture being the primary livelihood for the majority 
of East and Central Africa, challenges related to land have significant potential to contribute to further instability.  
 
Pests and diseases affecting agricultural yields and human health 
 
Several agricultural pests and diseases are periodically recorded within Kigoma. Examples of the most common crop 
pests and diseases as well as their occurrence severity are presented below in Table 1.  
 
Table 1. The most common pests and diseases and their occurrence severity for major crops in Kigoma42. 
Crop 
affected 
Name of pest or disease 
Occurrence severity 
Maize 
American bollworms 
Average 
Army worm 
Average 
Bacterial leaf spot 
Average 
Beans 
American bollworms 
Small 
Aphids 
Average 
Anthracnose 
Average 
Down mildew 
Average 
Cassava 
Angular leaf spot 
Small 
Cutworm 
Small 
Mosaic disease 
Average 
Streak disease 
Average 
Wilt 
Average 
Banana 
Banana Xanthomonas 
Average 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To date, evidence suggests that crop pests and diseases within Kigoma do not currently pose a considerable threat to 
the nutrition and food security of local communities 43. Moreover, there have been no recent major outbreaks in the 
region that result in extensive crop damage. The most recent army worm outbreak, for example, occurred more than 
fifty years ago. Climate change, however, has the potential to increase the occurrence of agricultural pests and diseases 
beyond the capacity of local communities to manage them. The presence, population dynamics and persistence of 
these pests and diseases are influenced by changes in climatic conditions, which is more pronounced under 
circumstances with high rainfall amounts. Farmers in Tanzania, for example, have suggested that there has been a 
notable increase in stalk borers (Calidea dregii) — known locally as Mpipi — as a result of warmer temperatures.  
 
An increase in the use of synthetic pesticides or insecticides in the control and suppression of pests and diseases poses 
a risk to both local communities and the environment. Recently, the use of pesticides for crops has increased 
substantially, resulting in the contamination of consumer products such as fruits and vegetables and presenting a major 
public health concern in Kigoma44. Inhabitants of the region are exposed to pesticides indirectly through the consumption 
of contaminated food and through aerosols released into the atmosphere, as well as through direct exposure via 
occupational, agricultural or domestic use. Consequently, farm workers are most exposed and are at a higher risk of 
acute intoxication and long-term adverse health conditions. Diseases and health conditions in farm workers that have 
been associated with exposure to pesticides include diabetes, neurological disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease,

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 
 
45 Gangemi S, Miozzi, E, Teodoro M, Briguglio G, de Luca, A, Alibrando C, Polito I & Libra M. 2016. Occupational exposure 
to pesticides as a possible rick factor for the development of chronic diseases in humans (Review). Molecular Medicine 
Reports, 14: 4475–4488.  
46 From consultation with UNHCR Environment Officers, December 2018. 
47 A zoonotic disease is an infectious disease that can be transferred from animals to humans. 
48 Kibona SN, Nkya GM & Matemba L. 2002. Sleeping sickness situation in Tanzania. Tanzania Health Research Bulletin, 4: 
27–29.  
49 Nzalawahe J. 2010. Role of domestic animals in the epidemiology of human African trypanosomiasis (HAT) in Kigoma — 
Tanzania. Master of Veterinary Medicine Thesis, Sokoine University of Agriculture, Tanzania. 
50 Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism and Tanzania Forest Services Agency. 2015. National Forest Resources 
Monitoring and Assessment of Tanzania Mainland (NAFORMA). Available at: 
http://www.tfs.go.tz/uploads/NAFORMA_REPORT.pdf  
51 United Republic of Tanzania, URT (1998) National Beekeeping Policy. Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism, Dar es 
Salaam. 
52 Food and Agriculture Organisation, FAO, Global Forest Resources Assessment 2010 
impaired reproductive fertility and numerous types of cancer45. Minimal education and training amongst rural farmers, 
limited alternatives to pesticides, insufficient information on hazards related to the use of pesticides and the 
unwillingness of farmers to risk crop losses contribute to the unsafe use of these synthetic chemicals to control pests.  
 
Human disease epidemics are a major concern affecting communities within Kigoma. Vector-borne and water-borne 
diseases are the most significant climate-sensitive diseases reported in Tanzania. These include malaria, Rift Valley 
fever (RVF), dengue fever, cholera, Human African Trypanosomiasis (HAT), plague, schistosomiasis and diarrheal 
diseases. In Nyarugusu the community reported the prevalence of waterborne diseases including diarrhoea, malaria, 
Bilharzia, and urinary tract infections during the rainy season. Downstream, in the host community of Kalimongoma, 
there has been an increase in the incidence of cholera and urinary tract infections, the community believes are as a 
result of refugees upstream using the Makere River for bathing and washing of clothes. These diseases have been 
amplified during periods of severe weather, including floods and droughts. In recent years, the region has had several 
outbreaks that have had considerable impacts on public health, in refugee camps and host communities. In 2015, 
cholera affected refugee and host populations in four of Kigoma’s districts, including Ujiji, Kigoma, Uvinza and Kasulu. 
In total, 5,581 cholera cases resulted from the 2015 outbreak, of which 1,051 occurred within host populations and 
4,528 in refugee communities 46. The Kigoma region is additionally impacted by zoonotic47 and vector-borne diseases, 
many of which are influenced by changes in climate. For example, Human African Trypanosomiasis (HAT) or sleeping 
sickness is a potentially fatal disease transmitted by the tsetse fly, with most cases in Kigoma being contracted when 
individuals in the host communities travel into unmanaged forested areas for provisions or to conduct livelihood activities 
such as collecting firewood or producing charcoal48. Refugee populations are also particularly at risk, owing to the 
overlap in cases of different strains of HAT brought into the region from neighbouring countries. Within Tanzania, 
Kigoma is particularly at risk of HAT, with the region accounting for 81% of the country’s cases49. All districts in Kigoma 
show evidence of this disease, with Kibondo and Kasulu containing the highest proportions of cases, as well as the 
refugee camps of Nduta and Nyarugusu, respectively.  
 
Forest resources and deforestation 
 
Western Tanzania, where Kigoma is located, is more densely forested than other parts of the country, with forest and 
woodland covering 62% of the land area. Across Tanzania, ~23% of land area is occupied by production forests — 
used for, inter alia, charcoal production — and ~7% is classified as shifting cultivation, which contains forests in various 
stages of regrowth that will not fully recover because of the practised farming system 50. Literature estimates that 
deforestation in Tanzania has increased from ~130,000 ha 51 to 500,000 ha52 of forest loss per year, between 1998 and 
2010. In the Kigoma region specifically, observations demonstrate changes in land use, where closed woodland had 
diminished to only 5.6% in 2010 from 23.2% in 1990, while cultivation increased to 17% in 2014 from 2% in 1990.   
 
Most of the refugee and host communities in Kigoma live within or near forests (Figure 3), and while lower than the 
national average, existing demand for natural resources by households within this region is remains high. The Kigoma 
Household Budget Survey 2017-2018 indicates that in Kigoma 57.2% of the population indicated to use fuelwood as 
the main source of cooking energy (against 60.9% national average), with 35.7% relying mainly on charcoal (against 
28.8% for the national average). Use of solar for cooking was relatively developed in the region, with some 4.3% 
indicating they use solar as the main source of energy (against only 1.1% on average nationwide).   Each of the host 
communities identified deforestation in the village and communal areas as a major environmental issue compromising 
ecosystem service provision. The trees are cleared predominantly for fuel wood and charcoal making, with community 
members highlighting that this occurs primarily from June to September each year. Within the refugee camps, the

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 
 
53 Quigley P. 2016. Providing energy for cooking: an analysis of fuel options in refugee camps in Tanzania. Geneva, 
Switzerland, UNHCR.  
54 Mussa KR, Mjemah IC & Malisa ET. 2012. The role of development projects in strengthening community-based 
adaptation strategies: the case of Uluguru mountains agricultural development project (UMADEP) – Morogoro – Tanzania. 
International Journal of Agricultural Sciences, 2: 157–165. 
55 FAO. 2013. A Fire Baseline for Tanzania. Available at: http://www.fao.org/forestry/39605-
016494740dc4dd315b0b298b573b083b.pdf. 
56 Information on fire impacts is limited and a further area of study. 
57 Sangeda, A., and Malole, J. 2014. “Tanzanian rangelands in a changing climate: Impacts, adaptations and mitigation.” 
Journal of Agricultural Science 2 (1). 
58 FAO and UNHCR. 2018. Cost–benefit analysis of forestry interventions for supplying wood fuel in a refugee situation in 
the United Republic of Tanzania, by A. Gianvenuti & V.G. Vyamana. Rome, Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United 
Nations (FAO) and United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Available at: 
http://www.fao.org/3/ca0164en/CA0164EN.pdf 
59 The Mtabila refugee camp was closed in 2012. 
average daily consumption of wood fuel is ~1.8 kg per person53.  Deforestation within the camps themselves is an acute 
problem that has left some areas “desert-like” in Nyarugusu and limits flood mitigation. Mtendeli former camp has less 
extensive deforestation, with reforestation being undertaken in certain areas in the camp. Numerous adverse impacts are 
caused by deforestation, including the reduced provisioning of ecosystem services such as water regulation, flood 
regulation and soil fertility and stabilisation, which further directly impact agricultural systems and threatens ecosystem-
based livelihoods.  
 
Forests within Tanzania are also increasingly becoming degraded by wildfires, with consequent changes in vegetation 
composition54. Kigoma ranks second as the most affected region by wildfires, with at least 1 million ha burned annually 55. 
In the district ranking of area burnt, Kibondo ranks 6th and Kasulu 21st among the surveyed sites56. Most of the fires 
occur in forest and game reserves from the later part of the dry season to the early part of the wet season, when 
vegetation is starting to lose moisture and is more prone to combustion.  However, as Tanzania’s climate becomes 
hotter and drier, the frequency and intensity of uncontrolled forest fires are expected to increase. Fires can negatively 
impact ecosystem service provisioning by, inter alia, reducing soil organic matter which affects soil aggregation — one 
of the major factors influencing the chemical, physical and biological processes that contribute to soil productivity and 
agricultural sustainability. Moreover, fire-related impacts on Tanzanian ecosystems are expected to increase under 
climate change with higher temperatures and lower rainfall increasing vegetation flammability, which will result in a shift 
in species composition because of greater fire frequency57. 
 
As traditional agriculture becomes less sustainable and natural vegetation becomes less suitable for agricultural 
purposes – as a result of climate impacts – this places pressure on these forest ecosystems and results in decreased 
agricultural yield and fewer biomass stocks. To meet this growing productivity gap, host community and camp residents 
have relied more heavily on the natural tree stocks to an unsustainable degree and expanded farming areas to meet 
their needs, leading to significant deforestation throughout the Kigoma region.  
 
The additional burden of the growing population, including through refugee influx, exacerbated by land clearing to 
reopen the two of the project’s target camps — Nduta in October 2015 and Mtendeli in January 2016 — has had a 
discernible impact forest cover.  During UNHCR and FAO field surveys, it was observed that fuel wood collection and 
clearing for agriculture are the main causes of forest degradation and deforestation in the areas surrounding the refugee 
camps58. Between 2011 and 2018, Kigoma lost ~108,000 ha of tree cover (~5.3% decrease). Several studies have 
pointed to the fact that the establishment of the Mtabila 59 and Nyarugusu refugee camps have contributed to accelerated 
deforestation, as a result of increased fuelwood harvesting and illegal cultivation. This has also created c omplex host 
community-refugee relations. Community consultations confirmed that deforestation is still prevalent in many of the 
project areas, with land being cleared for agricultural development, fuelwood or charcoal production and the illegal 
mining of limestone in the national forest reserve areas in Kasulu District.  
 
The majority of the additional forest loss after 2015 around the three refugee camps, however, occurred within the camp 
boundaries. It is likely that this initial acceleration of forest loss is attributable to the reestablishment and expansion of 
the camps, to accommodate the additional population (Figure 4). The land granted (in the 1970s for Nyarugusu and in 
the 1990s for Mtendeli and Nduta, initially) by the Government of Tanzania for the emergency settlement of refugees in 
the camps was selected to be fit-for-purpose at the time, located near to the border with Burundi and well situated 
topographically and ecologically. As described below in Section B.3, the initial rapid settlement at these sites could not 
consider the long-term implications of prolonged development pressures or climate change on land-use planning and 
practices, which have led to maladaptation as a result. Since the camps’ reopening in 2015/2016, the forested area 
within 4 km of the camps is still considerable, particularly around Nduta and Nyarugusu. In these areas, the rate of

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 
forest loss post-2015 is comparable to that of pre-2015 and is less than the average rate of acceleration in the Kigoma 
region (see Section 7.3 of the Feasibility Study). The implication of this is that the increase in the refugee population 
post-2015 exerted a negligible impact on the surrounding forests, as a result of clearing trees to expand settlements, 
beyond the camp boundary.  
 
 
Figure 3. Forests around Mtendeli former Camp (top left), Nduta Camp (top right) and Nyarugusu Camp (bottom).

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 
 
60 Hansen/UMD/Google/USGS/NASA, “Global Forest Change 2000–2018. Version 1.6.” 
61 Ibid 
62 United Republic of Tanzania, Ministry of Water. 2013. Water resources management strategic interventions and action 
plan for climate change adaptation. 
63JICA. 2018. The Project on the Revision of National Irrigation Master Plan in the United Republic of Tanzania  
64 Ibid. 
 
Figure 4. Forest cover (ha) between 2000 and 2018 for each camp within the camp boundary (left) and outside the camp boundary, 
within four km (right)60..  
 
The result of these pressures on the forest cover is a degraded landscape with low soil stability, reduced soil nutrient 
availability, and reduced soil moisture. Additionally, traditional methods of protecting forests used by government forest 
departments — involving forest guards patrol forest areas — have had limited success owing to limited resources and 
supervision. These factors make the landscape more susceptible to the impacts of climate change and less able to 
support agricultural and other livelihood activities, less able to retain water resources required for these livelihoods and 
more susceptible to flooding. This has been highlighted by all the host communities and refugees who noted 
vulnerabilities in: i) zones F, G, H and I of Mtendeli; ii) zones 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 11 and 12 in Nyarugusu; and iii) zones 10, 
15 and 16 in the Nduta camp (See Annex 2.1 Section 2.2.1 for maps of the camps’ zonation). Several projects in the 
region (see Table 2) aim to address these demand-side developmental drivers of degradation, whilst others provide 
supply-side solutions and interventions that the proposed project aims to build upon and scale.  
 
In addition, resource scarcity is also exacerbating the vulnerability of marginalised groups such as women and children.   
For example, community consultations revealed that female refugees were particularly vulnerable to incidences of GBV 
during fuelwood collection beyond the borders of their camps. Rural populations, and women in particular, generally 
have limited technical skills and technological support — such as access to information and improved agricultural inputs 
— which leads to reduced productivity, limited post-harvest storage for preservation of crops, and loss of harvests. 
Moreover, women are often excluded from decision-making on access to and the use of land and resources critical to 
their livelihoods. These challenges are expected to be exacerbated by the future impacts of climate change in the 
region61.  
 
Surface and groundwater  
 
Kibondo and Kakonko districts are part of the Lake Tanganyika Basin which is experiencing impacts of climate change 
on water resources in various ways, including a decline in the flow of major rivers and drying of the Katubuka, Kilubu 
and Katosho wetlands located in Kigoma Region 62. The national averages of Potential Evapotranspiration (PET) and 
Actual Evapotranspiration (AET) are 1,633 mm/yr and 771 mm/yr, respectively63. Kigoma region’s PET averages 1,625 
mm/yr. As a result, catchments are characterised by lower run off and higher evapotranspiration due to increased 
temperatures64.

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 
 
65 Assey P. 2007. Environment at the heart of Tanzania’s development: Lessons from Tanzania’s National Strategy for 
Growth and Reduction of Poverty. MKUKUTA (No. 6), IIED.  
66 Kirui OK & Mirzabaev A. 2014. Economics of land degradation in Eastern Africa, ZEF Working Paper Series No. 128. 
University of Bonn, Centre for Development Research, Bonn.  
67 Moore TR. 1979. Rainfall erosivity in East Africa. Geografiska Annaler, Series A, Physical Geography, 61: 147–156. 
68 in the 1970s for Nyarugusu and in the 1990s for Mtendeli and Nduta, initially. 
69 Wickama J. 2017. Soil fertility options necessary to facilitate integrated soil fertility management (ISFM) in Uvinza Distric t 
Kigoma. A consultancy assignment and report written for WEMA Consult-Dar-es-Salaam and the Nature Conservancy in 
Kigoma, Tanzania.  
70 Pramova E, Locatelli B, Djoudi H & Somorin OA. 2012. Forests and trees for social adaptation to climate variability and 
change. WIREs Climate Change, 3: 581–596. 
 
There is limited data available on actual flow rates of the rivers surrounding the camps and in the wider districts. 
However, considerable reductions of surface and groundwater resources have been observed according to anecdotal 
evidence. For example, the levels of the rivers surrounding Nduta, Nyarugusu and Mtendeli former camp have fallen 
markedly over the past 10+ years.  Despite precipitation having increased in the long-term, trend fluctuations since 2000 
show a reduction of ~7.5% from the historical climatological mean. Over this period, there has also been a statistically 
significant increase in daytime temperatures which have led to increased evaporation and evapotranspiration of surface 
water resources. These climatological factors may have been responsible for some of the streams in the districts having 
become seasonal and others have completely dried up, compounded by upstream agricultural activities that are putting 
unsustainable pressure on these rivers and streams. As a result, in Kakonko district as a whole, there is a heavy 
dependence on pumped groundwater. The district has a local, shallow aquifer, although groundwater resources are 
considered very low to medium, with only ~20–100 mm annual recharge. Groundwater is, consequently, not a reliable 
water source and previous efforts at extracting groundwater from boreholes had a low success rate, with only 6 out of 
21 boreholes yielding water. Moreover, there are only two ‘formal’ irrigation schemes (commissioned by the District and 
limited to paddies) in Kibondo and Kakonko Districts.  
 
Soil erosion and soil fertility 
 
Land degradation has been ranked as the major environmental challenge in Tanzania for more than 60 years 65. Of 
particular concern is soil erosion, which has occurred across more than 61% of Tanzania’s total area over this 
timeframe. Historically, the amount of soil lost through water erosion in Tanzania was 105 tonnes/ha/yr in the 1960s, 
increasing to 224 tonnes/ha/yr in both the 1980s and 1990s 66. Erosion mostly occurs at the beginning of the rainy 
season, with 70% of high erosion days taking place within the first month after the onset of the initial rains 67. This is 
because both cultivated and natural vegetation are sparser after the dry season, resulting in reduced water infiltration 
and increased surface runoff. The degree of erosion in an area is therefore susceptible to changes in climate, specifically 
related to alterations in rainfall intensity as well as increases in the length of drought periods that decrease vegetation 
cover and reduce the binding of the soil.  
 
Although the refugee camps are topographically relatively well situated, Tanzanian authorities and camp planners were 
likely unable to take long-term development pressures and climate change impacts into account when designating 68 the 
area for the settlements or during land use planning in their necessarily rapid establishment during acute situations. 
Within refugee camps in the Kigoma region, the high population densities in a small area and the associated human 
activities such as agriculture and the construction of shelters results in extensive soil degradation. Shelters, for example, 
are constructed with mud bricks that are excavated from pits within the camp. These pits promote erosion by creating 
bare areas lacking a topsoil which further contributes to their enlargement. If they become waterlogged, the pits present 
a physical hazard to the camp inhabitants and have the potential to increase the prevalence of water- and vector-borne 
diseases. If not addressed, these large pits — along with other forms of soil degradation including rill erosion and the 
development of gullies — have the potential to cause considerable injury to members of the refugee community.  Further 
landscape degradation within and around the camps, along with increases in the intensity of rainfall events, is expected 
to aggravate these impacts for refugees. 
 
Outside of refugee camps, farming practises that lead to vegetation degradation contribute to increased soil erosion. 
This is the case even for farms that are relatively recent (under five years old) and that were originally on stable soils 
previously covered by forests69. Soils on these farms become shallow with a larger proportion of stone, which reduces 
crop performance, particularly of cassava. The erosion of soil on smallholder farms is aggravated by the use of handheld 
tools. These tools do not allow farmers to plough deep enough, consequently leading to the formation of a hardpan over 
their farmlands that prevents water from infiltrating into the ground. Additionally, fire and over-grazing are both large 
contributors to soil erosion because they cause the exposure of the soil to abrasion from water and wind 70. These two 
events also expose the soil to heat from direct sunlight, which reduces biological activity in the near-surface zone,

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 
 
71 Bationo A, Kimetu J, Ikerra S, Kimani S, Mugendi D, Odendo M et al. 2004. The African network for soil biology and 
fertility: New challenges and opportunities. In: Bationo A (ed) Managing nutrient cycles to sustain soil fertility in sub-Saharan 
Africa. CIAT. 
72 Bationo A, Kimetu J, Ikerra S, Kimani S, Mugendi D, Odendo M et al. 2004. The African network for soil biology and 
fertility: New challenges and opportunities. In: Bationo A (ed) Managing nutrient cycles to sustain soil fertility in sub-Saharan 
Africa. CIAT. 
73 Liniger HP, Studer RM, Hauert C & Gurtner M. 2011. Sustainable land management in practise-guidelines and best 
practises for sub-Saharan Africa. TerrAfrica, World Overview of Conservation Approaches and Technologies and FAO.  
74 WFP. 2016. Market Assessment: Nyarugusu refugee camp, United Republic of Tanzania. Available at: 
https://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/ena/wfp286682.pdf?iframe 
75 Once vegetation is lost either through drought or poor land management, rainwater washes away the topsoil that is rich in 
organic matter, exposing subsoils. Heavy rains funnel water into channels that form deep gullies. Refer to section 7.3.3 of 
Annex 2. Feasibility Study for discussion 
76 See Annex 2: Feasibility Study section 2.2.2 for flood impact analysis. 
altering the structure of the soil and reducing its stability. Increasing temperatures and more frequent higher intensity 
rainfall events are likely to further reduce the stability of soils on agricultural lands, resulting in soil and nutrient los s 
through erosion.  
 
Through the removal of topsoils in agricultural areas or localities where vegetation has been removed, soil erosion 
affects soil fertility levels, a factor that is already limiting in certain areas of Kigoma. Soil fertility is a product of the 
balance between nutrients entering the system and nutrients being extracted, either by plants or as erosion 71. Increased 
erosion related to changes in climate will therefore increase nutrient depletion and further contribute to soil infertility in 
agricultural areas of Kigoma. 
 
Soil infertility resulting from nutrient depletion can be attributed to the breakdown of traditional farming practises and 
the low priority given by governments to agriculture in rural areas72. Over decades, small-scale farmers have removed 
large quantities of nutrients from their soils through unsustainable farming practises without replenishing them with 
sufficient amounts of manure or fertilisers. The community of Kalimongoma has noted the increase in land becoming 
infertile and are needing the effective use of fertiliser to replace the lost nutrients. Despite this, Tanzania shows very 
low fertiliser use compared with neighbouring countries, using 9 kg/ha/yr instead of the 32 kg/ha/yr or 29 kg/ha/yr used 
in Malawi and Kenya, respectively.  
 
In addition to loss of nutrients from erosion, irrigated cultivated lands that are poorly drained are impacted by increased 
salinity as a result of naturally high evaporation rates. This results in 27% of irrigated lands in Tanzania becoming 
unusable as of 201173. Climate change will exacerbate this problem, with increasing evaporation rates and greater 
demands for irrigation because of rising temperatures leading to higher salinity levels on cultivated lands and further 
reductions in the area of land that is usable for agriculture.  
 
Poor land use planning and degraded ecosystems in the areas surrounding the region’s refugee camps are also 
interacting to increase the negative impacts of increasingly frequent floods. Flooding causes, inter alia, roads to become 
impassable, damage to shelters and communal facilities, overflowing of latrine pits, and standing water which creates 
health and sanitation problems 74. Floods also worsen soil erosion that reduces yields in kitchen gardens and community 
plots, as well as leading to deep gully75 erosions that place community safety at risk of unstable ground. Notably, erosion 
also reduces the landscape’s capacity to provide ecosystem services, such as flood attenuation. During future extreme 
rainfall events, this reduced attenuation will amplify flood impacts 76, thereby creating self-perpetuating cycles of 
degradation. 
 
Interactions among host communities and refugees 
 
Despite Tanzania’s encampment policy, interactions between refugees and host communities take place. There are 
informal employment arrangements and agriculture land lease/land use agreements. Interactions take place through 
some trade activities despite the closure of common markets. Refugees exit the camps frequently to collect fuelwood 
from host communities’ land. Furthermore, refugees and hosts interact during peaceful coexistence meetings.  
 
The host community population in the project areas are composed of farmers and livestock keepers. Around 70% of 
the population in the region are engaged in small-scale farming, with others involved in livestock keeping. The current 
lack of land use planning and management of customary land can lead to conflict between farmers and pastoralists. 
Lack of land assigned for grazing can also lead to encroachment of village and national forest reserves outside camps 
and villages.

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 
 
77 Refer to Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Action Plan, section 1.3.3. for more information. 
78 See Annex 2. Feasibility study for detailed description of observed and modelled climate impacts at the level of the project 
sites. 
79 USAID. 2012. Tanzania Climate Vulnerability Profile. 
80 Long term maximum day time temperature. 
The recently conducted community consultations in September 2020 have given more insights on the interactions 
between host communities and refugees. Both communities generally remarked that relations between the communities 
are good. Economic activities between the local communities and refugees take place. Some refugees have informal 
arrangements with host communities as agriculture laborers or through land lease/land use arrangements.  It is 
important to note that these arrangements are informal and thus do not confer any tenure rights to the refugees.  
 
Despite good relations in general, there are some conflicts between host communities and refugees. The typology of 
local conflicts within host community groups and between refugees, host communities and other beneficiary groups are 
set out in Annex 6 Environmental and Social Management System Section 7.3. Some examples include tensions 
around: 
- 
benefit sharing on agricultural production on land informally leased to refugees; 
- 
concerns of responsibility for protection by host communities in upstream areas and benefit and pollution 
from bathing and washing by refugees in shared streams and water sources; and 
- 
gender-based violence experience during fuelwood collection.77 
 
Existing mechanisms to manage conflict include peaceful co-existence meetings that are known to work in resolving 
issues between refugees and host communities. 
 
Market conditions and available financial services 
 
The climate-vulnerability of smallholder and refugee farmers in Kigoma is determined by their strong reliance on rain-
fed agricultural systems which, under anticipated precipitation changes, are expected to become further exposed. 
Farmers’ vulnerability is exacerbated by low levels of knowledge of, and capacity to implement, resilient long-term 
climate-smart agricultural practises and the subsequent application of suboptimal means of production. These farmers 
also do not have the appropriate technology required to implement climate-resilient practises and have limited 
alternative income opportunities to counteract the potential loss of crop production.  
 
The limited availability of financial services in the region has exacerbated the difficulties regarding the uptake of climate-
resilient technologies within the Kigoma region. Most residents of the host communities in the Kibondo, Kakonko and 
Kasulu Districts are reliant on Savings Associations (SA) to manage their finances, in the absence of formal banking 
services. Community consultations noted that there were variations in both the level of participation in SAs as well as 
in the financial contributions and gains generated from SAs. Women tended to be better represented in SAs in host 
communities and reported received values of up to 800,000 Tanzanian shillings (TZS). The primary purpose of a SA is 
to provide simple savings and loan facilities. Levels of capital in single SAs are generally extremely low, and 25–30 SAs 
— with under 10 members each — may exist within a single village. UNCDF has been supporting VSLAs in the host 
communities as part of the Kigoma Joint Programme. There is significant potential for SAs to be used to scale up climate 
change adaptation interventions in Kigoma, for the distribution of funds to farmers for the improvement of inputs and 
the uptake of water-efficient technology. For more information on the role of SAs in the region — as well as an overview 
of their role in the proposed project delivery structure — please refer to Section 3.5.1. of the Feasibility Study (entitled 
‘The Savings Associations’). 
 
Historic and Projected Climate Change78 
 
Tanzania’s climate is highly variable, but climate trend data already indicates that temperatures are rising. Year on year 
rainfall volume is increasing in variability and peak precipitation intensity is increasing. The sections below discuss these 
historical changes and projections in the project sites in detail. 
 
Observed temperature and rainfall change and impacts 
 
Historical climate trends for the country indicate that temperatures have risen from 1960–1990 79. The long-term 
temperature trend for the three camp areas has a statistically significant increase in both the average maximum 
temperatures as well as the highest maximum temperatures80. This increase is ~0.16°C per decade from 1983 to 2016 
and this long-term general increase is also apparent in the more extreme temperatures. The change in the 90th 
percentile maximum temperature has increased from the 1980s to 2016 by more than 0.6°C. Analysis of both the day-

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 
 
81 USAID. 2012. Tanzania Climate Vulnerability Profile. 
82 UNDRR, DesInventar database. 
and night-time temperature profiles show a shift away from the lower temperatures, towards more extreme day- and 
night-time temperatures. These extreme temperatures have occurred more frequently in recent decades. 
 
Historical climate trends for the country indicate that rainfall is becoming more erratic. Over the past three decades, 
Tanzania has experienced several major national droughts as well as several instances of localised regions having 
anomalously lower precipitation for several years. Annual rainfall in Tanzania has decreased at an average rate of 3.3% 
per decade from 1960-200681. These decreases are predominately noted in the southern parts of the country. While 
there are noted general decreases in precipitation elsewhere in the country, precipitation in the camps of Nduta and 
Nyarugusu, the former camp of Mtendeli and surrounds has experienced a statistically significant (p value ~0.13%) 
increase of ~7.5 mm/ decade since 1901. The most prominent observed climate change trend has been a tendency 
towards lower rainfall volume during the early growing seasons (October to December) and increases later in the 
season. 
 
The increase in precipitation volumes is occurring in the presence of increasing temperatures. This has the effect of 
enhancing the moisture storing capacity of the lower atmosphere and therefore increases the potential 
evapotranspiration. The Standardised Precipitation-Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI) drought index classifies years from 
+3 (exceptionally wet) to -3 (exceptionally dry), with varying severity of wetness or drought between these values and 
+0.5 to -0.5 representing near normal wet and dry respectively. There is a general decrease in SPEI over time (Figure ). 
While there are natural oscillations in the SPEI magnitude and there will certainly be extremely and exceptionally wet 
years in the future, the long-term trend indicates a general decrease and leaning toward the more dry categories as a 
result of the increasing temperature’s effect on potential evapotranspiration. The long-term magnitude is decreasing for 
both the SPEI wet and dry years. This will result in wet years that are more moderate and dry years that are more 
severe. 
 
 
Figure 5. SPEI 48 month rolling variability magnitude over time (left), simplified SPEI wet and dry magnitude. 
 
The historical changes in the climate (increased temperature and more intense precipitation) have already had noted 
impacts on the ground in Tanzania. Information from the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) 
database82 records events and their impacts on local populations. While these impacts are not spatially explicit, they do 
demonstrate an increasing trend of communities being affected by rainfall related hazards (Figure 6). 
 
 (3.00)
 (2.00)
 (1.00)
 -
 1.00
 2.00
 3.00
1954
1964
1974
1984
1994
2004
2014
SPEI magnitude
Standardised Precipitation-Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI) over time
  Exceptionally Dry
  Extremely Dry
  Severely Dry
  Moderately Dry
  Abnormally Dry
  Near Normal
 Exceptionally Wet
 Extremely Wet
 Severely Wet
 Moderately Wet
 Abnormally Wet
 SPEI_48
y = -0.057x - 0.5263
y = -0.1504x + 1.4432
 (3)
 (2)
 (1)
 -
 1
 2
 3
SPEI 48 month magnitude
Dry years
Wet years

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 
 
83 three consecutive days above the highest average monthly daytime temperature 
 
Figure 6. UNDRR impact database for Tanzania. Rainfall-related impacts 
 
Observational climate change control site 
To quantify the additional effect — or lack thereof — of the refugees on the area surrounding the camps, a control site 
~85km south of Nyarugusu was selected for comparative purposes. The town of Uvinza and its surrounds have similar 
reference land use, climate and geographical profiles to the project area, although no refugee communities are hosted 
in this area. The control area has experienced a similar change in observational climate, with notable increases in both 
day and night-time temperatures as well as increasing annual maximums from the 1980s to present. The area has also 
experienced an increase in total precipitation over time, as well as a strong decrease in SPEI magnitude as a result of 
increased potential evapotranspiration over the observational period. 
 
Despite these similar physical and climatic conditions, the forest loss around the control site is significantly higher than 
in the area surrounding the refugee camps. This loss was, on average, ~850 ha per year between 2001 and 2018, 
although this increased over this period by ~102 ha per year. There are further losses through an ~22% increase in fire 
occurrence in the areas surrounding the control site. The cumulative NDVI surrounding the control villages shows losses 
similar to the areas surrounding Kasanda village close to Mtendeli former camp. The areas around Nduta and 
Nyarugusu camps have had even less forest loss. 
 
Although the drivers of degradation are a challenge to attribute with certainty, given the similar climatic factors and basic 
land use profile, the presence of refugees in Kasulu, Kibondo and Kakonko do not appear to have resulted in greater 
degree of degradation compared with the control site of Uvinza. This reinforces the findings of the landcover changes 
for the target project areas, that suggests the presence of refugees are not a key determinant of accelerated forest loss, 
after initial clearing to establish/expand the camps. Further detail of this control study can be found in Section 2.1.4 of 
the Feasibility Study.  
 
Projected temperature and rainfall change 
Average maximum temperatures (currently ranging from 27–31°C in Kigoma region (Figure 7) are likely to increase 
under all projected climate scenarios. The projected changes under both RCP4.5 and 8.5 scenarios suggest increases 
of 1.2–2.2°C for the average maximum temperature and an increase of 2.5–4.5°C in the hottest month of the year from 
2050 and 2070 respectively, with the area around Nyarugusu experiencing the greatest increases. 
 
Average minimum temperatures of 14°C for the region will increase by ~1–1.1°C by 2050 and by 1.3-2.3°C by 2070 for 
RCP4.5 and 8.5, respectively. These increases will shift both day- and night-time temperature profiles away from cooler 
temperatures towards an increase in the occurrence of warm and hot days. Extremely hot days that currently occur 
rarely will become more frequent, and the future ‘rarely occurring extremes’ will be much warmer than current extremes. 
The mean number of days per year with temperatures over 35°C is projected to increase by an additional one to nine 
days (RCP4.5 and 8.5) by 2050 and ~five to 33 days (RCP4.5 and 8.5) by 2070. Projections also an indicate an increase 
from ~10 heatwaves83 per year to an additional 19–24 per year by 2050 and 25–32 heatwaves more per year by 2070 
for RCP4.5 and 8.5, respectively. 
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
 Windstorm
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
 Thunderstorm
-
-
-
-
2
-
-
-
-
 Strong Winds
-
-
-
-
1,473
-
-
-
426
 Rains
-
-
-
-
42
-
-
-
-
 Lightning
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
70
 Heavy Rainfall & Strong Winds
-
-
-
251
647
1,582
9,060
-
2,315
 Hailstorm
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
558
 Flood
-
192
853
-
2,695
-
-
-
6,243
 -
 2,000
 4,000
 6,000
 8,000
 10,000
 12,000
Number of People
2 year bins
Persons impacted by rain/storm events

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 
 
84 The peak rainfall volume (mm) that occurs within one hour during a rain event. Measure of intensity 
By the 2050s total annual rainfall is projected to increase in Kigoma by ~7–9%. Annual projected precipitation changes 
in this region show general increases for both 2040–2060 RCP4.5 (Figure 8, bottom left) and 2060–2080 RCP8.5 
(Figure 8, bottom right). RCP4.5 projects a total increase in annual rainfall of 11 mm for Nyarugusu area and 16–27 mm 
for Mtendeli and Nduta areas by 2060. The latter have greater capacity for cloud formation and chance of rainfall in the 
future, having lower observed precipitation and currently being slightly cooler regions. This is further exacerbated under 
RCP8.5 with increases in the Kasulu area of 43 mm and 49–64 mm annually in the Kakonko and Kibondo areas. These 
increases account for between 5.3–9.7% of annual rainfall under future scenarios. There will be an increase in the dry 
spell duration because of the anticipated increase in total annual precipitation becoming more focused within a shorter 
timeframe. There will also be an increase in day- and night- time temperatures resulting in an increase in potential 
evapotranspiration. This will shift the SPEI measures more towards the dry and very dry categories overall, continuing 
the trend observed in the historical data. 
 
While the projected change in total annual rainfall by the 2050s is small, seasonal fluctuations are larger, with increased 
variability in the early onset of rainfall events from October to December (~9% under RCP4.5 and 12% under RCP8.5 
for 2050) and increased rainfall (5.8% under RCP4.5 and 3.9% under RCP8.5 for 2050) in March to May (the respective 
main growing seasons).  
 
Higher average and extreme temperatures will enhance evaporation and evapotranspiration from the earth’s surface, 
leading to an increase of water vapour in the atmosphere. This increased atmospheric moisture volume results in 
extreme rainfall events that can lead to flooding. Hourly peak precipitation intensity 84 will likely increase by up to 9% 
and 11% in 2050 and 11% and 17% by 2070 for RCP4.5 and 8.5, respectively. This will increase the precipitation profile, 
resulting in heavy and fast-occurring rainfall which is likely to increase the frequency and intensity of floods.

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 
 
85 Hijmans RJ, Cameron SE, Parra JL, Jones PG & Jarvis A. 2005. Very high-resolution interpolated climate surfaces for 
global land areas. International Journal of Climatology 25:1965–1978. 
 
 
Figure 7. Localised average maximum temperature changes for the historical scenario (top-left) and projected for 2040–2060 
RCP4.5 (bottom-left) and 2060–2080 RCP8.5 (bottom-right)85.

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 
 
86 Hijmans RJ, Cameron SE, Parra JL, Jones PG & Jarvis A. 2005. Very high-resolution interpolated climate surfaces for 
global land areas. International Journal of Climatology 25:1965–1978. 
 
Figure 8. Localised precipitation changes for the historical scenario (top-left) and projected for RCP4.5 (2050) (bottom-left), and 
RCP8.5 (2070) (bottom-right)86. 
 
Climate Impacts 
 
Climate change — in combination with non-climate drivers such as agricultural practises and land use changes — has 
already altered ecosystem functioning and affected livelihoods in the Kigoma region. The local-level impacts of climate 
change manifest through a cumulation of multiple, interrelated climate-forcing and meteorological-feedback 
mechanisms over the long term, interacting on socio- ecological systems, creating feedback loops that amplify climate 
hazards and their subsequent effects on the agro-ecological system.  
 
Temperature and precipitation changes interact to amplify impacts. The potential failure of early season rainfall 
increases the likelihood of severe and prolonged drought. At the same time, floods are expected to increase in frequency 
and intensity. These effects will particularly impact upon the region’s rainfall-dependent and flood-exposed livelihoods

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 
 
87 Some examples are stalk borers that are correlated with warmer temperatures and rift valley fever in livestock is mosquito 
borne and correlated with higher rainfall. Refer to Section 2.2.7 of Annex 2. Feasibility study for types of pests and diseases 
and influence of climate. 
and communities. Smallholder farmers in Kigoma region are particularly at risk of climate-driven impacts on their 
livelihoods, as their income and food supply depend on the rain-fed agricultural productive systems. In Kibondo district, 
27% of the area is arable land, of which 8% is under predominantly rain-fed cultivation. Livelihoods are therefore reliant 
on the timely arrival of rainfall. These livelihood pressures and agricultural impacts also contribute to perpetuating 
ecosystem degradation such as soil erosion and deforestation. For example, fuelwood consumption is a historical driver 
of deforestation and ground cover loss but may also increase as a result of climate impacts on agricultural yields 
compelling farmers to seek alternative incomes. Agricultural land use conversion — as a response to meeting 
development demand or because of climate-related impacts — also contributes to soil erosion and localised water 
logging associated with high precipitation events. These impacts, in turn, exacerbate the secondary impacts of flood 
events, which are projected to increase. In addition, climate impacts create mutually reinforcing feedback loops that 
drive and accelerate degradation, placing pressure on ecosystems and communities.  
 
The abovementioned challenges demonstrate the complex linkages between changes in climate variables and their 
direct and indirect impacts on agro-ecological systems, which support the livelihoods of host communities and refugees. 
The climate analysis and corresponding project design have been developed to address this complex interconnected 
system and to achieve transformative change at a landscape level. These impacts on the landscape, critical ecosystems 
and agro-ecological livelihoods are described below and demonstrated in Figure 9 to show the complex linkage between 
changes in climate variables and their direct and indirect impacts on the agro-ecological system, which supports the 
livelihoods of the communities. 
 
 
Figure 9. Climate change impact chain for agro-ecological systems and smallholder farmers in the host communities in Kigoma 
region. The +/- symbols in each cell represent the directionality of the projected changes. NC indicates ‘no change’. Black lines 
indicate climate variable-driven impacts, red lines indicate the compounding impacts from non-climate drivers. Dashed lines indicate 
indirect relationships.  
 
A large proportion of the country’s GDP is associated with climate-sensitive activities, in particular subsistence 
agriculture. Climate-related production risks (such as drought, diseases and pest attacks 87) are already costing 
Tanzania’s agriculture sector at least USD 200 million per year, and without urgent adaptation these costs are likely to

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 
 
88Arce CE & Caballero J. 2015. Tanzania: Agricultural Sector Risk Assessment. World Bank, Washington, DC. Available at: 
https://openknowledge. worldbank.org/handle/10986/22277 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO 
89 Global Climate Adaptation Partnership, 2011. The Economics of Climate Change in the United Republic of Tanzania. 
90 http://www.tzonline.org/pdf/kigoma.pdf p.25 
91 Kangalawe et al. 2017. Climate change and variability impacts on agricultural production and livelihood systems in 
Western Tanzania. Climate and Development, vol.9: 3 
92 Enabel. 2009. Sustainable improvement of the banana cropping system in Kagera region and Kibondo district in Kigoma 
region. Available at: http://www.diplomatie.be/oda/11765_PROGDESCR_Technisch_en_Financieel_Dossier.pdf 
93 Enabel. 2009. Sustainable improvement of the banana cropping system in Kagera region and Kibondo district in Kigoma 
region. Available at: http://www.diplomatie.be/oda/11765_PROGDESCR_Technisch_en_Financieel_Dossier.pdf 
94 Enabel. 2009. Sustainable improvement of the banana cropping system in Kagera region and Kibondo district in Kigoma 
region. Available at: http://www.diplomatie.be/oda/11765_PROGDESCR_Technisch_en_Financieel_Dossier.pdf 
95 Communication from UNHCR 
96 SNV. 2019. Climate Resilient Agribusiness for Tomorrow (CRAFT). Available at: 
https://snv.org/cms/sites/default/files/explore/download/final_amended_craft_factsheet_sept_2019_0.pdf 
97 SNV. 2019. Climate Resilient Agribusiness for Tomorrow (CRAFT). Available at: 
https://snv.org/cms/sites/default/files/explore/download/final_amended_craft_factsheet_sept_2019_0.pdf 
98 See Section 2.2.6 of Annex 2. Feasibility Study for further discussion. 
increase with rising climate variability 88. If climate risks remain unaddressed, aggregate models estimate that the 
associated economic costs may be equivalent to as much as 2% of GDP per year, by 2030 89. 
With agriculture being the predominant livelihood activity, the greatest risk from climate change is its impacts on 
agricultural yields and consequently food security 90. In addition to diminishing the critical ecosystem services provided 
by forest systems — such as flood mitigation, soil moisture retention, soil erosion control and soil fertility — the impact 
of climate change on livelihoods is a general decline in agricultural productivity and agro-diversity91.  Indeed, climate 
variability is already resulting in an average of 5–15% loss of maize crops per year because of the increased prevalence 
of pests and disease. Other crops have also been in decline. For example, a 50% decline in productivity of bananas 
and coffee has been reported between the 1970s and 1990s92. This occurred as a result of an increased prevalence of 
pests and disease, but also because of insufficient rotation of these crops resulting in inadequate return of nutrients to 
the soil. The decline in banana yields is accompanied by a concurrent increase in the demand for maize and root crops, 
putting greater pressure on land used to farm these crops93. The impacts of over-intensive agricultural practises have 
been exacerbated by an inheritance system which causes plots of land to continually be subdivided and fragmented — 
a factor directly related to population growth94. This is resulting in agricultural land being expanded into marginal areas. 
These factors are exacerbating the impacts of regional fluctuations in supply and demand for crops. As the population 
grows, this challenge is becoming more prevalent and will become increasingly severe under future climate change 
conditions 95, further compounding concerns of malnutrition. As a result, Kigoma will have to improve agricultural 
systems and diversify the variety of crops grown to meet the nutritional requirements of the growing population 96. To 
achieve this, there is a need to improve productivity of existing agricultural production and supply systems and to reduce 
the vulnerability of these systems to the impacts of climate change by adopting climate-resilient agricultural practises97. 
 
Climate change is particularly likely to affect resource-poor households such as smallholder local farmers and refugee 
families, all of whom are unable to invest in or take advantage of alternative livelihoods or new agricultural strategies. 
They will likely transfer this pressure and cause greater reliance on the local ecosystem, further accelerating 
degradation. The subsequent effects of this are already observed by increases in severe erosion and enhanced  flood 
impacts in the refugee camps, including zones F, G, H and I of the Mtendeli former camp and zones 3, 4, 8 in Nyarugusu 
camp (from December to April each year) where large gullies were eroded from significant overland flows. Projected 
increases in precipitation intensity will further exacerbate these impacts. Densely populated flood-prone areas are 
particularly exposed because of land clearance. Flat areas are prone to flooding, while high levels of erosion have 
occurred on slopes as observed in the project area. High intensity rainfall events following longer dry spells will further 
contribute to erosion on these slopes by displacing the topsoil layer. The overall result of the deforestation is a degraded 
landscape with low soil stability, reduced soil nutrient availability and reduced soil moisture. These impacts compound 
landscape susceptibility to further climate change impacts and means landscapes are less able to support agricultural 
and other livelihood activities, less able to retain water required for these livelihoods, and are more susceptible to 
flooding. 
 
The provision of the landscape to continue to provide ecosystem services (such as flood attenuation) under climate 
change conditions will also be affected by other climate hazards, including fires. Although increased incidences of fires 
in forested areas are largely related to human activity, climate change is expected to further compound the effects. As 
the climate becomes hotter and drier, the frequency and intensity of forest fires are expected to increase. This will 
negatively affect the livelihoods of communities by burning of crops and important forest trees, as well as retreat of wild 
animals from certain areas98.

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 
 
99 In 2015, cholera affected refugee and host populations in four of Kigoma’s districts, including Ujiji, Kigoma, Uvinza and 
Kasulu. In total, 5,581 cholera cases resulted from the 2015 outbreak, of which 1,051 occurred within the host populations 
and 4,528 in the refugee communities. Of the total cholera cases in 2015, 61 resulted in deaths. From consultation with 
UNHCR Environment Officers, December 2018. 
100 Cattle in Kigoma are susceptible to animal trypanosomiasis, particularly populations that are near the Malagarasi forest 
reserve which contains large numbers of tsetse flies. The prevalence of bovine trypanosomiasis in the Kasulu District was 
11% in 2010. From Kgotlele T, Torsson E, Kasanga CJ, Wensman JJ & Misinzo G. 2016. Seroprevalence of peste des 
petits ruminants virus from samples collected in different regions of Tanzania in 2013 and 2015. Journal of Veterinary 
Science and Technology, 7: 394. Doi: 10.4172/2157-7579.1000394. 
101 Mboera LEG, Mayala BK, KWek EJ & Mazigo HD. 2011. Impact of climate change on human health and health systems 
in Tanzania: a review. Tanzania Journal of Health Research, 13: 1–23.  
102 Ibid  
103 Although historical epidemics of RVF in Tanzania did not affect Kigoma, there is evidence of the virus occurring in sheep 
and goats at small percentages of 12%, 2% and 1% within the Kigoma, Kibondo and Kasulu Districts respectively. This 
indicates that there is the potential for future epidemics of this disease in the region. From Kifaro EG, Nkangaga J, Joshua 
G, Sallu R, Yongolo M, Dautu G & Kasanga CJ. 2014. Epidemiological study of Rift Valley fever virus in Kigoma, Tanzania. 
Onderstepoort Journal of Veterinary Research, 81:1–5. 
104 Refer to Appendix A: Stakeholder interviews and focus group discussions in the Feasibility Study (Annex B) for more 
information. 
This destruction of natural habitats and movement of animals will also increase the prevalence of pests and diseases, 
further compounding the direct impacts of climate change on these hazards. Future climate change conditions are 
expected to increase the risk and impact of crop pests and diseases as a result of higher temperatures as well as 
increased rainfall intensity and variability for the Kigoma region. Specifically, climate change is expected to have an 
influence by: i) changing the prevalence and distribution of crop pests; ii) increasing the frequency of new pest 
introductions; iii) increasing the occurrence of major pest outbreaks; and iv) encouraging the use of pesticides as well 
as increasing the resilience of pests to these chemicals, leading to food safety risks from pesticide residues. Human 
diseases in Kigoma are also expected to be influenced by climate change, particularly related to the unmanaged impacts 
of floods. Traditional experience and defences against these diseases will likely no longer be sufficient to respond to 
the unprecedented pest and disease burden. As the suitable conditions for the survival of pathogens increase because 
of changes in temperature or rainfall, this leads to an increased risk of emerging diseases, changes in migration 
pathways, carriers and vectors and changes in the natural ecosystems. Infectious agents are in a state of perpetual 
adaptation to their new hosts or vectors, which has the potential to lead to the emergence of ‘new’ diseases or the 
spread of known diseases to previously unaffected areas as climates shift. 
 
The distribution ranges of water- and vector-borne diseases are expected to increase where warmer temperatures 
combine with heavy runoff from increased precipitation events. An increase in unmanaged standing water caused by 
greater rainfall amounts from climate change, for example, coupled with reduced infiltrability in areas with limited 
vegetation cover has the potential to increase the risk of cholera, a water-borne disease associated with limited 
sanitation that has resulted in a number of epidemics within Kigoma99. This can be mitigated however, by interventions 
to improve drainage, limit standing water and improve vegetation cover. Future long-term changes in rainfall variability 
and intensity, drought periods and temperature within an area are also expected to affect the suitability of localities 
within Kigoma to insect vectors such as tsetse flies and mosquitoes 100. This will influence the epidemiology and 
transmission of diseases such as HAT or RVF101. Episodes of RVF, for example, are closely linked to variations in 
climate, particularly occurring after periods of abnormal drought, followed by abnormal heavy rains and the consequent 
emergence of large numbers of Aedes and Culex mosquitoes102 103.  
 
In addition to experiencing the consequences of the immediate impacts of extreme climate events, the limited local 
adaptive capacity and opportunities results in an inability to recover following droughts, floods, diseases or other shocks. 
Refugees in Nduta and Nyarugusu practicing small-scale agriculture around homesteads are already reporting crop 
losses because of unexpected weather conditions104, such as late rainy seasons, as they have little or no access to 
alternative water sources or water storage for supplementary irrigation. Increased early season onset variability will 
exacerbate this exposure. A further factor increasing the vulnerability of refugees is that they lack the traditional 
knowledge of local conditions which help to identify the warning signs for unusual weather. Negative impacts upon food 
security and nutrition of both refugee and host communities will result in additional pressures on the ecosystems which 
surround Kigoma’s refugee camps. In addition to socioeconomic conditions in the area, the lack of financial services 
available to host communities and refugees also means that they have a reduced ability to mitigate, cope with, and 
recover from climate shocks and to sustain their livelihoods.

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 
 
105 Kangalawe et al. 2017. Climate change and variability impacts on agricultural production and livelihood systems in 
Western Tanzania. Climate and Development, vol.9: 3 
106 Heltberg IR, Bennett P, Steen S, Jorgensen L. 2009. Addressing human vulnerability to climate change: Toward a ‘no-
regrets’ approach Global Environmental Change 19, 1, pp 89-99 
Other climate change impacts include flood impacts, heat stress, reduced water availability and functional changes to 
agro-ecological zones and ecosystems105. These climate impacts interact with structural development challenges, such 
as those caused by the pressure of recurrent influxes of refugees (with fuelwood, food and water, and livelihood 
demands) into the region. Many of these structural development challenges are being addressed through 
complementary projects, as described below.  
 
Investments in the Target Project Area 
 
This project aims to build upon the ongoing development and humanitarian work that has, and is, being conducted in 
Kigoma to address the outstanding challenges through an integrated approach based on land use planning — 
specifically, to address the climate and non-climate drivers of degradation in a coordinated way.  To avoid trade-offs 
and maximise co-benefits a “no-regrets” approach has been applied in the project design. Through this approach, 
measures have been developed using the precautionary principle. The aim is to allow refugees and host communities 
to respond immediately to the already existing impacts of climate change and other environmental pressures, while 
maintaining the maximum potential for on-going adaptation. This strategy is integrated into all of the project’s 
investments in order to reduce the climate and other environmental risks associated with the communities’ direct 
dependence on the surrounding ecosystems. Globally the no-regrets approach has been shown to increase resilience 
and enhance the potential to adjust to different types of hazards in a timely, cost-effective and equitable way because 
it works at the integrated landscape, or “whole system”, -level106. Although the parallel financing and other projects have 
begun to address elements of the baseline, their implementation is fragmented as they address issues separately. The 
project will contribute to addressing this through the integrated land use planning in Output 1, which will further be 
scaled and replicated through Output 4 through developing policy recommendations and supporting mainstreaming to 
address more systemic coordinated issues across sectors and institutions.  
 
In addition to committing co-financing to the project through its natural resources and shared environment programme, 
UNHCR will continue its activities over the project period to promote access to alternative energy for refugees and host 
communities.  Furthermore, at a regional level, UNHCR is one of 16 UN agencies contributing to the One UN Kigoma  
Joint Programme (KJP). By linking the implementation of the project directly to the KJP activities, opportunities will be 
created to discuss and exchange with regional and district level authorities. Increasingly, the KJP is seeking to align 
with and contribute to local planning processes and development plans. 
 
Several development and humanitarian projects are expected to be implemented in the next few years in the target 
area that will complement the GCF project activities, especially in addressing structural drivers of environmental 
degradation and building communities’ resilience. Some of these initiatives are still under discussion and in negotiation 
stages and are therefore indicative of the interventions the project will coordinate with. These investments are in addition 
to public finance from national, regional and district allocations towards energy and environment interventions in the 
refugee hosting areas. 
 
Section 2.2.6 of the FS provides detail on the current use of fuel wood in Kigoma that the project aims to address. 
Fuelwood will continue to be part of the energy mix for cooking, although other alternatives are being explored through 
other initiatives. Currently, fuel wood extraction accounts for 60% of forest resource usage. The proposed project will 
be addressing supply side factors, particularly in shifting extraction from slow-growing natural miombo ecosystems — 
that additionally provide important biodiversity and ecosystem services — toward faster growing species planted on 
marginal degraded land and/or toward sustainable, renewable offtake from agroforestry. The forestry activities under 
this project will be instrumental in scaling up supply side fuelwood interventions and complement UNHCR and others’ 
activities addressing the demand side of fuelwood.  
 
Several initiatives and projects are underway or planned to provide longer-term solutions and interventions to address 
demand-side problems of fuelwood extraction for heating and lighting in refugee camps and host communities. These 
include a briquette pilot and the continued provision of clean cookstoves and energy-efficiency training, as well as other 
UNHCR interventions that aim to reduce fuelwood demand. A new project funded by Denmark and to be implemented 
by the Danish Refugee Council will significantly scale up bio-briquette production as household level in the refugee 
camps and the host communities. The project will also focus on environmental and forest protection, addressing some 
of the supply-side elements highlighted above.

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
 
 
 
These parallel projects and programmes will ensure, in the long run, that investments in the proposed project are not 
put at risk after project end. Several international and national NGOs are also expected to continue supporting 
complementary activities targeting either refugee or host communities, or both, that will be implemented during the 
project lifespan. The value of these projects, and other projects undertaking complementary activities, amount to almost 
USD 48 million. A summary of the major projects and their relevance and complementarity with the proposed GCF 
project is provided in Table 2. 
 
Table 2. Current and planned projects in the region. ‘Relevant Complementary Activities’ refers to activities within the parallel 
projects, that are complementary to the proposed project’s interventions.  
Organisation and 
Project name 
Funding 
Duration 
Relevant 
Complementary 
Activities 
Related 
Output/ 
Activities 
Complementarity and/or scaling up 
UNHCR access to 
energy 
programme  
USD 
2,500,000 
(projected) 
 
 
2020– 
2024 
UNHCR’s other 
programming is 
facilitating access to 
alternative energy and 
promoting energy 
efficiency for refugee 
and host communities 
to help offset fuelwood 
consumption  
Output 2 – 
Activities 
2.1, 2.2 
Investments would complement the 
proposed supply-side fuelwood and 
conservation project activities in 
CBFM, afforestation, and agroforestry 
by addressing demand side fuelwood 
drivers of deforestation. 
Enabel – 
Sustainable 
Agriculture 
Kigoma Regional 
Project (SAKIRP) 
EUR 
8,800,000 
2016– 
2021 
SAKIRP is providing 
support to beans and 
cassava farmers and 
value chains through 
Farmer Field School 
(FFS) approach 
implementation 
modalities 
Output 3, 
Activity 3.1 
The proposed project will build upon 
the support delivery systems provided 
to small-scale bean and cassava 
farmers, by expanding savings 
activities and introducing climate 
smart agriculture inputs and training.  
Enabel – Natural 
Resources 
Management for 
Local Economic 
Development in 
Kigoma Region 
(NRM-LED) 
EUR 
5,000,000 
2014– 
2021 
NRM-LED is 
supporting 
participatory village 
land use planning for 
sustainable NRM, 
CBFM in Kibondo, 
Kakonko and Kasulu; 
and providing 
institutional support 
to districts on natural 
resource governance 
and landscape 
coordination. The 
project is also 
supporting 
establishment and 
governance of CBFM  
Output 1, 
Activity 
1.1; Output 
2, Activity 
2.1; Output 
4, 
Activities 
4.2, 4.3  
To scale and climate mainstream the 
land use planning approach, the 
proposed project would build on local 
capacities that have been strengthened 
in NRM planning and mutual benefit 
sharing. Scaling CBFM in target 
districts. 
GIZ – Renewable 
Energy Service 
and Products as 
an Opportunity 
in National and 
Displaced 
Markets 
(RESPOND) 
through SNV 
EUR 
1,680,000 
2018– 
2020  
RESPOND is 
promoting results-
driven and market 
driven approaches in 
woodlot afforestation 
(aligned with 
REDESO), fuel efficient 
cookstoves, alternative 
lighting solutions, and 
promoting energy 
efficiency in host 
communities and (to a 
lesser extent) refugee 
Output 2, 
Activities 
2.1, 2.2 
The proposed project would learn 
from and scale up supply-side 
activities related to afforestation and 
woodlots. The RESPOND project also 
addresses demand side fuelwood 
needs for both cooking and lighting in 
host communities and camps.

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
 
 
camps in Kasulu and 
Kibondo 
Danish Refugee 
Council (DRC) 
(funded by 
Denmark) – 
Improving access 
to alternative 
energy sources 
and promoting 
environmental 
conservation in 
refugee camps 
and host 
communities in 
Kigoma Region, 
Tanzania 
DKK 
25,000,000 
March 
2021 – 
December 
2023  
The project by DRC 
will focus on bio-
briquette production 
at household level to 
increase access to 
alternative energy 
sources for cooking. 
Further, increased 
forest protection will 
be sought through 
establishment of tree 
nurseries and 
awareness and 
capacity building on 
environment and 
forest management 
will utilise existing 
structures like 
environmental/forest 
committees and 
student clubs in 
schools.  
Output 2, 
Activity 2.2 
Sub-
activity 
2.2.1 
The proposed project complements the 
energy-related activities of the DRC 
project such as bio-briquette 
production at household level in the 
refugee camps and the host 
communities as well as environmental 
and forest protection activities.  
Jane Goodall 
Institute (USAID 
funding) – 
Landscape 
Conservation in 
Western 
Tanzania 
USD 
19,900,000 
2018– 
2023 
JGI is implementing 
land use planning and 
supporting effective 
natural resource 
management, 
including in the Old 
Refugee Settlement of 
Mishamo 
Output 1, 
Activities 
1.1, 1.2; 
Output 4, 
Activities 
4.2,4.3 
Activities and partnerships under the 
proposed project would scale and 
climate mainstream the land use 
planning and CBFM implemented, 
whilst also learning from the LUP 
experience of JGI in the region and 
particularly in context of the old 
settlements.   
FAO - Kigoma 
Joint Programme 
(KJP) Climate 
Smart 
Agriculture 
project 
USD 500,000 
(projected) 
2020– 
2021 
FAO is promoting 
climate smart 
agricultural practises 
in target districts, 
through FFS modality.  
Output 3, 
Activities 
3.1 
Output 3 of the proposed project 
would build on the extension services 
provided to smallholder farmers, 
emphasising climate resiliency to 
future conditions.  
UNCDF — 
Kigoma Joint 
Programme 
(KJP), 
Agriculture and 
Youth and 
Women’s 
Economic 
Empowerment 
projects.  
USD 700,000 
per year 
(projected) 
2020–2021 
(but likely 
to be 
extended to 
2022) 
UNCDF is supporting 
savings groups and 
access to agricultural 
and livelihood inputs 
in Kibondo, Kasulu and 
Kakonko. Developing 
digital platform for 
disaggregation of data. 
Output 3, 
Activities 
3.1, 3.3 
The proposed project would expand 
and institutionalize support provided 
to Village Savings and Loans 
Associations for both refugee and host 
communities and is considering the 
applicability of digital platform to 
support non-agricultural livelihoods.  
EU — Livelihood 
beekeeping 
support project, 
(expected to be 
implemented by 
Enabel) – 
country wide 
USD 2-
3,000,000 
(estimated 
amount for 
Kigoma 
region)  
TBC 
The EU project is 
supporting beekeeping 
activities  
Output 3, 
Activity 3.3 
Alternative livelihood enhancement 
would build upon synergies in 
implementing beekeeping activities 
and supporting beekeeping groups.  
REDESO — 
through various 
donors (Oxfam, 
US, UNDP) 
USD 
1,500,000 
(projected) 
2020– 
2024 
REDESO is 
implementing 
afforestation and 
woodlots in Kibondo 
and Kakonko (and 
soon, Kasulu), 
Output 2, 
Activity 
2.2; Output 
3, 
The proposed project would look for 
synergies for activities related to 
woodlots and sustainable livelihoods. 
Complementary activities addressing 
demand side of fuelwood

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 
 
107 This estimate is based on consultations with the Kibondo District Environmental Officer and Tanzania Forest Service that 
indicate that the Kibondo district annual environmental operating budget covering reforestation, soil conservation, solid 
waste management and similar activities normally stands at TSh 100,000,000 or around USD 43,500. For now, this budget 
has been taken as average budget across the three project districts in Kigoma. The Tanzania Forest Service (TFS) budget 
per district per year is estimated to be around TSh 100,000,000 for forest monitoring and beekeeping in Kibondo and 
Kakonko, whereas for Kasulu, the TFS budget is estimated to be slightly higher at TZh 300,000,000 per year. These figures 
were used to estimate government spending across five years in three districts. Discussions are ongoing with regional 
authorities to provide more accurate estimates of projected government contributions. 
including establishing 
nurseries, 
management and 
governance, and 
maintenance systems. 
Supporting mushroom 
cultivation and kitchen 
gardens in refugee 
camps.  
Activities 
3.1, 3.3 
 
As noted, some of the above investments and projects are still in discussion and negotiation stages and are only 
indicative of interventions the project will potentially coordinate with.  However, the table clearly illustrates that baseline 
degradation issues — including those resulting from the recent influxes of refugees and already impacted by climate 
change — are already being addressed by development and humanitarian financing. As environmental degradation in 
refugee hosting areas continues to be a key priority of the government, it is expected that new initiatives will be initiated 
by the Government with other funding sources during the course of the GCF project implementation.  
Table 2 does not include development financing allocated through district, regional, and national government 
investments and budgets in climate smart agriculture, alternative livelihoods, forestry, soil management, catchment and 
basin management, and land use planning activities in Kigoma. However, it is estimated that over the project duration 
public expenditure from local government authorities on related activities could be around USD 1,7 million. 107 The 
project will build on government policies and activities on environment and forest management and will closely 
coordinate with local government authorities throughout the project implementation to ensure project activities 
complement and reinforce government expenditures, plans and priorities. 
  
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram) 
Problem Statement 
 
Kigoma is experiencing rising temperatures as well as increasing rainfall intensity and variability, which will contribute 
to an increase in the frequency and severity of floods, droughts, heat stress and fires. Observed changes in weather 
patterns have produced impacts that have compounded environmental degradation, as well as negatively affecting 
agricultural outputs, incidence of pests and diseases, forest resources and deforestation, surface- and groundwater 
availability, and soil erosion and fertility. Projected climate changes will further exacerbate these impacts. These 
changes are threatening local rainfed and ecosystem-reliant livelihoods in the region. 
 
Climate hazards interact to produce impacts on ecosystems and agriculture that include: i) soil erosion — and 
subsequent soil nutrient and moisture loss; ii) water logging; iii) damage to crops and infrastructure; iv) reduced water 
availability; v) proliferation of pests and diseases; and vi) geographical shifts of agro-ecological zones and ecosystems. 
In turn, these impacts create negative feedback loops that amplify the effects of future climate hazards on an already-
pressurised landscape. These hazards and impacts are putting local livelihoods at risk and undermining the capacity of 
already-strained ecosystems to provide services for host communities and refugees. As the impact chain pathway 
(Figure 9 on page 23) above shows, the effects of projected climate changes on the agro-ecological system compound 
existing impacts from non-climate drivers, whilst simultaneously contributing to the factors that underlie the non-climate 
drivers themselves. Moreover, development (non-climate) impacts on ecosystems — which are likely to be exacerbated 
by climate change — are compounded by population growth, including the influx of refugees and host communities and 
refugees’ limited capacity to access financing, technology and information for adaptation.

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31 
 
 
 
108 Types of conflict include theft, skirmishes, and sexual and gender-based violence. Refer to Annex 6. Environmental and 
Social Management System for assessment of potential conflicts and their management. 
Insufficient access to natural resources and diminishing ecosystem services contribute to conflict both within and across 
refugee and host communities108. Accessing resources and inputs for adaptation is critical for maintaining livelihoods 
and ecosystem services in the project’s target sites, particularly given the historical impact of ‘business as usual’ land-
use planning and livelihood activities in refugee camps and host communities. In the absence of the intervention, the 
vital ecosystems of the Kigoma region may become irreparably degraded, which will be compounded by — and 
contribute to — the impacts of climate change on the agro-ecological system. Given the target districts’ reliance on 
agriculture, high rates of poverty, and refugees’ adaptive capacity being constrained by limitations on their livelihood 
activities, this will threaten the livelihoods and lives of most people in the project area.  
 
While other activities in region are addressing discrete elements of these problems, there is limited landscape-level 
coordination of these interventions. Additionally, projects and activities addressing humanitarian or development 
concerns have limited consideration for the long-term impacts of climate changes or have insufficient scale to trigger a 
paradigm shift.  
 
Preferred Solution 
 
The theory of change for this project (Figure 10 below) has the following goal statement:  
 
IF ecosystem-based adaptation is integrated into land use planning and development and humanitarian policies, key 
ecosystems restored/sustainably managed and resilient livelihoods practised, THEN climate-resilient sustainable 
development will be promoted thereby reducing community vulnerability BECAUSE of enabling policy and planning 
processes, healthy ecosystems and improvements to food security. 
  
The project interventions aim to disrupt the abovementioned feedback loops by strengthening organisational capacity 
and providing knowledge, technologies and other resources to address worsening conditions under climate change and 
the barriers to adaptation for host communities and refugees. Concretely, by undertaking land use planning, restoration 
of degraded ecosystems, promoting climate-resilient livelihoods, and mainstreaming successful actions into policy; 
institutional systems will be strengthened and ecosystem and livelihoods resilience will improve among host 
communities and refugees in the refugee hosting areas of the Kigoma Region.  This will be because communities will 
have the resources and knowledge to undertake adaptation activities, and local capacity will be created to accommodate 
needs of refugees and host communities in policy and planning. 
 
In order to complete participatory climate resilient land use planning and related environmental management, the project 
will strengthen district and community planning and management capacities and create greater environmental 
awareness among communities.  
 
The restoration of the degraded ecosystems will be largely informed by the completed land use planning processes. In 
addition, protection and monitoring support will be provided for selected impacted national forest reserve areas. 
Restoration of ecosystems will be achieved by facilitating and promoting Community Based Forest Management; 
undertaking agroforestry and village land afforestation.  In the refugee camps, flood and erosion control measures will 
be introduced that will help avoid soil run-off and erosion.  
 
To promote climate-resilient livelihoods and to provide incentives for sound environmental management and 
conservation, the project will promote climate resilient agriculture through the provision of inputs and transfer of skills 
and technologies to strengthen the capacities of farmers and district officials. Furthermore, through water harvesting 
and irrigation, water availability and water use efficiency will be improved. To promote livelihood diversification, including 
as a risk mitigation strategy, the project will strengthen skills and capacities to undertake beekeeping and mushroom 
cultivation.  
 
To anchor the gains and positive outcomes of the project, knowledge and lessons will be mainstreamed into national 
and local government structures and wider humanitarian programmes.  This will be achieved by generating and 
documenting evidence, disseminating information and providing inputs and knowledge to policy and planning 
processes.  
 
In order to address the mutually reinforcing system of climate impacts with an equally networked response, the project 
proposes four interconnected outputs, described in detail in B.3 below, delivering direct benefits to 15,000 households 
(80,000 people) and restoring 42,000 hectares of land.

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 1 will involve the development of climate-resilient land-use plans (C-LUPs) in host community villages (Activity 
1.1), applying a comprehensive landscape- and ecosystem-approach that includes for the needs of multiple 
stakeholders. Climate resilient land use planning within camps and villages will be coordinated through the project and 
maximize opportunities for mitigating climate impacts, such as through afforestation in key upstream areas and planning 
small-scale flood control infrastructure to reduce downstream flooding and erosion in host communities. Guided by the 
high-level perspective of these land-use plans, the land- and water-management interventions under the following 
outputs are therefore designed to cumulatively enhance the capacity and resilience of each catchment’s mosaic of 
ecosystems to continue to provide services to the camps and host communities under future climate conditions. This 
will ensure coherence and complementarity between interventions and will enable the project to address the complex 
system of projected climate impacts and hazards anticipated at the landscape level. The C-LUPs developed under this 
output will inform the landscape-level monitoring of ecosystem benefits by defining the coverage of each project activity.  
 
In Output 2, Community Based Forest Management (CBFM) interventions (Activity 2.1) will seek to improve the 
protection of natural forest systems and enhance ecosystem services. Simultaneously, the sustainability and ownership 
of this conservation is reinforced by the agroforestry and afforestation interventions (Activity 2.2), providing sustainable 
alternative sources for energy needs, thereby reducing pressure on the natural forests and allowing them to regenerate. 
Demand for fuelwood will be diverted from slow-growing indigenous Miombo ecosystems, towards fast-growing 
plantations that will be established on marginal land. Similarly, the agroforestry interventions, by providing multiple uses 
such as food, fodder, shade for crops, and sustainable fuelwood production, will further deter activities or behaviour that 
degrade the natural forest systems — including unsustainable fuelwood collection and charcoal burning109. The trees 
would be valued and protected due to their multiple uses including fodder, shade, and contribution to wood fuel supply. 
The shift from activities which degrade ecosystems towards more sustainable behaviour will also be facilitated by the 
improved income generation and savings associated with the enhanced agricultural and livelihood activities under 
Output 3. Consequently, pressure on the surrounding natural ecosystems will be further reduced. Reductions in the rate 
of deforestation and forest degradation will be measured by remotely sensed derived data relative to the baseline and 
projected business-as-usual deforestation rates (see Section 7.3 of the Feasibility Study). Soil and water conservation 
will benefit agriculture and livelihoods. Communities’ direct involvement in the project and its participatory design is 
intended to support awareness and provide incentives for communities to contribute to their preservation, further 
enhancing the sustainability and interdependencies of the project’s outputs.  
 
The flood and erosion control measures (Activity 2.3) will also contribute to strengthening the climate resilience of the 
project’s natural landscape. The interventions under this activity will substitute the services provided by ecosystems in 
areas that have been degraded to the extent of having insufficient natural flood-attenuation capacity. These measures 
will contribute to reducing the impact of floods on soil erosion, damage to crops and infrastructure, and waterlogging. 
Ultimately, this will help to support the resilience of the agriculture, forestry and agroforestry measures, contributing to 
restoring soil moisture and nutrients, as well as providing other ecosystem services and livelihood outcomes.  
 
Under Output 3, agroforestry will also support the climate-resilient agriculture interventions (Activity 3.1). This will be 
achieved through strengthening of the capacity of agricultural landscapes to sustain or improve yields under various 
climate conditions, through intercropping and boundary tree planting (see Activity 2.2 project description for details). 
These agricultural interventions will also be supported by the rainwater-harvesting and irrigation interventions (Activity 
3.2) which will help decrease risks to agricultural activities associated with increasing water stress and prolonged 
drought. The coverage of agroforestry adoption will be mapped in Output 1 and will be monitored by the changes in the 
remotely sensed seasonal vegetation index and productivity signals. 
 
The alternative livelihood interventions in beekeeping (Activity 3.3) will operate symbiotically with the forest interventions 
under Output 2. Investments in forestry systems will also support the flood-mitigation impacts of the interventions under 
Activity 2.3, contributing to reducing waterlogging as well as soil erosion, nutrient loss and moisture loss.  
 
The interactions described above will jointly contribute to strengthening the resilience of the landscape under future 
climate change conditions. This landscape approach will be institutionalised and upscaled to similar landscapes and 
scenarios under Output 4. Under this output, the results of the planning processes and physical interventions 
implemented under Outputs 1–3 will be used to demonstrate the economic, environmental and social value of this model 
to stakeholders. As a result, a shift in land-use planning and activities in target ecosystems will occur away from 
unsustainable practises leading to landscape degradation, towards climate-resilient landscapes and livelihoods. The 
activity will consist of capturing evidence of the ecosystem-wide benefits (Activity 4.1), developing communication

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
 
 
 
110 Village Land Use Plans are tools for conserving priority areas, reserving land for investment, reducing land use conflicts 
and establishing market opportunities that benefit rural economies.  
111 For example, Uvinza District has VLUP in 40% of its villages (25/60 villages) – Source: Regional Secretariat of Kigoma 
products for policy- and decision-makers to appreciate and replicate the landscape interventions (Activity 4.2), and 
drafting revisions to key plans and policies and supporting their integration into national and district government planning 
processes, to promote up-scaling of the EbA model (Activity 4.3).  
 
 
Proposed project approach 
 
The project will adopt an integrated landscape EbA approach to help communities manage floods, droughts and higher 
temperatures.  The project proposes an intervention strategy considers the mosaic nature of the landscape and the 
interconnectivity of various land uses. The complex human-ecological interface of the refugee context has also been 
considered by using a variety of tested and innovative tools at different levels across the development-humanitarian-
climate nexus. This approach includes joint meetings between host communities and refugees, awareness-raising and 
participatory processes to manage benefit sharing arrangements between host communities and refugees and facilitate 
sustainable offtake, promote ecosystem protection, and minimise conflict over resource use. The solution would also 
be complementary to other projects operating in the area that focus on other dynamics of non-climate drivers (such as 
demand-side energy use).  
 
 
Key barriers to reducing vulnerability and supporting resilience in the Kigoma region  
 
The proposed project will overcome a number of identified barriers that impede building the climate resilience of host 
communities and refugees in Kigoma. 
 
 
Institutional, planning, knowledge, and regulatory  
 
Barrier 1. Limited capacity in local institutions and processes to plan for and address long term climate vulnerabilities.  
The institutions providing support to the region are not well positioned to address long term climate vulnerabilities, as 
they have limited capacity and expertise to adequately promote adaptation. Whilst other districts in the region have a 
greater uptake of Village Land Use Plans (VLUPs)110,111, very few VLUPs in Kibondo, Kakonko and Kasulu districts, 
have been finalised, although several are in the process of development. The low uptake of VLUPs is caused primarily 
because of budget constraints due to various competing priorities at the District level. An additional challenge is related 
to the limited capacity of District Environment Management Committees to support ward and village environmental 
management committees in developing and enforcing the VLUPs, a challenge noted by district government officials 
during consultations in September 2020. While VLUPs provide a participatory approach to decision-making and 
administration of natural resources, they do not typically support communities in planning for resilient ecosystems.  
VLUP processes also seldom benefit from formal climate risk and vulnerability assessments. This barrier is reinforced 
by insufficient awareness by planners of the value of ecosystems services, which constrains the adoption of ecosystem-
based approaches to adaptation.  
 
Barrier 2. Refugees and the special needs of their host communities are not well articulated in adaptation policies, 
legislation, planning or programmes.  
Although policies and legislation in Tanzania provide an enabling environment for the adoption of adaptation 
interventions in some areas, refugees and the special needs of their host communities are not yet adequately 
considered in adaptation policies or activities such as National Adaptation Plans and Programmes, river basin plans, 
forest management plans, and health strategies. There are also opportunities for tailoring guidelines such as on climate 
smart agriculture, health and other plans and guidelines to the acute needs of host communities and refugees. 
 
Technological   
 
Barrier 3. Limited access and uptake of agricultural, forestry or land management technologies or knowledge to improve 
climate resilience. 
 
Kigoma is predominantly rural, with very limited access to agricultural, forestry or land-management technologies that 
can enhance the resilience of the region to future climate impacts. Farmers’ vulnerability is exacerbated by low levels 
of knowledge and capacity to implement resilient climate-smart agricultural practises such as those that promote soil

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 
conservation, minimum tillage, and other practices. In the long term, this results in the application of ineffectual means 
of production, unsustainable methods of cultivation. Access to inputs such as climate resilient varieties of crops and 
their seeds, materials for beekeeping and mushroom cultivation are limited. These farmers also lack resilient technology 
such as small-scale in-stream water infrastructure and pumping systems and have limited alternative income 
opportunities to substitute potential losses of crop production. For forestry-related activities, there is limited use of 
agroforestry in and around the project sites. Moreover, robust analysis of climate resilient species for afforestation and 
agroforestry is not present in Kigoma and requires specialist knowledge.  
 
With regards to monitoring of natural resources within Kigoma, the TFS is constrained by limited technologies available 
for patrolling and incident recording/reporting. Owing to the vast size of national forest reserves within Tanzania and 
surrounding the project area, current patrolling methods (foot patrols) are unable to cover the full extent of forest 
reserves. This is of importance as ~64% of the forest area in Tanzania falls under this type of management system. In 
addition, forest management plans are often either non-existent or not properly implemented, owing to limited expertise 
among monitoring teams for monitoring and patrolling activities. Where such plans do exist, uncertainty among 
monitoring teams and communities around responsibilities, costs and benefits leads to a limited uptake of the plans. As 
a result, encroachment and illegal harvesting of natural resources in forest reserves is common. Where local 
governments also participate in the management of forest reserves, their planning, management and monitoring 
capacity is severely constrained by lack of technological resources — brought about by both limited access to financial 
resources and training/upskilling services as described below.   
 
Financial 
 
Barrier 4. Low purchasing power of smallholder-farmers and refugees limits access to inputs for resilient agriculture and 
other long-term investments.  
The limited leverage of smallholder farmers and refugees reduces their access to equipment and improved planting 
materials for resilient agriculture and other investments in longer term solutions. Common markets allowing for 
exchange of goods and services between refugees and host communities were also closed in 2019, limiting flows and 
access to inputs. There are still markets within the camps although reduced in size and volume of transactions. More 
information is included in Annex 2.1. Feasibility Study Section 5.2.  
 
Barrier 5. Financial services are insufficient in the region, except for some savings associations.  
In the absence of formal financial services, mobile money services have been widely adopted by refugees and on a 
small scale by aid agencies to facilitate e-cash transfers. Digital cash is used to buy food in local markets both inside 
and outside the camps. The insufficient availability of local financial services and technical knowledge in the region limit 
the promotion and uptake of climate-resilient adaptation options. Although saving associations are present, they have 
limited capacity for high-level oversight and management to support savings and bulk procurement.  This compounds 
the already limited capacity of smallholder famers and refugees to access finances or credit for investing in resilience-
building inputs or livelihoods. Consultations undertaken in September 2020 noted that the scale of investment in savings 
associations in refugee camps was limited compared with host communities, and in some cases, savings associations 
required the monetisation of food rations.  
 
Barrier 6. Limited investment in Kigoma region and competing development priorities defer long-term adaptation 
planning or leave it underfunded.  
Although climate change adaptation is a priority for Tanzania, and whilst humanitarian activities are receiving 
international funding, the coordinated nexus of these clusters is underdeveloped at present, and as a result, generally 
underfunded. This discordance is reinforced by generally low investment in the region, as well as limited long-term 
planning, high levels of poverty, and more immediate social needs diverting priorities towards short-term interventions. 
District government budgets are very limited and nowhere near sufficient to address the climate adaptation needs in 
the region. Estimated amounts allocated to environment in district budgets are to the tune of $40,000.  The investments 
in adaptation required are public goods and require grants. Revenue streams for some livelihood activities are available, 
but with relatively low returns per beneficiary making loan products not viable. More information per activity on the 
nature of investments, implementation and management arrangements, financial returns on investments and other 
information are available in Annex 2.1 Feasibility Study and Annex 3. Financial and Economic model.  
 
Also, some development initiatives are struggling to mobilize resources to address environmental issues. To illustrate, 
the Kigoma Joint Programme that aims to provide development support to refugee hosting areas in the region has thus 
far not been able to mobilize any funding under its environment and energy theme. In addition to barriers to knowledge 
and access to technology, the actual funding is lacking.  
 
Social

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 
 
112 Refer to Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Action Plan section 1.4 for more information. 
  
Barrier 7. Unique needs and challenges related to working with host populations and their refugee communities.  
Refugees have limited adaptive capacity, as they have insufficient local adaptation knowledge as compared to the host 
community, cannot access the formal economy, have limitations in employment and livelihood activities due to the 
encampment policy, and have limited access to basic services (other than what is provided by humanitarian partners). 
Women smallholder farmers and refugees are particularly vulnerable to climate impacts because of limited access to 
capital, lack of land tenure, traditional gender roles, social and cultural norms, and limited access to training, decision-
making process and financial resources. 112 
 
Overcoming the key barriers 
 
Barrier 1 will be overcome by working with local government authorities to facilitate the development of climate resilient 
village land use plans (Output 1). These plans — and the participatory process by which they are developed — will 
provide the framework upon which subsequent interventions will be based, thereby ensuring their sustainability and 
effectiveness. This process, in combination with the upscaling interventions under Output 4, will also contribute to 
addressing Barrier 2 and strengthening the institutional and regulatory systems for climate-responsive planning and 
development. The participatory process and inclusion of both camps and host communities, will also help address 
Barrier 7, contributing towards ensuring the durability of the refugees in the medium- and long-term. 
 
Outputs 2 and 3 will address Barrier 3, through activities in capacity building through the Farmer Field School approach, 
and hands-on engagement in the project interventions, livelihoods, and resource management, as well as physical 
interventions and inputs in forestry and agriculture. For the forestry sector, interventions will focus on implementing 
Community-based Forest Management (CBFM), including enhancing the technical and institutional capacity of the 
Tanzania Forest Service (TFS) to monitor and protect the North Makere, South Makere, Mwale and Buyungu National 
Forest Reserves. Inputs in agriculture will also help to address Barrier 4. Using the Savings Association model to 
distribute inputs for Output 3 in host communities, will contribute to the sustainability of the project whilst also addressing 
Barriers 4, 5 and 6.  
 
Finally, Output 4 will contribute to scaling and institutionalising the mechanisms by which these barriers are being 
addressed, whilst also independently contributing to addressing Barriers 2, 5, 6 and 7. By specifically targeting 
institutions and key decision-makers, these activities will help subvert the underlying causes of these barriers to 
adaptation.

=== PAGE 40 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Theory of change diagram showing how the project design responds to barriers to achieve climate resilience. (To make 
the diagram readable, the linkages between the activities are illustrated in Figure 11 below).

=== PAGE 41 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
 
 
Together, the abovementioned interventions will overcome the barriers to climate change adaptation in Kigoma, 
thereby contributing to a paradigm shift in host communities and refugees’ climate-resilience. This shift will ultimately 
ensure that individuals, institutions and ecosystems move away from unsustainable practises and climate-vulnerable 
livelihoods, towards adaptation and climate-resilient sustainable development. In addition to the direct benefits to 
project beneficiaries the proposed project will also yield significant mitigation and gender co-benefits. The mitigation 
potential of the project has been estimated at a sequestration of 762,073 million tCO2e and emission reductions of 3.2 
million tCO2e over 20 years — including a five-year implementation period — as a result of avoided deforestation, 
improved agricultural practises, afforestation and agroforestry (estimated using the FAO Ex-Ante Carbon-balance 
Tool). For further detail, please see Appendix C and the project descriptions, under Sections 7.3.1, 7.3.2, and 7.4.1 in 
the Feasibility Study.   
Gender inequality in climate change adaptation planning and action is expected to be reduced through meaningful 
representation and participation of women in Climate-resilient Land Use Planning (C-LUP) to support ecosystem-
based adaptation.  
Additional environmental, economic, social and gender co-benefits are identified in section D3.

=== PAGE 42 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Proposed landscape approach to overcoming the barriers to adaptation showing how the proposed outputs and activities 
map onto the landscape’s mosaic of land uses 
Output 1. Participatory Climate-resilient Land Use Plans developed (C-LUP) to support ecosystem-based adaptation
1.1 Develop the land use plans in host community villages, considering a whole ecosystem-approach, that will provide the 
framework for Outputs 2 and 3 to cumulatively enhance the capacity and resiliency of the project landscape
CBFM establishes 
forest protection
Improved income generation & savings from agricultural 
and livelihood activities diverts communities from forest 
degrading behaviour
1.1 Climate resilient village land use planning
Output 4. Information on climate change adaptation disseminated and mainstreamed into policies, plans 
and strategies in Tanzania and in humanitarian programmes
Agroforestry & afforestation 
enhance CBFM’s sustainability
Resilient agricultural & 
alternative livelihoods
Water availability further 
reduces climate vulnerability
Forest systems provide ecosystem services that 
enhance agricultural & alternative livelihood outputs
4.2.  Develop communication products to 
disseminate project results to policy- & decision-
makers in Tanzania & UNHCR
4.1.  Generate evidence of the economic benefits of 
ecosystem-based adaptation to host & refugee 
populations, for use by policymakers & planners
4.3. Draft revisions to key plans & policies & support 
their integration into national & district government 
planning processes to promote up-scaling of the 
EbA model
Output 2. Degraded ecosystems restored 
to support climate change adaptation in 
host and refugee communities
2.2. Implement 12,000 hectares of agroforestry and 
village land afforestation to increase resilience of 
land use
2.1.  Implement Community Based Forest 
Management (CBFM) for resilient ecosystems
2.3.  Implement flood and erosion control in densely 
populated areas to reduce the exposed and flood-
prone ferralsol-type soils which have little or no 
vegetation cover
Output 3. Climate-resilient livelihoods 
practiced to increase the capacity of host 
communities to better adapt in changing 
climatic conditions
3.3.  Promote climate resilient livelihood 
diversification to strengthen food security & 
nutrition, provide alternative income as a safety net, 
&  sustain the impl. of climate resilient agric. & 
forest management practices.
3.1.  Promote modern tech & management practices 
to strengthen capacity of farmers, district officials & 
agric. extension workers in climate resilient 
agriculture
3.2.  Increase water availability and use-efficiency 
through water harvesting and efficient irrigation 
interventions.
Flood & erosion control 
interventions substitute for degraded 
ecosystems, reducing impact of 
floods on agro-ecological system
Agroforestry supports capacity of 
agricultural landscape to sustain 
or improve yields
Climate resilient agriculture and alternative 
livelihoods have vested interest in maintaining 
service-providing ecosystems
Improved income generation & savings from agricultural 
and livelihood activities diverts communities from forest 
degrading behaviour
Results of the planning processes & physical interventions 
used to demonstrate the economic, environmental & social 
value of landscape approach to institutionalise & upscale
Provides evidence base
Knowledge transfer to engender buy-in

=== PAGE 43 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
 
 
 
113 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Hydrologic Engineering Center's River Analysis System (HEC-RAS), 
https://www.hec.usace.army.mil/software/hec-ras/ 
114 Refer to Section 3.4 of Annex 2. Feasibility Study for an expanded discussion of selection and design. 
The selection and distribution of interventions for each sub-catchment where the target host communities and refugees 
are located will be scaled relative to the attributes (including population) of each camp and host community, as well as 
by contextual land use practises and flood risk. This approach aims to provide equitable benefits from the agr iculture, 
forestry and flood mitigation interventions under Outputs 2 and 3, that are appropriate to the on-the-ground context. The 
preferences of beneficiaries and the experience of local partners will be incorporated to ground-truth the intervention 
planning, but the initial distribution of interventions which this proposal describes is based on the relative population, 
number of host community settlements (villages), differential land use practises, and flooding risks in each sub-
catchment. 
• 
Population and village level analysis was undertaken using the NASA ~1 km Estimated Gridded Population dataset 
for 2020. 
• 
Basic land use analysis was conducted using ESA CCI 30 m land cover product, highlighting areas of activity 
engaging agriculture, areas of grasslands and shrubs, as well as the allocation of woodlots or forests that may be 
providing EbA benefits.  
• 
Flooding analysis (to inform distribution of interventions) was undertaken using the observed ERA5 hourly 
precipitation reanalysis to inform storm event characteristics in combination with SRTM 30 m topography data as 
the inputs for the HEC RAS hydrologic model113 .  
• 
These factors aid in intervention selection, design and prioritisation to build resilience of target beneficiaries that is 
appropriate, locally owned and has high prospects for sustainability 114. 
 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization 
Fill in the GCF results area table below to map each project/programme outcome identified in section B.2(a) to the contributing 
GCF results area(s) by referring to the description of eight results areas provided in the guidance note.  
Outcome 
number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation 
and access 
 
MRA 2 
Low-emission 
transport 
 
MRA 3 
Building, 
citiies, 
industries, 
appliances 
MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use 
ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities 
ARA 2 
Health, well-
being, food 
and water 
security 
ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment 
ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services 
Outcome 
1:Strengthened
policy and 
planning 
systems to 
promote 
climate-
resilient and 
sustainable 
resource 
management 
at the 
landscape 
level    
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☒ 
Outcome 2: 
Increased 
resilience of 
ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services in the 
project area  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
Outcome 3: 
Community-
level livelihood 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐

=== PAGE 44 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
 
 
 
115 Although they are technically not allowed to travel beyond a 4 km buffer zone, 10km is the approximate maximum 
distance that refugees have been reported to travel on foot to collect firewood for cooking and so is the area most 
significantly impacted by their presence.  
vulnerability to 
climate risk 
reduced in the 
project area 
Outcome 4: 
Improved food 
security in the 
project area 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
If any co-benefits have been identified in section B.2(a), fill in the Co-benefit table below to map each co-benefit to the 
corresponding category as defined in the FP guidance note. 
Please refer to section B2 a) for mitigation and gender co-benefits and section D3 for the description of other 
additional environmental, economic , social and gender co-benefits. 
Co-benefit 
number 
Co-benefit 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
Gender 
Adaptation 
Mitigation 
Co-benefit 1: 
Mitigation  as a 
result of 
avoided 
deforestation, 
improved 
agricultural 
practices, 
afforestation 
and agroforestry   
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
Co-benefit 2: 
Reduced 
gender 
inequality in 
adaptation 
planning and 
action 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
Co-benefit 3 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Co-benefit 4 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) 
 
This proposed project will address the urgent need for climate change adaptation for both host communities and 
refugees through four Outputs, namely: i) participatory, climate resilient land-use planning in villages; ii) improved land 
use and forestry management; iii) climate-resilient agriculture and livelihood diversification; and iv) information on 
climate change adaptation disseminated and mainstreamed into policies, plans and strategies in Tanzania and in 
humanitarian programmes. The project will focus on those areas that have been most degraded and are most vulnerable 
to climate change. These areas are the Nduta and Nyarugusu refugee camps, the former Mtendeli camp area and, 
within each camp’s catchment, the host community settlements located within ~10–15 km of the camp boundary115. 
Refugees in the former Mtendeli camp, with the exception of those opting for voluntary repatriation, were relocated to 
Nduta camp and would therefore continue to benefit from the project activities planned in the camps.  Therefore, the  
final beneficiaries under the project will be defined as the refugees in the Nduta and Nyarugusu camps. As part of the 
decommissioning process, UNHCR will embark on Mtendeli former camp rehabilitation to facilitate environmental 
restoration with the contribution of GCF project investments in flood and erosion control measures inside and around 
the camps, including Mtendeli former camp area. Figure 12a below shows the distribution of activities between host 
communities and the camps and Figure 12b shows how adaptation benefits accrue to different groups in response to 
climate change impacts and risks. The selection, scale and design of interventions have been informed by the needs,

=== PAGE 45 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
 
 
challenges, and available services in the respective sites and landscape connections. For example, concerns of erosion 
and flooding from increased runoff are more relevant in the high-density settlements of the camps where ground cover 
is limited and where people cannot always move out of flood prone areas — in contrast to the lower densities and 
greater mobility of communities around the camps. Conversely, the camps have more reliable water supplies and 
agricultural land is limited, so rainwater harvesting interventions are not as critical as in the host communities. The 
project maximises upon the mosaic of land uses, population densities and adaptation potential in the project area, 
targeting interventions geographically and by population to achieve the most effective, relevant and transformative 
impact. 
 
Figure 12a. Project structure mapping activities at the host community and camp levels showing the project execution 
arrangements 
 
Project 
interventions 
Increased 
severity of 
wildfires 
Increased 
frequency/intensity 
of floods 
Increased 
occurrence 
of 
prolonged 
droughts  
Increased 
water stress 
Increased 
occurrence 
of pests and 
diseases 
Increased heat 
stress 
Output 1 - Participatory Climate-resilient Land Use Plans developed (C-LUP) to support ecosystem-based adaptation 
1.1 Village land use 
planning 
 
Participatory planning to ensure success and 
sustainability of Outputs 2 and 3 
Output 2 - Degraded ecosystems restored to support climate change adaptation in host and refugee communities 
2.1 Community 
based forest 
management 
X 
X

=== PAGE 46 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
 
 
2.2 Agroforestry and 
village land 
afforestation 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
2.3 Flood and 
erosion control 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
Output 3 - Climate-resilient livelihoods practised to increase the capacity of host communities and refugees to better adapt 
in changing climatic conditions 
3.1 Climate resilient 
agriculture practises 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
3.2 Rainwater 
harvesting and 
irrigation 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
3.3 Livelihood 
diversification 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Output 4 - Information on climate change adaptation disseminated and mainstreamed into policies, plans and strategies in 
Tanzania and in humanitarian programmes supported by UNHCR 
4.1 Economic 
evidence base for 
EbA 
Establishes the institutional framework for the replicability 
and upscaling of the impacts under Outputs 1–3 
 
4.2 Communication 
products for scaling 
and mainstreaming 
project results 
4.3 Adaptation 
integrated with 
national and district 
planning processes 
 
Figure 12b. Climate change hazards addressed by each of the proposed interventions  
 
The project area has been defined (see Section 3.3 Project boundary and site selection in the Feasibility Study for 
detail) taking into account land use, administrative boundaries, population distribution and geographic and hydrological 
features around the camps. The selection and distribution of interventions for each catchment will be scaled relative to 
the attributes (including population) of each camp and its host communities, as well as by contextual land-use practises 
and flooding risks. Within the sites, these will be distributed through the land-use planning processes in Output 1. This 
approach aims to provide equitable benefits from the agriculture, agroforestry and flood mitigation interventions under 
Outputs 2 and 3, that are appropriate to the on-the-ground context. The preferences of beneficiaries and the experience 
of local partners will be incorporated to ground-truth the intervention planning, but the initial distribution of interventions 
which this proposal describes is scaled based on the relative population, number of host community settlements 
(villages), differential land-use practises, and flooding potential in each catchment. 
 
The project will be implemented by the Government of Tanzania, acting through its Vice President’s Office (VPO) and 
UNHCR, particularly on interventions in the refugee camps, as Executing Entities (EEs). The Government of 
Tanzania, acting through its Vice President’s Office (VPO), as lead EE will oversee and manage project 
implementation, with and through appropriate implementing partner organisations including local government 
authorities and, if and when required, engaging technical experts, and national and international NGOs.   Selection of 
the technical experts and national and international NGOs will be undertaken by the executing entities VPO and 
UNHCR. UNEP will provide guidance to VPO to select partners in line with UN partnership policies and procedures. 
Selected partners will be subject to a due diligence process considering conflict of interest, human rights and gender 
equality, alleged involvement in cases of irresponsibility/litigation/green washing and reputational risk as well as 
specific technical capacities, strategic capacities, financial capacity to undertake the partnership and procurement 
procedures. 
UNHCR will be the executing entity for the project activities 2.3 and sub-activities 3.2.1 and 3.2.2. The training/capacity 
development sub-activities 3.2.3 and 3.2.4 will be under the responsibility of the VPO to be implemented by the District 
Councils. Through committed co-financing, UNHCR will implement activities in the camps (contributing to activities 
2.2and 3.3) and the infrastructures planned in Activity 3.2.

=== PAGE 47 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
 
 
 
116 Detailed activity descriptions covering descriptions of interventions and their climate resilience, lessons learned from 
other projects and best practices, analysis of alternatives and suitability of the proposed option, factors influencing design 
and scale of intervention, implementation arrangements, risks and exit strategy can be found in Section 7 of Annex 2. 
Feasibility Study. 
117 The project Ecosystem-based Adaptation for Rural Resilience financed by the Global Environment Facility and 
implemented by UNEP plans to mainstream climate resilience in land use planning in selected wards and districts in 
Tanzania. Lessons learned and experiences will be shared with the GCF project. 
118 http://www.unpei.org/sites/default/files/PDF/Uganda-report-study-tour-TZ-march09.pdf. 
UNHCR will implement activities in consultation with MoHA. As the government authority responsible for overseeing all 
activities inside the camps and/or involving refugees, MoHA will have a supervisory role at government level.  This role 
will be recognized in a cooperation agreement between VPO and MoHA. This legal instrument will govern the transfer 
of funds for supervision costs from VPO to MoHA and the reporting requirements. Section B.4. Implementation 
arrangements contains further detail on the nature of these partnerships, the selection process, existent operating 
partnerships, and indicative organisation’s track records and suitability.  
 
Component 1. Increased resilience of ecosystems and people to climate change threats 
 
Output 1: Participatory Climate-resilient Land Use Plans developed (C-LUP) to support ecosystem-based 
adaptation116.  
 
The GCF funding request for the Output is US $ 1,062,805.  
 
This is the starting point for all project interventions, developing participatory climate-resilient land-use plans that are 
consistent with an ecosystem-based adaptation approach (EbA) and which will inform the design and distribution of 
subsequent Outputs.  
 
 
Activity 1.1. Support climate-resilient village land use planning  
 
It is the intention that the Village Land Use Planning process, and the subsequent interventions that are planned 
through this process, are carried out in villages in the target area surrounding the camps, near Mtendeli former camp 
area, Nduta camp and Nyarugusu camp. 
 
The Village Land Use Plan (VLUP) is an overall plan showing how land resources, located within the village boundaries, 
should be used to meet declared objectives. Lessons learned from these efforts suggest that while such participatory 
processes may require a considerable amount of time and resources, they successfully resolve conflicts around the use 
of natural resources, and they provide great opportunities for communities to take control and ownership of shared 
resources. The project will adapt this established approach, introducing the overall objective of increasing the climate 
resilience of the landscape into the planning process, resulting in a Climate-resilient Land Use Plan117. This will improve 
upon the VLUP process, by acknowledging and addressing the role of the changing climate in shaping local ecosystems 
and landscapes. This process will also help with identifying practises and behaviours that will become unsustainable 
under future climate conditions, in order to divert activities in anticipation. Participatory land-use planning is widely 
practised in the country and the project follows the effective approaches promoted by the UNDP-UNEP Poverty 
Environment Initiative in Kigoma118 as well as numerous resources from FAO, International Land Coalition, Enabel, 
Jane Goodall Institute, and IUCN in the country. The overall goal of this activity is to strengthen the capacity of actors 
and institutions that deal with land tenure and to apply ecosystem-based planning, thereby providing a comprehensive 
approach for implementing the other activities envisioned under this project. This would foresee a central role for district 
authorities in the implementation of planning activities, as an Implementation Partner. Completing the land-use planning 
is pre-requisite for carrying out the climate-resilient practises implemented later under Outputs 2 and 3.  
 
Technical assistance to facilitate the process and capacity building will be provided through experienced local partners 
with an understanding of the VLUP process. This process (and the interventions under Outputs 2 and 3) will further be 
supported by parallel awareness raising of the threats and opportunities of climate change in host and transient Sukuma 
communities.  
 
Although village land use planning is typically a public good, in the case of Kigoma, limited financial resources and 
institutional capacity remain barriers to landscape level land-use planning. Consultations undertaken in September 2020 
noted a lack of capacity amongst Village Environmental Management Committees to enforce village by-laws and 
regulations contained in existing land-use plans, as well as limited capacity amongst the District Environmental 
Management Committees to support the Ward and Village Environmental Management Committees. This has led to

=== PAGE 48 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
 
 
 
119 Ongoing government processes to develop land use plans are outside the scope of this funding proposal (e.g. not supported by 
project financing). Additional support will be provided through the project to processes that have started but which have not 
been finalized. The information collected by VPO from District Officials in November 2021 indicates 5 villages out of 9 in the 
surroundings of Nduta camp have ongoing VLUPs, 1 village out of 6 in the surroundings of Nyarugusu camp have ongoing VLUPs 
and no villages in the surroundings of Mtendeli former camp have VLUPs. 
 
ad-hoc land-use patterns and an inefficient spatial distribution of economic activity, where much of the land is under-
utilized or mismanaged. In addition to providing the public good of wide-scale land use planning, this activity will improve 
the definition and understanding of the property rights systems to ensure that markets can operate effectively. 
 
The beneficiaries of this activity will be: i) population of villages participating in land use planning process and receiving 
climate change awareness-raising (~300,000 beneficiaries in approximately 20-25 villages, or equivalent and agro-
pastoralist groups located in those communities); ii) local and regional government officials receiving capacity building; 
and iii) local and district management institutions being strengthened. Beneficiaries of other host community-based 
activities in Outputs 2 and 3), would be drawn from this population. 
 
The VLUP processes supported by the project in host communities under output 1 are participatory in nature and the 
national guidelines provide suggestions to ensure that women are represented in the decision-making process. The 
VLUP seeks to include agreements that change traditional land management practices, thus improving the position of 
women in controlling land and natural resources.  
 
Sub-activity 1.1.1. Scale-up land use planning for villages, and support to issuance of Certificates of Customary Rights 
of Occupancy (CCRO) 
 
The objective of participatory decision-making is to ensure the most effective use of land resources through negotiation 
between different interests. The guiding principles of this approach are equity, efficiency, viability, conservation and 
sustainability. The development and creation of land-use plans therefore requires a framework and forum where 
stakeholders meet, communicate, formulate strategies and implement them collaboratively. Because such a plan 
requires consensus, it can also provide a means of resolving conflict, for example about the boundaries between 
adjacent villages or the demands of competing land uses (for example, forestry versus grazing; water-source protection 
versus agriculture).  
 
Considering that the process of developing land use plans has already begun in some villages 119, the project will pursue 
a staged approach, helping to support the finalisation and enforcement of Land Use Plans already in development, in 
addition to developing new plans (see Annex 2.1 Feasibility Study section 7.2.1 for details). The 2011 National Land 
Use Planning Commission (NLUPC)’s guidelines describe six main steps to follow when developing VLUPs. As well as 
following these guidelines, the village and land use plans advanced or developed under this Activity will take into 
consideration the resource needs of camps which extend outside of camp boundaries. The project will also aim to 
develop benefit sharing schemes, to negotiate the complexities of serving camp needs from village forestry and 
afforestation. The first five steps of the NULPC’s guidelines, as listed below. 
1. 
Establishing a District-level Participatory Land-Use Management (PLUM) team 
2. 
Carrying out a participatory rural appraisal (PRA) 
3. 
A Village Land Use Management (VLUM) committee is set up 
4. 
Formalising the Village Land Use Plan 
5. 
Identification of appropriate land management measures 
 
The sixth and last step of the VLUP process is the issuance of a Certificate of Customary Right of Occupancy (CCRO), 
which is the long-term, legal outcome of the VLUP — with the process typically taking between four and six months. 
The CCRO specifies rights conferred to a land occupier and user following tribal customs and traditions on land. Under 
the customary land tenure system, land belongs to the whole tribe, clan and family, while tribal leaders are the 
custodians on behalf of the members. The Village Land Act (1999) confers these custodial powers to Village Councils 
and Village Assemblies in registered villages. Once the VLUP has been prepared and adopted by the Village Assembly 
and approved by District Council, the issuance of the CCRO is a formal issuance, albeit with some cost implications to 
be covered by the project (for example formal mapping of boundaries and depositing of information with registrar of 
Lands). The project will support this relatively small incremental cost to promote project ownership, engender support 
and lead to sustainability of project outputs and outcomes. CCROs for communal lands will be allocated at village level 
to provide long-term security for the villagers and may be used as collateral if borrowing money for village infrastructure.

=== PAGE 49 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
 
 
 
Depending on the level and extent of the LUPs already in development, funding allocated should allow for the issuance 
of 20-25 CCROs by project end. For further information please see Section 7.2.1 of the Feasibility Study. Following the 
steps on land use planning, bylaws and governance arrangements regarding land use would be formulated by the 
communities, including guidance on land and water management, including fire risk management in the face of climate 
change.  
 
Access of Sukuma people, agro-pastoralists, and other groups, to grazing land, will be given full consideration in the 
land use planning process of the project. Their participation in the land use planning process activities will be an 
important part of the process. Certificates of Customary Right of Occupancy will be used to secure communal land 
rights, including that for agro-pastoral use and grazing. Through the risk management framework, the project will 
routinely monitor any likely tension between refugees, host communities and other beneficiary groups. 
 
Sub-activity 1.1.2. Build capacity of local and regional government officials to support ecosystem-based adaptation and 
landscape restoration 
 
Capacity building will be provided to support district officials and Tanzania Forest Service officers in including climate 
impacts and risks for the region into the land-use planning processes, enabling PLUM teams (Participatory Land Use 
Management — see Implementation Arrangements) to support communities to embed these impacts in the allocation 
of land to different purposes. This will ensure that different land uses are mutually supportive. This capacity building will 
be provided by local consultants over a 2.5 years’ period (Years 1, 2 and 3) and supported by the provision of hardware 
and materials to district officials, including inter alia GIS software and tools, crested paper for CCRO printing etc.  
 
Since planning for climate resilience is a key project objective, ecosystem-based adaptation principles should be 
integrated into the land-use planning process. A risk-informed planning process considers future climate impacts and 
expected impacts on the agro-ecological zones and on the communities. District PLUM teams will require capacity 
building in advance, in order to facilitate the process with communities, which will include a community risk assessment 
process, the identification of hazards and their mapping on village land, the identification of specific siting of adaptation 
measures for each village (i.e. the activities suggested in this project) and intervention designs to account for climate 
change, for example for Activity 2.3 on flood and erosion control and Activity 3.2 on water harvesting and irrigation. The 
training material and the detailed nature of the technical assistance should be defined in the inception phase of the 
project.  
 
Sub-activity 1.1.3.  Improve public awareness of climate change by sharing information on climate change risks in the 
land use planning meetings   
The project will also use the opportunity of the community organisation during the VLUP consultation process to conduct 
training and awareness raising on climate change and good environmental management practices. Led by the District 
Governments, topics covered in this training would include describing the projected climate changes, impact such as 
wildfire risks, adaptation strategies and the importance of local ecosystems and the services they provide. This will 
support the land-use planning process, by providing a greater understanding of the projected changes to the landscapes 
in the project area, which would also help with compliance and enforcement. By improving their awareness of climate 
change, this training will also help to support the capacity of the host communities to generally build their resilience, in 
addition to supporting the uptake and buy-in of the forestry, agricultural and livelihood activities under Outputs 2 and 3. 
Training and public awareness raising will also target Sukuma agro-pastoralist communities that contribute to 
deforestation and ecosystem degradation in the project area, but  are not currently included in wider community 
conservation or land use planning processes. The refugee committees, who will be involved in the participatory process 
for Village Land Use Planning in the villages immediately surrounding the camps, will also benefit from the training and 
awareness raising on climate change and good environmental management practices under this sub-activity. Training 
would be conducted by project staff and district government, in coordination with the land-use planner and consultants.  
 
Sub-activity 1.1.4. Support District, Ward and Village Level Environmental Management Committees (EMCs) 
In order to overcome the challenges and sustainability issues of previous/ongoing VLUP processes, the project will 
strengthen the District-, Ward- and Village-level EMCs and improve coordination between the different levels. This will 
be achieved through the development of coordination protocols and structures, regular reporting and monitoring 
systems, and providing upskilling to EMC members at all levels. Training on conflict resolution and benefit sharing will 
also be provided to EMC members at all levels to ensure that the project contributes to reduced potential for conflict 
between natural resource users. This will capacitate EMC members to facilitate discussions when conflicts amongst 
beneficiaries have arisen, ensuring that suitable resolutions are identified and agreed on by all parties.  
Furthermore, benefit sharing agreements regulating the use of, and access to, shared natural resources will be 
formalised in the protocols and structures developed under this sub-activity, which will be undertaken through

=== PAGE 50 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
 
 
 
120 Refer to Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Action Plan for further discussion and Section G.2 below. 
consultation with all stakeholders and validated during engagement workshops.  These agreements may involve host 
community only, or host communities and refugees in villages bordering the camps, considering the resource needs of 
the camps extend outside the camp boundaries (ex. Fuelwood collection). The objective is to facilitate sustainable 
offtake, promote ecosystem protection, and minimise conflict over resource use. EMCs will have ownership of these 
agreements, and representatives of EMCs at all levels (including district, ward and village level) will facilitate their 
development in collaboration with appropriate stakeholders (further information is provided in Annex 6). The 
establishment of such agreements is supported by the Tanzanian Forest Service (TFS). In addition, the effectiveness 
of benefit-sharing agreements will be ensured by establishing strong linkages between EMCs and Water User 
Associations (WUA). Conflicts that cannot be resolved by EMCs will be addressed under the project’s grievance redress 
mechanism (presented in Annex 6: Environmental and Social Management System). Combined with building capacity 
of local and regional government officials (Sub-activity 1.1.2) and awareness-raising (Sub-activity 1.1.3) these 
interventions will help to ensure the sustainability of VLUPs, whilst supporting buy-in for their guiding the implementation 
of Outputs 2 and 3. 
 
 
Output 2: Degraded ecosystems restored to support climate change adaptation in host and refugee 
communities  
 
The GCF funding request for this Output is $9,978,657. UNHCR co-financing of USD $3,060,086 will go toward technical 
staff support and activities in forestry and flood reduction infrastructure in the camps and with selected activities, such 
as tree planting, also being implemented in the host communities. 
 
All of the host communities and refugees in the project area live within or near forests. Both host communities and 
refugees use timber and forest products construction of shelters and other uses as well as fuelwood. Efforts to manage 
deforestation and unsustainable offtake of fuelwood — such as patrol services from the Tanzania Forest Services (TFS) 
and community groups — are limited as a result of underfunding. The result of pressure on the forest cover by both 
host communities and refugees is a degraded landscape with low soil stability, increased soil erosion and soil loss, 
reduced soil-nutrient availability, and reduced soil moisture. This makes the landscape susceptible to climate change 
impacts, less able to retain water resources required for these livelihoods and making the landscape more susceptible 
to flooding. This in turn reduces its capacity to support agricultural and other livelihood activities.  
 
The land-use and forestry interventions will restore critical ecosystems to meet climate adaptation needs and improve 
ecosystem services. The outcome of the C-LUP process in Output 1 will determine specific areas where afforestation, 
natural forest regeneration and agro-forestry interventions will be carried out. The starting point for all project 
interventions will be the development of climate-resilient land-use plans to support EbA in the previous output. This is 
a fundamental step in determining how the proposed interventions will be planned and delivered. Major steps of the C-
LUP process will include the identification of specific siting of adaptation measures for each village and intervention 
designs to account for climate change — for example, for Activities 2.3 on flood and erosion control and 3.2 on water 
harvesting and irrigation. Additionally, as the process identifies village forest areas, it is also an entry point for the 
preparation of community-based forest management plans and for agroforestry interventions (see Output 2). The land-
use plans that are generated will then become the basis for the delivery of project activities (as described in Outputs 2 
and 3). For example, in consultation with TFS and District Councils that are key stakeholders in the planning process, 
villages that have identified a village forest will be supported to implement Community Based Forestry Management 
(see Activity 2.1).  
 
In addition to the climate adaptation objectives, the activity has significant social co-benefits. Adequate management of 
resources, opportunities for joint planning and benefit sharing schemes particularly for fuelwood, increasing available 
fuelwood resources, and protection of forest reserves have the opportunity of reducing conflict over resource use 
between host communities and refugees. Significant gender co-benefits are also expected. Provision of fuelwood closer 
to the camps (for example, within a 4 km radius) reduces risks of gender-based violence as incidents are more common 
the further refugee women walk from the camps120. 
 
The land use planning in host communities and forestry related interventions are expected to lead to better managed 
natural resources which will substantially reduce women’s work burden as less time will be spend collecting fuelwood. 
Moreover, and particularly for refugee women, the exposure to threat and GBV or other forms of violence will be reduced 
as they will no longer be compelled to move far from the camp boundaries in search of fuelwood. Finally, host community 
and refugee relations will improve as existing and expected future conflicts over fuelwood and deforestation will be 
mitigated.

=== PAGE 51 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
 
 
 
121 Malimbwi RE. 2000. An Inventory Report of the Principal Timber Resources of the Miombo and Riverine Woodlands and 
Forests of Rufiji District. 
122 Refer to Section 7.3 of Annex 2. Feasibility Study for further description of the role of Miombo woodlands in the 
landscape, and the project approach to provide alternative fuelwood sources and protection of natural forests. 
123 Nzunda EF Luoga EJ & Mahuve TG. 2011. Community-based forest management in Tanzania: Strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities and threats. Sokone University of Agriculture. 
This Output includes the activities described below. 
 
Activity 2.1.  Implement Community Based Forest Management (CBFM) for resilient ecosystems 
 
This activity will be conducted in village and national forests surrounding the three camps.  District Councils, in 
collaboration with Tanzania Forest Service (TFS) will lead the implementation of this activity with support from the 
Technical Partner and local NGOs with experience in facilitating the establishment of VLFR (for example REDESO or 
JGI) and the Technical Partner. 
 
The principal objective of this intervention is to implement CBFM in forest areas such as Miombo woodlands anchored 
to host communities.  Miombo is acknowledged for its resilience in the face of disturbances such as tree cutting for 
wood fuel, a characteristic that boosts the ecosystem’s potential to supply wood fuel over long periods, so long as the 
area is not repeatedly subject to fire or grazing pressure. Miombo woodland has the potential for a long-term supply of 
wood, when managed properly121122. The extent of degradation in the area, as well as decreasing returns from woodland 
resources, demonstrate that common-pool resources (forested land) are not being efficiently managed. The underlying 
reasons for this are predominantly institutional and are outlined below. Market failures around the ineffective 
management of common-pool resources will be addressed, in conjunction with Activity 1.1, through the implementation 
of CBFM. 
 
The concept of CBFM is already a central strategy of Tanzania’s Forest Policy (1998), Forest Act (2002) and National 
Forest Programme (2001) and has been successfully rolled out across the country — although very limited in the 
Kibondo, Kakonko and Kasulu Districts of Kigoma Region. Under CBFM, villagers take full ownership and management 
responsibility for an area of forest as a Village Forest Reserve. Following this legal transfer of rights and responsibilities 
from central to village government, villagers may harvest timber and forest products, collect and retain forest royalties, 
and undertake patrols (including arresting and fining offenders). They are exempt from local government taxes on forest 
products and from regulations regarding ‘reserved tree’ species, and they are not obliged to remit any royalties to 
government.  
 
Experience of CBFM has demonstrated effectiveness in improving ecosystem functions, as well as addressing poverty 
by enhancing livelihood conditions and providing alternative income to rural communities in Tanzania123. By integrating 
specific climate resilience objectives in CBFM — especially for threatened forest ecosystems, as in the case of the 
target regions — this approach can have a considerable climate adaptation potential by strengthening the adaptive 
capacity of forest-dependent communities. Community management is also preferential to central ‘top-down’ oversight 
for its advantages in reducing transaction costs, promoting local ‘ownership’ and responsibility for natural resources and 
promoting community cohesion and social capital. CBFM will replace conventional methods of protecting forest by 
government Forest Departments using Forest Guards to patrol and arrest local people found within forests. This 
conventional method alone has not been successful — Forest Departments are seldom sufficiently well-resourced to 
undertake the work and supervision is lacking. Figure 14 in page 45 shows the extent of forest loss in around Mtendeli 
former camp. 
 
Village Land Forest Reserves (VLFR) are designated sites declared under sections 32 and 23 or gazetted under section 
35 of the Tanzania Forest Act of 2002. According to this Act, the village council declares VLFRs based on the existing 
Village Land Use Plan. These forests are managed by the village forest management committees and are under general 
supervision of the village council. The village council may launch application to the National Director of the Forests and 
request gazettement of the forest. Upon clear commitment of the Village Council on the management of the forest, the 
Director in the Public note, declares the reserve to be a gazetted Village Land Forest Reserve. The management of the 
gazetted reserve is guided using the set of by-laws approved by the Director and implemented by the village forest 
management committees.  
 
Most of the VLFRs in Kibondo, Kasulu and Kakonko District are still in the stage of declaration by the village council. 
Although public gazettement of the forest by the Director upgrades the forest to a high-level conservation status, less 
than 10% of the VLFRs have this status. The cost implication and difficulties in slowness of the approval process has 
previously discouraged the option. Therefore, sustainability of the VLFRs will be ensured by the project commitment to

=== PAGE 52 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
 
 
support the full chain VLFRs gazettement, strengthening community institutional monitoring systems, and promoting 
conservation benefits to the users. 
 
This activity aims to bring 30,000 ha of land under CBFM, which is ~70% of the forested area within the project 
boundaries. This will provide benefits to most of the population of the project area covered by the land use planning in 
Output 1, through avoided degradation and associated ecosystem service provision. The major ecosystem services 
that could be promoted through Output 1 include inter alia soil stabilisation and reduced erosion, increased soil moisture 
and fertility, increased water infiltration leading to improved groundwater recharge, fuelwood collection and food 
provision. A co-benefit of the VLFRs is reduced exposure of local communities to forest areas that may contain high 
densities of tsetse flies, thereby minimising cases of sleeping sickness.     
 
The specific villages and land area to be included in the CBFM system (as well as for the afforestation and agroforestry 
under Activity 2.1) will be chosen through the land use planning process under Output 1, although these will be chosen 
with the specific criteria in mind and in collaboration with the TFS, including:  
• 
village forest land availability; 
• 
level of degradation of village forest land 
• 
whether the area falls within the sub-catchment of a camp; 
• 
priority for those that are adjacent to, or within the 4 km ‘buffer zone’ around the camps (where refugees are 
permitted to travel within to collect firewood);  
• 
the existence of provisional processes or interest for establishing CCRO or an existing forest reserve with 
management arrangements;  
• 
whether there is strong potential for forest protection (forests are not severely and irrecoverably degraded); and 
• 
if there is potential for collaborative benefit sharing schemes between refugees and host communities, where 
appropriate 
• 
if bylaws or community management arrangements are in place 
• 
consultations with stakeholders including agropastoralists, village leaders, and District Councils.

=== PAGE 53 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
 
 
 
124 Refer to Annex 2. Feasibility Study Section 2.2.6 for analysis of land cover change across the project sites. 
 
Figure 14. Forest loss in Mtendeli former camp124. The pink cross hatch represents the extents of local villages.  
 
The underlying policy goal for CBFM is to progressively bring unprotected woodlands and forests under village 
management. Descriptions of the adaptation potential for forest regeneration and management through CBFM are given 
in Table 3.  
 
Table 3. Adaptation potential for forest regeneration and management through CBFM. 
Characteristics 
Description 
Geographic area for 
implementation 
Village forests 
Climate hazards and 
impacts addressed 
• 
Increased damage to crops and infrastructure from more severe wildfires, more 
frequent and intense floods and prolonged droughts.

=== PAGE 54 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
 
 
 
125 Pienaar B, Thompson DI, Erasmus BFN, Hill TR & Witkowski ETF. 2015. Evidence for climate-induced range shift in 
Brachystegia (Miombo) woodland. South African Journal of Science. Volume 111 (Number 7/8):1–9. 
126 For more information, see Section 7.3.1 of Annex 2. Feasibility Study. 
127 RECOFTC, 2015. The role of Community Forestry in Climate Adaptation in the ASEAN region.  
128 Ibid. 
• 
Increased soil erosion from more frequent and intense floods and prolonged 
droughts, leading to the loss of soil nutrients and moisture. 
• 
The above impacts result in lower agricultural yields, leading to reduced income 
generation potential and diminishing food security  
• 
Potential impacts of shifts in temperature and precipitation to the range of Miombo 
woodlands125,126. 
Impacts addressed and 
adaptation potential127 
Increased damage to crops and 
infrastructure from wildfires 
Community forest management assists in 
preventing illegal ignitions, reducing the occurrence 
of severe wildfires. 
Increased damage to crops and 
infrastructure as well as soil 
erosion from floods 
Healthy forest ecosystems increase infiltration and 
decrease surface water run-off, therefore reducing 
floods and soil erosion.  
Increased damage to crops and 
soil erosion from droughts 
Through increased water infiltration, forests 
regulate hydrological processes, increasing 
groundwater recharge and reducing the impact of 
droughts.  
Soil nutrient loss 
Healthy forests enhance soil retention and increase 
soil microflora and fauna, increasing soil fertility  
Soil moisture loss 
Reduced runoff and the increase in soil fertility by 
healthy forests increases soil moisture 
Additional benefits that 
increase resilience128 
The resilience of local communities — by providing secure access to forest 
resources and to additional streams of income, CBFM strengthens livelihoods and 
increases food security, leaving them less vulnerable to climate change. The forests 
also perform a vital safety-net function by providing a range of non-timber forest 
products (NTFPs) that can be consumed directly or sold in local markets. NTFPs can 
increase the diversity of household income and nutrition. Forests, therefore, can help 
bridge the climate, humanitarian and development divide and build a resilient 
livelihood base, even in the face of climate change. 
 
The social capital of local communities — because community forestry is based on 
flexible and participatory management, it establishes decision-making structures that 
enable rapid and effective responses to change, climate or otherwise. These 
processes mobilise local knowledge and skills, allowing communities to connect to 
wider conservation efforts and to join in national planning and policies. 
 
Sub-activity 2.1.1.  Establish and manage 30,000 ha of Village Land Forest Reserves 
 
An established process towards CBFM exists and is described in the national CBFM Guidelines. As described in the 
national CBFM Guidelines, the process towards CBFM comprises six main stages, as described below. 
1. 
Assessing the existing resource/deciding what is required to bring it under effective protection and management. 
2. 
Preparing a provisional Management Plan — which is discussed and shared with the refugee communities and 
approved by the Village Council and Assembly. 
3. 
Implementing the Plan: electing a Management Committee; appointing patrol teams; agreeing and demarcating 
perimeter boundary; zoning the forest for protection and use (e.g. seasonal grazing; beekeeping, grass cutting); 
keeping essential records. 
4. 
Reviewing and revising the plan after at least one full year of implementation. 
5. 
Legalising the Plan — agreeing and formalising rules, and enacting village by-laws to enforce them. Under this 
project, the legalisation of village forest land is planned under Output 
6. 
 1, and this include formalising the by-laws under the CCRO 
7. 
Declaring and registering the Village Land Forest Reserve and its by-laws with the District Council.

=== PAGE 55 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
 
 
 
129 The engagement of District Councils and other implementing partners will be subject to a due diligence process, also as 
described below in Section B.4. 
130 The identification of NGOs is subject to criteria and processes outlined in Section B.4. 
District Councils of Kibondo and Kakonko Districts are expected to lead the implementation of this activity, in 
collaboration with Tanzania Forest Service and the technical advice from the Technical Partner 129.  In Kibondo and 
Kakonko Districts REDESO has been facilitating development of 16 community-based forest management plans for the 
village forests reserves. The project will support this established CBFM process by: 
• 
training facilitators (District Council staff / TFS staff / extension staff); and 
• 
identifying appropriate NGO support organisations as required130; 
• 
supporting field operations to build capacity of local Forest Management Committees to prepare implement and 
monitor land and resource management plans, including fire risk management plans. This support will be provided 
by the trained Facilitators. The project will support their training and field costs (travel and DSA). 
 
Sub-activity 2.1.2. Provide equipment and training for forest monitoring in national forest reserves for 10 forestry and 
natural resources officers. 
 
Two national reserves in close proximity to Nyarugusu in the Kasulu District — including North Makere (75,325 ha) and 
South Makere (59,500 ha) — have been greatly impacted by deforestation. Other forest reserves of concern include 
Buyungu Forest Reserve (74,430 ha) situated close to the Mtendeli former camp in Kakonko and the Mwale Forest 
Reserve (10,386 ha) in Kibondo. The Tanzania Forest Service Agency (TFS) has the mandate to protect the national 
forest reserves, as well as the forested areas on general land. The vastness of the reserve areas and the limited 
manpower and mobility constrain protection efforts.  
 
Host communities and district officials confirmed there is substantial grazing, fuelwood collection, and agriculture activity  
ongoing in the national reserve areas, where soils are fertile. Fires are also used to clear and regenerate land, despite 
the increased risks especially under climate change. Land is cleared and cultivated for a few years, after which the soil 
fertility diminishes, and the land is abandoned. In Kalimungoma, respondents also mentioned deforestation liked to the 
lime industry, where lime stones are illegally excavated and fuelwood is required to produce lime powder, which is 
subsequently sold to the lime industry. 
 
The sub-activity will empower TFS by increasing forest monitoring extent and improving the mobility of patrol teams to 
enhance the protection of the Makere, South Makere, Mwale and Buyungu National Forest Reserves. This will be 
achieved by developing forest management plans for the national forest reserves within the project area as well as 
setting clear boundaries for the conservation and monitoring of target areas. The existing monitoring systems of TFS 
will be strengthened with the development of a GIS-based forest monitoring data management system that integrates 
satellite imagery with high-resolution drone imagery and field data in a GIS platform.  TFS is progressively incorporating 
the use of GIS for fire monitoring with support of a JICA project and is willing to expand the use of GIS to monitor forest 
cover and fire risk management in Kigoma region. The integration of drone surveillance is considered particularly 
relevant in the transboundary context of Kigoma to assist in the control of illegal deforestation activities in the National 
Forest Reserves (~219,642 ha) in the target districts. The monitoring system will build on the experience of Jane Goddal 
Institute (JDI) in the use of ArcGIS to monitor the impact of VLUPs on the Village Forest Reserves in the area of the 
Gombe National Park and the Community Forest Monitoring Dashboard launched in Kigoma in January 2016 by the 
JGI, Blue Raster, local and regional government officials and other partners.  
 
To support these activities, TFS staff will be provided with equipment to maximise the coverage of monitoring in a cost-
effective way, including monitoring of the National Forest Reserves (NFR) and Village Forest Reserves. Such equipment 
will include: i) drone hardware  appropriate for the target NFR surface area and suitable for high altitude flight, as well 
as drone software and the required licenses; ii)  smartphones/tablets that contain Open Data Kit (ODK) and GPS units 
for the capturing of geo-location data; iii) IT equipment and GIS software, iv ) fire management gear and  camping 
equipment to be used in the field by patrol teams and v) electronic calibres to monitor tree growth.  
 
Training will also be provided to these staff on inter alia the efficient and effective use of drones for landscape monitoring, 
data collection techniques such as the use of transects to collect data and the use of the GIS -based monitoring system. 
In addition, training will be provided to TFS staff on conflict resolution and community engagement, to ensure that in 
situ conflict with and between land and resource users (both project beneficiaries and the broader population) is resolved 
effectively. This is in line with the TFS’s mandate on enforcement of laws and regulations in areas under its jurisdiction, 
and its support for the design and implementation of appropriate benefit-sharing agreements under Sub-activity 1.1.4. 
Should TFS staff not be able to adequately resolve conflicts, the affected parties will be referred to the grievance redress 
mechanism established under the project (refer to Annex 6: Environmental and Social Management System for more

=== PAGE 56 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
 
 
 
131 Findings from the Feasibility Study 
132 Options for species selection are in Annex 2. Feasibility Study and informed by current SNV projects in Kigoma. 
detail). Together, interventions under this sub-activity will strengthen TFS staff’s capacity for climate-responsive 
planning, monitoring and the protection of 219,642 ha of national forest reserves.This, in turn, will contribute to reducing 
the risk of fires in the project area, as well as preventing agricultural encroachment and land degradation in Tanzania’s 
forest reserves. Through the Village Land Use Planning process under Activity 1.1.1, boundaries of national forest 
reserves will be demarcated, and land use around them will be agreed upon to be consistent with conservation 
objectives. The land use planning process and the support to Environmental Management Committees under Activity 
1.1.4 will contribute to education, awareness raising, and effective communication of land use regulations and good 
environmental practices to local communities and agropastoralists.  
 
Activity 2.2. Implement 12,000 hectares of agroforestry and village land afforestation to increase resilience of land use  
 
This activity will be implemented in and around host community villages surrounding Mtendeli former camp area, Nduta 
camp and Nyarugusu camp as per the VLUPs.  District Councils, in collaboration with Tanzania Forest Service (TFS), 
will lead the implementation of this activity with support from the Technical Partner and local NGOs/CBOs for community 
facilitation.   
 
The principal objective of this intervention is to increase the number of trees across the agricultural (non-forest) 
landscape through agroforestry and village land afforestation. At landscape scale, agroforestry improves crop 
productivity and provides important ecosystem services including watershed protection and hydrological regulation, as 
well as biodiversity conservation and carbon storage. Most farms in the region are small-scale and rain-fed. Although 
some agroforestry systems — particularly agri-silviculture and silvopasture — have been adopted in the wider region, 
the benefits of agro-forestry do not appear to be well known to farmers in the target districts and uptake is presently 
low131. The training provided under this activity, and under the climate-resilient agriculture interventions in Activity 3.1, 
will help to address the presently low uptake and will promote ownership, sustainability and scalability of this 
intervention, by demonstrating the ecosystem and agricultural benefits of this approach. Complementary to this, village 
land afforestation can restore ecosystem services and establish a sustainable supply of fuelwood, taking the pressure 
off of native forest systems.  
 
In providing interventions on the supply of fuelwood this project will complement others in the region focused on energy 
demand, including those that promote alternative energy sources (see Section B.1 Investments in the Target Project 
Area). By doing so the proposed project will address the degradation of slow-growing Miombo woodlands, which are 
being cleared for fuelwood. Through this intervention existing projects with a focus on CBFM and afforestation will be 
scaled up. For example, regeneration of natural forests through CBFM in Kibondo and Kakonko districts has been 
occurring under the auspices of REDESO and UNHCR since 2016 via the Village Natural Forest Reserves (VNFR) 
project, as well as under the SNV Netherlands Development Organisation project entitled Renewable Energy Service 
and Products as an Opportunity in National and Displaced (RESPOND) Markets of Kigoma Region. Before the 
introduction of these projects there was a large dependency on wood collected from forests as a primary fuel source for 
residents of both refugee camps and host communities, resulting in extensive deforestation of surrounding areas. 
Consequently, these projects intervened to enable villages and refugee camps to access alternative fuel sources as a 
means of conserving surrounding natural forests. Under the REDESO project, woodlots have been created in eight 
villages (four per District) with a total of 496,522 and 504,025 seedlings planted across 447 and 454 ha in Kibondo and 
Kakonko districts, respectively. The proposed GCF project will be able to build on the work already done in the project 
area to restore forest cover and reverse the drivers of a degraded landscape with low soil stability, reduced soil nutrient 
availability, and reduced soil moisture. This will therefore reduce the susceptibility of the landscape to the impacts of 
climate change and improve its ability to support agricultural and other livelihood activities, retain water resources 
required for these livelihoods and reduce susceptibility to flooding. 
 
As with Activity 2.1, this activity will correct a market failure associated with the unsustainable management of common-
pool resources. The direct beneficiaries of this activity will include those engaged in the growing, planting and 
maintenance of agroforestry across 12,000 ha (~35% of the total farmed area within project boundaries), some of whom 
may additionally benefit from other activities, including 2.3, 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3. Additionally, these agroforestry systems 
will provide ecosystem benefits to the broader population of beneficiaries, predominantly in the host communities. These 
ecosystem benefits include increased water infiltration and reduced runoff, consequently resulting in reduced risk from 
flooding and erosion as well as increased soil stabilisation and fertility. The final species chosen for planting will be 
determined by a Species Suitability Assessment, which will be informed by fire risk assessment, among other factors 132.

=== PAGE 57 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
 
 
 
133 Lasco et al. 2014. Climate risk adaptation by smallholder farmers: the roles of trees and agroforestry. Current Opinion on 
Environmental Sustainability, 6:83–88. 
134 Ibid. 
135 VPO as the executing entity will contract such organizations as implementing partners as described in Section B.4. 
Sub-activity 2.2.1. Establish and maintain 10,000ha agroforestry systems to restore ecosystems that are critical to meet 
climate adaptation needs; and set up nurseries for production of tree seedlings 
 
Tanzania is home to several traditional agroforestry systems that have been used for hundreds of years. Some have 
been documented: the Chagga home-gardens, the related Mara region home-gardens known as Obohochere and the 
traditional Wasukuma silvopastoral system called Ngitili. One outstanding aspect of these traditional methods is the use 
of multi-layered systems with a mixture of annual and perennial plants, which imitate natural ecosystems. In the target 
area, agroforestry does not seem to be widely practised and few examples of on-farm tree planting were observed, 
mainly involving banana trees, some small-scale fuelwood plantations on farms, and natural Elephant grass (magugu) 
planted in the areas around the camps. Interviews with farmers consulted for this study showed a lack of awareness of 
the benefits of planting fodder trees, and an underappreciation of their value in supporting animal husbandry. 
 
Spatial land use analysis indicates ~28,000 ha of agricultural/crop land in the project area. Project ambition is to reach 
35% of this area at a density of 500 trees/ha (see Appendix B for further detail on assumptions) for a total of 10,000 ha. 
This requires 2,500 ha/year in years 2–5 inclusive, although this planting may be most intensive in years four and five 
given the time taken to familiarise with methods and benefits of agro-forestry. Small-scale community nurseries, growing 
~50,000 seedlings per year, are already a feature in the project area, and it is proposed that equivalent nurseries are 
established in 15–20 sites in project villages and in cooperation with the TFS in order to provide the number of seedlings 
required. 
 
The deliberate integration of trees and shrubs in crop systems offer a means of increasing climate and livelihood 
resilience, as described in Table 4 below. 
 
Table 4. The increased climate and livelihood resilience from integrating trees and shrubs in crop systems. 
Characteristics 
Description 
Geographic area for 
implementation 
In villages, on-farm and off-farm  
Climate hazards 
and impacts 
addressed 
• 
Increased damage to crops from more severe wildfires, more frequent and intense 
floods and prolonged droughts. 
• 
Increased soil erosion from more frequent and intense floods and prolonged 
droughts, leading to the loss of soil nutrients and moisture. 
• 
Heat stress leads to lowered crop productivity or crop death. 
• 
The above impacts result in lower agricultural yields, leading to reduced income 
generation potential and food security. 
Impacts addressed 
and adaptation 
potential133 
Increased damage to 
crops and infrastructure 
from more intense 
rainfall and floods  
Contour planting of trees will decrease exposure to intense 
rainfall and reduce run-off, thereby protecting crops. 
Increased damage to 
crops and soil erosion 
from droughts  
Through increased water infiltration, forests regulate 
hydrological processes, increasing groundwater recharge and 
reducing the impact of droughts. 
Increased heat stress 
Shading and increased soil moisture from trees reduces heat 
stress for crops.  
Soil moisture loss  
Increase the retention of soil moisture and increase fertility of 
soil, reduces erosion. 
Soil nutrient loss 
Keep the soil in place and stimulate soil microflora and fauna 
(i.e. encourage biodiversity) and increase fertility. 
Additional benefits 
that increase 
resilience134 
A co-benefit is the production of timber and fuel, thus providing an alternative means of 
renewable energy and reduces economic vulnerability by diversifying production as it acts 
as a security against total crop failure.  
 
Agroforestry activities will be facilitated by local government agriculture and forestry officials and sub-district extension 
and TFS staff, supported as required by contracted local NGOs/CBOs 135. The Technical Partner will provide training

=== PAGE 58 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
 
 
 
136 Kigoma Region Basic Demographic and Socio-Economic Profile 2016 
137 Quigley P. 2016. Providing energy for cooking: an analysis of fuel options in refugee camps in Tanzania. Geneva, 
Switzerland, UNHCR.  
138 See Appendix B of Annex 2. Feasibility Study. 
139 The first energy strategy for the refugee hosting areas in Kigoma was published in 1997, at which time fuelwood supplies 
were presented as the main option for meeting energy needs. The solutions to energy provision have evolved and changed 
over the intervening years. Current interventions by local and international agencies in Kigoma include large scale 
distributions of improved cookstoves and provision of energy efficiency training, it is also moving towards a significant 
increase in the use of liquid petroleum gas. Further details on demand-side energy interventions being undertaken in the 
region can be found below and in Section 6 of the Feasibility Study. International studies have shown that to achieve 
successful rural development, biomass fuels like firewood must first be replaced by a liquid or gaseous transition fuel like 
liquid petroleum gas (LPG). Once these are available and energy-use behaviours related to modern fuels are established, 
communities may ultimately make a final transition to electricity which can come from non-fossil fuel sources. This stepwise 
transition through the energy ladder has also been identified as the most achievable approach to improving energy access 
in Kigoma A number of actors in the region are introducing transition fuel programs, primarily improving access to LPG, to 
help refugees and host communities in Kigoma begin the move up the energy ladder, these include the Deutsche 
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) and UNHCR. As these 
fuel transition initiatives do depend on the medium-term use of fossil fuels, they are not expected to be supported by climate 
finance. However, these projects will work synergistically with this GCF project by working to meet the medium-term energy 
demand and drastically reducing the Kigoma region’s reliance on firewood, thereby creating an opportunity for the forest and 
ecosystem restoration components of this project to succeed. For further discussion, see Annex 2. Feasibility Study, Section 
7.3.2. 
and technical advisory services to the local government and forestry officials in the technical design, implementation 
and monitoring of agroforestry systems. Small-scale community nurseries, growing ~50,000 seedlings per year, are 
already a feature in the project area, and it is proposed that equivalent nurseries are established in targeted villages to 
provide the number of seedlings required. These are manageable by a small number of part-time workers. Seed, basic 
equipment (watering cans, pots) and technical support is initially provided through local NGOs or CBOs. The nursery 
area should be enclosed with a stock-proof fence. Each nursery will be supported by in-stream irrigation interventions 
(under Activity 3.2) or other sustainable sources to provide sufficient water for the seed production. 
 
Sub-activity 2.2.2. Undertake afforestation on 2,000 ha of village land to a) restore critical ecosystem services to meet 
climate adaptation needs and improve ecosystem services such as flood control, b) establish a sustainable supply of 
fuelwood which will take some of the pressure off the native miombo forest and allow it to regenerate so that it can meet 
its ecological and livelihood support functions.  
 
Pressure upon natural forest systems is predominantly driven by the local demand for fuelwood, as the main source of 
energy for cooking in both the refugee and host communities. In the Kigoma region, 98% of households rely on fuelwood 
for cooking, with 81% using firewood and the balance using charcoal136. Within the refugee camps, the average daily 
consumption of fuelwood is 1.8 kg per person 137. Only ~8% of the local fuelwood demand can be sustainably harvested 
from the Miombo woodland within 10 km of the refugee camps138. Over the past two decades a number of studies have 
been commissioned which examined the potential and feasibility of alternative energy sources to fuelwood for domestic 
cooking in the refugee camps and surrounding host communities. However, infrastructure for these technologies is still 
currently poorly developed, despite demand-side projects operating in the region139. Combined with local practises and 
a likely continued preference for fuelwood, these factors mean that pressure on the forests is anticipated to remain high 
for the near future. 
 
Table 5 below describes characteristics of village land afforestation activity. 
 
Table 5. Characteristics of village land afforestation activity. 
Characteristics 
Description 
Geographic area 
for 
implementation 
Village land 
Climate hazards 
and impacts 
addressed 
• 
Deforestation from activities such as fuelwood collection increase the vulnerability of 
surrounding ecosystems to climate hazards.  
• 
Increased damage to crops and infrastructure from more frequent and intense floods 
and prolonged droughts. Deforestation reduces the ability of forests to protect 
communities from climate hazards. 
• 
Anthropogenic deforestation exposes areas to increased soil erosion from more 
frequent and intense floods and prolonged droughts, leading to the loss of soil nutrients 
and moisture.

=== PAGE 59 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
 
 
 
140 TFS and a Technical Partner will be engaged by Tanzania VPO as implementing partners subject to the processes 
described in Section B.4. 
• 
The above impacts result in lower agricultural yields, leading to reduced income 
generation potential and food security. 
Impacts 
addressed and 
adaptation 
potential 
Increased 
deforestation 
Establish and maintain village forests that address non-climate 
drivers of vulnerability, by alleviating dependence on miombo 
forests for fuelwood harvesting.  
Increased damage to 
crops from more 
intense rainfall and 
floods 
Afforested areas and managed forests reduce run-off, preventing 
floods and soil erosion. 
Increased damage to 
crops and soil 
erosion from 
droughts 
Healthy forests under reduced pressure for fuelwood regulate 
hydrological processes, increasing groundwater recharge and 
reducing the impact of droughts.  
Soil moisture and 
nutrient loss 
By improving soil structure, afforested areas and non-degraded 
forests reduce soil erosion and prevent water and nutrient losses 
from runoff. 
Additional 
benefits that 
increase 
resilience 
The resilience of local communities: By providing access to fuelwood and strengthening 
their livelihoods with a reliable and sustainable source of energy. 
 
 
Species selection for afforestation in degraded land will be undertaken at the project inception during a rapid species 
suitability assessment led by the Technical Partner in coordination with TFS and the local government. The assessment 
will form part of the land-use planning process. This will ensure that a robust site-specific analysis is done that takes 
into account the ecology of the areas that have been identified for afforestation and economic value. Criteria to be used 
for species selection include: 
• 
Species suitability to environmental conditions (water availability, soil types, etc.),  
• 
Ecosystem services provision (e.g. rooting systems that anchor soil, prevent erosion, and facilitate infiltration, 
nitrogen-fixing species, etc.) 
• 
Productivity and growth,  
• 
Cost-effectiveness,  
• 
availability of local expertise for growing and management,  
• 
availability of seeds and plant materials 
• 
multiple uses / benefits of selected species (e.g. fuelwood, fodder, medicinal use, etc.) 
• 
market demand for forest products 
• 
community acceptance (e.g. traditional and cultural use)  
The Tanzania Forest Service (TFS)140, working together with Village Councils, will be provided with training and 
technical advisory from the Technical Partner to lead the technical design, implementation and monitoring of this 
activity. The land will remain under the control of the Village Assembly, and indeed, under Tanzania’s Forest Policy, 
such plantations can be declared CBFM forests with 100% of income arising from them reverting to the community. In 
the host communities, the afforestation labour force for the village woodlots will come from the village community 
members and be mobilised by village leaders. Afforestation will be undertaken on marginal land identified during the 
Village Land Use Planning process. To mitigate the increasing risk of wildfire and human-induced fires in the 
afforested area, TFS will conduct an assessment to identify the required firebreak areas during the design of the 
afforestation intervention which is scheduled in the first quarter of the second year of project implementation. TFS will 
establish the necessary firebreak areas through casual labour and provide fire management training for patrol teams 
and communities. 
The annual planting programme will require the production of 1,250,000 seedlings/yr in each of Years 2 to 5. An 
additional 20% should be added to these figures to allow for nursery losses and failure to establish — i.e. 1,500,000 
seedlings/yr. To minimise costs of seedling transportation, nurseries should be sited as close as possible to planting

=== PAGE 60 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
 
 
sites. As with the previous sub-activity, each nursery will be supported by irrigation interventions (under Activity 3.2) to 
provide sufficient water for the seed production. 
 
Activity 2.2 will complement the CBFM interventions implemented under Activity 2.1, which have the objective of 
protecting natural forest systems and enhancing the value that local communities place on the ecosystems they provide. 
The combined effect of these interventions will be that the demand for fuelwood from slow-growing, indigenous Miombo 
ecosystems will be diverted to fast-growing plantations and that local communities will become more involved in 
decision-making processes regulating the use of natural resources and enhancing the climate-resilience of agriculture. 
The shift from activities which degrade ecosystems towards more sustainable behaviour will also be complemented by 
agricultural and livelihood activities under Output 3 which will improve income generation and savings and reduce the 
need to produce charcoal as a livelihood source. 
 
The direct beneficiaries of this activity will include those engaged in the growing, planting, maintenance and offtake of 
the afforested woodlots across 2,000 ha (~1.5% of the total marginal land area within project boundaries), some of 
whom may additionally benefit from other activities, including 2.2, 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3. Additionally, these afforestation 
systems may provide some ecosystem benefits to the broader population of beneficiaries, to both refugees and the host 
communities. These ecosystem benefits include decreased runoff and increased infiltration, resulting in reduced 
flooding and erosion as well as increased soil stability and soil fertility.  
 
Activity 2.3. Implement flood and erosion control in densely populated areas to reduce the exposed and flood-prone 
ferrosol-type soils which have little or no vegetation cover 
 
This activity will be carried out within and in the vicinity of the refugee camps of Nyarugusu, Nduta and Mtendeli former 
camp area. 
 
As the camps were established rapidly, within a context of humanitarian pressures, limited land availability and no viable 
alternatives, this led to sub-optimal camp land-use planning. The establishment (and subsequent present layout) of the 
camps reflects a process which could not adequately consider the combined impacts of increased pressure from 
development and the increased intensity of rainfall events resulting from climate change on soils. Land (bestowed by 
MoHA) was cleared quickly, with vegetation being removed to provide space for the camps. This has amplified flood 
events in the area, leading to gully erosion, soil loss and degradation in and around the camps, as evidenced in Figure 
15 below. These are further amplified by the camps being densely populated, without opportunity to move away from 
flood risk areas and without space for run-off to drain naturally. The increased severity of flood events predicted under 
climate change are likely to result in losses for subsistence farmers, damages to homes and community facilities 
including schools, and injury and potentially loss of life. Unmanaged clearing of land in particularly sensitive areas has 
exacerbated the problem. This activity will reduce the extent to which ineffective land-use planning is resulting to flood 
risk in the camps and in surrounding host communities. 
 
In the areas outside the camps, the land-use and forestry interventions described above will increase soil stability and 
reduce the level of runoff and erosion, addressing flood impacts downstream, which are anticipated to worsen as rainfall 
intensity increases. Additionally, the interventions listed below will also contribute to flood and erosion control in host 
communities. 
• 
Soil improvements in agricultural areas (Activity 3.1) 
• 
Sensitising, awareness raising and training of local communities on how to manage local/micro (on household 
scale) storm water problems (rainwater harvesting) (Activity 3.2) 
• 
Storing water for use in dry periods (Activity 3.2) 
 
Figure 15. Erosion gullies in Mtendeli former camp

=== PAGE 61 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
 
 
 
However, in the camps, as a result of the higher population density, these types of interventions are not feasible. The 
principal objective of this intervention is to provide solutions in the areas most susceptible to erosion and floods from 
high water flows (Figure 16). The solutions themselves will be designed and use materials that are able to withstand 
changing weather extremes such as temperature and rainfall intensities based on outline technical designs in the 
feasibility study. These designs have taken into consideration flood-risk modelling under climate change conditions but 
would need to be calibrated to specific sites based on slope, local soils, and other site conditions. The package of grey 
and green flood and erosion measures will therefore be tailored to the characteristics of each camp and designed based 
on field technical assessment and stakeholder consultations carried out in the first year of implementation.  
 
Most of the refugee beneficiaries for this activity would be the inhabitants of the refugee camps of Nduta and Nyarugusu, 
with some flood-mitigation and erosion control benefits experienced by host communities located closest to the camp 
boundaries or immediately downstream. An additional co-benefit, particularly for inhabitants within the camps, is a 
reduction in the amount of standing water following high intensity rainfall events and flooding. This will reduce the 
prevalence of water- and vector-borne diseases such as cholera and Rift Valley fever.  
 
In Mtendeli former camp area, the flood and erosion control measures will be conducted after the camp closure in 
combination with other restoration interventions implemented by UNHCR.  The decommissioning of the camp (closure 
process) will be undertaken by UNHCR and other partners operating in the camp in the scope of other 
programmes/other funding sources. GCF proceeds will not be used for Mtendeli camp decommissioning. The post-
closure restoration will result in adaptation benefits for the host community in terms of i) reduced flood and erosion risk 
for downstream host communities, ii) potential for expansion of agricultural and agroforestry activities in the camp area 
and iii) enable District government plans to use the former camp infrastructure to improve access to education and 
health services.  The beneficiaries of such services will be host community in the district, since all the refugees from 
Mtendeli camp were relocated to Nduta camp in Kobondo district where have access to basic services such as 
education and health.   
 
As part of camp closure and consolidation, a taskforce, composed of MoHA at national and local level, District 
Commissioners of Kakonko, Kibondo and RC and RAS in Kigoma, UNHCR, DRC (camp management) and NRC 
(shelter &wash), has endorsed the following activities under camp clean up and environmental rehabilitation by 
relevant partners. 
1. Demolition of refugee houses/infrastructure after the camp consolidation and recycle the materials  
2. Decommission of latrines and bathing facilities  
3. Tree plantation 
4. Other activities related to environmental rehabilitations 
A rapid technical assessment was conducted in early October 2021 by UNHCR Assistant Environment Officer, and 
other technical colleagues and several recommendations are proposed for environmental rehabilitation. A joint camp 
boundary demarcation was conducted with Kakonko district authority. Kakonko District authorities are discussing the 
use of land and facilities that will remain after decommissioning to be utilized by authorities as well as to provide 
services to the surrounding communities. 
The feasibility study (Annex 2) included an analysis of land cover degradation through changes in NDVI (1981-2003), 
analysis of areas of erosion and hydraulic analysis to inform the flood profile of the camps, including Mtendeli former 
camp. The feasibility study also recommends designs and suitable areas for the location of gabions, stone-pit 
drainage channels and SUDs. A technical field assessment will be carried out in the first year of implementation to 
review and validate the final locations of the infrastructures and the technical designs required for each specific camp 
site to maximize results in flood and erosion mitigation in the camp areas and downstream villages. The results of this 
technical assessment and the stakeholder consultations will inform the Technical Dossier of the tender process for 
construction services.

=== PAGE 62 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58

=== PAGE 63 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
 
 
 
141 Contractors will be procured under applicable UN policies, rules and regulations. 
 
Figure 16. Potential locations for flood mitigation interventions in Mtendeli former camp (top), Nduta (middle), and Nyarugusu 
(bottom) 
 
Sub-activity 2.3.1. Construct 10 km of micro-scale stone-pitched drainage channels and Sustainable Drainage System 
(SuDS) interventions — including 16 stone-filled gabions and micro- infiltration trenches/ponds/soakaways — in three 
refugee camps. 
 
The beneficiaries for this intervention are primarily the refugees in Nduta and Nyarugusu camps and the host 
communities living in the vicinity of the Mtendeli former camp area, as well as the wider communities immediately 
downstream of the camp whose land and water sources may be impacted by flood and erosion events. Example 
technical designs accounting for the projected changes in precipitation, operations and maintenance requirements are 
included with the feasibility study. 
 
Stone pitched drainage channels and stone filled gabions: ~10 km of stone pitched channels are estimated to be 
required to remove water efficiently from the priority facilities and infrastructure within the camps. The installation of 16 
gabions will be needed in the main drainage channels just outside of the developed areas of the camps. These gabions 
will slow flood waters but will increase the horizontal propagation of water in doing so. These are therefore favoured 
outside of the camp area to limit this inundation. Hydrological modelling undertaken for the development of this funding 
proposal has provided indicative appropriate locations. The exact location of the drainage channels and gabions will be 
determined by the project’s water officer in conjunction with the camp authorities (Ministry of Home Affairs) and the 
Lake Tanganyika Water Basin Board (LTWBB). 
 
The traditional solutions will need to be designed and constructed by skilled technical contractors based on outline 
designs in the Feasibility Study, as they require specific technical knowledge and experience. The project’s water officer 
will be able to identify suitable contractors, either using those that constructed the existing flood control structures in the 
camps, or other local qualified contractors141.  Support can be provided by volunteer workers from with the camps.  
 
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) are systems that are constructed or engineered using man-made materials 
and/or natural systems that tend to preserve existing open space, protect natural systems (groundwater, surface water) 
for improved drainage and filtration, and make use of existing land-use plans and maintenance to manage stormwater 
flows. These options include solutions including:  
• 
infiltration trenches/ponds/soakaways; 
• 
earthen bunds; 
• 
rainwater gardens; 
• 
filter strips; and

=== PAGE 64 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
 
 
 
142 Incentive workers are refugees engaged by UNHCR or partners to undertake jobs or tasks in connection with the 
provision of assistance and services to the refugee community. Such work is often characterised as volunteering rather than 
employment, with compensation (in cash or kind) being described as an ‘incentive’ rather than a wage  
143 FAO. 2019. The United Republic of Tanzania Resilience Strategy 2019–2022. Rome. 
• 
vegetated swales. 
 
Detailed hydrological modelling undertaken has provided the indicative appropriate locations for the Sustainable 
Drainage System interventions. The exact location of the infiltration trenches, swales and bunds will be determined by 
the project’s water officer in conjunction with the camp authorities (Ministry of Home Affairs) (see Section 2.2.2 of the 
Feasibility Study). 
 
The SuDs can be easily constructed by the local workers, using local materials and with limited technical ‘know-how’. 
These will be constructed by the local communities after training and under supervision of the project’s water officer, 
with support from local NGOs as required (REDESO, DRC, etc.). Periodic maintenance of both the traditional solutions 
and the sustainable drainage systems will be required to ensure their ongoing effectiveness. It is anticipated that this 
can be carried out at little-to-no cost using volunteer workers from the camps, overseen by the project’s water officer.  
 
A number of the traditional solutions (stone-pitched drainage channels, weirs and stone filled gabions in the drainage 
channel) have already been installed in Nduta, Nyarugusu and the former Mtendeli camp, although not at the scale that 
is estimated to be required. These structures have proven effective in controlling floodwater and reducing erosion, 
although, only to the extent that their scale allows. These structures are relatively inexpensive, easy to build and require 
limited maintenance. These traditional solutions are simple, inexpensive and relatively easy to construct and maintain. 
The main goal for these traditional solutions is to create a rapid exit route for surplus stormwater out of the camp. Some 
estimates suggest that the adoption of these types of measures could offer up to 40% flooding and erosion mitigation. 
 
UNHCR will provide funds and oversight to its implementing partners to carry out operations and maintenance of water 
sanitation and hygiene and other infrastructure. The Implementing Partner, in turn, will utilise a combination of both 
national Tanzanian staff in managerial and technical roles, as well as incentive workers142 in skilled and unskilled 
labour roles. MoHA will provide overall leadership in terms of land availability and selection of settlement areas and 
verifying the functionality of infrastructure and services across all sectors. Infrastructure will be built according to national 
standards, which will facilitate eventual hand over. 
 
Output 3. Climate-resilient livelihoods practised to increase the capacity of host communities and refugees to 
better adapt in changing climatic conditions. 
 
The GCF funding request for this Output is US $5,687,324. UNHCR co-financing of US $1,407,207 will go toward 
technical staff support and livelihood training and capacity building. 
 
Activity 3.1. Promote modern technologies and management practises to strengthen the capacity of farmers, district 
officials and agricultural extension workers in climate-resilient agriculture. 
 
This activity will be implemented by the District Councils in coordination with the Government of Tanzania Vice 
President’s Office (VPO). 
Sub-activity 3.1.1,3.1.2 and 3.1.3 will be conducted in villages surrounding the camps. 
 
The two major crops are maize and beans which together represent 66% of total crop production. Farmers in Kigoma 
currently use locally available, unimproved varieties with low yield potential. Farmers with existing fields reserve viable 
seeds for replanting and sell seeds to vendors at local markets where farmers establishing new fields, including 
refugees, purchase them. As described in the Feasibility Study, the region has suffered extreme degradation caused 
by climate and non-climate drivers, which limits agricultural productivity. Kibondo uses only 23.3% of arable land, 
Kakonko uses 56.7% and Kasulu 30%, meaning that available land for agricultural production is not fully utilised and 
productivity is affected by the degraded ecosystems. 
 
Tanzania’s Resilience Strategy (2019–2022) identified Kigoma as one of the geographic regions in the country where 
improved agricultural techniques for enhanced climate resilience should be prioritised 143. As part of the implementation 
of the Resilience Strategy, interventions include the establishment of integrated food-production systems and 
diversification of incomes in areas where small-scale agriculture is the predominant livelihood strategy. The Resilience 
Strategy also includes an acknowledgement of the need for sustainable strategies on land use, improved management

=== PAGE 65 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
 
 
 
144 FAO. 2019. The United Republic of Tanzania Resilience Strategy 2019–2022. Rome. 
145 Enabel. 2009. Support to Income Generating Activities for Coast and Kigoma Regions. Available at: 
http://www.diplomatie.be/oda/11768_PROGDESCR_Technisch_en_Financieel_Dossier.pdf 
146 FAO. 2019. The United Republic of Tanzania Resilience Strategy 2019–2022. Rome. 
147 SNV. 2019. Climate Resilient Agribusiness for Tomorrow (CRAFT). Available at: 
https://snv.org/cms/sites/default/files/explore/download/final_amended_craft_factsheet_sept_2019_0.pdf 
148 Enabel. 2009. Support to Income Generating Activities for Coast and Kigoma Regions. Available at: 
http://www.diplomatie.be/oda/11768_PROGDESCR_Technisch_en_Financieel_Dossier.pdf 
149 Communication from UNHCR 
150 Enabel. 2009. Support to Income Generating Activities for Coast and Kigoma Regions. Available at: 
http://www.diplomatie.be/oda/11768_PROGDESCR_Technisch_en_Financieel_Dossier.pdf 
151 SNV. 2019. Climate Resilient Agribusiness for Tomorrow (CRAFT). Available at: 
https://snv.org/cms/sites/default/files/explore/download/final_amended_craft_factsheet_sept_2019_0.pdf 
152 SNV. 2019. Climate Resilient Agribusiness for Tomorrow (CRAFT). Available at: 
https://snv.org/cms/sites/default/files/explore/download/final_amended_craft_factsheet_sept_2019_0.pdf 
153 Rioux, J et al. 2017. Climate-Smart Agriculture Guideline for the United Republic of Tanzania: A country–driven response 
to climate change, food and nutrition insecurity. 
of natural resources and the facilitation of market mechanisms for improved livelihoods144. Services for improved crop 
production are currently limited. These services include crop forecasting, food security monitoring and early warning 
systems on transboundary challenges such as pests and disease, as well as extreme events such as droughts and 
floods.  
 
A significant challenge to enhancing the climate resilience of local communities in Kigoma is that limited amounts of 
agricultural produce is sold at market145. Input costs for agriculture are high and compounded by inadequate physical 
market and other infrastructure — particularly road networks. The lack of sufficient transport and storage infrastructure 
reduces market access significantly, which leads to impacts on food production, as farmers do not have incentive to 
produce a greater variety of crops. This results in an increasing trend towards monocropping, which is more vulnerable 
to fluctuations in regional demand and at increasing risk of climate impacts. These factors are threatening the curr ent 
food security in the region and exacerbating the existing challenge of underdeveloped and fragmented markets. In 
Kigoma, market mechanisms are inadequate and market information about prices insufficient — farmers are often 
unable to make an income or earn profits as a result of inadequate marketing and pricing policies. Market failures and 
high food prices, in combination with other systemic challenges, put pressure on livelihoods, food security and the 
nutrition of local communities.146  Therefore, to support effective adaptation to climate change, the improvement of 
physical infrastructure should be accompanied by development of value chains through investments by commercial 
partners and multilateral development agencies147. Indeed, agriculture has been identified as one of the primary areas 
for investment to enable economic development in Kigoma 148.  
 
Value-addition activities through the expansion of agro-processing are not well-developed in Kigoma. There are several 
underlying reasons for this, including insufficient access of farmers to funding for modern farming technology and 
methods, post-harvest losses, inadequate availability of farming capital and financing, as well as low productivity and 
low prices. Within the existing agro-processing industry, raw materials supplied by smallholder farmers are often of 
inadequate quality and the industry is characterised by insufficient availability of processing systems and equipment 149. 
Access to credit should be provided to rural micro and informal enterprises, and mechanisms should be developed 
which are suitable for the access of farmers to funding for improved agricultural inputs 150. These factors have been 
demonstrated in several existing projects. For example, the Climate Resilient Agribusiness for Tomorrow (CRAFT) 
project identified increased productivity and resilience to climate impacts as high priorities for enhanced resilience of 
local communities in the study area 151. Moreover, the project identified the need for improved incomes, improved 
business performance for agribusiness, as well as the need to implement climate-resilient food production systems 152. 
Improving institutional and technical capacity for climate-resilient agriculture is also necessary.  
 
The climate-smart agriculture (CSA) guideline, a document produced by the FAO, notes that agriculture is one of the 
central pillars of the economy of Tanzania, with the sector employing ~78% of the population and contributing ~95% of 
the nations required food153. As a large proportion of the sector is rainfed crop production, and most households produce 
at subsistence level, agriculture is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. The CSA guideline was developed 
in accordance with several national plans and programmes, including: i) National Adaptation Programme of Action 
(2007); ii) the National Climate Change Strategy (2012); iii) the Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan (2014–2019); iv) 
the National Climate-Smart Agriculture Programme (2015–2025); and v) the country’s Nationally Determined 
Contributions (2016). These documents are closely aligned with the government’s commitment to creating a resilient, 
climate-smart agriculture sector by 2030. The success of implementing and upscaling CSA in Tanzania is largely reliant

=== PAGE 66 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
 
 
 
154  Rioux, J et al. 2017. Climate-Smart Agriculture Guideline for the United Republic of Tanzania: A country–driven 
response to climate change, food and nutrition insecurity. 
155 Rioux, J et al. 2017. Climate-Smart Agriculture Guideline for the United Republic of Tanzania: A country–driven response 
to climate change, food and nutrition insecurity. 
156 Enabel. 2009. Support to Income Generating Activities for Coast and Kigoma Regions. Available at: 
http://www.diplomatie.be/oda/11768_PROGDESCR_Technisch_en_Financieel_Dossier.pdf 
157 Enabel. 2009. Support to Income Generating Activities for Coast and Kigoma Regions. Available at: 
http://www.diplomatie.be/oda/11768_PROGDESCR_Technisch_en_Financieel_Dossier.pdf 
158 The Sustainable Agriculture Kigoma Regional Project (SAKIRP). Available at: 
https://open.enabel.be/en/TZA/2157/p/sustainable-agriculture-kigoma-regional-project.html 
159 The Sustainable Agriculture Kigoma Regional Project (SAKIRP). Available at: 
https://open.enabel.be/en/TZA/2157/p/sustainable-agriculture-kigoma-regional-project.html 
on institutional changes and a behavioural shift of the population154. The CSA guideline identifies several key areas 
where capacity-building interventions are required, which align with the interventions to be implemented under the 
proposed GCF project. These key areas include awareness raising among farmers of improved and climate-resilient 
farming techniques, training tailored to the needs of specific groups of stakeholders, easier access to climate information 
services, and improved agricultural risk management mechanisms 155. Several projects in Kigoma have had a specific 
focus on capacity building for pro-poor economic development in the region as there is a high incidence of poverty in 
the population156. These projects also demonstrate the need to improve dialogue between stakeholders157. 
 
The Sustainable Agriculture Kigoma Regional Project (SAKIRP), implemented from 2015–2021is one example158. The 
project demonstrated the need for enhanced climate-resilience in agriculture and specifically the development of value 
chains for key commodities in the region — most notably cassava and beans. Moreover, the project involved technical 
capacity building for farmers through Farmers’ Field Schools (FFS) in a coordinated manner, as well as the provision of 
extension services and other services with the aim of increasing productivity and improving livelihoods159.  
 
The interventions proposed under this activity will focus on promoting the adoption of climate-resilient agricultural 
technologies and management practises, as well as the procurement and distribution of agricultural inputs. The climate 
resilient agricultural practises that the project plans to promote include: i) use of pest, drought and heat stress resilient 
cultivars; ii) integrated soil management; iii) integrated soil fertility management; iv) intercropping; and v) water 
harvesting and management training — as are appropriate to the participatory needs and capacity evaluations 
undertaken with beneficiary farmers. These interventions will be supported by strengthening capacity of district officials 
and extension services, who can directly engage with local farmers to promote climate-smart agriculture (CSA) practises 
(training of trainers).  Support provided will include training, recruitment of a local consultant to provid e technical support, 
materials provision for demonstration plots, and per diem fees for extension officers. More details can be found in Annex 
4. Project budget. Farmer field schools (FFS) in the villages will provide training to farmers and government extension 
workers. The FFS will function as centres of adaptive knowledge sharing methods can improve soil quality, water use 
efficiency and reduced erosion, as well as training in adaptive alternatives to crops, such as the production of honey 
and mushrooms. Project beneficiaries will also gain access to approximately 300,000 kg of climate resilient planting 
materials, among which at least 60% will be distributed to farmers through Savings Associations, prioritising resilient 
cassava and beans. The introduction of bean varieties such as Lyamungo 90 will out-yield more traditional varieties 
grown in the region and new varieties of cassava will bring disease resistance. The capital available in the Savings 
Associations will also stimulate markets for produce, incentivising local entrepreneurs to further establish small-scale 
nurseries for agroforestry seedlings. Through this, farmers will receive access to inputs such as drought-resistant seeds 
and a reliable market which will increase their incomes. For further information please Section 7.4.1 of the feasibility 
study. 
 
In the host communities, improved climate resilient agriculture practices focusing on beans and cassava, greater access 
to inputs and enhanced water and soil management as supported by the project, will increase agriculture production 
and reduce farmers’ vulnerability to climatic shocks and stresses. By improving agriculture production, food security will 
be improved both directly, by increasing the availability of food locally and indirectly by improving households’ income 
from agriculture thereby improving their access to food by enabling them to purchase other, more diverse, food items.   
 
A similar logic applies to the alternative livelihood activities related to beekeeping and mushroom production, which is 
planned to be implemented in both host communities and refugee camps. The production of honey, used as sweetener, 
and mushrooms, often used a meat substitute (as indicated during community consultations) brings more diversity to 
local diets, whereas increased incomes as a result of these activities improves households’ purchasing power, enabling 
them to buy more and more diverse food items. In Kigoma Region, preferred mushroom species is Pleurotus flabellatus. 
Scaling up the growing of these species in the refugee camps and also strengthening market linkages in the context of 
the host community will serve to ensure sustainability in the near to medium-term whilst also ensuring livelihoods and

=== PAGE 67 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
 
 
 
160 Which would include the households of the 1,200 farmers receiving training through the FFS, with selection of 
participants aiming to limit FFS attendance to one per household.  
nutritional diversity. A small mushroom growing pilot project has been undertaken in the refugee camps in collaboration 
with implementing partners and the response by persons of concern has been very positive. As such, the uptake is 
envisaged to be very good. 
 
The barriers discussed in Section B.2 demonstrate the precarious position occupied by those practicing smallholder 
agriculture in the area. Limited access to technology and financial services, combined with limited knowledge and 
capacity, result in low returns to agriculture as well as limited resilience. While these issues would ordinarily be 
addressed by the market through agricultural extension services and access to finance, in the case of Kigoma these 
services are provided at a sub-optimal level because of inadequate transport links and poorly developed value chains. 
This activity will improve the level at which these services are provided by increasing the level of knowledge and 
technical competence among key role players in the agriculture and finance sectors. 
 
Since this activity occurs on, or around agricultural land, some of the beneficiaries for this activity will likely overlap with 
those benefitting directly or indirectly from the agroforestry, afforestation and flood and erosion control measures in 
Output 2. The beneficiaries of Activity 3.1 will include: i) 1,200 farmers trained through 20 Farmer Field Schools; ii) 
~75,000 beneficiaries in 15,000160 households receiving agricultural inputs and on-training from those trained in the 
FFS; and iii) the Savings Association Management Offices (SAMOs) strengthened to support provision of agricultural 
and other climate-resilient livelihood inputs.  
 
Pro-actively targeting women in the project’s alternative livelihoods activities and enabling their full participation, is 
expected to contribute to their economic empowerment. Women refugees will be specifically targeted for alternative 
livelihood interventions (at least 50%). The strengthening of Savings Association is expected to bring positive 
externalities as women are generally well represented in these groups. Money obtained by women in host communities 
through these savings associations is not only used to invest in productive assets and activities, but also to meet 
household needs and pay for school fees. Increased incomes may enable some women to purchase fuelwood or other 
energy sources to meet (part of) their cooking energy requirements. Women, like men, engage in agriculture activities 
and by ensuring they are able to benefit from accessing agriculture trainings and inputs and irrigation investments, 
women in the host communities will increase their resilience to current and projected future climate change impacts. 
Furthermore, for women in the host communities, improved environmental management including conservation of water 
sources will improve their year-round access to water for domestic and productive uses and thereby reducing the burden 
on women who have to fetch water. 
 
Sub-activity 3.1.1. Build capacity of 60 farmers per Farmer Field School (FFS) on climate-resilient agricultural practises, 
including use of traditional knowledge, through trainings co-designed in collaboration with the farmers, district officials 
and extension services. 
The specific package with climate-resilient agricultural practises will be co-designed in collaboration with the farmers in 
the villages where the project will be working. Agriculture district officials (representing Ministry of Agriculture at the 
district level) and extension workers will be involved in co-designing the training activities based on the climate-resilient 
agricultural practises and technologies, including integrated pest management, that best fit the selected context. The 
National Climate Smart Agriculture guideline developed by the Government of Tanzania will be used as an instructive 
tool to design the training activities and to provide instructions for best strategies suited for the selected agro-climatic 
zone. As part of the design of training activities, a needs assessment of district officials and extension services will be 
carried out to identify training requirements prior to the implementation of capacity building activities. 
 
At the District level, a comprehensive training system will be provided to technical district staff and extension staff to 
build their capacity to plan for agricultural development, to facilitate community-level planning, and to sustainability 
support farmers in the long term. Standard procurement processes will be followed to identify the best-suited 
implementing agency.  
 
Extension staff will be responsible for mobilising and training farmers to adopt climate resilient agricultural practises. 
This system will take advantage of synergies with farmer’s groups to tailor input packages for increased yield. The 
Farmer Field School (FFS) approach will allow extension officers to establish new farmers’ groups, for example those 
who focus on a selected crop (i.e. women who cultivate cassava) and to support existing ones with technical and 
organisational skills development.

=== PAGE 68 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
 
 
 
161 Palm, Cheryl, Humberto Blanco-Canqui, Fabrice DeClerck, Lydiah Gaterea, and Peter Graced, 2014. Conservation 
agriculture and ecosystem services: An overview. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment 187: 87–105. 
162 For clarity, agroforestry and afforestation activities are not included in the operation of Savings Associations and in the 
financial model, as there are no viable revenue streams for these activities.  
163 Beneficiary farmers will own seeds, tools, and equipment. 
164 https://open.enabel.be/en/TZA/2157/p/sustainable-agriculture-kigoma-regional-project.html.  
165 UNCDF 2019. Strengthening resilience through savings groups www.uncdf.org. 
166 UNEP is accredited for grant awards. Details of the mechanism are in Appendix C: Operational Manual Outline for the 
Savings Association Management Offices in the Feasibility Study. 
Extension workers will encourage farmers’ learning through demonstration plots where they will have tools, start-up 
seeds and relevant crop husbandry training in pre-harvest, production and post-harvest practises. With the aim of 
addressing the lack of capacity of farmers to organise themselves and establish linkages to markets, the FFS will be 
used as a strategy to strengthen group cohesion, disseminate knowledge and ultimately create stronger farmers’ 
groups. A total of 60 direct beneficiaries will be involved in each of the 20 FFS planned (with the distribution of FFS to 
be determined through the VLUP process), with two demonstration plots established per FFS. Starter kits for the FFS 
will be provided and knowledge exchange visits between FFS groups will be organized. Beneficiaries will be selected 
in a participatory way with a view to have equal representation of women and men as well as to select for members of 
the community that have the potential to influence and capacity to teach other farmers. 
 
Climate resilient agricultural practises and technologies have been tested and adopted in several regions in Tanzania. 
For example, conservation agriculture practises are widely promoted as part of sustainable soil management and 
climate-resilient agriculture in Tanzania. The benefits of these practises on yield are the result of improved soil structure, 
as well as increased soil fertility, carbon content and water retention capacity 161 . As part of FAO Mitigation of Climate 
Change in Agriculture Programme (MICCA) in Tanzania there has been an agriculture extension component, various 
approaches have been used and FFSs have demonstrated to be very successful in Kolero and Morongo. Trainings 
have been organized in the villages — inspiring many people to participate. 
 
Sub-activity 3.1.2. Provide 20kg of resilient seeds and 1 kit (at least 60% to be procured by SAMOs and distributed 
through Savings Associations) to each of 15,000 farmers for climate-resilient agriculture including seeds, tools and 
equipment necessary for implementing climate-resilient agricultural practises162.  
Once the training activities have been delivered and the capacities of extension officers have been enhanced, 
communities will be able to access inputs (seeds, tools, equipment 163) to be procured by SAMOs (at least 60% of the 
total inputs) necessary for implementing climate-resilient agricultural practises. At the village level, procurement and 
distribution of agricultural inputs, such as climate and disease-resistant varieties of beans and cassava will be 
undertaken through the saving associations, who will receive requests from the farmers’ groups on the types and 
quantity of inputs they need over the course of the project. In year 2, seeds and equipment will be procured from the 
local market by the District Councils and directly granted to smallholder farmer beneficiaries (6,000 households). In 
years 3 – 5, the agricultural inputs will be accessed through Savings Associations (9,000 households). Each household 
will have access to improved agricultural inputs worth 88USD, which may include agricultural tools, cassava cuttings, 
beans or improved maize seeds. This amount enables the cultivation of 0.5 hectares of cassava (10,000 cassava 
cuttings required per hectare at an average of 40TZS/cutting) or 1 hectare of beans in pure stand (50-70 kg 
beans/hectare depending on bean size at an average of 3,000 TZS/Kg) or 1 hectare of beans i n intercropping with 
maize (40kg beans/hectare at an average of 3,000 TZS/Kg).  Detail provided in Annex 4. Budget- detailed assumptions. 
 
The project will prioritise two crops – cassava and beans – and will focus on increasing their productivity. The selection 
of these two crops is based on the following factors: i) the drought-tolerant and adaptation properties of these crops; ii) 
the availability of cuttings and seeds; iii) the preferences of potential beneficiaries expressed during focus groups 
discussions; and iv) the potential to create synergies with other projects in the area — such as agro-processing for 
cassava, supported by other agencies/NGO programmes. In the analysis of crops’ supply chains, cassava and beans 
scored the highest in terms of market potential, potential for promoting gender equity and women’s economic 
empowerment, contributing to food security, and income potential. This activity upscales the Sustainable Agriculture 
project by Enabel, incorporating the lessons learned from the implementation of that project164 as well as lessons 
learned from the UNCDF assessments of savings groups in Kigoma165. 
 
Sub-activity 3.1.3. Build capacity of Savings Association Management Offices (SAMO) to manage savings associations. 
Savings Associations (SAs) allow individuals to pool finances, to save and borrow money based on the consensus of 
members. This project seeks to strengthen and scale up these existing structures so that funds will be disbursed through 
a market-based approach166. Consultations undertaken in September 2020 indicated strong support for the proposed 
strengthening of Savings Associations, as focus groups recognised the role these associations played in facilitating 
access to finance and delivering agricultural inputs. SAs typically serve as cooperatives in the region to have improved

=== PAGE 69 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
 
 
 
167 Refer to Section 3.5.1 of Annex 2. Feasibility Study for further description of Savings Associations. 
access to farm inputs, collectively negotiate prices, facilitate tax collection, improve marketing of products, and have 
access to microfinance. SAs in the project will have similar roles with the key difference from other SAs being capacity 
support for promoting climate-smart and adaptive practises and crop varieties. In the host community, there are 
numerous examples of self-organised SAs, and the NGO Good Neighbours is currently piloting provision of support to 
4 host community SAs167. 
 
The project will support the SA and its members in managing funding decisions and building capacity to hold funds 
through ‘Savings Association Management Office’ (SAMO) and envisages a SAMO as playing a critical role in scaling 
up the funds available to participate in climate resilient activities. During early project implementation, barriers to SA 
membership as well as incentives and opportunities to increase enrolment will be investigated. In villages or areas 
where enrolment is low and not representative, direct provision of inputs will be considered. Options for supporting 
financial literacy can include digital platforms such as using tablets and SMS platforms together with in person trainings, 
similar to innovative approaches used by UN Community Development Fund (UNCDF) in Nyarugusu and Nduta. 
Options for building on experiences in the region on mobile-based financial services platforms for smallholder farmers 
will also be pursued. The SAMO can hold the accounts for multiple Savings Associations and can act as an intermediary 
between the Executing Entity and informal transactions with the host community. 
 
Savings Association Management Offices (SAMOs) are a market-driven means to disburse funds for the equipment 
required for the climate-resilient activities set out in the Feasibility Study, rather than via direct procurement. The SAMOs 
are not new organisations but would be an extension of services provided by existing structures (likely NGOs). SAMOs 
will provide resilient seed types or tools available to members. Members reinvest income and savings from successful 
livelihood activities into the SA as well as the cash value of the seeds or equipment received. GCF grants will not be 
used to make cash payments to beneficiaries. The mode of delivery will be through purchased goods. Further details 
on how the SAMOs would operate can be found in Appendix B of the Feasibility Study: Draft Outline Operational Manual 
for SAMOs. The operational manual will outline procedures such as cash payments procedures, financial statements 
and internal controls, monitoring and evaluation procedures, and other processes. Agreements will be made between 
SAMOs and beneficiaries to govern the use of funds. The PMU, through the Districts Councils, will work closely with 
the SAMO to build its capacity to manage funds, procure the agreed set of equipment and materials and to ensure funds 
are disbursed to SAs in line with project objectives. The terms of reference for the Finance Officer in the PMU will 
support capacity building and monitoring of SAs. 
 
Activity 3.2. Increase water availability and use-efficiency through water harvesting and efficient irrigation interventions. 
 
Activity 3.2 will be done in villages surrounding the camps. UNHCR will lead the procurement of rainwater harvesting 
and irrigation infrastructure in coordination with the District Councils and the Government of Tanzania Vice President’s 
Office (VPO). The District Councils will lead the implementation capacity building and awareness raising on water 
management and efficient water use. 
 
Under intensifying climate change, water scarcity is expected to become an ever more limiting factor for activities such 
as agriculture, agroforestry and afforestation. To ensure that the contribution that these activities make to livelihoods is 
not compromised as a result of lack of water, it is imperative that mitigation against this scarcity is prioritised. Provision 
of water can be considered a mixed good, given that it does not fully align with either the definitions of a private or a 
public good. For this reason, mixed goods are particularly prone to the market failure of inefficient distribution of the 
resource. This activity will ensure increased and continued availability of water for livelihoods. 
 
Interventions under this activity will ensure that water is available in closer proximity to agriculture areas, as well as for 
the nurseries for agro-forestry and village land afforestation described in Activity 2.2. The engineering solutions 
themselves will be designed and use materials that are able to withstand changing weather extremes such as 
temperature and rainfall intensities. The specific interventions that will be implemented will be determined through the 
C-LUP processes, based on sample technical designs (see Section 7.4.2 of the Feasibility Study). 
 
As this activity intends to complement and support the agricultural and forestry outcomes in Activity 3.1 and Output 2 
respectively, some of the beneficiaries for this activity will necessarily overlap with those benefitting directly or indirectly 
from the agricultural training and inputs provided in Activity 3.1 and the agroforestry, afforestation and flood and erosion 
control measures in Output 2. The beneficiaries of Activity 3.2 will include those involved in the construction, 
maintenance of the rainwater harvesting and irrigation systems, as well as those maintain the agroforestry and 
afforestation nurseries and those benefiting from complementary watering of rainfed crops and water collection during 
dry periods.

=== PAGE 70 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
 
 
 
168 Assuming all check dams are 500m3 and all Charco dams are 5000m3 and they all fill completely (ie Capture 100% of 
their maximum retention potential), this comes to 41,000m3 53,500 m3 52,500 m3 stored for Mtendeli, Nduta, and Nyarugusu 
respectively. Assuming there is only 1mm of rainfall falling over each of these areas, the stored water accounts for 
0.00569%, 0.00633%, and 0.00469% of the total areas upper catchment rainfall. This would then be the maximum influence 
of these dams as subsequent rainfall would serve to top up, rather than fill completely, the dams. Larger rainfall events 
would reduce this proportional influence. 
 
Sub-activity 3.2.1. Construct micro-rainwater harvesting systems: ~94 check dams ~20 run-off harvesting micro-dams 
(charco dams), ~120 unlined water-pans and ~120 lined micro-ponds in host communities in Kasulu, Kibondo, and 
Kakonko. 
 
Water flows as sheet flow over the surface without stagnation or accumulation in some areas. In other areas, water is 
stagnating or accumulating to flow as a stream. These areas are suitable for installation of inter alia small check dams 
or charco dams.  
 
Charco dams are off-channel permanent water retainers with anticipated sizes of ~5000m3. These would either use the 
natural landforms or require deliberate excavation.  As these are off-channel, these would be topped up during rain 
events. These may have linings depending on the underlying soils, resulting in reduced water loss to the soil. During 
the wet season, these dams will act as reservoirs allowing for more effective water usage in the community and 
agricultural areas. It is unlikely that these dams will be full throughout the year as the water will be used by the 
communities. However, these dams are meant to augment the water supply during the dry season to bridge the rainfall 
gap (June to August) which is currently negatively affecting livestock and crop productivity.   
 
Check dams are designed as temporary overtopping storage structures that slow water flow, decrease erosion, and 
increase infiltration.  While these small dams will be full only for short durations (weeks) after rain events, unless there 
is a near consistent flow in the channel, the longer-term benefit will be through the infiltration these check dams promote. 
The situating of these check dams is therefore in channels and generally upstream of agricultural areas. This has the 
dual benefit of slowing water reducing erosion and increasing the height of the water table in the agricultural areas.  
 
The dams and in stream structures require significant technical knowledge and experience to construct. This will require 
external contractors that specialise in these systems. Contractors will be procured from among those operating in 
Tanzania in accordance with applicable UN policies, rules, and regulations. Basic labour can be supplied by the 
technically trained members of the host communities. 
 
The hydraulic modelling of current and projected storm analysis indicates that in order to reach the majority of 
agricultural areas and host communities, 20 charco dams and 94 check dams could be built for water harvesting 
purposes. Irrigation in local agricultural areas will be augmented by approximately 240 lined and unlined in-situ ponds 
fed by pumping systems from the charco dams. The length of size, number of gabions and locations will be determined 
by the project’s water officer in conjunction with the camp authorities (Ministry of Home Affairs), (see Activity 1.2) and 
subject to change based on these surveys and community priorities. 
 
These interventions are expected to have minimal impacts on water availability and flood profile downstream. For 
Nyarugusu and its surrounding host community, a hydraulic assessment was undertaken on the changes that these 
structures would have at the entrance of the Malagarasi-Moyowosi RAMSAR site and concluded to be very minimal.  
The same holds true for the other sites. The structures will result in a flood profile similar to the current day events but 
will act to slow down water flow and lessen erosion. The maximum volume of water stored by the structures is nearly 
insignificant compared to the total volume of water that falls over the area168. 
 
The charco dams will be situated in areas feasible for natural refilling and being close to agriculturally important areas. 
The check dams, in the flow channel will also be constrained in the potential intervention location. Where possible these 
interventions are either higher or on the same contour as areas needing irrigation. This allows for gravity fed irrigation 
using the solar and treadle pumps for water dissemination. The propagation of this will be reliant on in-situ topographic 
factors. Lined and unlined ponds with minimal gravity fed recharge outside of the main channels, reply on water being 
pumped to them. They will therefore have more flexibility in their location, allowing for them being placed in closer 
proximity to crops. These could also be daisy chained to propagate irrigation networks, further. 
 
Figure 17 shows the suitable locations for rainwater harvesting (RWH) interventions around Mtendeli former camp area, 
Nduta and Nyarugusu camps and the surrounding host communities.

=== PAGE 71 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
 
 
 
Figure 17. Indicative suitable locations for RWH interventions in and around Nduta camp (top), Mtendeli former camp (center), and 
Nyarugusu camp (bottom), based on hydrological modelling undertaken. The maps on the left show potential location of charco dams 
while those on the right show potential location of check dams.

=== PAGE 72 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
 
 
Construction and installation of in-situ water ponds and sustainable infiltration systems technologies requires limited 
technical know-how and can be undertaken by the farmers themselves using local materials, with supervision from the 
technical teams of the local NGOs. The small lined and unlined ponds will be minor interventions sited as close as 
possible to the agriculture in the area. These will act as the local water storage for farm usage. The siting of these ponds 
will be done in the project implementation. 
 
Fencing or other physical structures to prevent encroachment would likely not be viable due to the cost of installation 
and maintenance. Some of the areas may also be marshy so that fences would not work well. Community ownership 
of these structures would be essential to ensure water resources are not misused. To minimize evaporation, trees would 
be planted around charco dams. These would also act as wind breaks, lowering evaporation. Covers may be effective 
and options for using locally available materials to make and repair these would be explored during implementation. 
Where possible, charco dams will be constructed deeper and have a lower surface area. Check dams would not require 
protection for evaporation as their store water temporarily and facilitate infiltration. Charco dams would have silt traps 
to reduce sediments getting into the dams. Maintenance activities would also be done in the dry season when the dams 
are at the lowest levels. Check dams require less maintenance for sediment as these allow for overtopping during flood 
events. Additional clearing, if required, would be done in the dry season. 
 
Training will be provided as part of Activity 3.1 (Resilient Agriculture). The specific run-off systems to use in each area 
will depend on the terrain, the population density, the size and type of the catchment system and how much water can 
be harvested, the type of soil and its properties, the groundwater level, geological information about the catchment, and 
the community priorities.  
 
Sub-activity 3.2.2. Establish water pumping and irrigation through ~50 micro-solar and ~172 treadle pumps that will 
draw water from the rainwater harvesting locations to where it is needed in host communities in Kasulu, Kibondo, and 
Kakonko. 
 
Water can be drawn from natural water courses and engineered rainwater harvesting locations (Activity 3.2.1) to where 
it is needed for irrigation. As well as the host community farmers, water pumps and irrigation systems are also proposed 
to be supplied to the nurseries supporting the agroforestry and afforestation activities.  
 
For those farming activities located close (or near/below elevation) to water sources (max head 7.5 m), a collection of 
farmers will be provided with treadle pumps to deliver water to their gardens. This water will be stored in tanks or small 
in-situ storage which then flows by gravity to the drip irrigation kits. The treadle pumps can also provide sprinkler 
irrigation. A treadle pump system would include: 
• 
the pump 
• 
mains distribution hose 
• 
irrigation kit (soil moisture testing kit, water tank, control head (valve), a filter and the drip lines)  
• 
spray/sprinkler head.  
 
Solar pumps will be provided for communities whose cultivated land is located further away from the water storage 
pond/dam/tank and where the network design is unable to propagate water to the needed locations (max head 150m). 
The solar pump system would include:  
• 
the pump and secure pump house/control room 
• 
the solar power system 
• 
mains distribution hose 
• 
irrigation kit (soil moisture testing kit, water tank, control head (valve), a filter and the drip lines)  
 
The beneficiary profile and technology selection will be undertaken in a participatory manner that accounts for technical 
factors as well as appropriateness for community needs. It is proposed that farmers’ drip irrigation kits are designed to 
irrigate up to 500m² are also provided. The technology is used for both high value crops (vegetables) and fruit 
trees/row/perennial crops like banana, coffee, cotton grown to Kibondo and Kakonko districts. The technology is 
available in the country and is part of the Climate Smart Agriculture guidelines, climate-smart agriculture activities in the 
GCF project in Simiyu, among others. In this method, water is applied frequently with volumes of water approaching the 
consumptive use/crop water requirements of the plant thereby minimizing losses.  
 
Sub-activity 3.2.3. Conduct training and awareness raising for 400 members of Water User Associations and farmers 
on water management and efficient water use through the FFS. 
 
Given the extent of the physical and administrative interventions planned in the project, an extensive programme of 
training and awareness is proposed. Project activities will only be sustainable in the long-term if they are supported by

=== PAGE 73 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
 
 
the community, which has the necessary skills to use and maintain the rainwater harvesting, storage and pumping as 
well as irrigation equipment. 
 
As noted above, the C-LUP process will seek to gain consensus among the host communities around how water 
resources should be managed, and how effective water management supports a climate-resilient landscape. Specific 
training will then be provided to ensure that this management plan can be implemented. Details of activities included in 
the training are described below. 
 
• 
Watershed and catchment protection 
o 
The advantages of protecting water sources and understand the watershed/catchment  
o 
Understanding how potential development and other land-use changes will impact source lands over time 
o 
The problems with and consequences of farming in the river floodplains 
o 
The available alternatives in terms of sources of water, better farming methods, water conservation practises, 
and boosting soil fertility. 
o 
The advantages of agroforestry and the tree line planted along the 60m mark 
 
• 
RWH, storage and distribution 
o 
Advantages of RWH for domestic and agricultural uses. 
o 
Soil and water conservation methods (in-situ RWH system) 
o 
How to install and operate a rainwater harvesting system  
o 
Operation and maintenance of the technologies put in place like the ponds/dams, the solar pumping stations, 
and the basic irrigation systems (design and installation) and basic irrigation agronomy  
o 
Causes of erosion, how to prevent it and the hands-on training on construction of proper vegetative swales as 
drainage systems for their homes/villages and farms. 
 
This training programme will enable community members to continue maintaining activities introduced by the project 
over the long term, even after the project’s close and to ensure that water supplies are protected, practise soil and 
water-conservation methods in their farms, and harvest water for irrigation and domestic use. Training will be done by 
a dedicated water resources management trainer (during the first six months of the project) and then continued as 
needed by the project’s water officer. 
 
Sub-activity 3.2.4. Support the establishment of and strengthen existing Water Users Associations (WUAs) through 
organizing and conducting 20 meetings/trainings. 
 
Although there have been considerable efforts by the host community to protect the major water sources within the 
project area, the enforcement of village environmental bylaws has been a challenge as there is still some agricultural 
activity occurring along the rivers. Pollution upstream of important river systems — including the Makere River near the 
Nyarugusu camp — has resulted in an increase in waterborne diseases such as urinary tract infections and cholera, 
limiting the ability of communities downstream to use the river for drinking water. The establishment of Water Users 
Associations (WUAs) has the potential to address challenges regarding water management, the enforcement of water-
related bylaws and conflicts that may arise between water users. To reduce the potential for such water-related conflicts, 
WUAs — alongside staff from the Tanzania Forest Service (TFS) and EMC members — will be trained on conflict 
resolution and community engagement to ensure that in situ conflict with and between water users will be resolved, in 
line with the benefit-sharing agreements established under Sub-activity 1.1.4. Moreover, strong linkages between the 
WUAs and EMCs will ensure horizontal and vertical coordination on conflict resolution and benefit sharing. If the conflict 
cannot be easily resolved, it will be managed through the grievance redress mechanism as outlined in Annex 6: 
Environmental and Social Management System. This in turn e combined impact of these interventions will assist in 
maintaining sufficient water quantity and quality for host and refugee communities that are predicted to be negatively 
influenced by future climate change.  
 
Currently, the Tanganyika Lake Basin Water Board has supported the establishment of a WUA in the area, however 
additional support and the establishment of more WUAs is required. The proposed project will strengthen the capacity 
of existing WUAs through mobilization and training in the area and support the establishment of new WUAs as needed 
working and coordinating closely with the Tanganyika Lake Basin Water Board. It will additionally enhance linkages 
between the WUAs and C-LUP processes as well as village environmental management committees. The WUAs have 
the potential to play a major role in supporting other sub-activities under Activity 3.2, including awareness raising on 
water management and efficient water use as well as the installation and operation of water pumping and irrigation.

=== PAGE 74 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
 
 
 
169 These include altering plant flowering time, increasing water stress especially in situations of drought, thus reducing 
pollen and nectar availability, inhibiting movement, affecting bee communications, causing physical damage of hives, colony 
starvation and retarding bee forage activities. A study on the impacts of climate variability and change on beekeeping 
productivity in Tanzania found that higher rainfall (over 700 mm) and higher temperature (over 33⁰ C) negatively influence 
honey production. Similar impacts have been observed in the project area. In response to climate change, beekeepers have 
adapted to reduce impacts by moving hives to other areas, providing food for bees, providing water, changing hive types, 
changing apiary location, putting hives in tree shadows, use of over-dimensioned wooden hive and changing harvesting 
methods and time. 
Activity 3.3. Promote climate-resilient livelihood diversification to strengthen food security and nutrition, provide 
alternative income as a safety net, and to sustain the implementation of climate-resilient agricultural and forest 
management practises. 
 
 The District Councils, in coordination with the Government of Tanzania Vice President’s Office (VPO), will implement 
the livelihood interventions in the host communities. UNHCR through the project co-funding will implement livelihood 
interventions in the camps, opening up to host communities if and where possible, with the final livelihoods activities to 
be coordinated and agreed with MoHA. 
Both host and refugee communities in the Kigoma region have a limited suite of livelihood options available to them and 
are therefore vulnerable to climate-related hazards such as drought. Further to this, high levels of malnutrition among 
members of the communities demonstrate the need for diversified diets. While agriculture is the predominant source of 
livelihood in the region, other activities such as beekeeping and mushroom growing are also practised in the host and 
refugee communities. These activities are largely dependent on the health of natural resources (particularly forests, 
soils and water), but are more resilient than agriculture to projected climate variability. However, there are several 
barriers to the uptake of additional livelihood options. The barrier relating to insufficient financial services will be 
addressed through the strengthening of Savings Associations in host communities to distribute inputs and reinvest 
income or benefits. This will create an enabling environment for additional livelihood options. Stakeholder consultations 
found a strong level of support from focus groups for the strengthening of SAs. Additionally, this activity will provide 
communities the information and technical support needed to efficiently implement additional livelihood options. While 
this support would ideally be provided through public services including development initiatives, these services are 
currently being provided as a sub-optimal level or do not serve the populations that this project aims to target. 
 
The primary objective of the livelihood diversification activities is to strengthen food security and nutrition in the event 
of hazards such as droughts or floods — which could reduce crop yields — provide alternative income as a safety net 
in case of yield loss and to sustain the implementation of climate-resilient agricultural practises. The selection and 
prioritisation of livelihood diversification activities has been discussed with potential beneficiaries in the target 
communities and with district officials, and interventions have been chosen to achieve the following objectives. 
• 
Strengthening the resilience of the ecosystem services by linking livelihood diversification with other interventions 
proposed in this project — specifically linking forest conservation and the promotion of beekeeping and agroforestry.  
• 
Increasing the resilience of households by targeting both assets and services that characterise their livelihoods. 
The livelihoods were selected because they provide both access to physical capital (e.g. beehives), knowledge (e.g. 
climate-resilient beekeeping practises) and improved services (e.g. training of extension officers). 
• 
Targeting activities to vulnerable and marginalised groups, including women and youth, who are often excluded 
from other income-generating opportunities. These activities also aim to improve relations between host 
communities and refugees.  
• 
Considering the synergies of livelihood diversification activities with existing programmes implemented in the region. 
These activities were selected because they build from pilots and lessons learned from other projects, and they 
integrate with and complement other programmes, such as Enabel’s efforts to develop honey value chains. 
 
As in Activity 3.2, some of the beneficiaries for these sub-activities are likely to be in the same communities benefiting 
from other interventions in Output 2 and in Activities 3.1 and 3.2.  
 
Sub-activity 3.3.1. Promote beekeeping to incentivise forest conservation in the forests surrounding the camps and 
villages by providing equipment and training to 850 people. 
 
Beekeeping and honey production are vulnerable to climate change and climate variability, which has negative impacts 
on the productivity of honeybees169. In addition to climate change impacts, two non-climate drivers of change have been 
linked to losses in honey production in Kibondo and Kakonko: the arrival of refugees and consequent demarcation of 
camps resulted in beekeepers moving into the nature reserves, while cattle grazing and tree cutting resulted in 
deforestation and hives loss. This project will tackle these challenges through participatory village land use planning 
which will mitigate conflicts between the two populations over shared natural resources, and consequently allow 
beekeepers to implement their activities on selected locations within the village forest reserves.

=== PAGE 75 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
 
 
 
170 See for example: Tutuba and Vanhaverbeke (2018). Beekeeping in Tanzania: why is it beekeeping not commercially 
viable in Mvomero? Africa Focus, Vol. 31; Honey and beeswax value chain analysis in Tanzania (2007). A study conducted 
by Match Maker Associates Limited, commissioned by Traidcraft and SME Competitiveness Facility; Mwakatobe and 
Mlingwa (n.d.). Tanzania - The status of Tanzanian honey Trade- Domestic and International Markets. 
171 Hausser and Mpuya (2004). Beekeeping in Tanzania: when the bees get out of the woods. An innovative cross-sectoral 
approach to community-based natural resource management. Game and Wildlife Science, Vol. 21 
172 Kibondo Socio Economic Profile, 2016. 
 
The activity will be carried out by the District Councils and the Tanzania Forest Service in collaboration with the Kibondo 
Beekeepers Association who will provide technical support and capacity building for beekeeping and awareness on 
forest conservation value. The Kibondo Beekeepers Cooperative Society was founded in 1992. The cooperative 
provides processing, packaging and labelling for its members and supports them by linking them to markets and 
establishing contracts with local companies (for example, Jasmine Bee and Upendo Honey). There are four beekeepers’ 
cooperatives in the selected districts which provide support to 43 beekeeping groups. At the district level, beekeepers 
are represented by a cooperative officer in Kibondo. A number of studies170 have found that beekeeping in the country 
has not reached the commercial potential because of several factors, including lack of knowledge and skills to increase 
productivity, reliance on traditional hives and limited access to finance. When linked to community-based natural 
resources management, beekeeping has been proven as an effective strategy from an economic and environmental 
perspective 171. 
 
Under this activity, beekeeping will be promoted as an alternative livelihood activity that contributes to forest 
conservation, food security and income diversification for both host communities and refugees. The activities will be 
implemented in the forests surrounding the camps and host community villages. Equipment and inputs will be distributed 
through the village saving associations.  
 
The promotion of climate-resilient beekeeping activities will involve the distribution of modern hives, which protect 
colonies from heavy rains. Modern beehives and equipment to be owned by farmers will allow them to improve their 
productivity. Key adaptation strategies to increase climate resilience of beekeeping will include the provision of training 
on good beekeeping practises that include knowledge of climate change and their impacts, enabling farmers to select 
the right location, the appropriate maintenance and harvesting methods. The promotion of beekeeping as a climate-
resilient diversification activity will therefore involve this type of training to both farmers and extension officers. The 
expected benefits from beekeeping are shown in Table 6 below. 
 
Inputs include: 
• 
identification of areas for beekeeping activities; 
• 
provision of modern beehives and equipment; and 
• 
capacity building and ongoing support to beekeepers and extension services. 
 
Table 6.  Economic benefits from beekeeping production for one group of about 10 people (20 beehives). 
 
Benefits 
from 
beekeeping 
In the first 
year 
Over the 
course of 
the project 
(5 years) 
Over 10 years 
Assumptions 
Honey 
produced 
(kg)  
 240 Kg 
1,200 Kg 
over the 
course of 
the project 
2,400 Kg over 10 
years 
 1 beehive produces 
12 kg per year. 
Each beekeepers 
group is provided 
with 20 beehives for 
1 village  
Honey 
production 
value 
816 USD 
4,080 USD 
8,160 USD 
1 Kg of honey is sold 
at 8,000 TZS (3.4 
USD) to the local 
market 
 
Demand for honey is established in the region and likely sufficient to support the business model. The target area, and 
particularly Kibondo district, leads as major producer of honey and beeswax in the region 172, with an annual production 
of honey of around 181 tonnes. Kibondo was the first district in Kigoma region to produce honey and beeswax. The 
Kibondo Beekeepers Cooperative Society was founded in 1992 and currently involves 43 beekeeping operations. The

=== PAGE 76 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
 
 
 
173 Chelela et al. (2014). Wild edible mushroom value chain for improved livelihoods in Southern Highlands of Tanzania 
174 https://www.ndf.fi/news/ncf-mushroom-farming-generates-new-income-streams-women. 
175 https://www.farmafrica.org/tanzania/forest-management-in-tanzania; https://www.reuters.com/article/us-tanzania-forest-
mushrooms/taste-for-mushrooms-helps-tanzanian-farmers-protect-forest-idUSKCN0ZY0V8 
176 USAID’s Innovations in Gender Equality programme, https://www.landolakes.org/resources/success-stories/more-than-a-
mushroom 
177 Case study: A community mushroom business in the Kilimanjaro region, FAO (2009) FAO Diversification Booklet. Make 
Money by Growing Mushrooms. 2009 
cooperative provides processing, packaging and labelling for its members and supports them by linking them to markets 
and establishing contracts with local companies (for example, Jasmine Bee and Upendo Honey). Enabel works to 
support honey value chains in the region. The project will support new beekeeping groups in improving product quality, 
packaging and marketing through training, equipment and advisory investments in order to facilitate access to the 
existing honey value chains in the Kigoma region. 
 
More information on market constraints and opportunities are in Section 7.4.3 of Annex 2.1 Feasibility Study. 
 
Sub-activity 3.3.2. Promote mushroom cultivation for marginalised groups with training and mushroom growing facilities 
by providing equipment and training to 500 people 
 
This activity aims at supporting livelihoods diversification for both host communities and refugees, by establishing 
mushroom growing facilities and providing technical assistance to farmers and extension officers to effectively upscale 
this activity. This project will establish one mushroom growing facility for each village group (~20) and two facilities for 
each refugee group (~5 groups), for a total of 30 facilities established under the project. 
 
Mushroom harvesting is a well-diffused practise in the region, particularly during rainy seasons. While mushroom have 
traditionally been eaten in Northern and Western Tanzania, most farmers do not grow them commercially. Mushroom 
harvesting in the miombo woodlands is a widely practised activity during rainy seasons, especially by women, who can 
earn considerable incomes (up to USD 650 per season) 173. During consultations with women-only focus groups, several 
participants noted their preference for mushroom farming to beekeeping, as beekeeping is perceived to be more of a 
men’s activity, but there is general interest in both activities. Small-scale mushroom farming has been used as a strategy 
for livelihood diversification in similar contexts where changes in rainfall patterns (more intense rainfall over shorter 
period of times) have affected communities 174. In Tanzania, communities reliant on forests have been supported to 
develop sustainable enterprises around forest resources such as mushroom and beekeeping as a strategy to better 
manage forests175. Other programmes in different regions of Tanzania have promoted mushrooms growing as livelihood 
diversification for vulnerable groups and women, and as community-based income generating activity176,177. 
 
Mushrooms are short-cycle, high-yield crops, and offer an alternative to currently cultivated crops both in terms of 
potential income opportunities and higher nutritional value. With continuous income from climate-friendly business 
activities different from crop cultivation, the communities will be better prepared for future climate change impacts. 
Existing studies and projects in the country have demonstrated that communities who harvest mushrooms have a higher 
seasonal income during rainy seasons, when crops are often damaged, leading to food shortages. Although climate 
and land conditions are not anticipated to present a risk to establishing growing facilities because of controlled humidity 
and temperature systems, the chosen species (Pleurotus flabellatus) was specifically selected because of its 
adaptability to warmer and wetter climates. In the selected districts, pilot projects that established mushrooms facilities 
have been implemented by a local NGO (REDESO) in the refugee camps and host communities, demonstrating the 
appropriateness of the species in the selected environment. Mushrooms are already a food crop in the region, and they 
are part of the local diets and used for medicinal purposes. Mushroom cultivation also provides opportunities for 
improving the sustainability of farming systems through the recycling of organic matter, which can be used as a growing 
substrate, and then returned to the land as fertilizer, or it can be used as fodder for poultry. Lastly, mushroom cultivation  
is a good livelihood option for farmers with limited or no available land. Existing pilots from REDESO served as 
stimulation of market demand. While host communities and refugees will be first targets, an additional large customer 
base is constituted by hotels and agencies in the region. While host communities and refugees will be first targets, an 
additional large customer base is constituted by hotels and agencies in the region. Fresh mushrooms need to be sold 
close to where they are produced, to reduce the amount spoiled during transportation. As there is a larger market for 
fresh mushrooms than for dried mushrooms in Tanzania, the limited availability of technology for preservation 
represents a significant constraint to expansion. The lack of reliable methods to transport mushrooms to markets also 
inhibits farmers from expanding their operations. However, dry mushrooms for food and medicine are still in demand in

=== PAGE 77 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
 
 
 
178 Tibuhwa, D.D., 2018. Edible and Medicinal Mushrooms Sold at Traditional Markets in Tanzania. Research Journal of 
Forestry, 12(1). 
179 Makoye, K. 2016. Taste for mushrooms helps Tanzanian farmers protect forest. Available at: 
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-tanzania-forest-mushrooms-idUSKCN0ZY0V8. 
180 Kivaisi, A.K. 2007. Mushroom cultivation in Tanzania. Available at: 
https://www.sustainableagtanzania.com/_webedit/uploaded-
files/All%20Files/agronomy/Mushroom%20Cultivation%20in%20Tanzania.pdf 
many areas and are sold in markets in multiple regions, including Kigoma 178 179 180. Existing demand for mushrooms 
coupled with parallel activities by local organizations in stimulating market demand, should allow for the viability of the 
activity. More information on the market for mushrooms and references are in Section 7.4.3 of Annex 2.1 Feasibility 
Study. The expected benefits from mushroom growing are shown in Table 7 below. 
 
Table 7.  Economic benefits from mushroom growing for each group of about 20 people (1 facility per group). 
 
Benefits from 
mushroom growing 
In the first year 
Over the course of 
the project (5 years) 
Over 10 years 
Assumptions 
Harvested 
mushroom for each 
facility (kg) 
900 Kg 
1,210 Kg per year 
after the first year 
5,740 Kg over the 
course of the project 
11,790 Kg 
10 kg of harvested 
mushroom per day, harvest 
each 3 days after the first 3 
months 
Mushroom 
production value 
1,953 USD 
12,455 USD 
25,584 USD 
5,000 TZS (2.2 USD) per 
Kg of mushrooms sold to 
the local market 
 
 
Component 2. Strengthened policies for climate responsive planning and development 
 
Output 4. Information on climate change adaptation disseminated and mainstreamed into policies, plans and 
strategies in Tanzania and in humanitarian programmes. 
 
The GCF funding request for this Output is US$ 469,554.  The Government of Tanzania Vice President’s Office will be 
the executing entity responsible for the implementation of Output 4. 
 
Responding adequately to increasing climate-related risks in the refugee camps and host communities requires an 
integrated approach to land-use planning, natural resource management and local livelihoods. Promoting an evidence-
based policy-making approach to achieve this will require decision-makers and stakeholders, including those involved 
in National Adaptation Planning, NDC development, and subsequent iterations of the National Climate Change Strategy 
processes, to be well informed on the benefits of the ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) approach. In addition, 
policymakers and institutions will need to be capacitated with tools and knowledge to mainstream adaptation into 
policies, plans and strategies in Tanzania and in humanitarian programmes.  
 
Within the UNHCR, institutional changes to address environmental challenges more effectively — and particularly 
climate change — will be prioritised. Although environmental considerations are accounted for in most aspects of 
UNHCR’s work with refugees and returnees, the Global Compact on Refugees (GCR) calls for strengthened partnership 
with development partners, private sector and other stakeholders to address challenges related to energy and 
environment beyond UNHCR’s direct engagement in this domain. Within the UNHCR, the proposed GCF project is 
recognised as a key partnership effort for the operationalization of the GCR. Lessons from the project’s approach and 
implementation will be documented and shared to guide UNHCR’s global engagement with environmental and climate 
change actors, as well as to inform operations in other countries. Dedicated teams have been established to strengthen 
the operationalisation of the GCR as well as to support UNHCR’s work on mitigation and adaption to climate change. 
Moreover, corporate commitments to climate change and environmental issues as well as organisational structures at 
UNHCR are in favour of the institutionalization of the approach set forth by the project.  
 
Output 4 will use the results of the planning processes and physical interventions implemented under Outputs 1–3 to 
demonstrate the economic, environmental and social value of this model to stakeholders. This approach will contribute 
to the sustainability and scalability of the outputs and fund-level outcomes at the national level. At the global level, the 
model will contribute to the growing evidence base on ecosystem-based adaptation. UNHCR is well placed as EE to 
promote upscaling and replicability of this model in other contexts, and to other UN organisations. UNHCR supports 
approaches that focus on the integration of effective practises by States and (sub-) regional organizations into their own

=== PAGE 78 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
 
 
normative frameworks and practises, in accordance with their specific situations and challenges. As Tanzania is a 
frontrunner in applying the One UN working modus, UN Agencies, including UNHCR, are often invited to contribute to 
national policy and development dialogues, with UNHCR also participating in the Development Partners Group on 
environment. The lessons from this project will be used to inform UNHCR’s contributions and inputs to these policy 
processes under Output 4. The broader environment forums would also be used to disseminate lessons and findings 
from the project, which would produce policy recommendations and briefs. Through this, the project will provide an 
adaptation model that can be replicated to ensure that the world’s most vulnerable populations benefit from climate 
finance. 
 
Direct beneficiaries will include those recipients of the reports, communication products, policy briefs, and guidelines 
produced under the activities, as well as those involved in the ongoing policy processes. These activities will also 
contribute to upscaling the activities of the other Outputs, to extend the range of beneficiaries to similar refugee-host 
community contexts elsewhere.   
 
The project acknowledges the intersectional systems of privilege and access that operate within the target sites, that 
may exclude women — particularly refugees or poor farmers —from consultative and decision-making processes and 
spaces. Additionally, women’s needs, interests and knowledge are often marginalised when planning for, and 
implementing adaptation interventions. To address this inequality, the project will work to ensure women are included 
in the activities of Output 4, their needs, knowledge and interests are captured, and communication products are 
gender-sensitive in their content, design and distribution.  
 
 
Activity 4.1. Generate evidence of the economic benefits of ecosystem-based adaptation to host and refugee 
populations, for use by policymakers and planners 
 
To prioritise an ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) approach, decision-makers need to understand and appreciate the 
relevant interlinked ecological processes and how they directly produce economic benefits. The analysis would 
consider: i) avoided costs — impacts or losses that would otherwise occur in the absence of ecosystem services, such 
as reduced food security or decreased water quality; and ii) replacement costs — the implication of implementing ‘grey’ 
artificial systems (as opposed to ‘green’ nature-based solutions) that would be required to deliver the same services as 
ecosystems. The tangible services provided by local ecosystems include food provisioning, sustainable biomass used 
for fuel, flood reduction, and improving water quality and water harvesting. As described in Section D.3., additional long-
term benefits of these services are carbon sequestration, soil nutrient cycling, waste decomposition and numerous 
cultural and social services. These benefits also include reduced risk of water- and vector-borne illnesses during flood 
incidents, as well as a reduced disease burden from exposure to tsetse flies and risk of contracting sleeping sickness. 
 
By recognising the positive environmental, economic and social co-benefits to communities of these ecosystems, this 
acknowledgment will help promote cross-sectoral cooperation and integrated planning to conserve and augment these 
natural resources. The sub-activities under this activity will achieve this by determining the economic value of the 
ecosystem services provided in the project site, conducting assessments and modelling the added value of EbA 
benefits, based on local livelihoods and primary resource dependence.  
 
Sub-activity 4.1.1. Identify benefit and cost streams for valuing ecosystem services under different climate scenarios. 
 
Project-delivered benefits and costs to be evaluated will be identified, to measure and value the ecosystem services 
provided by healthy vegetated ecosystems, water ways and areas of ponding. These benefits include flood mitigation 
(increasing lag time and decreasing flood peak), changes to water quality and quantity, enhanced soil health and 
reduced erosion, primary production, and social and cultural services, such as health. Costs would include direct 
implementation expenses, core institutional and enabling costs, opportunity costs, and unintended social and 
environmental losses (if any).  
 
Sub-activity 4.1.2. Identify data streams and modelling methodology for valuing ecosystem services. 
 
This sub-activity will determine the data required to conduct these valuations, as well as the modelling methodology for 
determining: i) avoided costs under hydrologic impact mitigation; and ii) replacement costs to replicate benefits of 
effectively functioning ecosystems for water and soil quality, and primary agricultural productivity.  
 
The identification and valuation of ecosystem services provided by the ecosystems referenced above will be conducted 
under different climate change projections and a sensitivity analysis will be carried out determining critical degradation

=== PAGE 79 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
 
 
 
181 For example, this could consider diverting funding and resources for WASH in Kigoma (which is relatively 
readily available from humanitarian funders) towards PES interventions to support ecosystem conservation that 
improves water quality and quantity. 
thresholds for effective flood mitigation, and production enhancements. The valuation will be undertaken through a 
variety of market and non-market methods, such as direct damage assessment, institutional and stakeholder analyses, 
spatial and temporal analyses of changes in the landscape and studies on people’s willingness to accept compensation 
for losses. 
 
Sub-activity 4.1.3. Gather primary and secondary data from project interventions. 
 
Following the identification of the methodology in Sub-Activity 4.1.2, primary and secondary data will be gathered to 
inform the valuation modelling in Sub-Activity 4.1.3. This will include quantitative and qualitative data, with elements 
such as spatial information, landcover and land-use data, socio-economic population data, livelihood analyses, survey 
responses, health statistics, market assessments, institutional analysis, stakeholder mapping and soil and vegetation 
surveys. 
 
Sub-activity 4.1.4. Carry out valuation modelling exercises of benefit and cost streams identified under 4.1.1. 
 
Based on the methodology determined under Sub-Activities 4.1.1–4.1.2 and the data collected under Sub-activity 4.1.3, 
a valuation process will be conducted, including data analysis, model calibration and computation. 
 
Sub-activity 4.1.5. Consider temporal, spatial and distributional impacts and opportunities resulting from the costs and 
benefits evaluated in Sub-activity 4.1.4 
 
This sub-activity would consider the rate at which habitat recovery (afforestation, agroforestry, flood interventions) 
restores ecosystem services as well as the timing of other benefit and cost streams, as identified in Sub-activity 4.1.1. 
This will consider gains and losses for up- and down-stream refugee and host communities. Additionally, this would 
evaluate changes in resource access or ecosystem services-linked income opportunities, amongst key population 
groups (gender, urban-rural, refugee-host community, youth etc.). In addition to considering the impacts, this sub-
activity would also appraise opportunities in the landscape and affected communities, including potential for conflict and 
synergy, finance solutions to optimise benefit streams (such as payment-for-ecosystem-services (PES)181 or redirecting 
revenues towards sustainable production modalities/conservation activities.  
 
Sub-activity 4.1.6. Prepare full and summary reports. 
 
The analysis and findings of the economic assessment will be compiled into full and summary reports — highlighting 
the interdependencies and sensitivities based on the redundancy hypothesis of the ecosystem — to be distributed to 
stakeholders. Briefing notes will be developed and working sessions held with key decision-makers, with the objective 
of communicating the evidence of benefits of EbA, providing specific policy recommendations and looking at 
opportunities for further engagement and investment. This knowledge base will help to mainstream these kinds of 
activities into local and district decision making, as well as being scaled globally through UNHCR and partners.  
 
Activity 4.2. Develop communication products to disseminate project results 
 
To scale the impacts of the proposed interventions, it is necessary to disseminate the results and lessons of the project 
to inform similar interventions in the future. This information, and the tools they inform, will help policy- and decision-
makers in Tanzania and UNHCR’s humanitarian programmes to mainstream climate resilience into village land-use 
planning, as well as to make use of Savings Associations to scale up climate-resilient agricultural practises. Products 
will also be shared more broadly to stakeholders involved in the National Adaptation Planning, NDC development, and 
subsequent iterations of the National Climate Change Strategy processes.  
 
Sub-activity 4.2.1. Develop policy briefs on mainstreaming climate resilience in village land-use planning. 
 
Capturing the lessons learned from the climate-resilient village land-use planning implemented under Activity 1.1, policy 
briefs will be compiled and distributed to key stakeholders, including the National Land Use Planning Commission, to 
inform recommendations for policy review and revision. Stakeholders targeted during distribution will include 
representatives from district and regional government, host villages, as well as refugees and camp authorities. These 
lessons are then scalable to other, similar, contexts within Kigoma and Tanzania at large, as well as in other refugee 
contexts globally.

=== PAGE 80 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
 
 
These policy briefs, and the guidelines developed under Sub-Activity 4.2.2 will improve upon existing land-use planning 
by addressing the gaps in mainstreaming climate change adaptation, planning integrated landscape approaches and 
incorporating the different needs and challenges of host communities and refugees. They will also allow for the approach 
piloted here to be scaled to other settings, to make them more climate resilient.  
 
Topics for these briefs may include: 
• 
capacity building of local institutions and anchoring of refugee-host community land use planning and adaptation 
activities to local governance in the hosting country 
• 
effectiveness of peaceful coexistence meetings, dialogues, and design of benefit-sharing arrangements in building 
consensus and mitigating conflict to achieve common climate change adaptation objectives  
• 
planning for, and implementing ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) interventions; 
• 
finance solutions to optimise benefit streams (such as payment-for-ecosystem-services (PES) or redirecting 
revenues towards sustainable production modalities/conservation activities; 
• 
including agroforestry or similar interventions as a tool for climate resiliency in host community land use planning;  
• 
including vulnerable groups (such as refugees and women) in participatory land-use planning processes;  
• 
effectiveness of sustainable production and benefit sharing arrangements for fuelwood in reducing gender-based 
violence and conflict; and 
• 
navigating the dynamics of refugee and host community relationships, to ensure durable and sustainable social-
ecological ecosystems. 
 
Sub-activity 4.2.2. Develop a guidelines paper on mainstreaming climate resilience in village land-use planning. 
 
To support the implementation of the policy briefs developed under Sub-Activity 4.2.1., guidelines will be developed and 
distributed to inform decision-makers, planners and authorities on how to mainstream climate resilience into the design, 
implementation and monitoring of village land-use plans. The guidelines will include options for interventions in different 
contexts and institutional responsibilities for enforcement, monitoring and implementation. In addition, the guidelines 
will offer detailed guidance on the processes of:  
• 
defining the climate problem threatening the camps/villages, including its impacts on women, men and vulnerable 
social groups;  
• 
best practices and effective strategies in consensus building and negotiation in fair and equitable allocation of land 
use across different resource user groups, including pastoralists; 
• 
selecting intervention sites and assessing impact scenarios with and without climate-resilient land-use planning;  
• 
identifying how impact mitigation targets can be met using land-use planning; 
• 
incorporating agroforestry, afforestation, and other EbA-type interventions into sustainable village planning and 
management;  
• 
estimating costs and benefits of climate-resilient land-use planning; 
• 
implementing and updating of climate-resilient land-use planning, including identifying appropriate sustainable 
financing strategies; and 
• 
monitoring and evaluating climate-resilient land-use planning. 
 
Sub-activity 4.2.3. Produce lessons-learned and guidelines paper on the use of Savings Associations to scale up climate 
resilient agricultural practises. 
 
Capturing the lessons from the use of Savings Associations (SA) in host communities to scale up climate-resilient 
agricultural practises demonstrated under Activity 3.1, findings will be compiled and distributed to key stakeholders to 
inform future scaling up or replication of these interventions. Stakeholders targeted during distribution will include groups 
at various levels, from SAs themselves to locally-operating NGOs, high-level district planners and multi-lateral 
development partners.  
 
In order to support the implementation of these findings, guidelines will be developed and distributed to inform users, 
decision-makers and development partners on planning, implementing and monitoring the use of SA’s  to scale up 
climate-resilient agricultural practises. The process to develop these guidelines would include a review of how SA’s  in 
different countries/contexts are being used for financing climate adaptation. The relative advantages and drawbacks of 
the Tanzania model will be benchmarked against other contexts, before and after implementation of project activities.  
 
The guidelines will include options for adapting this model in different contexts (in Tanzania, and globally) as well as 
defining the institutional responsibilities for enforcement, monitoring and implementation. The guidelines will build upon 
or adapt the Operational Manual Outline for the Savings Association Management Offices included in Appendix C. In 
addition, the guidelines will offer detailed guidance on the processes of:

=== PAGE 81 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
 
 
• 
defining the climate problems facing agriculture, including its impacts on women, men and vulnerable social groups;  
• 
selecting intervention sites and assessing impact scenarios with and without the use of SA’s to scale up climate-
resilient agricultural practises;  
• 
identifying how impact mitigation targets can be met using SA’s to scale up climate-resilient agricultural practises; 
• 
estimating costs and benefits of using SA’s to scale up climate-resilient agricultural practises; 
• 
implementing and maintaining the use of SA’s to scale up climate-resilient agricultural practises, including identifying 
appropriate sustainable financing strategies; and 
• 
monitoring and evaluating the use of SA’s to scale up climate-resilient agricultural practises. 
 
 
Activity 4.3 Draft revisions to key plans and policies and support their integration into national and district government 
planning processes to promote up-scaling of the EbA model 
 
This activity will focus on the development-humanitarian-climate nexus (Figure 18), to bridge the gaps and discordance 
between clusters within this space. Various institutions — from government, international organisations and civil society 
— oversee the various elements of these intersecting clusters, with divergent priorities, timelines and target 
beneficiaries. This creates silos, overlaps and inefficiencies that produce barriers to achieving integrated, sustainable 
and inclusive development in Kigoma. The coordination of the entities involved in the design and implementation of this 
project — namely the Government of Tanzania Vice President’s Office (VPO), UNHCR and UNEP and — are well 
placed to facilitate this integration, in a manner that is scalable to other refugee settings. Linkages will be sought during 
project implementation with initiatives that are ongoing to close these gaps and to strengthen planning process with 
Local Government Authorities, such as the One UN Kigoma Joint Programme and the UNHCR co-chaired host 
community working group. 
 
 
Figure 18. Development-humanitarian-climate nexus. 
 
Sub-activity 4.3.1. Review laws and policies that hinder adaptation in Kigoma region including political risks that need 
to be closely monitored, and identify entry points for where laws and policies require harmonisation to promote 
adaptation. 
 
As climate change has not yet been mainstreamed into the legal and policy frameworks governing host communities 
and refugees in Kigoma, related processes are not well oriented to advancing adaptation may create additional barriers 
to building climate resilience. This sub-activity will review the relevant laws and policies that govern or are relevant to 
adaptation in Kigoma region, to assess their role in hindering climate adaptation and identify entry points where 
harmonisation is required to promote adaptation, including analyses of how current policy targets should be revised to 
reflect adaptation the country's priorities.  
 
The purpose of the review would be to determine how each sector’s entities and plans, policies and practises are aligned 
(or divergent) from the other sectors. These include district development plans, forest management plans, livelihood 
development plans, river basin plans, health strategies and water and sanitation plans. The review would examine, for 
example, the extent to which UNHCR, the Ministry of Home Affairs and other entities operating within the camps/in 
humanitarian concerns, are embedded in district- and region-level development and spatial planning. Conversely, the

=== PAGE 82 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
 
 
review would include analysing the reciprocal role of institutions like the National Land Use Planning Commission 
(NLUPC), Tanzania Forestry Service (TFS), District government and others in mainstreaming development, adaptation 
and integrated land use planning and management, WASH and refugee livelihoods as well as the management of 
relations with the host community.  
 
The process of this review will include a desktop review of relevant policies (see below) as well as engaging with public 
and private sector stakeholders involved in planning for, and implementing adaptation, in Kigoma region. Various focus 
groups, workshops and meetings with planners, decision-makers and policy practitioners will be conducted to inform 
this process. Using a participatory approach will contribute to gaining buy-in from the relevant stakeholders and ensure 
that the regulations drafted are aligned with national priorities and climate change objectives stipulated in Tanzania’s 
NAPA, (I)NDC and national communications. The laws and policies impinging on adaptation will be determined and 
mapped, with recommendations developed for addressing these barriers. This review will be undertaken by an 
international expert working with a national policy expert who is well acquainted with the policies and processes in 
question. 
 
The project context involves political risks that may impact the implementation of ecosystem-based adaptation activities 
in the region. These will be monitored by the executing entities following risk indicators (See Risk Factor 10) and in 
conjunction with regular risk monitoring by UNHCR Senior Risk and Compliance Officer based in Dar Es Salaam and 
the use of the UNHCR risk registry for monitoring and updating emergent risks. 
 
Sub-activity 4.3.2. Identify legal, policy and planning processes that can be capitalised on to advance the mainstreaming 
of adaptation. 
 
The Kigoma Regional Administration statutory function, among others, is to provide administrative and technical advice 
as well as creating a conducive environment for LGAs to deliver quality services. As such the Regional Administration 
plays a key role in coordinating and supporting environmental interventions, land use planning, as well as agriculture 
activities in the Kigoma Region. The Regional Administration is therefore an important entry point for planning and 
coordination of the proposed project interventions. 
 
District planning to prepare the annual workplan and budget under the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) 
generally takes place in the second quarter of the government fiscal year, i.e. October to December, coordinated by the 
District Planning Officer. Budget requirements, including investment and recurrent expenses, are revisited and normally 
submitted to the central government in early in the calendar year. Project activities to be implemented by the local 
government authorities are to be incorporated and planned for the MTEFs. 
 
To strengthen country ownership and promote uptake, the project will capitalise on the baseline legal, policy and 
planning processes in Tanzania, leveraging on existing processes at the district and regional levels and involving key 
stakeholders such as the Tanzania Forest Service and the Lake Tanganyika Basin Water Board. Through stakeholder 
consultation with policymakers, this sub-activity will identify processes to capitalise upon for implementing the 
recommendations produced under Sub-activity 4.3.1. 
 
Sub-activity 4.3.3. Prepare guidelines and other inputs for policy- and decision-makers to use to inform in the 
mainstreaming of adaptation in national and district government planning. 
 
Following identification in Sub-Activity 4.3.2, guidelines will be developed for utilising the processes to mainstream 
adaptation into village land-use planning. This would include activities under regular medium- and long-term strategic 
development planning, as well as the National Adaptation Planning (NAP) process, implementation of Tanzania’s 
Country Programme (CP), production of National Communications to the UNFCC, and delivery of the priorities under 
the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC). Action plans will then be developed, including timelines, roles and 
responsibilities for integrating these recommendations into the target policies, plans and strategies. 
 
Sub-activity 4.3.4. Co-host workshops, forums and consultations within ongoing policy and planning processes to 
showcase project results and implications for the legal, policy and planning frameworks of the country. 
 
Finally, this sub-activity will — in conjunction with the recommendations of the action plan developed under Sub-Activity 
4.3.3 — co-host workshops, forums, and consultations to engage stakeholders. These events will aim to demonstrate 
the outcomes of the proposed project to decision-making stakeholders and distribute the materials and guidance 
developed under Activities 4.1–4.2. Additionally, in line with the action plan, implications for the legal, policy and planning 
frameworks of the country will be discussed and validated, to initiate the process of revising or initiating policies and 
legislation.

=== PAGE 83 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
 
 
 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
The proposed project will be implemented over a five-year period. The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
will be the Accredited Entity (AE), the Government of Tanzania, acting through the Vice President’s Office (VPO) and 
the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) will function as the Executing Entities (EE). The 
collaboration between these entities will combine UNEP’s expertise as the leading global environmental authority, VPO 
leverage capacity at the national, regional and district-level and climate change adaptation expertise and UNHCR’s 
unique capacity and experience in refugee protection, assistance and solutions.     
 
 
Accredited Entity  
 
As the Accredited Entity, UNEP will carry out fiduciary and safeguards oversight and provide the necessary scientific 
expertise and technical support to the project formulation, start up, implementation, evaluations and closure.  
 
Experience and track record of the AE 
 
UNEP has a broad global portfolio on climate change projects funded through, inter alia, the Least Developed Countries 
Fund (LDCF), Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF), Adaptation Fund (AF) and bilateral funds such as the European 
Commission. Through these projects, UNEP has supported selected national governments and local communities to 
adapt to climate change. UNEP’s knowledge base is derived from completed and ongoing projects supporting: 
i) methods and tools for decision-making; ii) prioritising, designing and implementing adaptation interventions; 
iii) enhancing climate resilience by restoring vulnerable ecosystems that underpin community livelihoods; and 
iv) monitoring the socio-economic and environmental benefits of adaptation interventions. It will draw upon previous 
experiences and lessons learned during the implementation of the proposed project.  
 
UNEP’s comparative advantage over other accredited entities lies in its ability to provide robust scientific/technical 
advice regarding sustainable national planning and development processes. These skills are supplemented with 
UNEP’s strong capacity in the field of climate change through implementation of climate change adaptation projects at 
global, regional and national levels. As the GCF AE for the proposed project, UNEP will therefore oversee the efficient 
and effective delivery of the project’s objectives. Lastly, UNEP’s in-house policies and expertise on gender 
mainstreaming as well as social and environmental safeguards will contribute towards gender- and environmentally-
sensitive project implementation. 
 
Executing Entities 
 
The Government of Tanzania Vice President Office (VPO) will act as the lead Executing Entity (EE) of the project, 
ensuring alignment with the national policies and plans as well as complementarity with other existing adaptation 
projects and Tanzania’s NAP process.  As the lead EE, VPO will oversee overall project implementation and will be 
accountable to the AE for the effective use of resources during project implementation.  All operating policies and 
procedures will follow applicable UN rules, regulations, and policies, which include provisions for financial management 
and procurement. A Partnership Cooperation Agreement (PCA) signed between VPO and UNEP will serve as the 
Subsidiary Agreement to regulate the obligations of the parties. Compliance with applicable UN rules, regulations, and 
policies will be reflected in the Subsidiary Agreement.  VPO will be responsible for the efficient disbursement of financial 
resources for the implementation of the designated project activities for the compilation of the required information from 
all implementing partners, including UNHCR as second EE, to provide consolidated project progress reports and 
expenditure reports to the AE.  
 
VPO will execute project activities through different mechanisms including direct execution by PMU, cooperation 
agreements with District Government and TFS as well as contracts with service providers and consultants.  The District 
governments, under the supervision of VPO, will execute delegated activities as the district-level directly and may be 
authorised to contract NGOs, SAMOs and service providers.  
 
The selection of such partners will be guided by UNEP to ensure that UN requirements are met and with the aim of 
speeding project implementation. UNEP will provide guidance and support to VPO in the selection of Personnel 
(personnel, agents, staff, contractors) as well as in the selection of implementing NGOs and the Technical Partner 
following UNEP partnership policy and procedures, including due diligence process. UNEP will review terms of

=== PAGE 84 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
 
 
reference and selection processes to ensure the eligibility criteria are met as well as contracts and agreements issued 
by VPO to ensure compliance with the procedures and regulations of the PCA, the ESMS (Annex 6)  and the Gender 
Action Plan (Annex 8).  The final selection of Personnel (personnel, agents, staff, contractors) and non -governmental 
implementing partners (NGOs and Technical Partner) will be taken by the VPO after confirmation of no objection by 
UNEP. This will be reflected in the Subsidiary Agreement (PCA). 
 
Execution by UNHCR is necessary to leverage its mandate on refugee and host community relations and its convening 
power among the different actors on the ground. As second EE, UNHCR will execute GCF funded project activities (2.3 
and 3.2) and contribute to Output 4 activities in collaboration with MoHA and VPO. UNHCR will be responsible for 
overseeing and managing the implementing partners that will be involved in the implementation of the designated project 
interventions in the camp areas, prioritizing implementation by local government authorities where possible.  
 
UNHCR will be accountable to the AE for the effective use of resources during project implementation. All operating 
policies and procedures will follow applicable UN rules, regulations, and policies, which include provisions for financial 
management and procurement. UNHCR will be responsible for the efficient disbursement of financial resources for the 
implementation of the designated project activities. The transfer of funds between the AE and UNHCR will be governed 
by an UN-to-UN Agreement that will serve as Subsidiary Agreement 
 
A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between VPO and UNHCR will define the principles of collaboration, team 
coordination and information sharing mechanisms between the two executing entities. This is particularly important for 
those activities that will require close coordination between the two executing entities such as 3.2, 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3.  
Moreover, the MoU will define the project reporting mechanism between the two executing entities. UNHCR will 
provide progress reports and financial reports to VPO concerning project activities and budget executed by UNHCR. 
As the lead executing entity, VPO will be responsible for providing consolidated progress and financial reports to the 
AE as per the PCA.  
 
 
Experience and track record of the EE Government of Tanzania Vice President’s Office 
 
VPO has experience with various projects of similar size and scope with several bilateral and multilateral donors, 
including ADB, IFAD, UNEP. The current portfolio includes among others: 
 
• 
IFAD/ GEF 9132 'Reversing Land Degradation trends and increasing Food Security in degraded Ecosystems of 
Semi-Arid Areas of Tanzania (LDFS' (July 2017- September 2022, US$ 7 M GEF grant plus US$ 42,94 M co-
finance).  
 
• 
UNEP/GEF 5691 'Sustainable Land Management of Lake Nyasa Catchment in Tanzania´ (February 2017 – 
December 2021 extended to December 2023, US$ 1,3 M GEF grant plus 4,4M co-finance),  
 
• 
UNEP/GEF 9524 'Supporting the implementation of integrated ecosystem management approach for landscape 
restoration and biodiversity conservation in Tanzania (December 2020 – December 2026, US$ 11,2 M GEF grant 
plus US$ 64M co-financing)). 
 
• 
UNEP/GEF5659 'Ecosystem-Based Adaptation for Rural Resilience in Tanzania approved September 2014 with 
UNEP as Accredited Entity. GEF financing US$ 7.5 M grant and co-financing of US$ 20.1M). 
 
 
Other closed projects include: 
 
• 
UNEP/ GEF LDCF 'Developing core capacity to address adaptation to climate change in productive coastal 
zones'. (November 2012-November 2019, GEF financing US$ 3.3 M grant from GEF LDCF and co-financing of 
US$ 41,943) 
 
• 
UNEP/Adaptation Fund 'Implementation of concrete adaptation measures to reduce vulnerability of livelihoods 
and economy of coastal communities of Tanzania'. (November 2012-March 2017, US$ 4.6 M grant from the 
Adaptation Fund)  
 
 
Experience and track record of the EE (UNHCR)

=== PAGE 85 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
 
 
 
182 These interventions were done by partners outside of this project. 
183 https://www.unhcr.org/protection/women/5aa13c0c7/policy-age-gender-diversity-accountability-2018.html 
 
UNHCR’s comparative advantage is in its expertise and mandate in the refugee context. As the vast majority of ~68.5 
million ‘persons of concern’ are concentrated in ‘climate change hotspots’ around the world, UNHCR has a long history 
of working to address climate change issues in refugee-hosting contexts — especially through promoting the inclusion 
of refugees into local climate change adaptation programming. UNHCR has three field offices in the project area (in 
Kigoma town, Kibondo, and Kasulu) which works with the Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA) and local government 
authorities. In addition to its humanitarian activities, UNHCR also supports local communities with a large portfolio of 
relevant projects including in forestry, water conservation and sustainable energy. Environmental considerations are 
taken into account in almost all aspects of UNHCR’s work with refugees and returnees. Beyond UNHCR’s direct 
engagement in this domain, the Global Compact on Refugees calls for strengthened partnership, including with 
development partners, private sector and other stakeholders to address issues related to energy and environment. The 
project with the GCF is recognised as a major partnership effort to operationalise the GCR. In line with the principles 
on the Global Compact on Refugees, UNHCR Tanzania has forged partnerships with a range of development partners, 
UN agencies and the private sector to address energy and environment challenges in the camps and facing the host 
communities. UNHCR will build on these experiences and partnership while implementing the project. Additionally, 
dedicated teams have been set up to strengthen the operationalisation of the GCR as well as to  support UNHCR’s work 
on mitigation and adaption to climate change. Quality assurance and technical support will be provided by UNHCR’s 
Global Technical Environment Teams located in UNHCR HQ in Geneva.  
 
UNHCR has a long-standing commitment to reducing the environmental impact of refugee crises, for example by 
launching climate change mitigation programmes which includes a shift to renewable energy options for refugees, 
reforestation activities, and enhancing refugees’ access to clean modern fuels and technology for cooking to reduce 
dependence on charcoal and firewood. UNHCR seeks to increase the sustainable use of renewable energy sources to 
minimise environmental impact, in a way that includes host communities and other stakeholders, while improving 
refugees’ protection and well-being. To further mainstream refugees’ access to sustainable energy and minimize climate 
impacts impact across its operations worldwide, UNHCR launched a five-year Global Strategy for Sustainable Energy 
in 2019.  In the strategy UNHCR commits to improving its environmental performance, climate compatibility and 
resource efficiency by reducing its use of fossil fuels, purchasing green energy from reliable suppliers and other 
sustainability initiatives.  In line with the GCR, the strategy strongly promotes partnerships and innovation, expanding 
UNHCR’s catalytic role to promote sustainability in displacement settings. This includes developing joint programs 
between humanitarian, development and environmental actors, as in the project proposed here. It further includes 
engagement with private sector and advocating for innovative financing mechanisms. For example, in 2019 UNHCR 
formed a partnership with Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida) to phase out fossil fuels from 
UNHCR operations. The partnership established UNHCR’s first ever rotational fund to help operations transition to 
renewable energy. Specifically, the fund will provide de-risking measures and other incentives to encourage private 
sector renewable energy providers to move into underserviced refugee hosting areas.  
 
UNHCR also engages to support climate change adaptation for refugees and host communities, working with partners 
to design and deliver climate change adaptation programmes in vulnerable countries. UNHCR through its environmental 
partner - REDESO, supported establishment of community and individual woodlots within host communities in Kakonko 
and Kibondo district. In Kasulu, in addition to UNHCR’s interventions implemented by CEMDO, SNV supported an 
individual farmer-based woodlot management program focusing on future energy sustainability for both host and 
refugee communities. Through this intervention, 245,000 fast growing tree seedlings were planted 182.   Some key 
examples of UNHCR’s global initiatives for climate compatibility in refugee hosting areas include: the establishment of 
solar farms in Jordan’s Azraq and Za’atari refugee camps; biogas fuel and solid waste treatment plants for refugees in 
Bangladesh; renewable biomass cooking energy access for refugees in Rwanda, Tanzania and Ethiopia and land 
restoration projects such as the “Green Refugee Camp” programs in Cameroon and Sudan. UNHCR has also developed 
partnerships with agencies like GIZ to include refugees into their wider, climate and energy programs in countries 
including Uganda, Kenya, Ethiopia and Tanzania. This is reflected in this project’s parallel finance through the GIZ 
RESPOND project in Kigoma, which seeks to provide renewable energy access and reforestation services in refugee 
hosting areas. Staff in UNHCR Tanzania relevant to adaptation and landscape management include a Senior 
Development Officer, Environment Officer and Energy Officer, among others. The partnership with UNEP will leverage 
their expertise in EbA. 
 
Project compliance with the UNHCR policy on Age, Gender and Diversity (AGD) 183 is mandatory. UNHCR applies an 
age, gender, and diversity (AGD) approach to all aspects of its work, applying participatory methodologies to promote 
the role of women, men, girls, and boys of all ages and backgrounds as agents of change in their families and

=== PAGE 86 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
 
 
communities. UNHCR issued key policies and tools such as the 2006 Tool for Participatory Assessment in 
Operations, the 2008 Manual on a Community-Based Approach in UNHCR Operations, and the previous 2011 Age, 
Gender and Diversity Policy and organized global consultations with women and youth, to better incorporate their views 
into the development of policies and tools. As part of its AGD approach, UNHCR has made progress in promoting 
gender equality in its operations: mainstreamed the inclusion of women and girls in decision-making processes, ensured 
individual registration for females and worked to prevent and respond to SGBV. 
 
Implementing Partners 
 
The Government of Tanzania, acting through its Vice-President’s Office (VPO), as lead EE will oversee and manage 
project implementation, with and through appropriate implementing partner organisations including local government 
authorities and, if and when required, engaging technical experts, and national and international NGOs.   Selection of 
the technical experts and national and international NGOs will be undertaken with UNEP guidance.  
 
Government agencies and UN agencies 
 
For the implementation of project activities, the Government of Tanzania Vice President’s Office (VPO) will establish 
cooperation agreements with local government agencies and institutions selected on the basis of their mandate and 
their relevant role in facilitating project execution and sustainability of project outcomes. 
 
The District Councils are the mandated authorities in land use planning and development at the district level and will 
therefore play a key role in convening all technical officers including agriculture to inform the project annual workplan 
and to discuss project implementation progress and adaptive management approaches, ensuring the project is 
anchored in local governance processes and that results are sustainable beyond the project duration. VPO will sign 
cooperation agreements with the three respective District Councils for the implementation of activities 1.1, 2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 
3.2.3, 3.2.4 and 3.3. under the supervision of VPO. This type of project implementation arrangement between VPO and 
District Councils is already in place in other ongoing projects such as the GEF/UNEP project “Ecosystem-Based 
Adaptation for Rural Resilience in Tanzania”. 
 
VPO will also sign one cooperation agreement with the Tanzania Forest Service (TFS), authority responsible for forestry 
interventions and forest monitoring Tanzania, for the implementation of activities 2.1 and 2.2 in coordination with the 
respective District Councils.  
Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA) will play a key role in overseeing the implementation of activities in the refugee camps, 
coordinating with UNHCR the planning and monitoring of camp activities. This will include consultation on the location 
and design of infrastructure in the camps. MoHA will also provide technical guidance and oversight on the performance 
of NGOs and service providers executing activities in the camps.   
 
National Environmental Management Council (NEMC), particularly NEMC office in Kigoma, will be responsible for 
ensuring compliance with relevant environmental laws and regulations as well as providing technical advisory and 
compliance guidance on all environmental aspects of the project to the two executing entities and the implementing 
partners. 
 
The Kigoma Regional Authority will host the PMU, provide support to the delivery of activities in the region and oversee 
the implementation of activities delegated to the District Councils. The Kigoma Regional Administration, where the PMU 
will be located, will convene all technical officers including land use planning officers, agriculture officers 
(representatives of Ministry of Agriculture at district level), engineering officers, etc. at regular intervals, to inform the 
project annual workplan and to discuss project implementation progress and adaptive management approaches. 
 
 
Research and technical expertise organizations 
  
A Technical Partner with expertise in landscape approach, agroforestry, afforestation and GIS will be identified as a key 
project implementing partner to provide technical advisory and capacity building services to District officials, TFS officials 
and participant communities in the implementation of Output 1 and Output 2.  Specific tasks of the Technical Partner 
include: 
• 
Technical advisory on the establishment of the Village Land Forest Reserves and Community Based Forest 
Management. 
• 
Technical advisory on the design and monitoring of agroforestry interventions.

=== PAGE 87 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
 
 
 
184 The selection processes are compliant with applicable UN rules, regulations, and policies. 
• 
Technical advisory on the design and monitoring of afforestation interventions. 
• 
Development of a GIS-based forest monitoring system integrating satellite, drone and field spatial data and 
capacity building to users (building on the existing TFS tools) 
• 
Social and ecological baseline assessment.  
• 
Assessment of tree species for afforestation.   
 
The selected Technical Partner will be a non-for-profit competent and reputable organization with expertise in forestry, 
agroforestry and landscape restoration approach, proven experience and capacity to deliver on the above tasks with 
high quality standards. The Technical Partner will be selected by VPO through a comparative analysis process in which 
at least three short-listed candidates will be considered. UNEP will provide support for the selection of the Technical 
Partner in line with UNEP partnership policy and procedures.  
A Pre-requisite for the Technical Partner is that the organization must align to UN values and must not be complicit in 
human rights abuses; tolerate forced or compulsory labour or the use of child labour or violate sanctions established 
by the UN Security Council. A partner due diligence assessment following UNEP Partnership policy and procedures 
will be carried out at two levels: 
• 
Level one due diligence process assessing conflict of interest, human rights and gender equality, alleged 
involvement in cases of irresponsibility/litigation/green washing and reputational risk 
• 
Level two due diligence process assessing specific technical capacities, strategic capacities, financial capacity to 
undertake the partnership and procurement procedures. 
 
The engagement of a Technical Partner is expected to have an added value in terms of quality assurance and 
knowledge transfer to national stakeholders, thereby enhancing the sustainability of the project outcomes.  The 
partnership will be governed by a cooperation agreement with VPO. 
 
Non-government organizations  
 
The contracting of qualified national and international non-governmental organization partners on the ground will be 
determined using a competitive selection process184 and is not pre-determined. The general criteria for selecting NGO 
implementing partners include: 
 
o 
Non-profit organizations  
o 
Legally registered internationally or nationally, with registration and permit to operate in Tanzania.  
o 
Sector expertise and experience: the required specific skills, sector specialists, knowledge and human 
resources. 
o 
Project management: ability to deliver project objectives, accountability mechanisms and sound financial 
management,  
o 
Local experience and presence: ongoing programme in the area of operation; local knowledge; engaging 
refugees and other persons of concern.  
o 
Contribution of resources: evidenced and documented contribution of resources to the Project in cash or 
in-kind 
o 
Cost effectiveness: level of direct costs and administrative costs imposed on the Project in relation to project 
deliverables. 
o 
Experience working with UNHCR (only for UNHCR partners): Partners that have three consecutive qualified 
audit opinions for UNHCR-funded projects may not be considered. 
o 
The Partner’s capacity to procure. Clarification is obtained on the capacity of the potential partners and 
their processes for conducting procurement in compatibility with UN procurement principles 
o 
Align to UN values, and must not be complicit in human rights abuses, tolerate forced or compulsory labour 
or the use of child labour or violate sanctions established by the UN Security Council. 
 
VPO will be responsible for the competitive selection of NGOs in alignment with UNEP partnership policy and 
procedures. Due diligence assessment will be carried out at two levels: 
-Level one due diligence process assessing conflict of interest, human rights and gender equality, alleged involvement 
in cases of irresponsibility/litigation/green washing and reputational risk 
-Level two due diligence process assessing specific technical capacities, strategic capacities, financial capacity to 
undertake the partnership and procurement procedures. 
 
Implementing partners engaged by UNHCR for the implementation activities 2.3 and 3.3 in the camps may be drawn 
from UNHCR’s existing partnerships and other organisations operating in the region. This process ensures cost

=== PAGE 88 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
 
 
effectiveness of implementation and taps into the subject matter expertise and depth of partners’ experience in the 
Kigoma host community and refugee context, as the project’s approach is to leverage lessons learned from previous 
and existing initiatives and anchor on local institutions. The project design has already benefitted from interactions for 
partners integrating lessons learned. Coordination mechanisms will be put in place to ensure lessons learned are 
leveraged in the project. Following the engagement of implementing partners, UNHCR implements risk-based 
approaches to implementation, including a strong monitoring framework for financial management and procurement by 
implementing partners, options for UNHCR to procure on behalf of implementing partners, and adequate controls on 
ensuring resources are used for intended purposes and right of use agreements. In Tanzania, UNHCR already engages, 
through national and international implementing partners, in activities such as nursery development, afforestation and 
other similar activities benefitting both refugees and host communities. Table 8 includes the list of UNHCR partnerships 
for 2020/21 activities in Tanzania. The flow of funds between UNHCR and implementing partners such as NGOs and 
other service providers is governed by a Project Partnership Agreement or in the case of firms or individuals other 
applicable contracting arrangements.  The flow of funds between VPO and NGOs will be governed by cooperation 
agreements.   
 
 
Coordination 
 
Linkages and coordination with the Ministry of Home Affairs for activities in the camps, the National Environmental 
Management Council, National Land Use Planning Commission, Tanzania Forest Services, Regional Administration, 
District Councils and other relevant agencies will be pursued for all project activities, including the various policy 
activities under Output 4.  
 
UNHCR coordinates and shares information with a range of other partners working on environment and energy issues. 
Partners such as Danish Refugee Council, Jane Goodall Institute (JGI) and Enabel are already working on the ground 
with interventions that complement proposed project activities. For example, Enabel has a track record in Kasulu, 
Kibondo and Kakonko in implementing CBFM, participatory VLUP, conducting FFS and value chain development in 
target crops of beans and cassava, and beekeeping capacity building and market development. SNV has experience 
in establishing and managing woodlots and afforestation in Kibondo and Kasulu, albeit with private modalities rather 
than on communal property. Jane Goodall Institute has 15+ years’ experience in land use planning, focussing on natural 
resources management whilst making consideration for livelihood enhancement. JGI also has experience in refugee 
settings, having worked in the old refugee settlement of Mishamo, which hosts Burundians who left their country of 
origin in the 1970s. The proposed project will draw upon JGI’s experience in Mishamo to pre-emptively address the 
maladaptation and maldevelopment that has built up in those contexts as a result of poor land use planning during early 
settlement.   
 
The proposed project will also closely coordinate with the Kigoma Joint Programme (KJP) partners including the  
United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF), Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO), 
World Food Project (WFP) and International Trade Centre (ITC) through coordination. Drawing on the complementary 
activities in the KJP (as described in B.1), the proposed project will apply the experience and lessons-learned from 
these partners to inform the implementation of key activities.

=== PAGE 89 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85 
 
 
 
 
Agency 
Category 
Sector/Description 
African Initiative for Relief and 
Development (AIRD) 
International NGO 
Logistics and Fleet Management 
DRC/DDG East Africa and Great 
Lakes region (DRC) 
International NGO 
Camp 
Management, 
Coordination 
& 
Community Empowerment to Refugees in 
Nyarugusu, Nduta Camps 
HelpAge International UK (HAI) 
International NGO 
Strengthen services for Persons with 
Specific Needs through an integrated and 
community-based approach 
Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) 
International NGO 
Access to WASH – Shelter and Protection 
services in Nyarugusu, Nduta and Mtendeli 
former camp 
International 
Rescue 
Committee, 
USA (IRC) 
International NGO 
Provision of Assistance and Protection to 
Refugees in Nyarugusu, Nduta and former 
Mtendeli camp 
Plan International, United Kingdom 
International NGO 
Strengthening Child Protection & Youth 
Empowerment 
services 
in 
Nyarugusu, 
Nduta and former Mtendeli camp 
Relief 
to 
Development 
Society, 
Tanzania (REDESO) 
Local NGO 
Environment 
and 
Urban 
Refugees’ 
Assistance 
Women's Legal Aid Centre (WLAC) 
Local NGO 
Access to Legal Assistance and Justice for 
Refugees and Asylum seekers in Tanzania 
Medical Team International (MTI) 
International NGO 
Comprehensive Health Care and Nutrition 
Assistance for Refugees in Nyarugusu, 
Nduta and former Mtendeli camp. 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA) 
RSD - MHA 
Government agency 
 
 
 
Table 8. UNHCR Tanzania Implementing Partners for Existing 2020 Activities185 
 
Project arrangements 
 
A series of agreements between project actors will allow GCF funds and their associated benefits to flow to beneficiary 
communities in the region. Figure 19 below summarises the headline agreements and engagements that are required. 
‘Service providers’ include suppliers of equipment and materials, professional/contractual services and independent 
consultants.

=== PAGE 90 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86 
 
 
 
 
Figure 19. Flow of funds from the Green Climate Fund through to beneficiaries. 
 
The diagram in Figure 20 below provides an overview of the implementation structure for the project.  
 
The Subsidiary Agreements between the AE and the EEs are: 
• 
Project Cooperation Agreement (PCA) between UNEP and the Government of Tanzania Vice President’s 
Office (VPO)  
• 
UN-to-UN Agreement between UNEP and UNHCR. 
The coordination and reporting mechanisms between VPO and UNHCR will be specified in a Memorandum of 
Understanding.  
 
 
UNEP, the Government of Tanzania Vice President’s Office (VPO) and UNHCR will coordinate closely with government 
agencies including the Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA), the National Environmental Management Council (NEMC) the 
Regional Government Authority of Kigoma and Local Government Authorities, the local district agencies and affected 
communities to deliver the project activities.  
 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA) will play a key role in overseeing the implementation of activities in the refugee camps, 
coordinating with UNHCR the planning and monitoring of camp activities. This will include consultation on the location 
and design of infrastructure in the camps.   
 
The National Environmental Management Council (NEMC) will ensure compliance with relevant environmental laws 
and regulations as well as providing technical advisory and compliance guidance on all environmental aspects of the 
project.

=== PAGE 91 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87 
 
 
The Kigoma Regional Authority will host the operation team of the PMU, provide support to the delivery of activities in 
the region and oversee the implementation of activities delegated to the District Councils.  The Kigoma Regional 
Administration, where the PMU will be located, will convene through the District Councils all technical district officers 
including land use planning officers, agriculture officers, engineering officers, etc. at regular intervals, to inform the 
project annual workplan and to discuss project implementation progress and adaptive management approaches. 
The execution of activities will be mostly decentralized to implementing partners through cooperation agreements with 
the District Councils, TFS, NGOs and SAMOs, whilst certain activities, particularly 3.2, 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 will be delivered 
directly by services providers through procurement contracts issued by VPO and UNHCR.  
 
 
Figure 20. Implementation structure for the project 
 
Project Steering Committee 
 
The Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be formed during the inception of the project and is responsible for high-
level project direction. It will also address concerns raised by any of its members (for example, transparency in 
procurement processes and changes in the humanitarian programming landscape) and will establish consensus 
amongst stakeholder groups on the best way to manage these concerns. The key responsibilities of the PSC will be to: 
• 
Provide project oversight and advisory support by overseeing implementation; 
• 
Review annual work plans, and project reports; 
• 
Approve any changes to the project’s targets, activities or timelines 
• 
Support the Project Management Unit in managing emergent risks; and 
• 
Meet bi-annually to discuss progress on the project and resolve any issues identified. 
 
It will be composed of nominated representatives from the Vice President’s Office as the NDA and lead Executing Entity, 
including the Ministry of Home Affairs of Tanzania (MoHA), President's Office — Regional Administration and Local 
Government, Ministry of Water and Irrigation, Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, Ministry of Livestock and 
Fisheries, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Human Settlement,  Ministry of Community Development, Women Affairs and 
Children, Ministry of Tourism and Natural Resources, National Environmental Management Council, Tanzanian Forest 
Service, District Government representatives and refugee leaders, UNHCR and UNEP. The PSC will be co-chaired by

=== PAGE 92 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88 
 
 
the Vice President’s Office and UNEP. The Project Management Unit will serve as the secretariat and coordinate the 
meetings, with each represented group nominating a suitably qualified individual.  
 
Project Management Unit (PMU) 
 
The lead EE, the Government of Tanzania Vice President’s Office (VPO), will establish a Project Management Unit with 
dedicated staff, which will be recruited competitively and responsible for the day-to-day implementation and 
management of the project as follows: 
• 
Project Manager — day-to-day implementation and management, including project oversight, technical inputs and 
guidance, adherence to workplan and management of results, reporting and key point of liaison with UNHCR and 
between the project and PSC The PM will also be responsible for ensuring that all tasks are carried out according 
to UNEP and GCF policies and best practises; 
• 
Climate-resilience agriculture & livelihood expert – technical oversight, implementation support to District Councils 
and monitoring of Output 3 activities. Responsible for ensuring the provision of quality inputs and adherence to 
Climate-Smart Agriculture guidance, linkages with value chains and integration of agriculture and livelihood 
interventions in the project landscape approach. 
• 
M&E officer — responsible for the implementation of the project M&E Plan, monitoring and reporting on the project’s 
activities in the field and production of project learning and communication outputs  in coordination with relevant 
government agencies and implementing partners; 
• 
Safeguards and gender specialist/officer— responsible for the implementation of the Social & Environmental 
Safeguards Plan, including Stakeholder Response Mechanism and the Gender Action Plan, ensuring equitable 
benefit distribution/minimal adverse impacts; 
• 
Finance officer — managing the budget, expenditures, procurement plans and decisions throughout project and 
training and supervision of the Savings Association Management Offices; 
• 
Procurement officer — lead procurement planning and procurement activities, oversee procurement of 
implementing partners and provide support as necessary; 
• 
Admin x 2 — support to PMU team in delivering project activities, including support in financial reporting; 
• 
Chief Technical Adviser (land use specialisation) — lead the climate-resilient village land-use planning process with 
the District Councils and provide technical backstopping to sector specialist consultants throughout the project. 
• 
Social & Environment Safeguards expert- A part time international expert consultant will be engaged to support 
PMU in the development and implementation of the Social & Environment Safeguards plan. 
• 
M&E expert –A part time international expert consultant will be engaged to support PMU in the development and 
implementation of the project M&E plan and the document of project learning. 
 
In addition to coordinating the land use planning process, the CTA will be employed on a full-time basis throughout 
project implementation to provide technical guidance on EbA and ensure that project activities result in building the 
climate-resilience of host communities and refugees in Kigoma. In the first two years of the project, during which Village 
Land Use Plans, technical designs and partnerships will be developed, the CTA will be a full-time international expert. 
In the last three years of the project the CTA position will shift to a national consultant contract. The responsibilities of 
the CTA include: i) providing overall technical support for the project; ii) supporting the annual planning process and 
budgets; iii) providing monitoring and operational support to the project; iv) coordinating and supervising the work of 
specialist technical consultants (including the water, forestry, livelihoods, agriculture and policy consultants) who will 
contribute to specific deliverables within each Output; and v) providing biannual reports to the PSC on project progress, 
performance towards objectives and recommendations.  
 
For the execution of the activities 2.3 and 3.2 UNHCR will engage a full-time water expert/consultant for one year to 
assist with the consultative planning process, the final technical designs and the drawing up of the tendering documents 
for the procurement and installation of the flood and erosion (2.3) and water harvesting and irrigation (3.2) infrastructure. 
UNHCR funded staff positions will manage the designated project and co-funded activities in forestry and livelihoods in 
close coordination with the PMU and relevant government authorities.  
The delivery of the project activities will incur a range of costs, from procurement of equipment and materials (for 
example, stone gabions) to costs associated with capacity building from NGOs on community-based forest 
management. The expected procurement costs for each year will be compiled in a procurement plan by the PMU’s 
Finance and Procurement Officer, for sign-off by the PSC. A unified procurement plan will cover the budget executed 
by the two executing entities. Indicative costs per year, along with a detailed description of individual cost items 
associated with each activity can be found in the detailed budget (Annex 4). The PMU is proposed to be located in the 
Regional Government Office of Kigoma to maximize interface with local policies and programs, anchor project activities 
to local processes, and facilitate uptake and mainstreaming of produced economic valuation, policy revisions, and 
communication products through Output 4.

=== PAGE 93 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89 
 
 
 
186 New crises in 2018 caused refugee populations in Bangladesh to triple and in Sudan to double, two of the most climate-
vulnerable countries. 
 
Key institutional actors 
 
In Tanzania institutional arrangements and decision-making processes are concentrated at the national level. The 
project will benefit from the leadership of the Government of Tanzania Vice President’s Office (VPO) as main executing 
entity. VPO’s Division of Environment (DoE) has the mandate to implement climate change actions in the country and 
is the designated lead agency for environment and climate change-related activities in the country. The DoE is the 
National Climate Change Focal Point (NCCFP). A National Climate Change Technical Committee (NCCTC) is chaired 
by the Director of Environment (VPO), to provide technical advice to the NCCFP. The function of the Committee is to  
oversee all technical issues related to the implementation of climate change actions and ensure coordinated initiatives 
among the Ministries.  
 
Climate change issues are currently addressed using this same institutional framework, following the mandate provided 
by the Environmental Management Act (2004). At the sub-national level, the Regional Administrative Secretariats that 
operate under the President’s Office, Regional Administration and Local Government (PO-RALG), oversee the Local 
Government Authorities’ (LGAs) activities providing supervision and administrative instructions. LGAs are responsible 
for service delivery concerning agriculture and natural resource sectors. Funding is provided directly from the Central 
Government and LGAs by the Ministry of Finance and Planning (MFP). District councils are mandated to provide 
extension services in the form of technical advice and support for local communities (wards and villages). Other key 
institutional actors relate to land-use planning and forestry. 
 
Land administration in Tanzania is done jointly by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Human Settlements Development, 
and District Land Offices that are under the PO-RALG.  
The Tanzania Forest Service (TFS), a semi-autonomous organisation under the Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Tourism, is responsible for all forestry activities at District-level. Formed out of the Forest and Beekeeping Division 
(FBD), its remit includes improving the protection capacity of local (village) forest managers under community-based 
forest management.  
 
Engagement with local institutions will be through coordination at the local level and signing of MOUs for the direct 
implementation of project activities. 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
GCF involvement is critical for the project as projected and existing climate impacts are evident the Kigoma region. The 
region is among the poorest in the country and with the most vulnerable livelihoods, in its dependence on rainfed 
agriculture. The districts of Kibondo, Kakonko, and Kasulu are particularly vulnerable as they share resources with a 
large refugee population. Tanzania, as a least developed country, has limited financial and technical capacity to support 
adaptation activities. The majority of the activities and funding will benefit host communities in adapting their livelihoods 
and agroecosystems to the potential impacts of climate change.  
 
Refugees are also vulnerable to climate change as, by circumstance, they are often fleeing to already climate vulnerable 
nations, such as Tanzania186. Their circumstances of limited movement, livelihoods, and access to financial services 
hamper their capacity to adapt to climate impacts. They are also a vulnerable group that is underrepresented in climate 
finance, as to the proponent’s knowledge, this is the first climate project at this scale to include refugees as beneficiaries.  
 
The refugee situation is protracted for approximately 115,000 refugees from neighbouring countries. Despite the 
Government’s preference for voluntary repatriation as the durable solution, the protracted refugee situation is not likely 
to stop, considering that fewer refugees are opting for return to their country of origin. Given the current situation in 
neighbouring countries, the refugee population in Kigoma, notably the enduring insecurity in (Eastern) DRC means that 
repatriation for many refugees from this country is not a feasibly solution. While resettlement, mostly to the US, provides 
a solution to some of the DRC refugees, many are expected to remain in Tanzania in the foreseeable future. Given 
Tanzania’s location in a region surrounded by countries that are experiencing insecurity and extremist insurgency, such 
as in the north of Mozambique, or the volatile security situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo, it is 
expected that the country will remain an important refugee hosting country in the coming years. Hence, the project’s 
approach is to promote long-term solutions in the Kigoma landscape that consider refugee presence that are  
 anchored in the host communities and local institutions.

=== PAGE 94 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90 
 
 
 
The project provides an opportunity to address the climate change adaptation needs of both host communities and 
refugees in an integrated way, and lead in demonstrating complementarities in climate, development, and humanitarian 
finance. The project leverages the roles of UNEP, the Government of Tanzania Vice President’s Office and UNHCR in 
mainstreaming climate change adaptation within humanitarian operations in a way that harnesses the organisations’ 
strengths, while promoting collaboration with other non-humanitarian partners. Unless supported by activities such as 
those proposed in this project – such as strengthening the provision of ecosystem services and increasing the resilience 
of agro-ecosystems – forced displacement can further reduce the resilience of host communities and refugees to climate 
change. Table 9 below summarises alternatives to GCF funding for mainstreaming climate change resilience into 
refugee response and explains why they do not currently represent viable sources of funding. 
 
Table 9. Alternatives to GCF funding for mainstreaming climate change resilience. 
Alternative 
funding options  
Barriers and limitations  
Funding by the 
Government of 
Tanzania 
The Government of Tanzania is unable to address fully the adaptation needs of the Tanzanian 
population, meaning that the complex question of how to increase the resilience of refugee 
camps and host communities is hardly discussed. International commitments to burden and 
responsibility sharing should also be considered as the project targets areas where refugees are 
hosted. 
Funding from 
UNHCR core 
budget 
UNHCR funding is largely comprised of annual non-earmarked core funding. Humanitarian 
funding priorities focus on basic human needs for example, security, food, water and shelter. 
Although UNHCR does have selected donor funding lines to support efforts of the Energy and 
Environment team, these would not be sufficient for an ambitious project such as the one 
proposed here. 
Funding by the 
Government of 
Tanzania 
The Government of Tanzania is unable to address fully the adaptation needs of the Tanzanian 
population, meaning that the complex question of how to increase the resilience of refugee 
camps and host communities is hardly discussed. International commitments to burden and 
responsibility sharing should also be considered as the project targets areas where refugees are 
hosted. 
Funding from 
other multilateral 
and bilateral 
donor sources  
Multilateral and bilateral donors have historically contributed to UNHCR through the lens of 
supporting humanitarian relief efforts. Over the longer term, we would expect to see a more 
holistic approach to funding the needs of refugees and their host countries, in line with the 
principles of the Global Compact on Refugees, through the mechanism of the UN Sustainable 
Development Goals. Whilst many of the proposed activities may align with multilateral/bilateral 
funding in the future, many of the modalities are still to be defined. Development institutions face 
constraints in addressing climate issues, which is within the mandate of the GCF and other 
financial mechanisms of the UNFCCC. 
Funding from the 
private sector  
There is very little private sector activity in the target region, mostly limited to small scale 
livelihoods and agriculture. Private sector activity in the camps is even more limited than that in 
the surrounding host communities since: i) refugees are not encouraged to engage in income-
generating activities; ii) closure of common markets has reduced opportunities for some market-
based solutions; and iii) UNHCR’s country office have gathered from discussions with local 
private sector actors that they still view refugees as transient customers — with little assurance 
that they will form a long term, secure market, despite long-term residence of many refugees in 
the area. SAMOs would be engaged in market expansion efforts for crop, honey and mushroom 
production. The role of private sector in energy provision is being pursued by UNHCR through 
LPG and solar options, noting constraints such as affordability and very low incomes in the 
region and the policy environment limiting the operations of common markets. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
While a significant amount of development activity has taken place in the Kigoma region, projects that have taken place 
to date have: 
• 
not considered the long-term climate change impacts on water, agriculture and livelihoods and so have not been 
framed to adequately support adaptation; 
• 
been dispersed throughout the Kigoma region and so have not concentrated on, or been designed for, the unique 
problems facing refugees and their host communities; and 
• 
tended to look at water, livelihoods or agricultural systems in isolation, rather than considering the ecological 
interlinkages between these. Consequently, projects to date have not benefitted from mutual reinforcement of 
interventions with a landscape level approach. 
Hence, there is clear value added for GCF funding for a project that will address climate change impacts in a holistic 
manner, with specific attention given to those most vulnerable, including the refugees in the camps and their neighbours.

=== PAGE 95 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91 
 
 
 
Justification for level of concessionality 
 
Tanzania is in need of concessional financing. Tanzania is currently classified by the UN as a Least Developed 
Country with an estimated GNI per capita of ~USD 900 in 2016. Consequently, government budgets do not provide any 
allocation for addressing the impacts of climate change at Tanzanian refugee camps and the lands surrounding them. 
Furthermore, the Kigoma region has suffered from chronic underinvestment over the years, having the among the 
highest poverty rates in the country. The project requires a high degree of concessionality as it focusses on delivering 
non-financial benefits.  
 
Majority of the project interventions do not have significant revenue streams. While some project activities such 
as resilient livelihoods are expected to supplement food and contribute to incomes, these are not expected to provide 
sufficient revenue streams for formal debt repayments during the lifetime of the project. Access to financial services in 
the region is very low. The project aims to promote sustainability through the use of Savings Associations but loan 
repayments are not viable. GDP per capita in the host community is around USD 250, amongst the lowest in Tanzania. 
Livelihood activities are already threatened by climate change and since these are mostly for subsistence/basic needs 
rather than larger scale businesses, the resulting impact on household food security and resilience can be immediate. 
Furthermore, there are only five banks across the districts of Kibondo and Kakonko serving over 450,000 people. Most 
of these residents lack the assets which the banks request as collateral for transactions. This makes them unable to 
access finance to scale up their businesses and try new, climate-resilient practises. 
 
Refugees do not form part of the formal economy. Refugees are required to remain in the camps and are not able 
to partake in formal employment either within or outside the camps. This means that their economic activities are mostly 
informal (for example, barter or in-kind payments) or are fully reliant on humanitarian assistance. Despite these 
limitations, they do have some engagement with the markets of the nearby host communities, creating a unique and 
complex economic context. Since almost half of the project’s direct beneficiaries are refugees who cannot take part in 
the formal economy, this makes it challenging to stimulate economic activities that are robust enough to enable reliable 
loan repayments. 
Reimbursable grants are not appropriate to use as a financial instrument for the project. A limited amount of 
the GCF funding requested is spent on equipment with the potential to directly generate revenue and even then, the 
benefits are primarily for subsistence or to supplement incomes of very poor, vulnerable populations, particularly in 
districts that host and share resources with refugees. Any increases in income and revenue will be re-channelled back 
to the operation of Savings Associations. In the face of climate shocks and its impacts such as low yields and damage 
to property, savings offer an important safety net for very poor households. 
 
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
The project has been designed so that interventions will translate into long term solutions which outlast the GCF’s 
funding.  
 
At the intervention level, long-term sustainability is ensured because of the inclusion of mutually supportive interventions 
in land use, agriculture, water and livelihoods, which are themselves supported by a revised institutional framework and 
sustainable financing mechanism. The basis for project sustainability and a successful exit strategy for GCF is 
underpinned by several factors, outlined below. 
 
Anchoring interventions at the landscape level: While refugees are temporary residents in the Kigoma region, the region 
will most likely continue to host refugees in the long term. The project strategy is to ensure that the landscape and 
ecosystem of the Kigoma region can continue to support its residents, including refugees, and host communities, 
including agro-pastoralist groups that pass through the region as it faces challenges of climate change. The interventions 
are planned within the sub-catchments and contiguous landscape of host communities and refugees with the aim of 
strengthening the ecosystem’s capacity to respond to climate shocks and continue to provide services such as provision 
of soil nutrients, prevention of flooding and erosion, creating shade for crops and others. Majority of the project 
interventions will be implemented in the host community, that will be less vulnerable to population movements. 
 
Capacity building and empowerment of local government authorities: The project aims to involve local government 
authorities in the implementation of the project including the Regional Commission, District Councils, Tanzania Forest 
Service, Lake Tanganyika River Basin Authority, and other relevant actors. Training and equipment will be provided by

=== PAGE 96 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92 
 
 
the project to support their mandate in land use planning, forest monitoring and conservation, and expanding extension 
work climate resilient agriculture practices.  The expert consultants and technical advisory organizations engaged in the 
project will work hand in hand with the local government authorities, NGOs and project staff to transfer technical 
knowledge and build capacity on-the-job and through training sessions. These include the CTA expert in land use 
planning, the Technical Partner, the Climate-resilient Agriculture & Livelihoods expert, the M&E expert consultant and 
the Safeguards expert consultant. UNHCR’s field presence and its partnerships with other agencies and NGOs in the 
Kigoma region can continue to provide support and backstopping on project interventions beyond the project timeframe.  
 
Introduction of a strategic tool for climate-resilient land-use planning: The Village Land Use Plan process has been the 
main tool for the integrated planning and management of natural resources in Tanzania since the 1990s. Its practise is 
enshrined in the legal framework for the management and administration of land within village boundaries. The project 
will introduce climate resilience considerations into the traditional planning process but work within this established 
framework to ensure its legitimacy.  
 
Self-sustaining interventions: Many of the interventions introduced can be maintained or expanded by the host 
communities without further support after the initial five-year project period since they require minimal funding and repay 
the investment in inputs and labour through increases in productivity and income. The project aims to show the viability 
and impact of its activities, setting the context for the continuation of these interventions beyond the project lifespan.  
 
Financial mechanisms: The majority of the physical inputs for project interventions will be funded through Savings 
Associations (SAs). This will be done by supporting the expansion of activities that SAs provide financial services. The 
host communities will have control over and be personally invested in these SAs. Profits from activities made possible 
by GCF funding will be channelled back to the SAs, thus making them self-sustaining.  
 
Capacity building of the communities and inclusion: Project interventions include extensive training and capacity 
building, which will allow knowledge of the benefits of activities such as community-based forest management, resilient 
agriculture and alternative livelihoods to be sustained and dissipated through wider communities. 
 
Gender sensitive approach: The project’s gender sensitive approach seeks to achieve practical and tangible benefits 
to women as well as bring about strategic changes in gender relations. The gender action plan (Annex 8) outlines 
concrete steps and activities that will ensure inclusion of women in decision making processes and project activities. 
Through enhanced capacities, skills, access to assets transferred to refugee and host community women by the 
project, they will be capacitated to improve their decision-making power both at the household and the community 
level. This effect is expected to extend beyond the duration of the project.     
 
Revised institutional and regulatory systems: The institutionalisation of climate change adaptation into regional, local 
and UNHCR plans, policies and programmes through Outputs 1 and 4 will contribute to the sustainability and replicability 
of these interventions, scaling to a broader project area as well as other refugee sites globally.  
Beyond the direct engagement of UNHCR with refugees regarding environmental considerations, the Global Compact 
on Refugees (GCR) calls for strengthened national and international partnership with development partners, the private 
sector and other stakeholders to address challenges related to energy and the environment. The proposed project is 
recognised as a major partnership effort to operationalise the GCR. Lessons from the project’s approach and 
implementation will be documented and shared to guide UNHCR’s global engagement with environment and climate 
change actors as well as inform operations in other countries. Dedicated teams have been set up to strengthen the 
operationalisation of the GCR as well as to support UNHCR’s work on mitigation and adaptation to climate change. 
Corporate commitments to climate change and environmental challenges as well as organisational structures at UNHCR 
encourage the institutionalisation of the approach proposed by the project.  
 
Operations and maintenance (O&M): For assets outside the camps, ownership of equipment and infrastructure will be 
turned over to district or regional authorities for operations and maintenance after the project ends. Prior to this turnover, 
a budget will be identified to finance these O&M activities. Assets within the camps will be managed by MHA, with 
maintenance agreements being formulated with MHA and district councils prior to the implementation of relevant 
activities. Additionally, further insight will be given by UNHCR’s and other partner NGOs, who have well established 
operations and presence in the region and districts. 
 
The participatory land-use planning intervention in Output 1 is designed to be both sustainable in itself and to ensure 
the sustainability of other interventions. The main part of this intervention will conclude with the villages having: i) 
reached consensus on how the village land should be used to improve climate resilience; and ii) obtained legal status 
in the form of a Customary Certificate of Rights of Occupation. Achieving these goals will allow the host communities to

=== PAGE 97 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93 
 
 
 
187 UNEP is expected to be accredited for grant awards by the time the proposal is brought forward for GCF Board 
consideration.  
assert their own authority around land-use planning (including by resolving any potential competing claims to land use) 
to adapt to be more climate resilient and in doing so, will ensure sustainability in the long term. In addition, through the 
capacity-building activities, the District Council and the host communities themselves will be better placed to adapt to 
future changes in circumstances. The land use plan forms the basis of the other interventions of this project and indeed 
of any other development activity, whether funded by government or other agencies. By selecting and designing these 
interventions in a participatory and consensus-based process, their long-term success is more likely.  
 
With respect to the community-based forest management (Activity 2.1), experience from elsewhere in Tanzania and 
further afield shows that once the governance structures are in place villagers are able to ensure ongoing management 
with minimal external support. The project will promote and support local leadership by establishing strong community-
level institutions in the form of Forest Management Committees to ensure this continuity. Agroforestry (Activity 2.2) will 
also become self-sustaining — as farmers realise the benefits of including trees in their farming systems, it is expected 
that the practise will both intensify and spread wider afield. For the tracts of afforested land, the Tanzania Forest Service 
will be able to provide continuing management support after the project has ended. Furthermore, recent increases in  
the local price of fuelwood (as reported by residents of the refugee camps) mean that the communities will have an 
interest in further extending the area under plantation to meet a larger part of fuel demand in the future.  
 
The water harvesting, storage, distribution and irrigation interventions in Output 3 are designed to provide additional 
water to agricultural areas in the host communities, and so increase their resilience in the face of climate-related stresses 
on the land. This intervention is anticipated to help the host communities maintain, and even increase, agricultural 
production. Consequently, they are expected to be highly valued interventions. The water management systems will 
need to be maintained in order to ensure their ongoing effectiveness. Much of this will require only a basic level of skills 
that will be developed through the intervention’s training activities. For the more advanced technologies, basic 
maintenance training will be delivered at village level, with more advanced maintenance training delivered to one 
engineer in each District. Funding will be made available through the Savings Associations for more advanced 
maintenance/repairs that may need to be carried out by the equipment suppliers. It is expected that the cost of such 
repairs will have reduced over the period of the project as the technologies become more prevalent in the region.  
 
Output 4 will contribute to building strengthened institutional and regulatory systems for climate-responsive planning 
and development. These strengthened systems, and the evidence-base that underpins them, will further contribute to 
the sustainability of Outputs 1–3. This will be achieved by broadening the EbA and climate-resilient planning 
knowledge base — with economic evidence, policy briefs, guidelines — and by institutionalising adaptation in into 
policies, plans and strategies in Tanzania, as well as in humanitarian programmes. This will have an enduring legacy 
and once implemented (within the project cycle), will not require further updating in the medium-term, as the 
communication materials developed will help guide further developments, as needed.  
 
Savings Associations as a Key Part of Sustainability 
 
Savings Associations (SAs) are proposed as a key delivery mechanism for the project. SAs allow individuals to pool 
finances to save and borrow money based on consensus between members. SAs — which typically have 20–25 
members — are a recognised mechanism for providing basic financial services in areas with limited banking services, 
including the Kigoma region. Most residents of the host communities and the refugees in the Kibondo, Kakonko and 
Kasulu Districts are reliant on SAs to manage their finances. However, their levels of capitalisation are low, and they 
have a general focus on saving rather than promoting climate-resilient activities specifically. This project aims to function 
as a critical tool to gather information on the financial services needs of the host communities, building on past 
assessments by agencies like UNCDF. This could demonstrate early results and pave the way for less concessional 
finance and broader access to financial services in the future. 
 
To promote sustainability of financing for climate-resilient activities, the proposed project features an innovative 
approach which involves the channelling of funds to local communities through the SAs187. The project will enable these 
existing structures to be strengthened and scaled up which will allow beneficiaries to access seeds and seedlings, 
equipment, and tools for greater engagement in climate resilient activities. This will promote savings and reinvestment 
and boost markets for these inputs. In addition, the approach will allow for the barriers of limited purchasing power to 
be overcome and will provide an alternative to accessing formal banking services. For clarity, GCF funds will be used 
to procure tools, seeds, and basic goods to promote climate-resilient livelihood but will not be used to provide cash 
grants.

=== PAGE 98 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94 
 
 
 
 
The project is intended to develop the capacities, tools, and systems for the local and regional stakeholders, thereby 
sustaining a model that can continue beyond the project cycle. By developing diversified livelihoods and strengthening 
the capacities of farmers to benefit from these, the activities fostered by the project will become self-sustaining with 
time. This also applies for the village savings associations, which will continue to function, with the funds revolving. 
The capital available in the SAs will also stimulate markets for produce, incentivizing local entrepreneurs to further 
establish small scale nurseries for agroforestry seedlings. Moreover, the host communities will have control over and 
be personally invested in these SAs. Profits will be channelled back to the SAs, therefore making them more self-
sustaining over time. Sustainability of the mechanism will also be ensured through the production of a lessons-learned 
and guideline papers on the use of SAs for upscaling of climate-resilient agricultural practises (Under Activity 4.2). 
The guideline papers will be provided to key stakeholders to inform users, decision-makers and development partners 
on planning, implementing and monitoring the use of SAs. The process to develop these guidelines will include a 
review of how SAs in different countries/contexts are being used for financing climate adaptation. Further details on 
the SAs and SAMOs can be found in Section 3.5.1 of the Feasibility Study (Annex 2.1) as well as in the operational 
manual outline for SAMOs that is appended to the Feasibility Study.

=== PAGE 99 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 95 
 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested GCF funding 
(i + ii + iii + iv + v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
$19.01 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) 
Senior loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(ii) 
Subordinated loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(iii) 
Equity 
Enter amount 
 
 
Enter % equity 
return 
 
(iv) 
Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable grants 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(vi) 
Grants 
$19,007,353 
 
 
 
(vii) 
Results-based payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-financing information 
Total amount 
Currency 
$ 4.61 
million USD ($) 
Name of institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
UNHCR 
In kind 
4.61 
million 
USD ($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
Click here to enter text. 
Options 
Enter amount 
Options  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
Click here to enter text. 
Options 
Enter amount 
Options  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
Click here to enter text. 
Options 
Enter amount 
Options  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
(c) Total financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
$ 23.62 
million USD ($)  
(d) Other financing 
arrangements and 
contributions (max. 250 
words, approximately 0.5 
page) 
In addition to the projects and financing described in this funding proposal under 
Table 2, which lists over US$ 48 million in parallel financing, the ‘Overview of other 
relevant projects in the region’ in the Feasibility Study (Annex 2.1) includes other 
climate change and development projects operating in the project area, whose 
activities complement those of the proposed project. The funding for these projects 
stems from GIZ (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit – 
German Development Agency), DFID (UK Department for International 
Development), BPRM (US Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration), GAC 
(Global Affairs Canada), KOICA (Korea International Cooperation Agency) and 
various UN agencies.  
C.2. Financing by component  
Component 
Output 
Indicative 
cost 
Options 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
Options 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
Options 
Financial 
Instrumen
t 
Name of 
Institutio
n 
Component 1 
Increased 
resilience of 
ecosystems 
and people 
Output 1: Participatory 
Climate-resilient Land 
Use Planning (C-LUP) to 
support ecosystem-
based adaptation 
 $1,062,805   
$  
$1,062,805  
Grants 
  
   0

=== PAGE 100 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 96 
 
 
 
 
to climate 
change 
threats 
Output 2: Degraded 
ecosystems restored to 
support climate change 
adaptation in host and 
refugee communities 
 $ 
13,038,743  
 $ 9,978,657  
Grants 
 $3,060,086  
In-kind 
UNHCR 
Output 3. Climate-
resilient livelihoods 
practised to increase the 
capacity of host 
communities and 
refugees to better adapt 
in changing climatic 
conditions 
   $ 
7,094,532 
478,767  
  
$ 5,687,324   
Grants 
 $1,407,207 
In-kind 
UNHCR 
Component 2 
Strengthened 
policies for 
climate 
responsive 
planning and 
development 
Output 4. Information on 
climate change 
adaptation disseminated 
and mainstreamed into 
policies, plans and 
strategies in Tanzania 
and in humanitarian 
programmes  
 $ 469,554  
 $469,554  
Grants 
 
0 
 
 
Monitoring & 
Evaluation 
 
$ 1,421,283   
$1,421,283 
Grants 
0 
 
 
Project 
Management 
Cost 
 
 $531,730  
  $ 387,730  
Grants 
 $144,000 
In-kind 
UNHCR 
Indicative total cost (USD) 
$23,618,646 
$19,007,353 
$4,611,293

=== PAGE 101 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 97 
 
 
 
 
D.EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Impact potential 
The primary impact potential of the proposed project can be summarized as follows:  
• 
Approximately1,281,800 total beneficiaries, consisting of ~ 570,300 direct (292,800 women and 277,500 men) and 
~7 11,500 indirect beneficiaries (366,635 women and 344,865 men)188;  
• 
15,000 farmer households benefiting from the adoption of diversified, climate-resilient livelihood options. At least 
50% of participants practicing climate smart agriculture, mushroom growing activities and beekeeping are women.  
• 
42,000 ha of ecosystems protected and strengthened in response to climate variability and change; and 
• 
Approximately 363,745 people covered by village land use plans which improve incentives for climate resilience 
and their effective implementation. 
• 
Approximately 30,000 ha of forest ecosystems protected under community-based forest management (CBFM).  
• 
An additional 10,000 ha of agroforestry implemented and 2,000 ha of afforestation converted from monocrop or 
degraded land, equating to ~80% of forest area in the project area, and 2% of the total forest area in Kigoma region 
(noting that much of the forest in Kigoma is outside of the project area, in already-protected sites such as the 
Moyowosi Game Reserve Ramsar site and Mahale National Park).  
 
Women will be specifically targeted for inclusion, seeking to reach at least 50% of women as part of the interventions. 
Further information on the gender targets and targeting strategy can be found in the Gender Action Plan (Annex 8). 
Number of beneficiaries 
Direct beneficiaries — drawn from both the host community and refugee camps — are those who directly engage with 
the project’s activities, such as recipients of training. Although some interventions are targeted at specific groups of 
beneficiaries, all of the individuals listed in Table 10a below are expected to directly benefit from one or more of the 
interventions delivered under the project. Further details of the assumptions underpinning the number of beneficiaries 
can be found in the ‘assumptions’ tab of the project budget (Annex 4). 
 
The project will contribute to GCF Result areas ARA1, ARA 2 and ARA4 and the following core indicators of the GCF 
Integrated Results Management Framework (IRMF):  
 
Core indicator 2: Direct and indirect beneficiaries reached 
 
Core indicator 4: Hectares of natural resource areas brought under improved low-emission and/or climate-resilient 
management practices  
 
Core indicator 5: Degree to which GCF investments contribute to strengthening institutional and regulatory 
frameworks for low-emission climate-resilient development pathways in a country-driven manner  
 
Core indicator 8: Degree to which GCF investments contribute to effective knowledge generation and learning 
processes, and use of good practices, methodologies and standards.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
188 Considering 51% women population in the camps (UNHCR Tanzania Refugee Statistical Report, September 2021) and 
51.5% women population in the three target Districts (Tanzania population and housing census, 2012). Calculations can be 
consulted on Annex 4- detailed assumptions or sources.

=== PAGE 102 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 98 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 10 a. Project beneficiaries. 
Community189 
Direct 
beneficiaries 
Accompanying remarks 
Project population – 
Kibondo host community 
 159,311 
This includes Tanzanians living in the settlements which fall within ~10–15 
km radius of Nduta camp in the Kibondo District. The projected population 
at the end of the programme in 2028 is considered. (See Annex 3 and 
Annex 4 Detailed assumptions) These inhabitants (as well as those in the 
Kakonko and Kasulu districts) are the focus of the project as they are 
considered to be part of a host community which engages with the refugee 
population and are thus subject to a related set of climate challenges which 
the proposed project seeks to address. Beneficiaries are primarily 
individuals that benefit from resilient infrastructure installed in the host 
community (e.g. charco dams). 
Project population – Nduta 
camp refugees 
59,534 
 
This is the population of Nduta camp as of September 2021. 
Project population – 
Kakonko host community 
 38,519 
As above for Kibondo – this is the population living within a 10-15 km radius 
of Mtendeli former camp area in the Kakonko District. The projected 
population at end of the programme in 2028 is considered. (See Annex 3 
and Annex 4 Detailed assumptions) 
Project population – 
Mtendeli camp refugees 
17,777 
This is the population of Mtendeli camp as of September 2021, prior to the 
closure and relocation to Nduta camp closure and are therefore considered 
as project beneficiaries in Nduta camp. 
Project population – Kasulu 
host community 
 166,915 
As above for Kibondo – this is the population living within a 10-15 km radius 
of Nyarugusu camp in Kasulu District. The projected population at end of 
the programme in 2028 is considered. (See Annex 3 and Annex 4 Detailed 
assumptions) 
Project population – 
Nyarugusu camp refugees 
 128,285 
This is the population of Nyarugusu camp as of September 2021. 
Agro-pastoralist groups 
Unknown 
numbers 
Numbers of agropastoralist groups who are not residents in host 
communities will be estimated at the project inception phase. 
Refugees as % of total 
direct beneficiaries  
36 % 
There is an approximately equal balance of beneficiaries between refugees 
and the host community, reflecting the project’s objective of improving the 
climate resilience of refugee-hosting districts as a whole. 
Total direct beneficiaries  
 570,341  Total population expected to directly benefit from project activities. 
Indirect beneficiaries – 
broader Kibondo, Kakonko 
and Kasulu host community 
 711,516 
This is the remaining population of the Kibondo, Kakonko and Kasulu 
Districts that does not include the host and refugee communities described 
above. The projected population at end of the programme in 2028 is 
considered (See Annex 3 and Annex 4 Detailed assumptions) They are 
expected to observe and learn from the climate-resilient activities being 
undertaken within the project’s area of focus and will replicate these 
activities and approaches to increasing climate resilience in adjacent areas.  
The structures of Saving Associations may also be replicated in these 
neighbouring regions. 
Total beneficiaries 
 1,281,857  Total population expected to benefit directly and indirectly from the 
project activities and areas of Kibondo, Kakonko and Kasulu Districts 
which lie outside the project area. 
 
Table 10.b. Project benefits across beneficiary groups 
Project 
Beneficiary/ 
Stakeholder 
Group  
Main 
climate 
change 
impacts 
and risks  
Socio-economic 
impacts    
Type of 
adaptatio
n 
interventi
on / 
project 
activities 
Project 
activities  
Benefits / 
incentives for 
participation 
Assumptions 
Refugees in 
Nduta and 
Nyarugusu 
camps  
 
Increased 
precipitation 
and floods 
Gully formation 
and enlargement 
leading to loss of 
land in already 
cramped areas 
Flood and 
erosion 
control 
infrastruct
ure 
2.3. Flood and 
erosion control 
Climate 
adaptation: 
Reduced flood 
damage to 
settlements, 
improved public 
Refugees 
participate in 
infrastructure 
planning 
processes

=== PAGE 103 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 99 
 
 
 
 
and risk of 
injuries; 
 
Cholera, Dengue 
fever and vector 
and water borne 
diseases.  
health, safety, and 
well-being  
 
Co-benefit: 
Improved 
environmental 
health due to the 
reduction of 
stagnant waters and 
breeding sites for 
disease vectors 
such as mosquitos 
and flies.  Reduced 
risk of latrine pit 
overflow and 
uncontrolled 
dispersion of solid 
waste 
 
Prolonged 
drought and 
high 
temperature
s;  
Hunger and 
malnutrition: 
Refugees 
engage in small-
scale agriculture 
such as planting 
beans and 
kitchen gardens 
but with poor 
harvests 
compared to 
previous years. 
 
Food security 
within camps has 
been reduced by 
cuts to food 
rations from lack 
of resources and 
closure of 
common markets 
in 2019 
 
 
Climate 
resilient 
household 
level 
agriculture 
(kitchen 
gardens) 
and 
alternative 
livelihoods  
3.1 Climate 
resilient 
agriculture 
practices 
 
3.2 Mushroom-
growing and 
beekeeping 
 
 
Climate 
adaptation: 
 
Improved food 
security from 
nutritional 
supplement of 
crops, mushrooms 
(meat substitute) 
and honey 
(sweetener); 
improved income 
and resilience to 
shocks; improved 
skills and knowledge 
that can be used to 
rebuild livelihoods in 
case of repatriation 
 
Co-benefit: 
 
Contributes to 
empowerment of 
vulnerable groups 
such as women and 
elderly 
 
Type and scope 
of livelihoods 
activities to 
benefit refugees 
as part of the 
UNHCR co-
financed activities 
are to be firmly 
agreed with 
MoHA during 
project start-up 
 
 
 
Host 
communities 
in Kasulu, 
Kakonko, 
and Kibondo 
districts, 
including 
agropastorali
st groups 
Forest fires; 
flooding; 
drought 
conditions 
Soil loss and 
reduced 
agricultural 
production.   
 
 
Land use 
planning 
and 
promotion 
of 
sustainabl
e land 
managem
ent 
practices 
1.1.1 Scale up 
land use 
planning in 
villages 
 
1.1.2 Capacity 
building of 
local officials to 
support EbA 
 
1.1.3. Improve 
public 
awareness of 
climate change 
Climate 
adaptation: 
 
Improved 
agricultural 
production and 
productivity through 
reduced fires and 
improved soil health 
 
Optimised land use 
and management 
 
Co-benefits: 
 
Planning 
meetings are 
successfully led 
by local 
government 
authorities that 
have sufficient 
capacity for 
planning, 
enforcement and 
monitoring 
 
189 Refugee numbers are based on the most recent available information and are subject to change (UNHCR Tanzania 
Refugee Statistical Report, September 2021). Host community population considers projected population at the end of the 
project in 2028 (Tanzania population and housing census, 2012). Population calculations and sources are detailed in Annex 
4.

=== PAGE 104 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 100 
 
 
 
 
Improved 
monitoring of 
forests 
 
1.1.4 Support 
district, ward, 
and village 
level 
environmental 
management 
committees 
Reduced conflict 
over communal 
land, particularly 
between farmers 
and pastoralists 
 
 
 
Heat stress 
due to 
increased 
temperature
s; drought 
conditions; 
flooding; 
increased 
fire 
incidence 
Deforestation for 
wood fuel 
building materials 
and for 
agriculture 
 
 
Forestry 
and agro-
forestry  
2.1 Community 
Based Forest 
Management 
 
2.2 
Agroforestry 
and village 
land 
afforestation 
 
 
Climate 
adaptation: 
Improved 
ecosystem services 
(ES) that can buffer 
against climate risk. 
ES include improved 
soil health; erosion 
control; availability 
of non-timber forest 
products, tree cover 
providing cooler 
microclimate 
conditions and, 
longer term 
improvement of food 
security from 
improved land 
fertility 
 
Sustainable 
production of fodder 
for livestock.  
 
Co-benefits: 
 
Increased 
availability of 
agroforestry 
products, timber, 
and fuel 
Identified co-
benefits will 
motivate both 
groups to reach 
agreements and 
manage forest 
resources 
sustainably. 
 
Energy needs of 
host communities 
and refugee 
communities can 
be met through 
means that do not 
undermine 
forestry 
investments. 
 
Flood; 
drought; 
high 
temperature
s and heat 
stress 
Crop losses and 
poor productivity 
from maize, 
cassava, beans 
and nuts; poor 
productivity and 
quality; crops 
subjected to heat 
stress 
 
 
 
Degraded land 
and soil loss 
result in low 
production 
 
Climate 
resilient 
agriculture 
and 
enhancing 
water 
security  
3.1 Climate 
resilient 
agriculture 
 
3.2 Water 
harvesting and 
efficient 
irrigation 
interventions 
 
3.3 Livelihood 
diversification 
(beekeeping 
and mushroom 
growing) 
 
Climate 
adaptation: 
 
Improved yields and 
income for cassava 
and beans 
 
Beekeeping and 
mushroom growing 
as alternative 
/diversified 
livelihoods to 
support income and 
nutritional needs 
 
Provision of water 
during dry periods 
for irrigation reduced 
reliance on rainfed 
agriculture and 
related climatic risks 
 
Co-benefits: 
 
Successful 
interventions 
allow for income 
and savings that 
can be reinvested

=== PAGE 105 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 101 
 
 
 
 
Savings can support 
household expenses 
such as food, 
education, and other 
needs 
 
Improved food 
security and 
nutrition outcomes 
 
Improved financial 
literacy 
 
Contributions to 
empowerment of 
vulnerable groups 
such as women and 
elderly 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 Under the proposed project, a new innovative model will be implemented which brings together host communities and 
refugee camps through a mutually beneficial, ecosystem-based adaptation landscape planning approach that will 
improve the resilience of both groups to climate change. The project’s innovation is that it promotes a paradigm of 
inclusivity in addressing the climate vulnerability of underserved populations in climate finance — refugees and their 
host communities facing unique challenges and layered vulnerabilities.  
 
The sustainability of adaptation actions in the region requires addressing the needs of both groups as critical 
populations impacting the landscape. Addressing only host community needs and impacts on the landscape would not 
account for the impacts of refugees in the degradation of the environment, and vice versa. There are no examples or 
paradigm to date of adaptation policies in the refugee-host community setting yet, that involve the two communities, 
local and national governments as well as the humanitarian and development community in the implementation of 
adaptation activities and future planning. Current investments are limited to sectoral and fragmented solutions such as 
focus on energy or livelihood solutions only and operating only in limited land areas. The scale of investment in the 
project could be catalytic and bring together different actors and implementing partners in the region for activities to 
make a lasting impact at the landscape level. As described in further detail below, Outputs 1-3 will test this model of 
implementing adaptation activities at the landscape level with refugees and host communities and Output 4 will support 
policies and institutionalization of adaptation policy and planning across these levels, with lessons learned to be scaled 
up and applied by UNHCR in other operations. In Kigoma, after the exit of the GCF investment, it is expected that local 
government authorities, UNHCR, and implementing partners that have continued field presence in Kigoma over the 
long term will have the capacity to plan and implement adaptation investments at the landscape level based on the 
project’s model and program their future investments from local, bilateral and multilateral sources accordingly.    
 
This project contributes to broader strategic benefits bringing equitable benefits for host communities and refugees as 
well as increases the protection space for refugees. Kigoma has been home to refugees for at least five decades in 
variable numbers that depend on the security situation of neighbouring countries. As such, refugee presence is part of 
the landscape, social relations, and economy in Kigoma. The project recognizes their presence in the region and 
eligibility to receive adaptation finance as a vulnerable population. Addressing adaptation needs of both groups in a 
participatory way results in minimizing conflict over resources in the region, supporting self-reliance among refugees, 
limiting exposure of women and girls to gender-based violence while collecting fuelwood, and builds trust among 
different stakeholders. This is the first project of this kind and scale that is well-positioned to make a lasting change in 
the socio-environmental system in the region and with lessons informing broader humanitarian operations where 
climate change adaptation needs are present. 
 
At the project level, the inclusive, landscape-level adaptation will be achieved through a comprehensive assessment of 
and planning for land-use, forestry, and livelihood interventions that consider refugee presence and provision of 
sustainable energy for cooking, complementing development projects in the region that are addressing non-climate 
drivers of degradation and vulnerability. Complementary activities are being implemented by UNHCR and others to 
address biomass energy demand by promoting distribution of improved stoves, promoting e-cooking, good cooking 
practises and examining the viability of market-based solutions to provide alternative cooking energy sources (although 
challenging in the context of poverty in the host community and lack of incomes among refugees). This planning-based 
landscape approach offers scalable solutions to address climate adaptation that considers resource use, management 
practises, landscape ecology and complex development-humanitarian needs and concerns.

=== PAGE 106 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 102 
 
 
 
 
 
Through this, a paradigm shift will be achieved whereby land-use planning and activities move away from unsustainable 
practises and climate-vulnerable livelihoods towards approaches that promote climate-resilient sustainable 
development. This will be achieved by:  
i) 
climate informed, integrated land-use planning (Activities 1.1 and 1.2), technologies and practices (Activities 
2.1-2.3 and 3.1-3.3) to build lasting local resilience to climate change by reducing the rates of land degradation, 
erosion and sedimentation, as well as by improving waterways, forests and agricultural resilience;  
ii) 
improving access to sustainable funding mechanisms (i.e. Savings Associations) (Activities 3.1-3.3) and their 
capacity to provide micro-infrastructure, skills, knowledge and access to productive assets, use funds in a 
catalytic way; and  
iii) 
supporting the mainstreaming of climate change adaptation into policies, plans and strategies in Tanzania and 
in broader humanitarian programmes, with capacity-building for policy- and decision-makers (Activities 4.1.-
4.3). The project aims to integrate climate resilience within the planning functions of multiple sectors, including 
agriculture, water use, flood prevention and forestry and will systematically collect lessons learned for scaling 
up and replication.  
 
To our knowledge, this project is the first of its kind that addresses adaptation needs of host communities and refugees 
in an integrated way by institutionalising climate-resilience and EbA practises. This approach has the potential to lead 
globally in mainstreaming climate change adaptation in refugee and host community settings as many countries that 
host refugees are also among the most vulnerable to climate change (Bangladesh, Jordan). The project will shift the 
paradigm in land use planning and practices in refugee and host community settings from fragmented, sector-based 
approaches that do not consider climate change impacts, to integrated solutions that build resilience to climate change 
impacts. This will move the paradigm of the refugee-host-ecosystem nexus to avoid circumstances where landscape 
degradation compounds climate change effects to produce vulnerability for communities in Kigoma. Locally, the 
demonstrated economic, social and environmental benefits of EbA interventions will help to change the mindsets and 
practises of village and camp planners and governing authorities — as well as refugees and local communities — 
towards embracing practises and behaviours that promote climate resilience.  
 
Output 4 activities support replication and scaling up of the project results through sharing of lessons learned and 
mainstreaming more broadly in the in refugee and host community context within Tanzania and beyond. Activities in 
this final output that conduct ecosystem service valuations, develop guidelines and policy briefs, and undertake policy 
mainstreaming within district, regional, and national governance arrangements in Tanzania will leverage the project 
outcomes to achieve the broader adaptation objectives. They allow for the generation of evidence and scaling up of 
successful interventions. On a global level, the ecosystem management and adaptation model developed in the project 
will promote the dissemination of best practices in EbA and the contribute to the global adaptation knowledge base. 
The model can be scaled-up and replicated in other refugee hosting regions by UNHCR and other humanitarian 
partners, supported by the materials developed under Output 4, namely economic valuation products, policy briefs , 
guidelines, and other knowledge and communication products. 
 
UNEP and UNHCR support approaches that focus on the integration of effective practises by States and (sub-) regional 
organizations into their own normative frameworks and practises in accordance with their specific situations and 
challenges. As Tanzania is a frontrunner in applying the One UN working modus, UN Agencies, including UNEP and 
UNHCR, are often invited to contribute to national policy and development dialogues, with UNHCR also participating in 
the Development Partners Group on environment. As a result, UNEP as AE and UNHCR as one of the EE of the project 
are well placed to promote upscaling and replicability of this model in other contexts, and to other UN organisations. 
The lessons from this project will be used to inform UNEP and UNHCR’s contributions and inputs to these policy 
processes under Output 4. The broader environment forums would also be used to disseminate lessons and findings 
from the project, which would produce policy recommendations and briefs. Through this, the project will provide an 
adaptation model that can be replicated to ensure that the world’s most vulnerable populations benefit from climate 
finance. 
 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The proposed project will contribute towards achieving 9 of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 
namely: i) SDG 2 — Zero Hunger; ii) SDG 3 — Good Health and Well-being; iii) SDG 5 — Gender Equality; iv) 
SDG 6 — Clean Water and Sanitation; v) SDG 8 — Decent Work and Economic Growth; vi) SDG 11 — 
Sustainable Cities and Communities; vii) SDG 13 — Climate Action; viii) SDG 15 — Life on Land; and ix) SDG 
16 — Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions. For monitoring, focus in given to SDG 2, to report under indicator 
2.4.1 Proportion of agricultural area under productive and sustainable agriculture, and SDG 13 to report under 
indicator 13.b.1 Number of least developed countries and small island developing States that are receiving

=== PAGE 107 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 103 
 
 
 
 
specialized support, and amount of support, including finance, technology and capacity-building, for mechanisms 
for raising capacities for effective climate change-related planning and management, including focusing on 
women, youth and local and marginalized communities. 
 
In addition, as a result of the no-regrets approach, the project interventions will produce numerous environmental, 
social and economic co-benefits, through a gender-sensitive and -responsive development approach, as 
described below in Table 11 below. The monitoring and evaluation officer for the project will develop 
methodologies to establish baselines, track, and report on these co-benefits. 
 
Table 1. Economic, environmental, social and gender benefits of the proposed project interventions. 
 
Benefit type 
Description of benefits 
Economic  
• 
An increase in provisioning services in the form of timber for wood fuel, associated with the establishment 
and maintenance of agroforestry systems (Activity 2.2.1) has been estimated to have an NPV over a 20-
year period of US$9.8 million, with an associated IRR of 98%. 
• 
The increase in timber provision which will be generated by afforestation of village land (Activity 2.2.2) has 
been determined to have an NPV of US$2.9 million and an IRR of 50%. 
• 
Increased returns to agriculture under climate-resilient management (Activity 3.1.2) would result in a net 
present value (NPV) of US$5.8 million over a 20-year period using a discount rate of 9%. The internal rate 
of return (IRR) associated with this activity is 541 %. 
• 
Increase water availability and use-efficiency through water harvesting and efficient irrigation interventions 
(Activity 3.2) has an estimated IRR of 197% and an estimated NPV of US$3.5 million. 
• 
Beekeeping (Activity 3.3.1) would generate an NPV of US$1 million. The IRR for promotion of beekeeping 
under Sub-Activity 3.3.1 is undefined, given that there are no years in which net benefits are less than zero 
for this activity. This is of course a favourable indication, and the best possible value for the IRR. In 
addition, this activity would generate substantial co-benefits in the form of conservation incentives and 
improved ecosystem functionality, which have not been quantified. 
• 
Mushroom cultivation (Activity 3.3.2) would generate an NPV of US$554,000 and an IRR of 787%. 
• 
Comparing the with project scenario to the without project scenario, it has been estimated that the net 
present value of the overall project is US$10.5  million when greenhouse gas mitigation benefits are 
excluded from the analysis. When these benefits are included, the NPV for the whole project is estimated to 
be US$20.8  million. The project has been estimated to have an economic rate of return (ERR) of 13% 
when greenhouse gas mitigation benefits are excluded and 20% when these benefits are included. 
• 
In addition to the selected provisioning of services valued above, the project will result in ecosystem 
services which would consist of supporting (incl. nutrient cycling, soil formation), provisioning (incl. timber, 
non-timber forest products), regulating (incl. water regulation, flood control) and cultural (incl. recreation, 
education). The total economic value associated with these services is likely to be substantial. Zhang et al. 
(2015190) found that for a similar ecosystem type in Miyun County, China, raw materials accounted for 38% 
of overall value. It is therefore conservative to assume that the economic values quantified above are likely 
to make up less than half of the total economic value associated with these project activities. 
• 
The economic benefits associated with flood and erosion control in densely populated areas (Activity 2.3) 
will ensure that damages from flooding are attenuated. These damages would include a loss of crops to 
flooding, damage to houses and community facilities including schools, and injury and potentially loss of 
life. 
• 
Measures designed to increase water availability and use-efficiency will provide members of the host 
communities access to a more reliable source of water. This will extend the growing season as well as 
mitigate against drought by increasing storage capacity. The infrastructure put in place for these purposes 
will also have the added benefit of reducing the impacts of floods through attenuation. 
• 
Access to supplemental non-timber forest-foods. The 2019 studies by FAO in Ugandan refugee settings 
showed that a co-benefit of reforestation is the protection of refugees’ and host communities’ access to a 
range of non-timber forest products, primarily for supplemental nutrition191. The study found that 100% of 
surveyed households used non-timber forest products and it identified over 200 such products. Most 
contributed directly to the diets of refugees and host communities. The study noted, that while difficult to 
specifically value in economic terms, the huge diversity of non-timber forest products, their year-round 
availability, and the universal access to them, supports resilience at a landscape, community and 
 
190 Zhang, Ping, He, Liang, et al., “Ecosystem Service Value Assessment and Contribution Factor Analysis of Land Use 
Change in Miyun County, China,” Sustainability (Switzerland) 7, no. 6 (2015): 7333–56, https://doi.org/10.3390/su7067333. 
191 FAO, 2019b Building Resilience With Non-Wood Forest Products: Assessing Opportunities For Nutrition And Livelihoods 
In The West Nile Sub-Region, Uganda FAO report for UNHCR

=== PAGE 108 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 104 
 
 
 
 
household level. While not specifically focused on non-timber forest products, the 2018 FAO study in 
Kigoma similarly found that these products were used by refugees and host communities in the region and 
that these represented an important component of resilient local livelihoods192.   
Environmental  • 
Improved ecosystem services. Studies have shown that in Tanzania an increase in community-based land 
management results in a decrease in soil erosion, improvement in water quality and quantity and well as a 
reoccupation of beehives and an increase in ecological interaction diversity, which is critical for ensuring 
climate resilience in activities like honey production 193,194. 
• 
Sequestration of 762,073 million tCO2e and emission reductions of 3.2 million tCO2e over 20 years 
(including a five-year implementation period) as a result of avoided deforestation, improved agricultural 
practises, afforestation and agroforestry (estimated using the FAO Ex-Ante Carbon-balance Tool195). 
Establishing a robust monitoring system would not be cost-effective in the absence of revenue streams. In 
2019, UNHCR’s consultations with UNFCCC and FAO confirmed this is an important mitigation co-benefit 
though entry into the carbon market was not advised by UNFCCC due to the current status of the 
market.196 
Social and 
health benefits 
• 
The participatory process of village land use planning is an open, equitable system for involving the public 
in planning and decision-making and increases social cohesion and peaceful co-existence.  
• 
Improved food security and nutrition for vulnerable communities.  
• 
Increase in quality of life from reduced risk of water- and vector-borne illnesses during flood incidents. 
• 
Reduced exposure to tsetse flies and risk of contracting sleeping sickness, arising from livelihood 
diversification and woodlot provision reducing the need of local communities to enter forested areas for 
activities like harvesting wood or producing charcoal for income.  
• 
Reduction of risk conflicts and competition for resource use. 
• 
Improved social cohesion among host communities and refugees. 
 
192 FOA and UNHCR,  2018 Cost–benefit analysis of forestry interventions for supplying wood fuel in a refugee situation in 
the United Republic of Tanzania Public report 
193 Patenaude, G. & Lewis, K. 2014. The impacts of Tanzania’s natural resource management programmes for ecosystem 
services and poverty alleviation. International Forestry Review, 16(4): 459−473. 
194 Kaiser-Bunbury CN, Mougal J, Whittington AE, Valentin T, Gabriel R, Olesen JN, Blüthgen N (2017) Ecosystem 
restoration strengthens pollination network resilience and function, Nature 9,542(7640):223-227 
195 FAO (2019). Ex-Ante Carbon balance Tool (Ex-ACT). Version 8.5.4. Accessed: 13 November 2019. URL: 
http://www.fao.org/tc/exact/ex-act-home/en/ 
196 In 2019 UNHCR commissioned the FAO to develop “Guidelines for Managing Forest Resources in Bidibidi Refugee 
Hosting Area” in Uganda (FAO, 2019a). UNHCR further commissioned FAO to produce an assessment of the non-timber 
forest products in the same area (FAO, 2019b). The context in Bidibidi is comparable to that in the Kigoma region of 
Tanzania. These studies were commissioned to inform UNHCR on the best value-for-money, sustainable land-use and 
development options for land that has been earmarked for refugee use. The studies recommended that afforestation to 
increase the supply to fuelwood and reduce the harvesting of native trees for fuelwood was a viable and recommended 
activity, if undertaken to directly supply fuelwood for refugees. The studies by FAO did not recommend the production of 
fuelwood or timber for sale, there is no value chain for these products as they can be freely harvested from indigenous 
forests. Further, despite the large potential for reforestation, afforestation and forest restoration, the studies also did not 
specifically recommend engagement with carbon markets. Fuelwood sales and carbon markets were considered but also 
not specifically recommended by the FAO in their 2018 study, the “Cost–benefit analysis of forestry interventions for 
supplying wood fuel for refugees in the Kigoma region of Tanzania” (FAO, 2018). Nevertheless, as UNHCR invests 
approximately $10 million USD per year in reforestation/afforestation, UNHCR has investigated the potential to engage with 
carbon markets for the benefit of refugees and host communities. In particular, in 2019 UNHCR undertook extensive 
consultations with the UNFCCC on the potential to support afforestation and reforestation through the clean development 
mechanism (CDM). The consultations concluded that, given the UNHCR context, the costs involved in establishing and 
monitoring CDM projects and the current and expected mid-term global carbon prices, the UNFCCC did not advise UNHCR 
to pursue CDM forestry initiatives. Nevertheless, while it may not translate into a carbon-related revenue stream, the 2018 
FAO study in Kigoma did shown that forestry in refugee  areas will contribute measurably to carbon sequestration (FAO, 
2018), we see this as and important mitigation co-benefit of this project that supports the overarching goal of climate 
compatibility.  
References cited in this note include: FAO, 2019a Guidelines For Managing Forest Resources In Bidibidi Refugee Hosting 
Area Yumbe District, Uganda FAO report for UNHCR; FAO, 2019b Building Resilience With Non-Wood Forest Products: 
Assessing Opportunities For Nutrition And Livelihoods In The West Nile Sub-Region, Uganda FAO report for UNHCR; FAO 
and UNHCR,  2018 Cost–benefit analysis of forestry interventions for supplying wood fuel in a refugee situation in the 
United Republic of Tanzania Public report.

=== PAGE 109 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 105 
 
 
 
 
Gender197  
• 
Reduction of risk for gender-based violence, particularly those that typically occur during firewood 
collection198 199. 
• 
Opportunities for women to take leading roles in Savings Associations, livelihoods activities and 
participatory land-use planning processes. 
• 
Of the direct beneficiary farmers that engage with the project by becoming members of Savings 
Associations, the objective is that at least 50% will be female. The Savings Associations will be designed 
specifically to appeal to female farmers, and the Savings Associations Management Offices will be 
instructed to ensure a balance of member’s genders (in line with existing Savings Association practises). 
An approximately equal distribution of male and female beneficiaries is assumed amongst the indirect 
beneficiaries in the neighbouring communities. 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
As described above, Kigoma is one of the poorest and most vulnerable regions in Tanzania. The adaptation 
requirements of the country’s rural poor, including refugees, focus on increasing water availability and quality, 
supporting livelihoods that are resilient to climate change and strengthening the skills and knowledge of beneficiaries 
to implement climate-resilient agriculture. Furthermore, these requirements are strongly aligned to the self-identified 
needs of the recipients, as expressed and documented by UNHCR through ongoing consultation with host communities 
and refugees. Consultations are supported by numerous external studies undertaken in Kigoma.  
 
Identified recipient needs are summarised below.  
• 
The need for improved economic opportunities: On a macro level, Tanzania is modernizing rapidly, but this 
transformation is largely in urban areas and has limited linkages to the rural Kigoma region. The proposed project 
promotes an approach to climate proofing subsistence activities and small-scale livelihoods, ensuring local 
economic needs are met.  
• 
The need to address environmental degradation in Kigoma. Improved planning and protection of natural 
resources, including forestry resources, is needed to halt the negative patterns of land and ecosystem degradation 
in the region. This environmental degradation negatively influences the availability and quality of natural food and 
water resources that host communities and refugees depend on. Complementary activities are being undertaken 
outside the scope of this GCF project to address the demand side drivers of degradation, as well as other 
development concerns for the region.  
• 
The need for financial services: Within the Kigoma region, the availability of financial services is limited. 
Disbursing funds through Savings Associations to deliver climate-resilient interventions is a critical tool of the project 
and provides access to financial services, including savings and finance, which are currently limited in Kigoma. The 
proposed project will scale up financial inclusion activities to improve access to finance for the host community and 
climate-resilient equipment for refugees. This improved access will have a clear and direct impact on livelihoods, 
economic growth and inclusive social and economic development, and will help to build resilience to future climate 
impacts. 
• 
The need to address refugees’ unique vulnerability: Refugees are nearly universally excluded from national or 
local adaptation plans, education and interventions. This project will develop a model for meeting the adaptation 
needs of both host communities and refugees, which can be applied locally and globally. 
 
Another aim of the proposed project is to address critical institutional capacity needs in Kigoma. Many of the project’s 
interventions are designed to address future climate impacts that are included on the agenda of local government 
officials. However, local government and civil society capacity to deliver such complex, multi-stakeholder interventions 
is considerably limited. For example, district government officials noted that District Environmental Management 
 
197 Refer to Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Action Plan section 1.4.3 for more information 
198 A 2015 field report from Refugees International found that 25% of 224 GBV incidents reported by Burundian refugees in 
Tanzania over a five month period occurred during firewood collection trips, and 90% of these incidents were rape or sexual 
assault. Vigaud-Walsh, Women and Girls Failed: The Burundian Refugee Response in Tanzania, 2015. Available at: 
http://static1.squarespace.com/static/506c8ea1e4b01d9450dd53f5/t/5678aee07086d7cddecf1bab/1450749707001/2015122
2+Tanzania.pdf. 
199 More recent data report 2,900 incidents per year between 2016-2018. There are local mechanisms for reporting, 
providing support, and addressing incidents within the camps. Refer to Annex 6. Environmental and Social Management 
System and Annex 8. Gender Assessment and Action Plan for further discussion. UNHCR data from the Sexual and 
Gender-based Violence Information Management System as at December 2019. Participating actors include HelpAge 
International, International Rescue Committee (IRC), Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), Ministry of Home Affairs, United 
Republic of Tanzania (MoHA), OXFAM, Plan International , Save the Children, Tanganika Christian Relief Services (TCRS), 
Tanzania Police Force, Tanzanian Red Cross Society (TRCS), The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), United 
Nation High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), United Nations World Food 
Programme (WFP), Women’s Legal Aid Center (WLAC).

=== PAGE 110 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 106 
 
 
 
 
Committees did not have the capacity necessary to support the Ward and Village Environmental Management 
Committees. A critical intervention of the project to address the overarching institutional capacity deficit is climate-
resilient land-use planning in villages. The District Agencies in Kigoma, along with refugee and host community 
representatives, will receive capacity building and training to develop climate informed land use plans that are owned 
at the local level. District officials will receive further capacity building to with regards to including climate impacts and 
risks in regional planning processes. Additionally, the policy review process will support the institutionalisation of the 
impacts and lessons learned of this project as well as its demonstrated benefits.  
 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The Tanzania Development Vision 2025 aspires to have the country transformed to a middle income and semi 
industrialized nation by 2025. The Vision is implemented through three consecutive Five Year Development Plans. The 
second Tanzania National Five-Year Development Plan 2016—2021, currently under implementation, defines specific 
sector interventions in natural resource management and agricultural development for climate change adaptation. 
 
Tanzania’s NDC (2021) identifies adaptation as a national priority, which includes addressing the severity of climate 
related disasters and the impacts associated with spatial and temporal variability of rainfall, droughts and higher 
incidence of floods. The proposed project has been designed with the Environment Division of the Vice President’s 
Office and aligns with their plans and strategies, including: i) the National Adaptation Programme of Action 
(NAPA)(2007); ii) National Climate Change Strategy (2012); and iii) Guidelines for Integrating Climate Change 
Adaptation into National Sectoral Policies, Plans and Programmes of Tanzania (2012).  
 
Several of the project activities are listed in the proposed “topmost urgent and immediate projects” in the NAPA, 
including: 
• 
increase irrigation by using appropriate water efficient technologies to boost crop production;  
• 
develop water harvesting, storage and recycling programs for rural communities;  
• 
community based catchments conservation and management programs; 
• 
afforestation programmes in degraded lands using more adaptive and fast-growing tree species; and 
• 
establish good land tenure systems and facilitate sustainable human settlements. 
 
The project’s activities are also well aligned with relevant national sector-level priorities in water, agriculture and 
forestry. In the Water Sector Development Programme (phase II), these priorities include: i) integrated water resources 
development and management practises; ii) enhanced protection and conservation of water catchments; iii) enhancing 
exploration and extraction of underground water; and iv) rainwater harvesting. The Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan 
(2014) and the Climate-Smart Agriculture Programme for Tanzania (2015-2025) have the objective of an “agricultural 
sector that sustainably increases productivity, enhances climate resilience and food security for the national economic 
development’’. The Tanzania climate-smart agriculture (CSA) guideline — developed in accordance with numerous 
national plans and programmes — notes that the agriculture sector employs ~78% of the population and contributes 
~95% of the nations required food200. As a large proportion of the sector is rainfed crop production, and most households 
produce at subsistence level, agriculture is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. The documents used to 
develop the guidelines are closely aligned with the government’s commitment to creating a resilient, climate-smart 
agriculture sector by 2030. The success of implementing and upscaling CSA in Tanzania is largely reliant on institutional 
changes and a behavioural shift of the population The CSA guidelines identify several key areas where capacity-
building interventions are required, which align with the interventions to be implemented under the proposed GCF 
project. These key areas include awareness raising among farmers of improved and climate-resilient farming 
techniques, training tailored to the needs of specific groups of stakeholders, easier access to climate information 
services, and improved agricultural risk management mechanisms201. Several projects in Kigoma have had a specific 
focus on capacity building for pro-poor economic development in the region as there is a high incidence of poverty in 
the population202. These projects also demonstrate the need to improve dialogue between stakeholders203. 
 
 
200 Rioux, J et al. 2017. Climate-Smart Agriculture Guideline for the United Republic of Tanzania: A country–driven response 
to climate change, food and nutrition insecurity. 
201 Rioux, J et al. 2017. Climate-Smart Agriculture Guideline for the United Republic of Tanzania: A country–driven response 
to climate change, food and nutrition insecurity. 
202 Enabel. 2009. Support to Income Generating Activities for Coast and Kigoma Regions. Available at: 
http://www.diplomatie.be/oda/11768_PROGDESCR_Technisch_en_Financieel_Dossier.pdf 
203 Enabel. 2009. Support to Income Generating Activities for Coast and Kigoma Regions. Available at: 
http://www.diplomatie.be/oda/11768_PROGDESCR_Technisch_en_Financieel_Dossier.pdf

=== PAGE 111 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 107 
 
 
 
 
The Tanzania Country Refugee Response Plan for refugees from Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo 
January 2019 — December 2020 includes “wider efforts within the environment and energy sector and associated links 
with climate change adaptation and mitigation. This will be undertaken in the context of both the host community and 
the refugee community. Implementation priorities in this regard will include climate smart agriculture, forest landscape 
restoration, sustainable forest management, community based natural resource management, land use planning, water 
conservation through the promotion of water harvesting technologies, Integrated Water Resource Management, river 
catchment conservation and the adoption of renewable energy technologies”. In the project area, the Regional 
Commissioner and the Regional Administrative Secretary of Kigoma have identified the region’s highest priorities for 
development, which include improving extension services to farmers in order to increase productivity and community 
participation in forest management and reforestation, both of which are addressed through this project. 
 
The regulatory framework in respect of refugees in Tanzania is set out in the Refugees Act, 1998 (the 1998 Act) and 
Tanzania’s 2003 National Refugee Policy (2003 Policy). Tanzania has ratified the 1951 United Nations Convention 
Relating to the Status of Refugees and the 1967 Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees. The Tanzanian 
Government is committed to protecting refugees and asylum seekers by its international legal obligations. The project’s 
approach to addressing the needs of both the host communities and refugees follows principles in the Global Compact 
for Refugees204, which has been endorsed by the Government of Tanzania, proposes coherent humanitarian and 
development responses to support both groups as effective management of refugee situations are based on the 
resilience of host communities. Moreover, in the context of this project and many refugee situations, host communities 
and refugees are embedded in the same landscape and benefit from the same ecosystem services and resources that 
are impacted negatively by climate change. Hence, their needs should be addressed in an integrated way.  
 
In discussions on the project with the Tanzanian NDA (Vice President’s Office-Division of Environment) throughout 
2017–2021, the NDA expressed continued support and prioritization of the project to UNEP, UNHCR and GCF and 
issued a no objection letter. Following consultations with the Government of Tanzania from June to September 2021, 
it was agreed that the Government pf Tanzania, acting through its Vice-President office, and UNHCR will co-execute 
this project in order to enhance country ownership, strengthen the climate-humanitarian nexus, facilitate policy and 
planning processes and promote the sustainability of project outcomes at the local, regional and national level. As 
described in Section B4 Implementation Arrangements, the Vice President’s Office-DoE and UNHCR will be executing 
entities of this project, with the Vice President’s Office- DoE acting as the lead executing entity.  Additional consultations 
with the Vice President’s Office- DoE, the Tanzania Forest Service and UNHCR took place in the period September-
October 2021 to inform the revision of the funding proposal and the new execution arrangements. 
 
In addition to the executing entities, the Government of Tanzania (at ministerial, regional and district levels) will be 
represented in the Project Steering Committee of the project to ensure oversight and provide contributions. 
A series of stakeholder consultations have been conducted throughout project preparation to gauge interest, solicit 
feedback and engender ownership, the outcomes of which have been incorporated into the project design. The 
stakeholder engagement during the second field visit (16–23 September 2018) included focus groups with 
representatives of host communities and refugees. These engagements were aimed at gathering information about 
existing programmes active in the region, discussing the feasibility of potential interventions and collecting information 
about the necessary management and arrangements structures for the implementation of the project. The scope of 
these engagements included validating baseline data, assess interesting and buy-in for potential interventions and 
providing opportunities to discuss needs and desires of the targeted population. Details of the stakeholders 
consulted, and the feedback provided can be found in the Feasibility Study.   
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
This project has been designed to use GCF funds as efficiently and effectively as possible, while recognizing the unique 
challenges faced by refugee-hosting regions. This is achieved through consideration of the points below. 
• 
The selection and design of project activities is rooted in proven, effective methods to address the identified impacts 
of climate change on ecosystems, ecosystem services and agro-ecological systems. For example, Community-
Based Forest Management is included as an activity as there is extensive evidence in Tanzania and neighbouring 
countries of its effectiveness in restoring miombo woodland and its associated ecosystems services. Each activity 
section in the Feasibility Study outlines where it has worked before, and what lessons can be learned. 
• 
The exact locations for interventions and detailed intervention design will be agreed during the project itself, during 
the participatory climate-resilient land-use planning process. This approach will be driven by the current, localized 
needs of beneficiaries in the project area and reflects the rapidly changing nature of refugee-hosting regions. This 
 
204 UNHCR, 2018. Global Compact on Refugees, final draft as at 26 June 2018.

=== PAGE 112 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 108 
 
 
 
 
dual approach of being demand-led whilst also rooted in best practise will ensure that GCF funds are efficiently 
utilised where they are needed most and on proven interventions.  
• 
The project prioritises traditional, low-cost solutions wherever possible. For example, the irrigation needs for 
agriculture of the project are met by a combination of rainwater-harvesting systems, solar water pumps and hand-
operated treadle pumps. The pumps, both solar and treadle, would primarily draw water from the rainwater 
harvesting structures described above (although a limited number may draw directly from natural water courses). 
This approach promotes the rational and equitable use of water, which will be discussed and agreed upon in the 
village land use planning process. Treadle pumps represent a more efficient usage of GCF capital to meet irrigation 
requirements, pumping 4 litres per USD, compared with 8 litres per USD for solar pumps. Treadle pumps therefore 
play a key role in the project, with ~3 treadle pumps installed for every solar pump. However, solar pumps are still 
critical, for instance in supplementing water for the large-scale afforestation nurseries which require greater 
volumes of water of per day and would be unsuitable for a manually-operated system. Other examples of traditional, 
low-cost solutions include stone pitching and gabions to prevent flooding and erosion and prioritising resilient strains 
of native crops (cassava and beans) over foreign species. 
• 
The project scales up successful best practises in the region practised and financed by different partners, including 
the following. These examples are discussed in the activity descriptions in Section B.3: 
o 
Resilient production of cassava and beans 
o 
Fuelwood production and forest protection 
o 
Savings Associations  
o 
Land use planning  
o 
Beekeeping and mushroom growing 
o 
Farmer field schools 
• 
A critical aspect of the project’s financial structure is the use of Savings Associations (SAs), accompanied by the 
Savings Associations Management Office (SAMO) which provide support and capacity building. These enable GCF 
grant funds to be used efficiently by providing them as farm inputs and tools for climate resilient practises. As 
members earn higher incomes from resilient activities, savings are reinvested into the SAs. The structure is 
intended to ensure that GCF funds are recycled after project close.  
• 
Agroforestry and afforestation activities are included in the economic model, but a revenue stream would not be 
viable. Sub-activity 2.2.2 is intended to take the pressure of fuelwood harvesting in native miombo forests. Selling 
of fuelwood would provide a disincentive to protect natural forests. 
• 
The project will be ~20% co-financed. Projected parallel financing is about double the project size. 
 
In addition to the points above, the economic and financial analysis associated with the funding proposal (Annex 3) has 
revealed the following with regards to the project’s efficiency and effectiveness. 
 
Financial analysis of key project Activities and Sub-Activities was carried out, along with an economic analysis of the 
full project. Table 12 shows positive internal rate of return (IRR) figures for all activities analysed. 
 
The IRR estimated for the establishment and maintenance of Agroforestry systems (Sub-activity 2.2.1) is 98% and the 
net present value is US$9.8 million over a 20-year period. It should be noted that Agroforestry provides a wide spectrum 
of ecosystem services including provisioning, regulating, habitat and cultural services205. However, the value measured 
in the financial analysis of agroforestry includes only two provisioning services, namely those of timber harvesting and 
fodder production. A broader array of the benefits from agroforestry will be assessed under Activity 4.1, which will 
provide a more complete picture of this activity’s true IRR. 
 
Afforestation is also shown to result in a relatively high IRR of 50%. However, the NPV is lower than that of forestry at 
US$2.9 million over the 20-year period. As with agroforestry, it is likely that his low NPV is the result of the partial nature 
of data considered in the analysis. Only one of the ecosystem services associated with woodland – timber production 
– has been measured under the analysis. For example, a systematic review across the tropics found that afforestation 
resulted in an average of a three-fold increase in the infiltration capacity of soils in the 14 comparative experiments 
 
205 Sileshi, G. Akinnifesi, FK. Ajayi, OC. Chakeredza, S. Kaonga, M. Matakala, PW. 2007. Contributions of agroforestry to 
ecosystem services in the miombo eco-region of eastern and southern Africa. African Journal of Environmental Science and 
Technology, 1(4). Jose, S. 2009. Agroforestry for ecosystem services and environmental benefits: an overview. Agroforest 
Syst 76, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10457-009-9229-7; Buchelli, VJP, Bokelmann, W. 2017. Agroforestry systems for 
biodiversity and ecosystem services: the case of the Sibundoy Valley in the Colombian province of Putumayo. International 
Journal of Biodiversity Science, Ecosystem Services and Management, 13(1); Brown, S.E., Miller, D.C., Ordonez, P.J. et al. 
Evidence for the impacts of agroforestry on agricultural productivity, ecosystem services, and human well-being in high-
income countries: a systematic map protocol. Environ Evid 7, 24 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13750-018-0136-0 
  Ilstedt, U. Malmer, A. Verbeeten, E. Murdiyarso, D. 2007. The effect of afforestation on water infiltration in the tropics: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Forestry Ecology and Management, 251. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2007.06.014

=== PAGE 113 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 109 
 
 
 
 
considered. The implications for groundwater recharge and flood attenuation may be considerable. The economic 
analysis planned under Activity 4.1 is expected to reveal the value of a broader spectrum of ecosystem services 
associated with in-tact woodland ecosystems. 
 
Climate-resilient agriculture is shown to provide an IRR of 541%, with an associated NPV of US$5.8 million over the 
20-year period under the “with project scenario” relative to the “without project scenario”. The benefits measured under 
this analysis include improved yields from planting climate-resilient crop varieties. It is possible that other benefits, such 
as those associated with a higher consistency production relative to traditional agriculture, have not been captured as 
part of this analysis. 
 
The water harvesting and irrigation interventions under Activity 3.2 have been found to generate an IRR of 197%. The 
NPV was estimated to be US$3.5 million over the 20-year period, which is equivalent to ~US$175,000 per year. 
 
The IRR for promotion of beekeeping under Sub-Activity 3.3.1 is undefined, given that there are no years in which net 
benefits are less than zero for this activity. This is of course a favourable indication, and the best possible value for 
the IRR. Given the limited local market for honey, it is likely that only a portion of the value of this activity will generate 
monetary returns. The NPV is US$ 996,463 over the 20-year period, which equates to ~US$48,823 per year. 
 
The promotion of mushroom cultivation was estimated to generate an IRR of 787% and an NPV of US$554,000 over 
the 20-year period. This equates to ~US$27,700 per year. Marginalised groups will be identified to receive this benefit. 
 
All NPV figures presented in Table 12 have been estimated using a discount rate of 9%, in accordance with the rate 
used in FAO & UNHCR’s 2018 Cost–benefit analysis of forestry interventions for supplying wood fuel in a refugee 
situation in the United Republic of Tanzania by A. Gianvenuti & V.G. Vyamana. 
 
Table 12. Internal rate of return and financial net present value for each of the listed activities and sub-activities. IRR for activity 
3.3.1 is undefined, given that there are no years in which net benefits are less than zero for this activity. 
 
Project sub-activity 
IRR 
Increase in NPV with project relative to without 
project (US$) 
NPV 
NPV per hectare 
2.2.1. Establish and maintain (a) agroforestry systems; and (b) nurseries 
for production of tree seedlings 
98% 
9,828,099  
343  
2.2.2. Undertake afforestation on village land to a) restore critical 
ecosystem services, b) establish a sustainable supply of fuelwood 
50% 
2,933,973  
1,467  
3.1.2. Provide inputs for climate-resilient agriculture 
541% 
5,877,457  
19,592  
3.2. Increase water availability and use-efficiency through water 
harvesting and efficient irrigation interventions 
197% 
3,509,447  
8,158  
3.3.1. Promote beekeeping to incentivise forest conservation in the 
forests surrounding the camps and villages.  
Undefined  
996,463  
N/A   
3.3.2. Promote mushroom cultivation for marginalised groups with 
training and mushroom growing facilities. 
787% 
553,763  
N/A   
 
Table 13 displays the project’s ERR, which was estimated to be 13% when the value of greenhouse gas mitigation 
benefits are excluded and 20% when they are factored in. Also displayed is the project’s NPV over a 20-year 
period. The net benefit estimated to result from project implementation is US$ 10.5  million over the 20-year 
period, when mitigation benefits are excluded and US$20.8 million when they are included. These values equate 
to US$49 per hectare excluding mitigation benefits and US$ 98 per hectare including mitigation benefits. The 
economic analysis used the social rate of time preference as the discount rate. This was estimated to be 6.2%, 
following adjusted for Tanzania’s growth in per capita consumption206. 
 
Table 13. Economic rate of return and economic net present value of project 
Economic CBA 
ERR 
NPV with project relative to without project 
(US$) 
NPV 
NPV per hectare 
Excluding mitigation benefits 
13% 
10,516,821  
49  
 
206 Further details are provided in Annex 3, which includes all financial and economic models used to generate 
the information presented here.

=== PAGE 114 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 110 
 
 
 
 
Including mitigation benefits 
20 % 
20,882,214  
 98  
 
The results of financial and economic analyses were subjected to sensitivity analysis to assess their level of robustness 
to changes in key parameters, and to ascertain switching values. The results, outlined in Table 14, show that Sub-
Activity 3.1.2 (inputs for climate-resilient agriculture) is most sensitive to changes in key cost and benefit streams. Under 
a 13% reduction in benefits, this activity results in a negative IRR. Similarly, a 30% reduction in benefits leads to a 
negative IRR for Sub-Activity 2.2.2 (afforestation). Also highlighted in the table, a 35% reduction in benefits results in a 
negative IRR for Activity 2.2.1 (agroforestry). The project as a whole is shown to be sensitive to changes in the 
magnitude of benefits. When mitigation benefits are excluded from the analysis, a 61 % reduction in project benefits 
results in a negative project ERR ( 71 % when mitigation benefits are included). 
In contrast to changes in project benefits, the outcomes of the analysis appear to be relatively robust to changes in 
costs. Of note is that when costs incurred by beneficiaries in the ‘with project’ scenario are increased by 30%, the IRR 
for Activity 3.1.2 (inputs for climate-resilient agriculture) switches to negative. Also, when the costs associated with 
Activity 2.2.1 (agroforestry) are increased by 53%, the IRR switches to negative. The project as a whole, however, 
maintains a positive ERR up to a 156% increase in costs when mitigation benefits are excluded and a 239% increase 
in costs when mitigation benefits are included.  
As mentioned previously, the full range of project benefits has not been included in the cost-benefit analysis. By 
comparison, it is likely that a relatively smaller proportion of the total costs has been omitted from the analysis. These 
findings should therefore be taken as representing a cautious outlook. 
Table 14. Sensitivity analysis of financial and economic analyses. 
 
Assumption and parameter 
Values at which IRRs switch to negative 
`Value at which project ERR 
switches to negative  
2.2.1 
2.2.2 
3.1.2 
3.2 
3.3.1 
3.3.2 
Excluding 
mitigation 
benefits 
Including 
mitigation 
benefits 
Increase in activity implementation costs 
53% 
120% 
30% 
195% 
 901% 
236% 
156% 
239 % 
Decrease in magnitude of benefits 
35% 
30% 
13% 
61% 
 91% 
71% 
 61% 
71 %

=== PAGE 115 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
This section refers to the project/programme’s logical framework in accordance with the GCF’s Integrated Results Management Framework to which the 
project/programme contributes as a whole, including in respect of any co-financing.  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus 
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross-cutting proposals, select both. 
☐ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
This section of the logical framework is meant to help a project/programme monitor and assess how it contributes to the paradigm shift described in section D.2 above by 
applying three assessment dimensions - scale, replicability, and sustainability.  
Accordingly, for each assessment dimension (see the definition per assessment in the accompanying guidance note), describe the current state (baseline) and the potential 
scenario (target) and rate the current state (baseline) by using the three-point-scale rating (low, medium, and high) provided in the guidance note. Also describe how the 
project/programme will contribute to that shift/ transformation under respective assessment dimensions (scale, replicability and sustainability). In doing so, please refer to 
section B.2(a) (theory of change).        
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/programme will 
contribute (Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Scale 
Tanzania ranks 8th in the GDP 
ranking of Africa countries 207 and 
26 in the HDI ranking of African 
countries 
(low 
human 
development). Kigoma region is one 
of 30 regions in Tanzania, with a 
population of ~2.3 million people, in 
a country of ~47 million people.  
Kigoma Region is part of the Lake 
Tanganyika 
basin, 
a 
global 
biodiversity hotspot. Forests in the 
Kigoma region are largely miombo 
woodland, 
representative 
of 
High 
The project landscape-based approach 
offers scalable solutions to address 
climate adaptation that consider resource 
use, management practises, landscape 
ecology 
and 
complex 
development-
humanitarian needs and concerns. The 
project will promote a paradigm shift 
towards: 
1) 
inclusive 
solutions 
to 
adaptation needs of host communities and 
refugees through adaptation solutions at 
the 
landscape 
level; 
2) 
integrated 
interventions across sectors that are 
designed to be mutually reinforcing; and 3) 
implementation of activities that are 
Outputs 1-3 will implement adaptation 
activities at the landscape level with host 
and 
refugee 
communities. 
Output 
4 
activities will support scaling up and 
replication of the project results through 
sharing of lessons learned and policy 
mainstreaming within Tanzania and beyond. 
Output 4 activities including ecosystem 
service 
valuations, 
development 
of 
guidelines and policy briefs, and policy 
mainstreaming within district, regional, and 
national 
governance 
arrangements 
in 
 
207 World Economic Outlook database SSA: April 2022 Nominal GDP". imf.org.

=== PAGE 116 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 112 
 
 
 
 
 
Tanzania as whole. Approximately 
10 million ha of forest was lost in 
Tanzania between 1990 and 2015, 
the majority of which were miombo 
woodlands. 
Miombo 
woodlands 
span across parts of: Angola, 
Botswana, 
Burundi, 
Democratic 
Republic 
of 
Congo, 
Malawi, 
Mozambique, Namibia, Tanzania, 
Zambia and Zimbabwe, Covering 
around 2.4 million km2, 
Today,~250,000 
refugees 
are 
present today in Tanzania, with 
most accommodated in the two 
camps in Kigoma.   
There are now more than 100 
million people globally displaced, 
around 75% of whom are hosted by 
low or middle-income countries and 
living in protracted circumstances. 
African countries host 5,7million 
refugees (24% of the refugees 
under UN mandate worldwide) and 
14.7 million IDPs of concern to 
UNHC.208 Global estimates are that 
climate change could contribute to 
the movement of 216 million people 
within their own countries by 2050, 
unless 
concrete 
climate 
and 
inclusive development actions are 
taken. According to the IPCC 
AR6‑WG2 report, IDP and refugee 
settlements are disproportionately 
concentrated in regions that are 
exposed to higher‑than‑average 
warming levels and specific climate 
hazards, 
including 
temperature 
extremes and drought. 
informed by projected climate impacts 
where the people and landscape would be 
better able to cope with, and adapt to, 
climate shocks.  
Experience from elsewhere in Tanzania 
shows 
that 
once 
the 
governance 
structures are in place villagers are able to 
ensure ongoing community-based forest 
management 
with 
minimal 
external 
support. The practise will both intensify 
and spread wider afield. with the villages 
having: i) reached consensus on how the 
village land should be used to improve 
climate resilience; and ii) obtained legal 
status in the form of a Customary 
Certificate 
of 
Rights 
of 
Occupation. 
Achieving these goals will allow the host 
communities to assert their own authority 
around land-use planning (including by 
resolving any potential competing claims 
to land use) to adapt to be more climate 
resilient and in doing so, will ensure 
sustainability in the long term.  
The Tanzania Forest Service will be able to 
provide continuing management support 
after the project has ended. We expect that 
communities will have an interest in further 
extending the area under plantation to 
meet a larger part of fuel demand in the 
future. The District Council and the host 
communities themselves will be better 
placed to adapt to future changes in 
circumstances. 
To our knowledge, this project is the first of 
its kind that addresses adaptation needs of 
host communities and refugees in an 
integrated 
way 
by 
institutionalising 
climate-resilience and EbA practises. This 
Tanzania will leverage the project outputs to 
achieve the desired adaptation outcomes. 
The scale of investment in the project will be 
catalytic and bring together different actors 
and implementing partners in the region for 
activities to make a lasting impact at the 
landscape level. The project aims to involve 
local 
government 
authorities 
in 
the 
implementation of the project including the 
Regional Commission, District Councils, 
Tanzania Forest Service, Lake Tanganyika 
River Basin Authority, and other relevant 
actors. Training and equipment will be 
provided by the project to support their 
mandate in land use planning, forest 
monitoring 
and 
conservation, 
and 
expanding extension work climate resilient 
agriculture practices.   
Capacity building will be provided to support 
district officials and Tanzania Forest Service 
officers in including climate impacts and 
risks for the region into the land-use 
planning processes, enabling Participatory 
Land 
Use 
Management 
to 
support 
communities to embed these impacts in the 
allocation of land to different purposes.  
Knowledge 
and 
lessons 
will 
be 
mainstreamed into national and local 
government 
structures 
and 
wider 
humanitarian programmes.  This will be 
achieved by generating and documenting 
evidence, disseminating information and 
providing inputs and knowledge to policy 
and planning processes. In Kigoma, after 
the ex the GCF investment, it is expected 
that local government authorities, UNHCR, 
and implementing partners that have 
continued field presence in Kigoma over the

=== PAGE 117 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 113 
 
 
 
 
 
 
208 Data of 2022 available at UNHCR - Refugee Statistics

=== PAGE 118 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 114 
 
 
 
 
 
There is evidence of a pathway 
towards 
better 
mainstreaming 
climate 
resilience 
in 
sectoral 
policies 
and 
plans 
and 
the 
consideration of host community 
and refugee needs as part of the 
same socio-ecological landscape. 
Example of this is the Kigoma Joint 
Programme II and the associated 
initiatives 
supporting 
the 
humanitarian-development-peace 
nexus in Kigoma. However, while 
other activities in the region are 
addressing specific development 
and humanitarian needs, there is 
limited landscape-level coordination 
of these interventions Additionally, 
projects and activities addressing 
humanitarian 
or 
development 
concerns have limited consideration 
for the long-term impacts of climate 
change or have insufficient scale to 
trigger a paradigm shift. 
 
approach has the potential to lead globally 
in 
mainstreaming 
climate 
change 
adaptation in refugee and host community 
settings as many countries that host 
refugees are also among the most 
vulnerable 
to 
climate 
change 
(e.g. 
Bangladesh, Jordan). The project will shift 
the paradigm in land use planning and 
practices in refugee and host community 
settings from fragmented, sector-based 
approaches that do not consider climate 
change impacts, to integrated solutions 
that build resilience to climate change 
impacts. 
As Tanzania is a frontrunner in applying 
the One UN working modus, UN Agencies, 
including UNEP and UNHCR, are often 
invited to contribute to national policy and 
development dialogues, with UNHCR also 
participating in the Development Partners 
Group on environment. As a result, UNEP 
as AE and UNHCR as one of the EE of the 
project are well placed to promote 
upscaling and replicability of this model in 
other 
contexts, 
and 
to 
other 
UN 
organisations. 
UNHCR Global Compact on Refugees 
(GCR) calls for strengthened national and 
international partnership with development 
partners, the private sector and other 
stakeholders to address challenges related 
to energy and the environment. The 
proposed project is recognised as a major 
partnership effort to operationalise the 
GCR. Lessons from the project’s approach 
and implementation will be documented 
and shared to guide UNHCR’s global 
engagement with environment and climate 
change actors as well as inform operations 
long term will have the capacity to plan and 
implement adaptation investments at the 
landscape level based on the project’s 
model and program their future investments 
from local, bilateral and multilateral sources 
accordingly.

=== PAGE 119 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 115 
 
 
 
 
 
in other countries. Dedicated teams have 
been 
set 
up 
to 
strengthen 
the 
operationalisation of the GCR as well as to 
support UNHCR’s work on mitigation and 
adaptation to climate change. Corporate 
commitments to climate change and 
environmental challenges as well as 
organisational 
structures 
at 
UNHCR 
encourage the institutionalisation of the 
approach proposed by the project. 
Replicability 
 Though the districts of Kibondo, 
Kakonko and Kasulu in Kigoma 
region are among the poorest, and 
the region’s per capita income — at 
~USD 503 — is particularly low 
compared with other regions in the 
country, many of the development 
issues 
are 
representative 
of 
challenges 
in 
the 
country. 
Approximately 25% of Tanzania’s 
population of ~47 million live below 
the poverty line, with subsistence 
agriculture 
being 
the 
primary 
livelihood of 75–80% of households 
in the country — including the 
majority of the rural low-income 
families. Agriculture is a dominant 
sector of the Tanzanian economy, 
accounting for 25% of the GDP. 
Despite having fertile land and 
water resources, the agricultural 
sector 
is 
hampered 
by 
low 
productivity and persistent poverty. 
This project will therefore be a 
flagship on the use of nature-based 
solutions 
for 
adaptation 
in 
Tanzania. 
Tanzania’s Nationally Determined 
Contributions 
(NDC) 
identifies 
High 
The proposed project will overcome key  
barriers that impede building the climate 
resilience at the landscape level such as : 
• 
Limited capacity in local institutions 
and processes to plan for and 
address 
long 
term 
climate 
vulnerabilities  
• 
Refugees and the special needs of 
their host communities are not well 
articulated in adaptation policies, 
legislation, planning or programmes.  
• 
Limited access and uptake of 
agricultural, 
forestry 
or 
land 
management 
technologies 
or 
knowledge 
to 
improve 
climate 
resilience. 
• 
Low 
purchasing 
power 
of 
smallholder-farmers and refugees 
limits access to inputs for resilient 
agriculture 
and 
other 
long-term 
investments.  
• 
Limited investment in Kigoma region 
and 
competing 
development 
priorities defer long-term adaptation 
planning or leave it underfunded.  
 
During the implementation period the 
policy environment remains favourable to 
the mainstreaming of adaptation into 
policies, 
plans 
and 
programs 
as 
The project will use the results of the 
planning 
processes 
and 
physical 
interventions implemented to demonstrate 
the economic, environmental and social 
value of this model to stakeholders. This 
approach will contribute to the sustainability 
and scalability of the outputs and fund-level 
outcomes at the national level. 
 
The project will contribute to building 
strengthened institutional and regulatory 
systems for climate-responsive planning and 
development. These strengthened systems, 
and the evidence-base that underpins them, 
will further contribute to the sustainability of 
field-based adaptation measures. This will 
be achieved by broadening the EbA and 
climate-resilient planning knowledge base 
— with economic evidence, policy briefs, 
guidelines — and by institutionalising 
adaptation in into policies, plans and 
strategies in Tanzania, as well as in 
humanitarian programmes.

=== PAGE 120 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 116 
 
 
 
 
 
adaptation as a national priority. 
The interventions outlined in this 
Feasibility 
Study 
have 
been 
designed with the support of the 
Environment Division of the Vice 
President’s Office and aligns with 
their plans and strategies including 
the National Adaptation Programme 
of 
Action 
(NAPA, 
2007) 
and 
National Climate Change Strategy 
(NCSS, 
2012), 
Guidelines 
for 
Integrating 
Climate 
Change 
Adaptation into National Sectoral 
Policies, Plans and Programmes of 
Tanzania 
(2012), 
Tanzanian 
Nationally 
Determined 
Contributions (NDC) of 2021, and 
the Tanzania Development Vision 
2025.  
The 
is 
an 
increasing 
trend 
worldwide in the consideration of 
nature-based solutions to enhance 
climate 
resilience 
in 
refugee 
settings. However, the adaptation 
needs of host communities and 
refugees tend to be considered 
separately by development and 
humanitarian 
programmes. 
Through this project, UNHCR and 
the Government of Tanzania are  
promoting  an innovative landscape 
approach 
that 
addresses 
adaptation 
needs 
of 
host 
communities and refugees in an 
integrated way 
recommended by the Tanzania NAP stock 
take, the National Adaptation Compact 
and 
the 
National 
Climate 
Change 
Response Strategy (2021-2026).   
The replication of climate-resilient village 
land use planning is facilitated by the 
learning generated by this initiative and the 
new enabling policy framework, including 
the National Climate Change Response 
Strategy 
(2021-2026), 
the 
National 
Environment Policy of 2021 and the 
Environmental Master Plan (2022-2032), 
which promote the scale up of resilient 
land 
use 
plans 
for 
sustainable 
development (in at least 4,800 villages by 
2032) and to mainstream climate change 
into land use planning by 2032. 
The draft 3rd edition of the Guidelines for 
Integrated and Participatory Village Land 
Use 
Planning, 
Management 
and 
Administration from the National Land Use 
Planning 
Commission, 
which 
include 
climate change adaptation and mitigation 
strategies 
and 
recognize 
ecosystem 
protection 
and 
conservation 
as 
an 
adaptation strategy is operationalized and 
capacity built through its implementation in 
target villages.

=== PAGE 121 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 117 
 
 
 
 
 
Sustainability 
More than 32% of Kigoma region’s 
population lives below the poverty 
line. The rising population of the 
region, as well as the continual 
subdivision of land within families 
have resulted in over-intensive 
agricultural practises which are 
placing increasing pressure on 
limited natural resources.  Farmers 
and livestock keepers sell charcoal 
and 
fuelwood 
in 
lean 
times, 
resulting 
the 
deterioration 
of 
miombo 
forests. 
Fuel 
wood 
extraction accounts for 60% of 
forest resource usage.  In Kigoma, 
closed woodland had diminished to 
only 5.6% in 2010 from 23.2% in 
1990, while cultivation increased to 
17% in 2014 from 2% in 1990.   
Agricultural production in Kigoma is 
dominated 
by 
small-scale, 
subsistence farmers practising low-
input farming, with average farm 
sizes ranging between 0.2 and 2 ha.  
Uptake of agricultural technology in 
Kigoma is low.  Political instability in 
neighbouring countries results in 
food shortages, which are often 
augmented 
with supplies 
from 
Tanzania, 
producing 
price 
fluctuations 
in 
Kigoma 
and 
impacting food security in the 
region. 
Tensions 
between 
host 
communities and refugees result 
over shared natural resources — 
including forests, arable land and 
water resources — which are often 
the result of insufficient provision of 
Low 
 
The project strategy is to ensure that the 
landscape and ecosystem of the Kigoma 
region can continue to support its 
residents, including refugees, and host 
communities, including agro-pastoralist 
groups that pass through the region as it 
faces challenges of climate change. The 
interventions are planned within the sub-
catchments and contiguous landscape of 
host communities and refugees with the 
aim of strengthening the ecosystem’s 
capacity to respond to climate shocks and 
continue to provide services such as 
provision of soil nutrients, prevention of 
flooding and erosion, creating shade for 
crops and others.  
The interventions in degraded areas within 
and around refugee camps are expected 
to support the broader resilience of both 
ecosystems and communities.  Having 
locally-led land management systems and 
climate resilient agricultural improvements 
can reduce the drivers of deforestation 
while at the same time improving the 
condition of the forest and soils. Managing 
forests for climate change impacts also 
safeguard forest-based climate resilient 
livelihoods, such as beekeeping, further 
encouraging sustainable forest use. 
Preserving and restoring native forest 
landscapes 
under 
community 
management regimes yield benefits in 
flood control and erosion reduction not 
only at the immediate intervention areas, 
but more broadly at the basin level. 
The water harvesting, storage, distribution 
and irrigation interventions will protect and 
The project will promote 1) inclusive 
solutions to adaptation needs of host 
communities 
and 
refugees 
through 
adaptation solutions at the landscape level; 
2) integrated interventions across sectors 
that are designed to be mutually reinforcing; 
and 3) implementation of activities that are 
informed by projected climate impacts 
where the people and landscape would be 
better able to cope with, and adapt to, 
climate shocks.  
Village land use planning culminating in the 
issuance of a Certificate of Customary Right 
of Occupancy (CCRO) is expected to 
empower communities to protect their land. 
Village Land Forest Reserves (VLFR) 
gazettement, 
strengthening 
community 
institutional monitoring systems will further 
ensure conservation benefits to the users. 
Community Based Forest Management 
(CBFM) interventions will protect natural 
forest systems and enhance ecosystem 
services. Conservation will be reinforced by 
the 
agroforestry 
and 
afforestation 
interventions 
providing 
sustainable 
alternative sources for energy needs, 
thereby reducing pressure on the natural 
forests and allowing them to regenerate. 
Demand for fuelwood will be diverted from 
slow-growing 
indigenous 
Miombo 
ecosystems, 
towards 
fast-growing 
plantations that will be established on 
marginal land.  
Agroforestry interventions, by providing 
multiple uses such as food, fodder, shade 
for 
crops, 
and 
sustainable 
fuelwood 
production, will further deter activities or 
behaviour that degrade the natural forest

=== PAGE 122 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 118 
 
 
 
 
 
food in 
camps, and a 
strict 
encampment policy which has led to 
limited livelihood activities within the 
camps. The combination of the 
reliance on subsistence agriculture 
and the additional pressure on, and 
conflict over, natural resources as a 
result of hosting the refugees has 
resulted 
in 
the 
significant 
degradation of ecosystems in the 
region of the camps. 
Kigoma ranks second as the most 
affected region by wildfires, with at 
least 1 million ha burned annually. 
The risk of uncontrolled fires is 
expected to be exacerbated under 
climate 
change 
conditions. 
Increasing temperatures and more 
frequent higher intensity rainfall 
events are likely to further reduce 
the stability of soils on agricultural 
lands, resulting in soil and nutrient 
loss through erosion.    
A degraded landscape with low soil 
stability, 
reduced 
soil 
nutrient 
availability, 
and 
reduced 
soil 
moisture make the landscape more 
susceptible to the impacts of climate 
change and less able to support 
agricultural and other livelihood 
activities, less able to retain water 
resources 
required 
for 
these 
livelihoods and more susceptible to 
flooding. 
Kibondo and Kakonko districts are 
part of the Lake Tanganyika Basin 
which are experiencing a decline in 
the flow of major rivers and drying 
increase agricultural production in the face 
of climate change.  
Local 
leadership 
is 
promoted 
by 
establishing 
strong 
community-level 
institutions 
in 
the 
form 
of 
Forest 
Management Committees to ensure this 
continuity. Agroforestry will also become 
self-sustaining — as farmers realise the 
benefits of including trees in their farming 
systems, it is expected that the practise will 
both intensify and spread wider afield. 
The capital available in the SAs will also 
stimulate 
markets 
for 
produce, 
incentivizing local entrepreneurs to further 
establish 
small 
scale 
nurseries 
for 
agroforestry seedlings. 
The project has targets on adoption of 
climate 
resilient 
farming 
practices, 
diversified livelihoods, protected forest 
area. 
After the exit of the GCF investment, it is 
expected 
that 
local 
government 
authorities, UNHCR, and implementing 
partners 
that 
have 
continued 
field 
presence in Kigoma over the long term will 
have the capacity to plan and implement 
adaptation investments at the landscape 
level based on the project’s model and 
program their future investments from 
local, bilateral and multilateral sources 
accordingly. 
 
systems 
— 
including 
unsustainable 
fuelwood collection and charcoal burning.  
The protection of the North Makere, South 
Makere, Mwale and Buyungu National 
Forest Reserves will be ensured through the 
technical 
and 
institutional 
capacity 
development of the Tanzania Forest Service 
(TFS). 
Climate resilient agriculture will be adopted 
through the provision of inputs and transfer 
of skills and technologies to strengthen the 
capacities of farmers and district officials. 
Furthermore, through water harvesting and 
irrigation, water availability and water use 
efficiency will be improved. Livelihoods will 
be diversified in respect of beekeeping and 
mushroom cultivation. 
 
In the refugee camps, flood and erosion 
control measures will help avoid soil run-off 
and erosion. The flood and erosion control 
measures 
will 
strengthen 
the climate 
resilience of the project’s natural landscape, 
e.g. soil erosion, damage to crops and 
infrastructure, 
and 
waterlogging. 
The 
interventions 
under 
this 
activity 
will 
substitute 
the 
services 
provided 
by 
ecosystems in areas that have been 
degraded to the extent of having insufficient 
natural flood-attenuation capacity.  
 
Project 
interventions 
include 
extensive 
training and capacity building, which will 
allow knowledge of the benefits of activities 
such 
as 
community-based 
forest 
management, 
resilient 
agriculture 
and 
alternative livelihoods to be sustained and 
dissipated through wider communities. This 
approach includes joint meetings between

=== PAGE 123 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 119 
 
 
 
 
 
wetlands in Kigoma, leading to a 
heavy dependence on pumped 
groundwater.  Host communities 
reported 
exacerbated 
flood 
impacts. In the camps areas the 
main issue is storm water, not river 
flooding – causing gully erosion. 
Rural 
populations, 
including 
women, generally have limited 
technical skills and technological 
support. Women are often excluded 
from decision-making on access to 
and the use of land and resources 
critical to their livelihoods. The 
enforcement 
of 
established 
guidelines 
and 
village 
bylaws 
intended to protect water resources 
and mitigate flood impacts is a 
challenge. 
Human disease epidemics are a 
major 
concern 
affecting 
communities within Kigoma. and 
have been amplified during periods 
of severe weather, including floods 
and droughts.  
 
host communities and refugees, awareness-
raising and participatory processes to 
manage 
benefit 
sharing 
arrangements 
between host communities and refugees 
and facilitate sustainable offtake, promote 
ecosystem protection, and minimise conflict 
over resource use. 
Many of the interventions introduced can be 
maintained 
or 
expanded 
by 
host 
communities without further support after the 
initial five-year project period since they 
require minimal funding and repay the 
investment in inputs and labour through 
increases in productivity and income. The 
project aims to show the viability and impact 
of its activities, setting the context for the 
continuation of these interventions beyond 
the project lifespan.  
Scaled up Saving Associations which will 
allow beneficiaries to access seeds and 
seedlings, equipment, and tools for greater 
engagement in climate resilient activities. 
This will promote savings and reinvestment 
and boost markets for these inputs. 
The project’s gender sensitive approach 
seeks to achieve practical and tangible 
benefits to women to improve their decision-
making power both at the household and the 
community level as well as bring about 
strategic changes in gender relations.  
 
 
 
 
 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)

=== PAGE 124 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 120 
 
 
 
 
 
Select appropriate IRMF core and supplementary indicators to monitor project/programme progress. More than one IRMF (core and or supplementary) indicators may be 
selected as applicable for each GCF results area and project/programme outcome (as defined in the table in section B.2(b)). If IRMF indicators are unable to measure any 
given project/programme outcomes, project/programme-specific indicators should be developed under section E.5 (project/programme specific indicators).  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final209 
All adaptation result 
areas 
Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
Baseline reports, mid-
term and final evaluation 
reports 
 
Population data records 
from the national census 
and UNHCR  
0 direct 
beneficiaries  
0 indirect 
beneficiaries  
0 direct 
beneficiaries  
0 indirect 
beneficiaries 
 570,341 direct 
beneficiaries 
~50% of which 
are female  
These are the 
households in 
the host 
community 
with access to 
benefits, along 
with the 
refugees in the 
camps within 
the area of 
focus. 
 
711,516 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
~50% of which 
are women 
 
 
Benefits for direct 
and indirect 
beneficiaries are 
obtained upon 
completion of 
planned  
interventions in all 
target host villages 
and the refugees 
camps. Please refer 
to Table 10.a above 
for the detailed 
calculations and 
assumptions on 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries.  
 
Estimated average 
population growth 
rate of 2.4%  in host 
communities.  
 
No major variance in 
refugee population 
numbers  
 
 
209 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the 
target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.

=== PAGE 125 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities 
 
Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
Baseline reports, mid-
term and final evaluation 
reports 
 
Population data records 
from the national census 
and UNHCR  
0 direct 
beneficiaries  
0 indirect 
beneficiaries  
0 direct 
beneficiaries  
0 indirect 
beneficiaries 
 570,341 direct 
beneficiaries 
~50% of which 
are female  
These are the 
households in 
the host 
community 
with access to 
benefits, along 
with the 
refugees in the 
camps within 
the area of 
focus. 
 
711,516 
indirect 
beneficiaries 
~50% of which 
are women 
 
 
Benefits for direct 
and indirect 
beneficiaries are 
obtained upon 
completion of 
planned  
interventions in all 
target host villages 
and the refugees 
camps. Please refer 
to Table 10.a above 
for the detailed 
calculations and 
assumptions on 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries.  
 
Estimated average 
population growth 
rate of 2.4%  in host 
communities.  
 
No major variance in 
refugee population 
numbers  
 
 
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities 
 
Supplementary 2.1: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) adopting 
improved and/or new 
Independent result 
verification  reports to be 
produced at midterm and 
completion stages and 
compared to the initial 
situation (baseline) 
incorporating community 
Number of people 
who adopted 
climate resilient 
farming 
0 people 
0 females 
0 Males 
Number of 
people who 
adopted climate 
resilient farming 
 
1,500 people 
750 females 
750 males 
Number of 
people who 
adopted climate 
resilient farming 
 
15,000 people 
7,500 females 
7,500 males 
Policies on livelihoods 
and labour regulations 
among refugees remain 
consistent

=== PAGE 126 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 122 
 
 
 
 
 
climate-resilient 
livelihood options 
surveys based on a random 
sampling plan. 210  
  
 
 
Number of people 
who adopted 
mushroom 
growing  
 
0 people 
0 females 
0 males 
 
 
 
Number of people 
who adopted 
beekeeping  
0 people 
0 females 
0 males 
 
Total number of 
people who 
adopted 
diversified, 
climate-resilient 
livelihood options 
 
0 people 
0 females 
0 males 
 
 
 
Number of 
people who 
adopted 
mushroom 
growing211  
 
50 people 
25 females 
25 males 
 
Number of 
people who 
adopted 
beekeeping   
80 people  
40 females 
40 males 
Total number of 
people who 
adopted 
diversified, 
climate-resilient 
livelihood 
options 
 
1,630 people 
815 females 
815 males 
 
Number of 
people who 
adopted 
mushroom 
growing  
 
500 people 
250 females 
250 males 
 
Number of 
people who 
adopted 
beekeeping 
850 people 
425 females 
425 males 
 
Total number of 
people who 
adopted 
diversified, 
climate-resilient 
livelihood 
options 
 
16,350 people 
8,175 females 
8,175 males 
 
The socio-cultural 
behaviours of 
beneficiaries will 
change as a result of 
project activities 
Incentives and benefits 
are sufficient in 
promoting uptake and 
behaviour change 
among beneficiary 
groups. 
 
210 Means of Verification for Fund-level Impact and Outcome indicators will be triangulated with the baseline surveys that will be undertaken by project consultants, and at 
project mid-term and project end with the latest available national census data. When data is available from the next national census, this will be used. 
211 . ~30 mushroom growing facilities have been established for ~25 mushroom growing groups (for marginalised people in refugee camps and host communities, sized 10-20 
people per group). The estimates of males and females are indicated for planning purposes. The activity will likely have more female participants.

=== PAGE 127 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 123 
 
 
 
 
 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
 
Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
Independent result 
verification reports to be 
produced at midterm and 
completion stages and 
compared to the initial 
situation (baseline) 
incorporating community 
surveys based on a random 
sampling plan 
Direct 
beneficiaries: 
0 people 
0 females 
0 males 
 
Direct 
beneficiaries: 
1,630 (50% 
women)        
indirect 
beneficiaries: 
34,839 (50% 
women) 
 
Direct 
beneficiaries: 
16,350 (50% 
women)        
indirect 
beneficiaries: 
348,395 (50% 
women)  
 
Direct beneficiaries of 
livelihood support 
including beneficiaries 
of climate smart 
agriculture and efficient  
irrigation. Indirect 
beneficiaries are 
considered the 
remaining population of 
the target host villages 
(population figures 
resented in Table 10.a)  
Incentives and benefits 
are sufficient in 
promoting uptake and 
behaviour change 
among beneficiary 
groups. 
ARA4 Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services 
 
Core 4: Hectares of 
natural resource areas 
brought under improved 
low-emission and/or 
climate-resilient 
management practices  
Independent change 
analysis report based on 
GIS mapping of land cover 
change and project 
certifications 
 
Total of 0 ha of 
forest ecosystems 
in Kakonko, 
Kasulu, and 
Kibondo Districts 
protected and 
strengthened in 
response to 
climate variability 
and change 
Total of 620 ha 
of forest 
ecosystems in 
Kakonko, 
Kasulu, and 
Kibondo Districts 
protected and 
strengthened in 
response to 
climate 
Total of 
42,000212 ha of 
forest 
ecosystems 
protected in 
Kakonko, 
Kasulu, and 
Kibondo 
Districts and 
strengthened in 
response to 
 
Different groups are 
able to agree on land 
use, including allocation 
of village forest land 
 
 
212 Although not enumerated here (because of the difficulty of attribution) the flood management and rainwater harvesting interventions will also have indirect impacts on the 
scope of resilient ecosystems provided by the project, through improved infiltration, soil nutrient retention and freshwater ecosystem function, as well as reduced surface runoff, 
soil erosion, and siltation. Additionally, improved agricultural outputs may relieve pressure off natural ecosystems, by reducing land use change or the need for bridging income 
(from charcoal burning, wood fuel collection etc.) in the event of failing yields. Similarly, the sustainable provision of wood fuel from the agroforestry and afforestation 
interventions will also help relieve pressure off the natural forests, that are intended to be protected under CBFM. The economic valuation in Output 4 will be quantifying the 
benefits streams in relation to ecosystem services listed here.

=== PAGE 128 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 124 
 
 
 
 
 
variability and 
change 
climate 
variability and 
change 
ARA4 Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services 
 
Supplementary 4.1: 
Hectares of terrestrial 
forest, terrestrial non-
forest, freshwater and 
coastal marine areas 
brought under 
restoration and/or 
improved ecosystems 
Independent change 
analysis report based on 
GIS mapping of land cover 
change and project 
certifications 
 
0 ha under CBFM 
0 ha under 
afforestation 
0 ha under 
agroforestry 
Total of 0 ha of 
forest ecosystems 
in Kakonko, 
Kasulu, and 
Kibondo Districts 
protected and 
strengthened in 
response to 
climate variability 
and change 
500 ha under 
CBFM 
20 ha under 
afforestation 
100 ha under 
agroforestry 
Total of 620 ha 
of forest 
ecosystems in 
Kakonko, 
Kasulu, and 
Kibondo Districts 
protected and 
strengthened in 
response to 
climate 
variability and 
change 
30,000 under 
CBFM 
2,000 under 
afforestation 
10,000 ha under 
agroforestry 
Total of 
42,000213 ha of 
forest 
ecosystems 
protected in 
Kakonko, 
Kasulu, and 
Kibondo 
Districts and 
strengthened in 
response to 
climate 
variability and 
change 
 
Different groups are 
able to agree on land 
use, including allocation 
of village forest land 
 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable) 
 
213 Although not enumerated here (because of the difficulty of attribution) the flood management and rainwater harvesting interventions will also have indirect impacts on the 
scope of resilient ecosystems provided by the project, through improved infiltration, soil nutrient retention and freshwater ecosystem function, as well as reduced surface runoff, 
soil erosion, and siltation. Additionally, improved agricultural outputs may relieve pressure off natural ecosystems, by reducing land use change or the need for bridging income 
(from charcoal burning, wood fuel collection etc.) in the event of failing yields. Similarly, the sustainable provision of wood fuel from the agroforestry and afforestation 
interventions will also help relieve pressure off the natural forests, that are intended to be protected under CBFM. The economic valuation in Output 4 will be quantifying the 
benefits streams in relation to ecosystem services listed here.

=== PAGE 129 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 125 
 
 
 
 
 
Select at least two relevant IRMF core (enabling environment) indicators to monitor and elaborate the baseline context and project/programme’s targeted outcome against the 
respective indicators. Rate the current state (baseline) vis-à-vis the target scenario and select the geographical scope of the outcome to be assessed. Describe how the 
project/programme will contribute towards the target scenario. Refer to a case example in the accompanying guidance to complete this section. 
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for current 
state (baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
Core Indicator 5: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to strengthening 
institutional and 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission climate-
resilient development 
pathways in a country-
driven manner 
 
Current  policies and 
legislation in Tanzania 
provide an enabling 
environment for climate 
change mainstreaming and 
adoption of adaptation 
interventions in some 
areas, however, refugees 
and the special needs of 
their host communities are 
not yet adequately 
considered in the relevant 
policy and planning 
frameworks such as the 
NDC, National Adaptation 
Plan, the National Climate 
Change Response 
Strategy (2021-2026); 
National Environment 
Policy of 2021 and the  
Environmental Master Plan 
(2022-2032) and National 
Land Use Planning 
Guidelines, as well as 
regional, district and village 
planning instruments in 
refugee-hosting areas like 
Kigoma.   
All these policy frameworks 
support the scale-up of 
resilient village land use 
plans that  incorporate 
climate change adaptation 
low 
 
Legal and policy frameworks 
that govern or are relevant to 
adaptation in the Kigoma 
region are revised and  
harmonized to promote 
ecosystem-based adaptation 
considering the current and 
projected  climate impacts 
and the adaptation needs of 
host and refugee populations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 1 will involve the 
development of climate-
resilient land-use plans (C-
LUPs) in host community 
villages applying a 
comprehensive landscape- 
and ecosystem-approach 
that includes for the needs 
of multiple stakeholders 
 
Under output 4 the project 
will contribute to drafting 
revisions to key plans and 
policies and supporting 
their integration into 
national and district 
government planning 
processes, to promote up-
scaling of the EbA model 
(Activity 4.3). 
Single sub-national 
area within a 
country

=== PAGE 130 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 126 
 
 
 
 
 
and mitigation strategies, 
recognizing ecosystem 
protection and 
conservation as an 
adaptation strategy.     
 
On the other hand, the 
regulatory framework with 
respect of refugees in 
Tanzania ( Refugees Act, 
1998 and Tanzania’s 2003 
National Refugee Policy) 
has limited consideration of 
climate impacts and 
adaptation needs of these 
displaced populations. The 
Global Compact for 
Refugees, been endorsed 
by the Government of 
Tanzania, proposes 
coherent humanitarian and 
development responses to 
support both groups as 
effective management of 
refugee situations are 
based on the resilience of 
host communities. 
Example of this is the 
Kigoma Joint Programme II 
under implementation. . 
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards 
Evidence of the benefits of 
integrated ecosystem-
based  landscape 
approach to address the 
adaptation needs of both 
host and refugee 
communities in refugee-
hosting landscapes is 
limited in Tanzania and 
worldwide due to the 
low 
Evidence generated on the 
economic, environmental and 
social value of this model 
supports mainstreaming of 
EbA into policies, plans and 
strategies in Tanzania and in 
humanitarian programmes, 
contributing to the scalability 
and replication of the project 
results at the national level 
Under this output 4, the 
results of the planning 
processes and physical 
interventions implemented 
under Outputs 1–3 will be 
used to demonstrate the 
economic, environmental 
and social value of this 
model to stakeholders. The 
project will  capture 
Multi-countries

=== PAGE 131 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 127 
 
 
 
 
 
limited number of 
experiences in the 
implementation of such 
approach. However, there 
is a global demand to 
expand the knowledge 
base on integrated 
approaches to build the 
resilience of host and 
displaced communities in a 
context of increasing 
displacement due to 
climate change impacts 
and conflicts.  
and internationally in other 
refugee hosting landscapes 
through UNEP and UNHCR 
operations and policy 
contributions.     
evidence of the ecosystem-
wide benefits (Activity 4.1) 
and develop 
communication products 
for policy- and decision-
makers to appreciate and 
replicate the landscape 
interventions (Activity 4.2) 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) 
This section should list out project/programme-specific performance indicators (outcomes and outputs) that are not covered in sections above (E.1-E.4). List down tailored indicators 
to monitor /track progress against relevant project/programme results (outcomes/outputs).  AEs have the freedom to decide against which outcomes they would like to set 
project/programme specific indicators. If any co-benefits are identified in sections B.2(a)(b), and D.3, AEs are encouraged to add and monitor co-benefit indicators under the 
“Project/programme co-benefit indicators” section in table below. Add rows as needed. 
Please number each outcome and output as shown below to indicate association of outputs to the contributing outcome. The numbering for outputs under this section should 
correspond to the output numbering in annex 4 (detailed budget plan). 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
 
Project/programme 
specific Indicator 
 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
 
 
Sources of information and 
methods used to collect and 
report data/information to 
measure progress against 
targets 
The starting point or 
current value of the 
indicators before 
the implementation 
of the project 
The estimated 
value of the 
indicator at the 
mid-point of the 
implementation 
The estimated 
value of the 
indicator at the 
completion of the 
implementation 
Externalities and factors 
outside project 
management's control that 
may impact on the 
Component 
 
Data sources and 
methodologies applied for 
estimating baseline and 
targets

=== PAGE 132 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 128 
 
 
 
 
 
 
214 Level 1:  communities and local authorities are aware of climate risks but have insufficient awareness on how landscape degradation and unsustainable practices contribute 
to increase climate risk and how ecosystem-based adaptation can enhance resilience; Level 2: communities and local authorities discourse reflects the arguments of 
ecosystem-based adaptation and show support to shift from unsustainable practises leading to landscape degradation, towards climate-resilient landscapes and livelihoods ; 
Level 3: resources are allocated and capacities built among communities and local authorities to implement ecosystem-based adaptation; Level 4:  C-LUPs and EbA 
interventions are implemented by communities and local authorities resulting in a shift from unsustainable practises leading to landscape degradation, towards climate-resilient 
landscapes and livelihoods.  
Outcome 1:  
Strengthened policy and 
planning systems to 
promote climate-resilient 
and sustainable resource 
management at the 
landscape level 
Capacity of communities 
and local authorities  to 
conduct ecosystem-
based adaptation 
planning and implement  
strategies and activities 
to respond to climate 
change and variability 
Capacity assessment 
scorecard measurements 
Participants to the 
C-LUP process and 
supporting 
operational 
structures (Village 
Committees, 
WUAs, EMCs, 
District 
government) have 
Level 1214 capacity 
to continue 
ecosystem-based 
adaptation planning 
and resource 
allocation. 
Participants to 
the C-LUP 
process and 
supporting 
operational 
structures 
(Village 
Committees, 
WUAs, EMCs, 
District 
government) 
have Level 3 
capacity to 
continue 
ecosystem-
based 
adaptation 
planning and 
resource 
allocation. As a 
result, a shift in 
land-use 
planning and 
activities in 
target 
ecosystems will 
occur away from 
unsustainable 
practises leading 
to landscape 
degradation, 
towards climate-
resilient 
Participants to 
the C-LUP 
process and 
supporting 
operational 
structures 
(Village 
Committees, 
WUAs, EMCs, 
District 
government) 
have Level 4 
capacity to 
continue 
ecosystem-
based adaptation 
planning and 
resource 
allocation. As a 
result, a shift in 
land-use 
planning and 
activities in 
target 
ecosystems will 
occur away from 
unsustainable 
practises leading 
to landscape 
degradation, 
towards climate-
resilient 
Institutional support and 
engagement of stakeholders 
in the project is high thanks 
to the alignment with the 
national, regional and local 
priorities and policy 
frameworks.  
Political and institutional 
changes have limited impact 
on the C-LUPs process and 
its supporting operational 
structures at the district and 
village level.  
Different groups are able to 
agree on land use, including 
allocation of village forest 
land 
Beneficiaries understand the 
multiple benefits of different 
interventions and implement 
the measures promoted in 
the C-LUPs

=== PAGE 133 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
215 Although not enumerated here (because of the difficulty of attribution) the flood management and rainwater harvesting interventions will also have indirect impacts on the 
scope of resilient ecosystems provided by the project, through improved infiltration, soil nutrient retention and freshwater ecosystem function, as well as reduced surface runoff, 
soil erosion, and siltation. Additionally, improved agricultural outputs may relieve pressure off natural ecosystems, by reducing land use change or the need for bridging income 
(from charcoal burning, wood fuel collection etc.) in the event of failing yields. Similarly, the sustainable provision of wood fuel from the agroforestry and afforestation 
interventions will also help relieve pressure off the natural forests, that are intended to be protected under CBFM. The economic valuation in Output 4 will be quantifying the 
benefits streams in relation to ecosystem services listed here. 
216 The LVI-IPCC Index is scaled from −1 (least vulnerable) to 1 (most vulnerable) applying Hahn et al. (2009) LVI methodology  and incorporating the IPCC vulnerability 
definition by grouping the seven major components under exposure, adaptive capacity, and sensitivity.   It makes use of seven major components in three groups: Group 1 
adaptive capacity (socio-demographic profile, livelihood strategies, social networks), Group 2 sensitivity (health, access to food, access to water) and Group 3 climate exposure 
(natural hazards and climate change). 
landscapes and 
livelihoods. 
 
landscapes and 
livelihoods. 
 
Outcome 2: Increased 
resilience of ecosystems 
and ecosystem services in 
the project area   
Hectares of forest 
ecosystem protected 
and strengthened in 
response to climate 
variability and change 
 
Independent change 
analysis report based on 
GIS mapping of land cover 
change and project 
certifications 
 
0 ha under CBFM 
0 ha under 
afforestation 
0 ha under 
agroforestry 
Total of 0 ha of 
forest ecosystems 
in Kakonko, 
Kasulu, and 
Kibondo Districts 
protected and 
strengthened in 
response to climate 
variability and 
change 
500 ha under 
CBFM 
20 ha under 
afforestation 
100 ha under 
agroforestry 
Total of 620 ha 
of forest 
ecosystems in 
Kakonko, 
Kasulu, and 
Kibondo Districts 
protected and 
strengthened in 
response to 
climate variability 
and change 
30,000 under 
CBFM 
2,000 under 
afforestation 
10,000 ha under 
agroforestry 
Total of 
42,000215 ha of 
forest 
ecosystems 
protected in 
Kakonko, 
Kasulu, and 
Kibondo Districts 
and 
strengthened in 
response to 
climate variability 
and change 
 
Different groups are able to 
agree on land use, including 
allocation of village forest 
land 
 
 
Outcome 3: Community 
level livelihood 
vulnerability to climate 
Average change in LVI-
IPCC Index216 or similar 
index 
Secondary data on average 
standard deviation in 
monthly minimum and 
maximum temperatures and 
To be determined 
during the baseline 
survey 
N/A 
Decrease in 
livelihood 
vulnerability 
expressed by an 
average increase 
A similar methodology can 
be used at baseline and 
endline

=== PAGE 134 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 130 
 
 
 
 
 
 
217 Target to be confirmed after the determination of the index at baseline 
218 Total 16,350 people. 
219 to be validated during project baseline survey. 
220 to be validated during project baseline survey. 
221 to be validated during project baseline survey. 
change reduced in the 
project area 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monthly rainfall over a 30-
year period.  
 
Primary data will be collected 
with a tested questionnaire 
for LVI-IPCC Index 
administered by trained 
enumerators through a 
household survey to a 
statistically representative 
sample of households  in 
host communities at baseline 
and endline. 
 
of at least 0.3 
points in the LVI 
range217 in host 
communities by 
the end of the 
project 
 
A tested questionnaire for 
LVI-IPCC Index be 
administered by trained 
enumerators through a 
household survey to a 
statistically representative 
sample of households 
Outcome 4: Improved 
food security in the project 
area 
% of beneficiaries under 
Output 3  eating 3 meals 
per day218 
Primary data will be  
collected with a tested 
questionnaire by trained 
enumerators through a 
household survey to a 
statistically representative 
sample of households  in 
host communities at 
baseline and endline. 
0% of beneficiaries 
under Output 3 
eating 3 meals per 
day219   
7% of 
beneficiaries 
under Output 3 
eat 3 meals per 
day220 
 
70% of 
beneficiaries 
under Output 3 
eat 3 meals per 
day221 
A similar methodology can 
be used at baseline and 
endline  
 
No major economic crisis,  
political crisis or major 
climate hazard affects food 
accessibility and avaibility in 
the project implementation 
period.  
Component 1: Increased resilience of ecosystems and people to climate change threats 
Output 1.  Participatory 
Climate-resilient Land Use 
Plans developed (C-LUP) 
to support ecosystem-
based adaptation 
Number of villages in 
project area have 
adopted C-LUP plans 
and have implemented 
measures within them 
(interventions under 
Outputs 2 and 3)  
Baseline report and project 
monitoring 
 
District and National Land 
Use Planning Commission 
registers of existing land use 
plans 
 
0 villages in the 
project area have 
adopted C-LUP 
plans 
 
~20-25 villages 
have adopted C-
LUP plans  
 
 
 
 
 
 
~20-25 villages 
have adopted C-
LUP plans and 
have 
implemented 
measures within 
them 
(interventions 
Consensus reached by 
Village Assemblies on land 
use allocations

=== PAGE 135 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 131 
 
 
 
 
 
 
222 Baselines to be confirmed through the social and environmental baseline survey to be implemented in year 1 of the project. 
223 The 219,642 ha of national forest reserve land monitored is not included in the total hectares of ecosystem protected. The inputs towards the protection are minimal 
compared to other activities that support management, afforestation, agroforestry and more intensive inputs and activities.  
 
Independent assessment of 
the quality of the C-LUP 
plans in respect of climate 
change mainstreaming 
 
 
under Outputs 2 
and 3) 
 
Output 2: Degraded 
ecosystems restored to 
support climate change 
adaptation in host and 
refugee communities 
Hectares of agroforestry, 
afforestation and flood in 
kms of erosion control 
measures implemented 
in priority locations 
identified, as identified in 
the C-LUP process 
Hectares of national 
forest reserve under 
increased protection 
Independent change 
analysis report based on 
GIS mapping of land cover 
change  
Certification of hectares 
protected, afforested, under 
agroforestry or CBFM 
Certification of flood and 
erosion control infrastructure 
completed 
 
~0 km of river 
channel under flood 
control222 
 
~0 ha of forest area 
under CBFM 
 
0 ha of agroforestry 
 
0 ha of national 
forest reserve 
under increased 
protection 
 
~2 km of river 
channel under 
flood control 
 
~500 ha of forest 
area under 
CBFM 
  
~100 ha of 
agroforestry 
 
~50,000 ha of 
national forest 
reserve under 
increased 
protection 
 
~25 km of river 
channel under 
flood control 
 
~30,000 ha of 
forest area under 
CBFM 
 
10,000 ha of 
agroforestry 
 
~219,642 ha of 
national forest 
reserve under 
increased 
protection223 
 
C-LUP process effectively 
identifies priority locations 
for flood and erosion control 
measures and these 
locations are available for 
construction 
 
Output 3. Climate-resilient 
livelihoods practised to 
increase the capacity of 
host communities and 
refugees to better adapt in 
changing climatic 
conditions 
Amount of water 
available for irrigation as 
a result of water 
harvesting and 
groundwater usage 
interventions 
 
 
Baseline report and project 
monitoring 
Independent change 
analysis report 
encompassing community 
surveys based on random 
sampling plan. 
0 L of water 
available to farmers 
for irrigation as a 
result of water 
harvesting and 
ground water 
usage 
interventions; 
2,500 L of water 
/day/ household 
made available 
for ~50 plots as 
a result of water 
harvesting and 
ground water 
usage 
interventions; 
2,500 L of water 
/day/ household 
made available 
for ~1,700 plots 
as a result of 
water harvesting 
and ground 
water usage 
interventions; 
Farmers are convinced of 
the benefits of measures to 
improve climate resilience 
and decide to implement the 
measures on their farms. 
C-LUP process results in 
agreement on the selection 
of water use efficiency 
measures and their location.

=== PAGE 136 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 132 
 
 
 
 
 
 
224 Amount of food produced combined with income indicators under 1.2 are used as proxies for measuring food security. An important component of food security related 
relates to food availability and income, as they influence the number of meals taken by households. Please see Gwalema 2010 reference, accessible from: 
http://repository.out.ac.tz/217/.  
225 Baseline production is based on unimproved varieties. Hectares under cassava production to be confirmed in inception phase. 
226 Baseline production is based on unimproved varieties. Hectares under bean production to be confirmed in inception phase. 
227 Baseline assumes no honey production beehives, exact baseline numbers to be confirmed in inception phase. 
228 Baseline assumes no mushroom production facilities available, exact baseline numbers to be confirmed in inception phase. 
 
Amount of cassava, 
beans, mushrooms, and 
honey produced224 
District and Region data on 
livelihoods 
Kigoma Joint Programme, 
WFP and UNHCR 
assessments on food 
security and nutrition 
 
 
8,000 kg of 
cassava per ha225 
400 kg of beans 
per ha226 
15 kg of honey per 
beehive227 
1,210 kg of 
mushrooms per 
facility 228 
11,000 kg of 
cassava per ha 
for 750  ha 
1,048 kg of 
beans per ha for 
750   ha 
15 kg of honey 
per beehive for 
170 beehives  
1,210 kg of 
mushrooms per 
facility for 3 
facilities 
11,000 kg of 
cassava per ha 
for 7,500  ha   
1,048 kg of 
beans per ha for 
7,500 ha 
15 kg of honey 
per beehive for 
1700 beehives  
1,210 kg of 
mushrooms per 
facility for 32 
facilities 
Labour is available for 
construction activities 
Component 2  Strengthened policies for climate responsive planning and development 
Output 4. Information on 
climate change adaptation 
disseminated and 
mainstreamed into 
policies, plans and 
strategies in Tanzania and 
in humanitarian 
programmes 
Planners in Ministry of 
Water and Irrigation, 
Ministry of Agriculture 
and Tanzania Forestry 
Service Agency at the 
National and District 
levels include economic 
valuation information in 
policy and planning 
documents. 
 
Baseline report and project 
monitoring 
Availability of completed 
economic valuation of 
ecosystem services 
 
Workshop / consultation 
meeting reports  
 
 
0 Planners at the 
National and 
District levels 
include economic  
valuation 
information in 
policy and planning 
documents 
Weak  
 
 
 
None (Output 4 
only begins 
implementation 
after mid-term) 
 
 
 
 
Economic  
valuation 
information 
reflected in 
water, agriculture 
and forestry 
policy and 
planning 
documents 
 
 
 
No major political 
upheaval/turnover in 
relevant authorities 
Ongoing policy and planning 
processes are taking place 
during project 
implementation and are 
accommodating of climate 
mainstreaming

=== PAGE 137 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 133 
 
 
 
 
 
 
229  
Capacity/awareness scorecard229 of representatives from key policy/planning authorities in Tanzania  
. Level 0:Climate change and EbA not understood, or not considered meaningfully when developing policies, plans or strategies; Level 2: Training materials and/or draft policy 
briefs, guidelines or recommendations in climate change adaptation have been developed; Level 2: High-level representatives have attended training/workshops/forums and/or 
received policy briefs, guidelines or recommendations in climate change adaptation 
Capacity developed at 
District level for EbA 
planning including cross-
sectoral coordination. 
 
Capacity/awareness 
scorecard229 of 
representatives from key 
policy/planning authorities in 
Tanzania  
 
Key 
representatives in 
Kigoma region 
capacitated to level 
0 
 
None (Output 4 
only begins 
implementation 
after mid-term 
Key 
representatives 
in Kigoma region 
capacitated to 
level 2 
 
Political risk monitoring 
framework established 
and updated at the 
project level (See Risk 
Factor 10 including 
political risk indicator 
table) 
 
Situation reports from VPO 
and UNHCR Tanzania (See 
other means of verification 
for political risk indicators 
under Risk Factor 10) 
No political risk 
mitigation strategy 
established at 
project level 
Political risk 
monitoring 
framework and 
mitigation 
strategy 
established and 
updated every 3 
months 
Political risk 
monitoring 
framework and 
mitigation 
strategy 
established and 
updated every 3 
months 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators 
Co-benefit 1 Mitigation  as 
a result of avoided 
deforestation, improved 
agricultural practises, 
afforestation and 
agroforestry   
Estimated sequestration 
and reduced emissions 
in tCO2e over 20 years  
Estimated using the FAO 
Ex-Ante Carbon-balance 
Tool as per the project  
Feasibility study 
0 
0  
Sequestration of 
762,073 million 
tCO2e from 
afforestation, 
agroforestry and 
Climate-Smart 
Agriculture and 
emission 
reduction from 
avoided 
deforestation of 
3.2 million tCO2e 
over 20 years  
The mid-term target for  
forest protection, 
afforestation and 
agroforestry is 1% at mid-
term, therefore mitigation co-
benefit will only be 
measured at the end of the 
project intervention.  
 Estimated using the FAO 
Ex-Ante Carbon-balance 
Tool ). For further detail, 
please see Appendix C of 
the Feasibility study

=== PAGE 138 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 134 
 
 
 
 
 
 
230 This is an indicative number, averaging the populations of the host communities in the three districts, since the exact number and sites of villages will only be determined 
during project implementation.  
Co-benefit 2  Reduced 
gender inequality in 
climate change adaptation 
planning and action 
Women representation 
and meaningful 
participation in land use 
planning at the village 
level 
Gender capacity 
assessment and gender 
analysis of completed  
Village Land Use Plans 
(VLUP) 
 
VLUPs and EMCs 
committees membership 
Baseline values to 
be determined 
during the baseline 
survey   
50% of VLUP 
committees and 
EMCs 
representatives 
are women. 
 
100 % of VLUPs 
reflect women’s 
needs and 
interests 
50% of VLUP 
committees and 
EMCs 
representatives 
are women. 
 
100 % of VLUPs 
reflect women’s 
needs and 
interests 
The project will promote 
these targets to the extent 
possible, but recognizing 
that the Village Councils are 
independently organized 
and the project may not be 
able to fully influence 
committees composition. 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
All project activities should be listed here with a description and sub-activities. Significant deliverables should be reflected in annex 5 implementation timetable. Add rows as 
needed. 
Please number the activities as shown below to indicate association of activities to the related outputs provided above in section E.5. Similarly, please number sub-activities as 
shown below to associate to the related activity. 
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
1.1. Support climate-resilient village land 
use planning 
This, and Activity 1.2. are the starting point 
for all project interventions, by the 
development of participatory climate-
resilient land-use plans for villages that are 
consistent with an ecosystem-based 
adaptation approach (EbA). 
 
The Village Land Use Plan (VLUP) is an 
overall plan showing how land resources, 
located within the village boundaries, 
should be used to meet declared 
objectives. The project will adapt this 
established approach, by introducing 
climate resilience of the landscape into the 
planning process, resulting in a Climate-
resilient Land Use Plan (C-LUP). The 
overall goal of this activity is to strengthen 
the capacity of actors and institutions that 
deal with land tenure and to apply 
ecosystem-based planning, thereby 
1.1.1. Scale-up land use planning for 
villages, and support to issuance of 
Certificates of Customary Rights of 
Occupancy (CCRO) 
 
1.1.2. Build capacity of local and regional 
government officials to support 
ecosystem-based adaptation and 
landscape restoration 
 
1.1.3. Improve public awareness of climate 
change by sharing information on climate 
change risks in the land use planning 
meetings   
 
1.1.4. Support District, Ward and Village 
level Environmental Management 
Committees (EMCs).  
~20-25 village land use plans finalised or 
developed230, with processes initiated for 
receiving CCRO 
 
~20-25 revised or formulated bylaws 
 
50 officers from Tanzanian Forest Service, 
District Agriculture, Livestock and Forest 
Officers, district water engineers, and land 
use management teams trained. Learning 
outcomes will be measured as part of the 
training package. 
 
2,000 people from ~20 villages in Kasulu, 
Kibondo, and Kakonko receive training on 
climate change impacts  
 
1 Workshop and 20 trainings provided to 
EMCs

=== PAGE 139 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 135 
 
 
 
 
 
 
232 This is an indicative number, averaging the populations of the host communities in the three districts, since the exact number and sites of villages will only be determined 
during project implementation.  
providing a comprehensive approach for 
implementing the other activities 
envisioned under this project. Completing 
the land-use planning is pre-requisite for 
carrying out the climate-resilient practises 
implemented later under Outputs 2 and 3. 
This process will also consist of supporting 
the issuance of Certificates of Customary 
Rights of Occupancy (CCRO) and include 
concurrent climate change awareness 
raising for host communities as well as 
capacity building for officials including: 
representatives from the Tanzania 
Forestry Service; district agriculture, 
livestock and forest officers; district water 
engineers; and land use management 
teams. This capacity building will be 
supported by the provision of hardware 
and materials to district officials, including 
inter alia GIS software and tools, crested 
paper for CCRO printing etc.   
2.1. Implement Community Based Forest 
Management (CBFM) for resilient 
ecosystems  
The principal objective of this intervention 
is to implement CBFM in forest areas 
anchored to host communities over the 
course of the GCF project activity. Under 
CBFM, villagers take full ownership and 
management responsibility for an area of 
forest as a Village Forest Reserve. 
Following this legal transfer of rights and 
responsibilities from central to village 
government, villagers may harvest timber 
and forest products, collect and retain 
forest royalties, and undertake patrols 
(including arresting and fining offenders), 
as well as receiving tax and regulatory 
benefits. The underlying policy goal for 
CBFM is to progressively bring 
2.1.1. Establish and manage 30,000 ha of 
Village Land Forest Reserves 
 
2.1.2 Provide equipment and training for 
forest monitoring in national forest 
reserves for 10 forestry and natural 
resources officers. 
 
 
30,000 ha under CBFM management 
 
~20 Approved management plan for each 
Village Forest Area, supported by by-laws 
approved by the District Council 
 
Active FMCs in ~20 villages232 
 
10 Forestry and natural resources 
extension officers having received training 
in implementing CBFM  
 
10 TFS staff equipped and trained in the 
use of drone and GIS-based monitoring 
system.

=== PAGE 140 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 136 
 
 
 
 
 
 
231 Equipment to be turned over to TFS at project completion. 
unprotected woodlands and forests under 
village management. 
 
National forest reserves will benefit from 
improved monitoring and management by 
the Tanzanian Forest Service through a 
GIS-based forest monitoring system and 
the provision of supplementary equipment 
in the form of drones,  smartphone/ODK 
and GPS devices and camping and fire 
protection gear for TFS patrol teams. 231. 
2.2. Implement 12,000 hectares of 
agroforestry and village land afforestation 
to increase resilience of land use 
The principal objective of this intervention 
is to increase the number of trees across 
the agricultural (non-forest) landscape 
through agroforestry and village land 
afforestation. At landscape scale, 
agroforestry improves crop productivity 
and provides important ecosystem 
services including watershed protection 
and hydrological regulation, as well as 
biodiversity conservation and carbon 
sequestration. Complementary to this, 
village land afforestation can restore 
ecosystem services and establish a 
sustainable supply of fuelwood, taking the 
pressure off of native forest systems. 
2.2.1. To establish and maintain 10,000 ha 
of agroforestry systems to restore 
ecosystems that are critical to meet 
climate adaptation needs, and set up 
nurseries for production of tree seedlings 
 
2.2.2. Undertake afforestation on 2,000 ha 
of village land to a) restore critical 
ecosystem services to meet climate 
adaptation needs and improve ecosystem 
services such as flood control, b) establish 
a sustainable supply of fuelwood by 
planting suitable tree species which will 
take some of the pressure off the native 
miombo forest and allow it to regenerate 
so that it can meet its ecological and 
livelihood support functions 
10,000 ha of agroforestry established 
 
2,000 ha afforested land established 
 
~15 representatives from TFS and District 
Councils provided with technical advisory 
and capacity building services in the 
design, implementation and monitoring of 
agroforestry and afforestation 
2.3. Implement flood and erosion control in 
densely populated areas to reduce the 
exposed and flood-prone ferrosol-type 
soils which have little or no vegetation 
cover 
 
The refugee camps are exposed to a high 
risk of flooding and erosion, owing to the 
land clearance that has taken place. 
Whilst the land-use and forestry 
interventions described above will 
increase soil stability and reduce the level 
of runoff and erosion in the project area, 
these interventions not suitable within the 
camp boundaries because of their density.  
 
2.3.1. Construct 10 km of micro-scale 
stone-pitched drainage channels, 16 
stone-filled gabions and Sustainable 
Drainage System (SuDS) interventions —
including micro- infiltration 
trenches/ponds/soakaways — in three 
refugee camps. 
 
Drainage channels (~10.1km) 
 
Gabions (~16) 
 
Establish sustainable Drainage System 
(SuDS) interventions such as infiltration 
trenches and basins, the number and 
locations of which will be determined 
during project implementation.

=== PAGE 141 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 137 
 
 
 
 
 
The principal objective of this intervention 
is to provide engineering solutions in the 
areas most susceptible to erosion from 
high water flows. The engineering 
solutions themselves will be designed and 
use materials that are able to withstand 
changing weather extremes such as 
temperature and rainfall intensities. The 
final design and distribution of the 
interventions would be guided by a 
technical assessment and stakeholder 
consultations.  
1,500 Water user association members 
trained on how to construct and maintain 
flood and erosion control measures. 
Learning outcomes will be measured 
through assessments built into the training 
package. 
3.1. Promote modern technologies and 
management practises to strengthen the 
capacity of farmers, district officials and 
agricultural extension workers in climate-
resilient agriculture 
The interventions proposed under this 
activity will focus on promoting the 
adoption of climate-resilient agricultural 
technologies and management practises, 
as well as the procurement and 
distribution of agricultural inputs. These 
interventions will be supported by 
strengthening capacity of district officials 
and extension services, who can directly 
engage with local farmers to promote 
climate-smart agriculture (CSA) practises 
(training of trainers).  
 
The specific package of climate-resilient 
agricultural practises and inputs to be 
distributed will be co-designed in 
collaboration with the farmers in the 
villages where the project will be working, 
District officials and extension services, 
based on the climate-resilient agricultural 
practises and technologies that best fit the 
selected context. 
 
This project seeks to strengthen and scale 
up Savings Associations (SAs) so that 
funds will be disbursed through a market-
based approach. SAs typically serve as 
cooperatives in the region to have 
improved access to farm inputs, 
collectively negotiate prices, facilitate tax 
3.1.1. Build capacity of 60 farmers per 
Farmer Field School (FFS) on climate-
resilient agricultural practises, including 
use of traditional knowledge, through 
trainings co-designed in collaboration with 
the farmers, district officials and extension 
services. 
 
3.1.2. Provide 20 kg of resilient 
seeds/cuttings and 1 agricultural tool kit (at 
least 60% to be procured and distributed 
through savings associations) to each of 
15,000 farmers for climate-resilient 
agriculture including seeds, tools and 
equipment necessary for implementing 
climate-resilient agricultural practices. 
 
3.1.3. Build capacity of Savings 
Association Management Offices (SAMO) 
to manage savings associations  
~20 Farmer Field Schools established 
 
~1,200 farmers receiving training through 
FFS 
 
300,000 kg of seeds/cuttings distributed to 
farming households by Year 5 (at least 
80% through SAs) 
 
15,000 CSA kits distributed to farming 
households by Year 5 (at least 60% 
through SAs) 
 
~ 3 SAMOs trained

=== PAGE 142 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 138 
 
 
 
 
 
collection, improve marketing of products, 
and have access to microfinance as well 
as being capacity support for promoting 
climate-smart and adaptive practises and 
crop varieties.  
 
The project will support the SA and its 
members in managing funding decisions 
and building capacity to hold funds 
through ‘Savings Association Management 
Office’ (SAMO) and envisages the SAMOs 
as playing a critical role in scaling up the 
funds available for refugees to participate 
in climate resilient activities.  
3.2. Increase water availability and use-
efficiency through water harvesting and 
efficient irrigation interventions. 
Interventions under this activity will ensure 
that water is available in closer proximity 
to agriculture areas, as well as for the 
nurseries for agro-forestry and village land 
afforestation described in Activity 2.2. The 
engineering solutions themselves will be 
use materials that are able to withstand 
changing weather extremes such as 
temperature and rainfall intensities.  
 
The final design and distribution of the 
interventions would be guided by the C-
LUP process. 
 
Rainwater harvesting will be supported by:  
• 
solar powered pumps (for 
societal/communal use to supply a 
number of farms from a single source) 
and manual pumps (e.g. treadle 
pumps) for individual household use 
• 
irrigation systems for nurseries and 
farms, including moisture testing kits 
• 
training on water management good 
practise, soil and water conservation 
techniques 
• 
technical training on RWH, pumping 
and irrigation system; and 
3.2.1. Construct micro-rainwater 
harvesting systems: ~94 Check dams  
 ~20 run-off harvesting micro-dams 
(charco dams), ~120 unlined water-pans 
and ~120 lined micro-ponds in host 
communities in Kasulu, Kibondo, and 
Kakonko. 
 
3.2.2. Establish water pumping and 
irrigation through ~ 50 micro-solar and ~ 
172 treadle pumps that will draw water 
from the rainwater harvesting locations to 
where it is needed in host communities in 
Kasulu, Kibondo, and Kakonko. 
 
3.2.3. Conduct training and awareness 
raising for 400 members of Water User 
Associations and farmers on water 
management and efficient water use 
through the FFS.  
 
3.2.4. Support the establishment of and 
strengthen existing Water Users 
Associations (WUAs) through organizing 
and conducting 20 meetings/trainings. 
94 Check dams  
 
20 Charco dams  
 
120 Unlined and 120 lined water ponds  
 
50 Solar pumps 172 treadle pumps 
 
 
Training of 1200 farmers in effective water 
usage and irrigation installation and 
management 
 
~400 participants of WUAs trained over 20 
meeting/training sessions

=== PAGE 143 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 139 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
new and existing WUAs that will 
support water management and 
efficient water use practices 
 
3.3. Promote climate-resilient livelihood 
diversification to strengthen food security 
and nutrition, provide alternative income 
as a safety net, and to sustain the 
implementation of climate-resilient 
agricultural and forest management 
practises. 
While agriculture is the predominant 
source of livelihood in the region, other 
activities such as beekeeping and 
mushroom growing are also practised in 
the host and refugee communities. These 
activities are largely dependent on the 
health of natural resources (particularly 
forests, soils and water), but are more 
resilient than agriculture to projected 
climate variability. 
 
The primary objective of the livelihood 
diversification activities is to strengthen 
food security and nutrition in the event of 
hazards such as droughts or floods — 
which could reduce crop yields — provide 
alternative income as a safety net in case 
of yield loss and to sustain the 
implementation of climate-resilient 
agricultural practises. This would entail 
establishing and capacitating beekeeping 
and mushroom growing groups with 
training, oversight and inputs (equipment 
and materials). 
3.3.1. Promote beekeeping to incentivise 
forest conservation in the forests 
surrounding the camps and villages by 
providing equipment and training to 850 
people.  
 
3.3.2. Promote mushroom cultivation for 
marginalised groups with training and 
mushroom growing facilities by providing 
equipment and training to 500 people. 
850 people trained and provided with 
materials for beekeeping, honey and by-
products quality control, packaging and 
marketing. 
 
~30 mushroom facilities constructed, 
supplied with the necessary inputs and 
associated with training 500 people 
4.1. Generate evidence of the economic 
benefits of ecosystem-based adaptation to 
host and refugee populations, for use by 
policymakers and planners 
To prioritise an ecosystem-based 
adaptation (EbA) approach, decision-
makers need to understand and 
appreciate the relevant interlinked 
ecological processes and how they directly 
produce economic benefits and costs.  
 
The sub-activities under this activity will 
contribute to the evidence base to achieve 
this by determining the economic value of 
the ecosystem services provided in the 
project site, conducting assessments and 
modelling the added value of EbA 
benefits, based on local livelihoods and 
4.1.1. Identify benefit and cost streams for 
valuing ecosystem services under different 
climate scenarios 
 
4.1.2. Identify data streams and modelling 
methodology for valuing ecosystem 
services 
 
4.1.3. Gather primary and secondary data 
from project interventions 
 
4.1.4. Carry out valuation modelling 
exercises of benefit and cost streams 
identified under 4.1.1. 
Full and summary reports of economic 
benefits and costs of ecosystem-based 
adaptation interventions 
 
Raw data used for modelling and valuing 
ecosystem services (e.g. economic values 
per ecosystem service)

=== PAGE 144 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 140 
 
 
 
 
 
primary resource dependence. By 
recognising the positive environmental, 
economic and social co-benefits and costs 
to communities of these ecosystems, this 
acknowledgment will help promote cross-
sectoral cooperation and integrated 
planning to conserve and augment these 
natural resources. 
 
 
4.1.5. Consider temporal, spatial and 
distributional impacts and opportunities 
resulting from the costs and benefits 
evaluated in Sub-activity 4.1.4. 
 
4.1.6. Prepare full and summary reports 
4.2. Develop communication products to 
disseminate project results 
 
To scale the impacts of the proposed 
interventions, it is necessary to 
disseminate the results and lessons of the 
project to inform similar interventions in 
the future. This information, and the tools 
they inform, will help policy- and decision-
makers in Tanzania and UNHCR’s 
humanitarian programmes to mainstream 
climate resilience into village land-use 
planning, as well as to make use of 
Savings Associations in host communities 
to scale up climate-resilient agricultural 
practises. This activity comprises 
compiling and distributing these lessons to 
key stakeholders.  
4.2.1. Develop policy briefs on 
mainstreaming climate resilience in village 
land-use planning 
 
4.2.2. Develop a guidelines paper for 
mainstreaming climate resilience in village 
land-use planning 
 
4.2.3. Produce lessons-learned and 
guidelines paper on the use of Savings 
Associations to scale up climate-resilient 
agricultural practises 
Policy briefs on mainstreaming climate 
resilience in village land-use planning 
 
Guidelines paper on mainstreaming 
climate resilience in village land-use 
planning. 
 
Lessons-learned and guidelines paper on 
the use of Savings Associations to scale 
up climate resilient agricultural practises. 
4.3. Draft revisions to key plans and 
policies and support their integration into 
national and district government planning 
processes to promote up-scaling of the 
EbA model 
 
To achieve enduring and sustainable 
climate resilience amongst host 
communities and refugees, the local and 
high-level legal and policy frameworks for 
Tanzania will require updating and 
revision. In doing so, climate resilience 
and adaptation planning will become 
institutionalised within public operations, 
thereby addressing barriers to reducing 
climate vulnerability amongst host 
communities and refugees.  
 
This will be achieved by proposing policy 
revisions and updates of relevant reviewed 
policies and processes, in close 
consultation with government decision-
makers and technical staff. Along with the 
mainstreaming work, policy briefs will be 
4.3.1. Review laws and policies that hinder 
adaptation in Kigoma region, including 
political risks that need to be closely 
monitored (See Risk Factor 10 and risk 
indicators), and identify entry points for 
where laws and policies require 
harmonisation to promote adaptation 
 
4.3.2. Identify legal, policy and planning 
processes that can be capitalised on to 
advance the mainstreaming of adaptation 
 
4.3.3. Prepare guidelines and other inputs 
for policy- and decision-makers to use to 
inform in the mainstreaming of adaptation 
in national and district government 
planning 
 
Consultancy report on laws, planning 
processes, and policies pertinent to 
adaptation in Kigoma region 
 
Guidelines paper, training materials and 
other inputs to inform mainstreaming of 
adaptation 
 
1 workshop with policy- and decision-
makers (20-40 pax) to identify and/or 
validate entry points for policy 
harmonisation 
 
10 consultation meetings held with 
stakeholders (2-10 pax) to identify and/or 
validate entry points for policy 
harmonisation

=== PAGE 145 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 141 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developed and working sessions will take 
place with key decision makers and 
stakeholders to bring forward specific 
policy recommendations and evidence to 
be considered in policy working groups. 
These revisions will be informed by the 
evidence base established under Activity 
4.1 and supported by the demonstrated 
impacts of project interventions 
implemented under Outputs 1–3. 
 
4.3.4 Co-host workshops, forums and 
consultations within ongoing policy and 
planning processes to showcase project 
results and implications for the legal, 
policy and planning frameworks of the 
country 
1 workshop with policy- and decision-
makers (20-40 pax) to identify legal, policy 
and planning processes 
 
10 consultation/meetings held with 
stakeholders (2-10 pax) to identify legal, 
policy and planning processes 
 
1 2-day workshop with policy- and 
decision-makers (20-40 pax) to develop 
guidelines for mainstreaming adaptation 
into national and district government 
planning 
 
5 workshops (2 days, 20-40 pax) to 
showcase project results and validate 
implications for the legal, policy and 
planning frameworks of the country 
 
Political risk mitigation framework 
established

=== PAGE 146 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 142 
 
 
 
 
 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
An M&E officer will be recruited in the PMU for the duration of the project to conduct and supervise the 
monitoring and reporting on the project’s activities. The M&E officer will be supported by an M&E expert 
international consultant (part-time) in the implementation of the project M&E plan which includes independent 
surveys and assessments to monitor the results framework indicators (see Annex 11 for further details). The 
M&E officer will coordinate the execution of the project M&E plan with UNHCR, implementing partners, relevant 
stakeholders at the district and regional level and with relevant ministries particularly the Regional 
Administration and Local Government, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security and 
the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Human Settlement Development. Monitoring and evaluation reports, drafts 
of the Annual Performance Reports, the terms of references for the interim evaluation (mid-term review) and 
independent ex-post evaluation (terminal evaluation) will be circulated to the relevant ministries and the Project 
Steering Committee. 
 
A UNEP Task Manager will be responsible for monitoring progress against output and outcome indicators 
during project implementation. At key points (i.e. baseline, mid-point and end of project) the project team will 
carry out evidence gathering exercises to verify this progress.  During the ex-post evaluation (terminal 
evaluation) at the end of the project an evaluation consultant will validate a sample of the data collected through 
these monitoring tools.  
 
UNEP will be responsible for managing an interim evaluation Mid-Term Review (MTR) at the mid-point of the 
project’s duration. The Task Manager will oversee the process of hiring an external consultant to carry out the 
MTR, which will provide an assessment of project performance at the project’s mid-point. This will be a 
formative exercise and will include analysing whether the project is on track, what problems and challenges 
the project is encountering, and which corrective actions are required so that the project can achieve its 
intended outcomes by project completion in the most efficient and sustainable way. The Project Steering 
Committee will participate in the MTR process and develop a management response to the review’s 
recommendations along with an implementation plan. It is the responsibility of the UNEP Task Manager to 
monitor whether the agreed recommendations are being implemented during the remainder of the project’s 
operational life. The Independent Evaluation Office of UNEP will provide an assessment of the quality of the 
Mid-Term Review report.  
 
An independent ex-post evaluation (terminal evaluation) (TE) will take place once the project has reached 
operational completion. The Evaluation Office of UNEP will be responsible for the TE, which is a summative 
evaluation, and will liaise with the UNEP Task Manager and relevant stakeholders throughout the process. An 
independent assessment of project performance against standard evaluation criteria (e.g. strategic relevance, 
effectiveness, efficiency, likelihood of impact and sustainability) will be made based on documentary evidence, 
stakeholder interviews and, in most cases, a field mission. Each evaluation criterion will be rated using a six-
point rating scheme and a weighted average will be determined to provide an overall performance rating for 
the project as a whole. Where there are any differences in ratings between the evaluation team and the 
Evaluation Office a final determination will be made by the Evaluation Office when the evaluation report is 
finalised.  
 
The draft ex-post evaluation (terminal evaluation) report will be sent to project stakeholders during 
a commenting process managed by the Evaluation Office. Formal comments on the report will be shared by 
the Evaluation Office in an open and transparent manner. This evaluation report will be publicly disclosed 
and will be followed by a recommendation compliance process.  
 
The total 5-year cost associated to project monitoring and evaluation is $1,421,283, including: 
 
- 
Safeguards and gender specialist $228,000 
- 
M&E Officer $240,000 
- 
Social and environmental safeguards expert (international consultant part-time 30-35 days/year) 
$99,000 
- 
M&E expert (international consultant part-time 30-35 days/year) $99,000 
- 
Implementation of Safeguards management plan ESMS $75,000 
- 
Implementation of Gender action Plan $ 50,000 
- 
Implementation of M&E plan $ 222,783  
- 
Baseline assessment $150,000 
- 
Interim evaluation/ Mid-Term Review $114,500

=== PAGE 147 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 143 
 
 
 
 
 
- 
Ex-post evaluation/terminal evaluation $143,000 
 
The Vice-Present’s Office, as lead EE, will compile UNHCR reports and will submit consolidated semi-annual 
progress reports and quarterly financial statements to the UNEP as the AE. In turn, UNEP will submit annual 
performance reports and semi-annual financial reports to GCF. The detailed reporting timelines are as follows: 
 
Under the PCAs, the EE will be required to report to UNEP as follows: 
a. Progress reports: by 30 July for January to June; 
b. Annual Performance reports on or before 15 January; 
c. Quarterly financial reports by 15 January, 15 April, 15 July, and 15 October; 
d. Annual audited statements by 30 April; 
e. Final report: within 3 months of project completion. 
 
UNEP (AE) reports to the GCF: 
a. Annual Performance Reports by 28 February; 
b. Semi-annual Financial Information by 1 March and 30 Sept; 
c. Mid-Term Assessment report: halfway through Programme; 
d. Final APR: within 6 months of project completion; 
e. Ex-post evaluation (terminal evaluation) report: within 12 months of Programme completion. 
Monitoring will also be undertaken by the AE through supervision visits and field missions to track 
implementation progress and challenges and strategically plan the way forward.

=== PAGE 148 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 144

=== PAGE 149 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 145 
 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
The main risk factors include political, technical and operational, social and environmental and financial risks. 
Section G.2 discusses the environmental and social risks identified in the Environmental and Social Assessment 
and how these risks are mitigated. The project design minimises project risks and includes mitigation measures for 
the identified risks, taking into account lessons learned from previous interventions in the area. Risks are 
continuously monitored at the levels of the Project Management Unit, Government of Tanzania Vice Preside nt’s 
Office and UNHCR as the Executing Entities, and UNEP as the Accredited Entity.   
VPO established a risk management policy and framework in 2018, this was driven by the fact that managing risk has 
been an increasingly important aspect of public sector governance and a significant factor to support the achievement of 
public objectives. Risk coordinators are charged with the overall responsibility of reporting risk management issues to the 
Permanent Secretary and audit committee as well as consolidating risks and periodically updating the risk register. 
VPO will consolidate, analyse and triangulate risk information reported by different project partners including UNHCR, 
MoHA, NEMC, TFS and the District Council, as well as information collected by PMU during field monitoring visits. The 
role of the Safeguards and Gender officer at PMU will be to monitor risks as they arise, and facilitate avoidance, 
mitigation, and management of risks. The Safeguards and Gender officer will be supported by a Safeguards expert 
international consultant (part-time) to develop, implement and monitor the Environmental and Social Management System 
and the Gender and Social Inclusion Plan. The recruited person will work closely with the Project Management Unit, 
the Project Steering Committee, UNHCR, and UNEP in managing such risks. 
In the event of significant risks to the project, VPO will engage in consultations with the relevant parties (District Councils, 
Kigoma Regional Authority, TFS, MoHA, UNHCR or others) to agree on adequate measures for conflict resolution and 
mitigation of impacts on the project. This will be done through the project steering committee or ad-hoc project stakeholder 
consultations. 
The Government of Tanzania Vice President’s Office Project Management Unit will coordinate risk management with 
UNHCR who will apply its approach to management of risks, including political and safeguard risks. As of 2018, UNHCR 
has embarked on a process to strengthen risk management across the agency, through the launch of the Risk 
Management 2.0 initiative. Risk Management 2.0 is an initiative which strengthens the accountability and integrity of 
UNHCR’s programmes and addresses the root causes of corruption and fraud, and other types of critical risks to UNHCR.  
It aims at improving programme delivery, making operations more efficient, and in doing so, maximizing UNHCR’s our 
ability to achieve its objective of providing protection and assistance to people forced to flee. Within the UN, UNHCR co-
leads the UN High Level Committee on Management Taskforce on Risk Management and recently was assessed as 
having an “established” level of risk maturity. Based on a request by the UNHCR High Commissioner, work is currently 
underway to develop a new risk management strategy that will allow UNHCR to achieve an “advanced” level of risk 
maturity by the end of 2025. This initiative has led to the expansion of professional resources across all levels of the 
organization, providing targeted support to specific operations who needed it most.  
UNHCR Tanzania has staff, specifically the Senior Project Control Officer to support facilitation of risk assessments, 
updating and maintenance of the country risk register, undertaking risk reviews, following up on risk treatments, sharing 
risk information, overseeing risk escalation, and providing risk management training and support to the entire operation. 
This capacity is in place to support the entire spectrum of work undertaken by UNHCR Tanzania, including any future 
GCF projects. In addition to the support of the Senior Project Control Officer’s risk management tasks, UNHCR has also 
introduced a new position of Senior Protection Officer in Kigoma to support overall protection activities, including mitigation 
of protection risks.  
At the Accredited Entity level, the Task Manager, with the support of the Portfolio Manager, the Safeguards Advisor, and 
the GCF Coordination Office, will take the leading role in monitoring risks in close cooperation with the Project 
Management Unit and UNHCR. 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium

=== PAGE 150 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 146 
 
 
 
 
Description 
Water-related infrastructure fall into disrepair, lack of spare parts or lack of skills in the host communities impedes 
maintenance of irrigation equipment. As a result, irrigated areas are abandoned and cultivation of riparian areas 
increases further, therefore degrading water courses. Operations and maintenance (O&M) costs are embedded in the 
contractual services costs during the project implementation period. Beyond the lifetime of the project, O&M costs will 
be assumed by asset owners (e.g. District Councils and water user associations, community members in the case of 
charco dams). Majority of the maintenance work required are inspection, cleaning, desilting, and weeding (through 
community labour). Materials for replacement in case of need for repairs are widely available on site or in the local 
markets. These include stones, brushwood, wooden posts, sandbags, wire mesh. Costs of maintenance depend on the 
structures, with stone gabions at around 10% of the cost, infiltration strips at between $0.3 – $1.3 per square meter of 
surface, and infiltration basins at $0.1 - $0.4/ square meter of detention basin area.  The total costs will be estimated 
during the implementation stage once the interventions and their extent have been plotted on the project area. It is 
highly likely that the costs in Tanzania will be at the lower end of these estimates (based on references in US and UK. 
Please See Annex 2.2 for references), based on local market prices.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
UNHCR, as he EE of this project activity will monitor effectiveness of training provided to water engineers and 
communities and adapt as necessary. The project will work with suppliers to ensure parts can be made available in 
Kibondo/Kakonko/Kasulu and develop operations and maintenance plans. Annex 21. Operations and Maintenance has 
already been prepared to address relevant issues. Within the camps, assets will be turned over to the Ministry of Home 
Affairs for management and maintenance oversight. The water and sanitation humanitarian cluster (WASH) 
development agencies can support MHA in this role. Water harvesting infrastructure in the host communities will be 
turned over to district and regional authorities, with regular maintenance activities to be performed by trained water user 
associations (WUAs) and in cooperation with the Lake Tanganyika River Basin Authority. WUAs can leverage on 
savings associations or devise schemes for small user fees to support O&M. This will be determined during project 
implementation for payment structures and viability. 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Low 
Description 
Savings Associations are unable or unwilling to increase the amount of funds under their management to the degree 
needed in order to implement project interventions. As a result, project funds are not able to be spent or are spent 
ineffectively. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will support the substantial expansion foreseen in the funds management by SAs through the establishment 
of a Savings Association Management Office (SAMO), which will be supported by a dedicated member of the Project 
Management Office. The SAMOs and the Savings Association Expert will work together to enable the SAs to gradually 
increase the amount of funds handled. To mitigate this risk, the proportion of agricultural inputs supplied to farmers through 
SAs is limited to 60% of the total cost of agricultural input. This percentage will be adjusted based on the SAs performance 
in the delivery of agricultural inputs to farmers in Years 3, 4 and 5.  
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Extreme weather events such as heavy rains and wildfire risk may result in implementation delays.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Timing of the project activities will consider rainy season and maximum and projected rainfall parameters when planning 
and designing interventions. The latest information from the met services and other information providers will be sought 
and used. Firebreak areas will be established in the afforested land area and wildfire risk monitoring will take place in

=== PAGE 151 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 147 
 
 
 
 
coordination with the Tanzania Forest Service. Capacity building activities with the TFS include fire management response 
plans. Awareness raising in communities under Activity 1.1 on wildfire risk and prevention measures will take place.  
Selected Risk Factor 4 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Low 
High 
Description 
Women are not adequately engaged in decision-making structures. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Gender and Social Inclusion action plan for the project will set forth the guidelines for engaging women at various 
levels of decision-making including in village land use planning, Savings Associations, and other participatory approaches 
adopted by the project. Representation of the Ministry of Community Development, Women Affairs and Children 
(MCDWAC) included in the steering committee to advise project stakeholders on gender and women empowerment 
mainstreaming and implementation of the Gender Action Plan. Adequate representation of women representatives in the 
steering committee will be encouraged.                                                                                                                                     
The project will support villages that have not initiated the land use planning process, as well as those that have initiated 
but not completed it. For the latter, the project will ensure meaningful representation of women at various stages of the 
process and may review previous steps in the land use planning process if a gender-sensitive approach has not been 
applied and correct the gap based on an assessment of whether all planning processes have followed the guidelines set 
by the National Land Use Planning Commission of Tanzania, titled 'Guidelines for Integrated and Participatory Village 
Land Use Planning, Management, and Administration,' which apply to all stakeholders involved, including local institutions, 
NGOs, and the private sector. These guidelines emphasize a gender-sensitive approach, which is an integral part of the 
participatory approach, ensuring the consideration of different roles, interests, and expectations of both men and women. 
Specifically, the guidelines call for 'ensuring full participation of socio-economic groups in a village, including gender, 
which have different interests and expectations.' 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Refugees return to their countries of origin. As a result, camps reduce operations. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
UNHCR will keep close attention to the situation, should major developments take place that would prompt large-scale 
voluntary repatriation. In the unlikely event of refugee numbers dramatically decreasing or other camp(s), (besides 
Mtendeli camp closure and land allocation to the host communities), project activities have been designed to be of ‘no 
regret’ and not sensitive to the fluctuation or transience of the refugees and anchored on the landscape and host 
community population. Additionally, the landscape interventions proposed in the camps (flood and erosion control) are 
sustainable measures that result in adaptation benefits for host communities in the long term. Adaptive management 
measures and flexibility in implementation will be undertaken to redistribute interventions to host communities, if 
necessary, with camp benefits and livelihood activities being absorbed by the host communities (who are receiving similar 
interventions), and the flood and erosion control measures will help to protect future occupants against climate-driven 
flood events and erosion damages. The Tanzania’s Refugee Act of 1998 and the National Refugee Policy of 2003 serve 
as the legal and policy framework in the country. The Government of Tanzania also has regional commitments to refugee 
protection under the Organization of African Unit, the East African Community, and the Southern African Development 
Community and the government has expressed support Global Compact on Refugees. Government actions and support 
for the camps are governed by a complex interplay of law, policy, norms, practice, and politics. There is an existing policy 
of voluntary repatriations. Any forced evictions of refugees would violate the government’s commitments. 
Selected Risk Factor 6 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Medium 
Medium 
Description

=== PAGE 152 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 148 
 
 
 
 
Tension between those within the project area and those outside. The benefits received by host communities in the project 
areas create a source of tension with those outside of the project area. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
As much of the project is based on capacity building, the awareness and benefits can be transferred outside of the project 
area. ‘Priming’ with initial investment, for example for irrigation, will spur markets in the project areas, increasing 
accessibility of them to a wider area in the community. The conflict sensitivity assessment planned under output 1 will 
contribute to further assess the risk and identify suitable measures to mitigate conflicts between the target area population 
and the host community outside the target area. 
 
Selected Risk Factor 7 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Risk of tension between refugees following relocation of refugees from Mtendeli camp to Nduta and/or surrounding host 
communities due to arrival of relocated refugees. As existing tensions and occasional conflicts (including GBV incidences) 
are often related to the collection of fuelwood, an increase in camp population in Nduta may exacerbate these conflicts.  
The population relocated from Mtendeli to Nduta are of the same profile of those in Nduta. Both populations are 
predominantly Burundian refugees who were displaced following the 2015 upheavals in Burundi. Host communities 
around Nduta have been coexisting for years with these Burundian refugees in an overall peaceful manner and have built 
relationships through various formal and informal interactions. The main issue for tension and conflict has been related to 
fuelwood. Other concerns from refugees related to the consolidation adding pressure to repatriate, the new housing 
situation and access to services in Nduta camp. It can be anticipated that an increase in refugee population will result in 
increased competition for fuelwood.  Also, longer distances may need to be tracked by refugees to meet cooking energy 
needs which may lead to increased SGBV incidences.   
 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
UNHCR risk assessment, using UNHCR risk register methodology, was undertaken for Mtendeli consolidation exercise 
and mitigation measures identified. A Task Force has been established to plan and oversee the relocation consisting of 
MoHA at national and local level, District Commissioners of Kakonko, Kibondo and RC and RAS in Kigoma, UNHCR, 
DRC (camp management) and NRC (shelter &wash). Furthermore, Camp Consolidation Coordination teams (CCCT) 
has been established consisting of MoHA, UNHCR, DRC CCCM to lead and supported by Registration, Protection 
WASH, Shelter, AIRD, Health, Education, Environment, Refugee leadership, CWT, Police and Host community 
leadership. The Protection working group (UNHCR, MoHA, protection partners) has also been involved and specific 
protection actions/activities have been identified planned in the context of the relocation.  This includes specific 
measures to deal with protection risks of vulnerable individuals as they move. After relocation specific measures have 
been identified to be implemented to ensure inclusion and protection of vulnerable groups. UNHCR and partners are 
stepping up their activities in support of scaling up alternative energy sources for cooking through different interventions 
complementary to the GCF project, primarily through increasing production and use of biomass briquettes.  The 
afforestation of 2,000 hectares of land in villages (sub-activity 2.2.2) aims to establish fast-growing fuelwood species on 
degraded areas of village lands adjacent to refugee camps. It is calculated that 12% of the current fuelwood demand 
can be met (see detailed assumptions in Annex 4: Detailed Budget Plan). Though this is a modest direct contribution, it 
is a critical part of overall fuel mix for the region.   
UNHCR supports regular peaceful co-existence meetings which bring together community leaders from refugees and 
host communities. These forums are used to discuss and resolve any conflict that may arise from the arrival of relocated 
refugees from Mtendeli. With regards to conflicts among refugees in Nduta, community structures are in place to resolve 
tensions and conflicts among community members.   Sensitization of refugee leadership on the consolidation process 
will be undertaken. Refugee leaders play a key role in communicating with and disseminating information to the wider 
refugee community and creating awareness on a range of issues. By maintaining a dialogue and sharing information 
during physical meetings with refugee leaders in practicalities as well as risks and mitigating actions (for example as 
identified by the protection working group) the wider refugee community will be informed and sensitized.

=== PAGE 153 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 149 
 
 
 
 
Mass communication campaigns were carried out in both Nduta and Mtendeli. Engagement and communication with the 
host communities is done through formal and informal peaceful coexistence activities whereby leaders from both 
communities (refugees and hosts) are represented. 
In the host communities, the Village executive officers and the Ward executive officers have a mandate in dispute 
resolution and reporting of incidences of local conflicts over land or resources to the District Councils. This includes 
reporting of local conflicts between host community and refugees. The District Councils will in turn report conflict 
incidences to VPO PMU for project risk monitoring and risk management.  
The conflict sensitivity assessment planned under output 1 will contribute to further assess the risks associated with the 
relocation of refugees from Mtendeli to Nduta and identify suitable measures to mitigate conflict within the camps and 
with host community in the scope of the project intervention. 
Selected Risk Factor 8 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Financial 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Risk that there is low adoption of livelihood activities or that these interventions are not economically sustainable. The 
livelihood activities do not achieve the intended uptake nor generate the anticipated economic impact.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Kigoma Joint Programme establishes the framework for long-term economic development in the region, and 
Kibondo and Kakonko regions are becoming more connected to markets — a new paved road connecting Kigoma to 
Mwanza (through Kibondo, Kakonko and Kasulu) is due to open in 2020. 
The funding framework proposed for the project uses Savings Associations that have the potential to reinvest resources 
to continue to support resilient activities. Savings Associations from UN CDF activities have shown success. 
Selected Risk Factor 9 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Medium 
High 
Description 
Large-scale refugee in-migration. Further influx of large numbers of refugees from adjacent countries into project area 
due to political instability/climate-stress. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Liaison with government/UNHCR. Use of NGOs and bilateral agencies to support project implementation. 
Selected Risk Factor 10 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Low uptake from local government of policy recommendations under Result/Output 4.  
Mitigation Measure (s) 
At the project design stage, local government agencies have been involved in the development of interventions and 
community-level consultations as reflected in Annex 7. There is a very high level of engagement and support for all the 
project interventions. Output 4 activities are design to show evidence of benefits of ecosystem-based adaptation to 
facilitate inclusion into development and sectoral planning. The potential location of some project positions in the Regional 
Office, can also facilitate understanding of the project activities and policy recommendations with the Regional 
Administration. Additionally, with the revised execution arrangements proposed, the implementation of activities will be 
partially delegated by the Government of Tanzania Vice-President’s Office to District Councils and TFS through 
cooperation agreements, further enhancing project ownership from local government. 
Selected Risk Factor 11

=== PAGE 154 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 150 
 
 
 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
High 
Medium 
Description 
Political risks. Tanzania’s policies towards refugees have been more restrictive in recent years. UNHCR Tanzania has 
identified a number of risks related to government policy. These risks relate to Tanzania’s implementation of its asylum 
policy in line with international standards, access to asylum seekers fleeing conflict from neighbouring countries, risks 
related to voluntary repatriation, refugee data, and an overall restrictive protection environment. 
Mitigation Measure (s) 
UNHCR Tanzania develops a yearly risk register to support risk identification and treatment. The most recent Risk 
Register was updated on 1 December 2020, for risks foreseen in 2021. The Risk Register includes specific proactive and 
reactive treatment measures to ensure that UNHCR can proactively mitigate them and, in the event they materialise, that 
UNHCR has the ability to react and address them.  
To address the political risks noted above, UNHCR has and will continue to put in place measures to ensure that 
government capacity to apply international refugee standards are continuously strengthened. Initiatives are underway to 
train government officials and build their capacity in management of refugee data and application of international 
protection standards and to jointly develop Standard Operating Procedures with government, particularly around voluntary 
repatriation and data management. UNHCR Tanzania continually undertakes advocacy with government at all levels to 
ensure that refugees are able to live in an environment where their needs are met. Such advocacy is undertaken at the 
country level by UNHCR Tanzania as well as at the regional and Headquarters level and, where necessary, also at the 
UN Secretary-General level. Where appropriate, joint advocacy is also conducted with other UN agencies and with the 
international donor community in Tanzania. UNHCR has paid particular focus to bolstering relations with the Kigoma 
regional authorities (where the project will be based) as a direct measure to mitigate risks that government policies may 
lead to increased restrictions on refugees and the humanitarian community. In 2020, significant progress was made in 
this regard and as of 2021, UNHCR’s presence in Kigoma will be strengthened with the opening of a Sub-Office and the 
deployment of some senior management positions to that office.  Through its own risk analysis, while UNHCR notes that 
government policies towards refugees will continue to be restrictive, efforts implemented in 2020 and treatments to be 
implemented in 2021 will likely reduce the impact these policies have on UNHCR’s ability to continue supporting refugees 
in 2021, especially in the Kigoma region.    
Furthermore, it should be noted that the GCF project will, upon realization, contribute to the recognition that refugees can 
contribute to host communities, therefore ensuring greater local acceptance of refugees. Evidence on the benefits of the 
project to climate adaptation of both groups in the region will be collected to inform these discussions. The GCF project 
also addresses a key government priority, namely environmental degradation in refugee hosting areas. In doing so, the 
project is expected to positively influence the discourse on refugee issues and management, also through the involvement 
of a wider range on government ministries.  
At the regional and district level, there remains overwhelming support for the project and its activities as it engages direc tly 
with District officials and communities to promote harmonious relationships between host communities and refugees and 
project benefits to host communities. Through these people-to-people dialogues and benefit sharing arrangements in the 
project, the project aims to minimize and mitigate conflict in the area and promote dialogue. Overall, the positive outcomes 
of this projected are expected to contribute to a more positive outlook on refugee hosting and peaceful coexistence, which 
in turn will further contribute to improvement of government policies related to refugees. It is expected that  project 
leadership from VPO may contribute to an improved policy dialogue involving MoHA and sector ministries, which will 
mitigate any possible (refugee related) political risks and may even have a positive impact on the existing policy 
environment – as the project is believed to be able to highlight the shared benefits and advantages of a more inclusive 
approach.

=== PAGE 155 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 151 
 
 
 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
Project categorisation 
 
The project is being proposed as Category B or moderate risk according to the GCF project classification. This is 
because the project has potential limited adverse environmental and/or social risks and impacts that are few, generally 
site-specific, largely reversible, and readily addressed through mitigation measures. Justification for this is provided in 
the Environmental and Social Management System in Annex 6. The main risks anticipated are summarised below in 
Table 15, along with mitigation measures to address them. 
 
Table 15. Summary of risks and mitigation measures. 
Summary of risks  
Mitigation factors or measures and management strategies 
Environmental  
 
Risk that project has potential 
impact on national game reserves 
(the 
proposed 
project 
area 
surrounding Nduta camp is located 
within 10 km of the Moyowosi 
Game Reserve, and within 30 km 
of the Kigosi Game Reserve) 
 
Low risk 
An overriding objective of this project is ecosystem restoration, including improving the 
quantity and quality of water in the region. Consequently, net environmental impacts will 
likely be positive rather than negative.  
 
Restoration and conservation in forest reserves within a 10 km radius to the Moyowosi Game 
Reserve would be conducted. This is expected to have positive benefits. No afforestation 
with fast-growing species for fuelwood will take place in this area. 
 
Hydrological connectivity to the Malagarasi- Moyowosi wetlands is present, but the drainage 
obtains water from many sources external to the project. Water extraction from in-stream 
rainwater harvesting schemes would likely have a negligible impact on the wetland. There 
are expected net benefits in improvement to water quality in the wetland due to the project. 
Modelling and discussion are available in more detail in the Feasibility Study. 
 
The project team will monitor any potential impacts of the rainwater harvesting structures on 
streamflow into the wetland by monitoring extraction rates and streamflow over time relative 
to a baseline that will be determined at the start of the project. 
Risk that project has potential 
impact 
on 
areas 
considered 
protected or important by local 
communities 
 
Low risk 
The project will be initiated through the land use planning processes (Output 1), which will 
work with local communities to identify the specific areas of land where interventions can be 
sited.  
 
This process will be used to identify any areas of land that are locally important and ensure 
these are demarcated in the land use planning process to reflect the wishes of the local 
communities. 
 
This process is fully participatory, involving multiple stakeholder groups, and interventions 
will only be implemented on host community land with the full support of the host 
communities. 
Risk 
associated 
with 
the 
introduction of non-native species, 
but which are non-invasive 
 
Moderate risk 
 
 
For species related to Activity 2.2, the final species in different sites will be selected during 
the Species Suitability Assessment conducted within the first year of the project. In the 
preparation stages, a mix of species was explored, including reference to species used in 
recent SNV afforestation projects in the country. 
 
Species selection will be informed by properties as being fast growing and highly productive 
– which will help to meet the fuelwood demand and by doing so reduce the pressure on the 
native Miombo forest. 
 
Plantation areas will be chosen by experienced foresters, focussing on degraded land where 
planting is required to reduce erosion and run off etc. Distribution of non-native species will 
be sensitive to the ecosystems in the project area, making particular consideration for 
avoiding riparian land and or where the water table is <5m, to ensure there is no negative 
impact on groundwater levels 
 
Species chosen for the afforestation would constitute only a small element of the mosaic 
landscape provided in Activity 2.2 and is restricted to already degraded lands. This will be 
complemented by the use of indigenous species such as Acacia auriculiformis, A. 
crassicarpa, A. leptocarpa, A. mangium, Albizia lebbeck, Glyricidia sepium, Leucaena 
pallida and Senna siamea in agroforestry, which will reduce landscape degradation and 
encourage the regeneration of biodiversity.

=== PAGE 156 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 152 
 
 
 
 
The final species chosen will be determined by the Species Suitability Assessment, which 
will be informed by fire risk assessment, among other factors. The Feasibility Study 
describes the types of characteristics to be considered (see Annex 2.1 Feasibility Study). A 
specialist forest consultant will be engaged to select species for each site. Species selection 
will be benchmarked against other practises in the area such as activities promoted by the 
District Officers, GIZ and SNV projects. 
Risk of impact on passage of fish 
from in-stream structures  
 
Low risk 
The in-stream structures have been designed to incorporate fish ramps to allow for the 
passage of fish (see Activity 3.2). 
Risk of impact on water resources 
in the project area from water 
pumping and irrigation of farmland 
and nurseries 
 
Low risk 
 
Project objectives include increasing overall water infiltration and reducing flooding restoring 
degraded land, improving soil stability and providing rainwater harvesting infrastructure. This 
will reduce the pressure on surface and groundwater resources. While the project will look 
to supply water pumping equipment, this is intended to draw upon water stored in rainwater 
harvesting systems, as well as surface water sources. The solar and treadle pumps 
proposed have relatively low capacity.  
 
Capacity building on water conservation as well as soil moisture testing practises will be put 
in place to use water resources efficiently. 
 
Hydrological modelling in the feasibility study indicates sufficient availability of water relative 
to extraction under climate change. In addition, the project team will monitor any potential 
impacts of the rainwater harvesting structures on streamflow into the wetland by monitoring 
extraction rates and streamflow over time relative to a baseline that will be determined at 
the start of the project. 
Risk of impact on ecosystems from 
more intensive agriculture 
 
Low risk 
The project is funding training and tools only –pesticide use will not be provided/promoted 
in the project. Pest resistant crop varieties will be promoted.  
 
There may be some risk of farmers having increased production, thereby increasing their 
incomes and resources available for farm inputs. The implementation of activities will be 
consistent with the Climate Smart Agriculture guidelines of Tanzania that promote 
sustainable practises and will be done in coordination with the Agricultural District Officer. 
Sustainable practises will be promoted in the Farmer Field School approach. 
Social  
 
Risk to health, safety or labour 
rights of workers involved in the 
construction of structures in the 
project (for example, mushroom 
structures, rainwater harvesting 
structures, pump houses) 
 
Low risk 
The project will implement health, safety and labour rights safeguards.  
 
The procurement process for the project will include contractors’ processes to manage 
health, safety and labour rights at the construction phase. 
Safety 
impacts 
of 
in-stream 
structures 
 
Low risk 
The intended structures are small scale only, which reduces the likelihood of integrity issues, 
the safety impact in the event of any damage to structures, and risk of children or people 
falling into drainage infrastructure.  
 
The procurement process for the project will include consideration of contractors’ experience 
in building similar structures. 
 
Local communities will be trained by the contractor on maintenance and safety near water 
sources. 
Risk of disputes between villagers 
during village land use planning 
 
Moderate risk 
Joint land use planning process will used to develop land use plans for villages that share 
resources such as grazing land. These are based on existing land use management 
approaches that are enshrined in Tanzanian national regulations and policies.  
 
Lessons learned from these efforts suggest that while such participatory processes may 
require a considerable amount of time and resources, they successfully resolve conflicts 
around the use of natural resources, and they provide great opportunities for communities 
to take control and ownership of shared resources.  
 
While not usually accounting for climate change risks, the land use planning process is well-
established in Tanzania, and it provides a proven approach for establishing the basis to 
formalise land tenure under the CCROs.

=== PAGE 157 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 153 
 
 
 
 
The conflict sensitivity assessment planned under output 1 will contribute to further assess 
the risk of potential conflicts associated with Land Use Planning and the identification of 
suitable mitigation measures in the specific context of the project target areas. 
 
The land use planning process will engage separately with a range of potentially under-
represented groups (e.g. women, pastoralist representatives) to ensure full participation.  
 
The project will engage NGOs experienced in delivering the planning processes and will 
follow the provisions of the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure 
(as applicable) to ensure best practise in this process. 
Risk of water and vector borne 
diseases from standing water in 
rainwater harvesting structures 
 
Low to moderate risk 
Water in rainwater harvesting structures is for irrigation only, not intended for human 
consumption and hence not expected to result in increased prevalence of cholera, 
diarrhoea, and other illnesses from drinking contaminated water. 
 
Risks will be monitored during the project period through field surveys. Management of 
diseases to be coordinated closely with the health cluster and district officer and explore the 
use of biological controls and education on the health risks of standing water. 
Risk of security concerns/conflicts 
between host communities and 
refugees in relation to project 
delivery 
 
Moderate risk 
The project has been designed to improve the ecosystem that hosts (and provides for) both 
the host communities and refugees and increase available resources, and by doing so 
reduce the level of tension / conflict between these groups. 
 
Where possible, dialogues and coordinated implementation between refugees and host 
community groups for activities like beekeeping and mushroom growing, will be pursued. 
These serve as important opportunities for interaction that can help fill the vacuum left after 
the closure of the common markets. When consulted in September 2020, ‘peaceful 
coexistence meetings’ were highlighted as an important peacekeeping and conflict-
resolution tool by both refugees and host communities. This was attributed to the improved 
dialogue between the two groups that was facilitated by these meetings (elaborated on in 
Annex 2.1, Section 9.1).  
 
Management arrangements for forest reserves and afforested woodlots for fuel will consider 
the needs of both the host and refugee communities, with a view to develop benefit sharing 
schemes co-designed with the refugee and host communities. Management mechanisms 
promote dialogue and shared use. This has the potential to improve host-refugee relations, 
as damage to agricultural fields caused by fuelwood collection was highlighted as a 
challenge by host communities during consultations in September 2020.  
 
The majority of the interventions are located in host communities. This will help to rebalance 
the perception that refugees have unfairly benefited from support (in comparison to the host 
communities). 
 
The project will be delivered under the guidance of the Regional government, District 
Councils, UNHCR and other agencies / NGOs experienced in working in the region and 
managing any disputes. 
 
The conflict sensitivity assessment planned under output 1 will contribute to further assess 
the risk of potential conflicts and tensions linked to project delivery between host community 
and refugees, as well as between direct beneficiaries and indirect beneficiaries outside the 
project target area, to identify suitable mitigation measures in the specific context of the 
project target areas. 
 
Risk 
of 
displacement, 
dispossession or limitations on 
access to resources 
 
Low to moderate 
The land use planning, including the allocation of grazing land / corridors for pastoralists 
such as the Sukuma, and conflict resolution mechanisms such as peaceful coexistence 
meetings in the project are expected to lower the risk.  
 
There are plans to set aside land for jointly managing forests for sustainable harvest of 
fuelwood that will be accessible to both groups. Consultations among both host communities 
and refugees have found interest in both groups. There are concerns to having clear and 
jointly agreed upon arrangements for responsibility and benefit sharing, which will be 
addressed by project through Activity 2.2. 
 
The feasibility study recognizes that agricultural development in riparian areas is an issue 
within the project area (in terms of its negative impact on water availability).  The project 
does not seek to actively restore riparian areas, although restoration may be an outcome of 
providing additional benefits in terms of agriculture, livelihoods and water supply. However,

=== PAGE 158 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 154 
 
 
 
 
there may still be a perception that the project is seeking to displace economic activity from 
riparian areas.  
 
It is proposed that the land use planning process will provide the mechanism by which local 
communities will be able to understand how agricultural and livelihood activities can be at 
least as productive away from riparian areas compared to within them. The process will also 
help communities to recognize the benefits to the wider landscape of restoring the riparian 
areas. All decisions regarding land use planning will be taken by local communities and 
there will be no involuntary restrictions on land use, livelihood resources or any loss of land 
(see Component 1.1). Sensitization on local bylaws relating to providing a 60m buffer 
between land under cultivation and the riverbanks can be promoted by the local authorities 
in this regard. 
Potential increase of incidence of 
Sexual 
and 
Gender 
Based 
Violence and Sexual Exploitation, 
Abuse, and Harassment 
 
Moderate risk 
The project is not introducing activities that are expected to result in increased risk for SEAH. 
SEAH protocols by partners on the ground are in place. 
 
The project may potentially increase the risk of SGBV, particularly intimate partner violence, 
in carrying out activities targeted to women’s livelihoods. The beneficiary selection process 
will consider this risk and involve male partners at the outset. Continuous monitoring of 
women’s risks at the beneficiary level will be implemented in carrying out activities. 
 
The project will likely reduce SGBV risks for women from fuelwood collection, by providing 
fuelwood sources within the 4km buffer zone and reducing distances travelled. The 
incidence of SGBV as a result of firewood collection outside camps was highlighted as a 
particular issue by refugees, during consultations in September 2020.  
 
 
 
Approach to environmental and social management during project implementation 
 
The risks considered in the ESERN risk screening checklist have been further elaborated in the Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP) in Annex 6. This shows how these risks have been considered in the fundamental 
design of the project and any additional mitigation measures that may be required. 
 
In addition, given the structure of the project, whereby the exact siting and detailed design of the project interventions 
are being determined as part of the project itself (through the participatory land-use planning processes), the specific 
nature of any residual environmental and social risks that remain will be assessed as part of project implementation. 
  
Risks will be managed through: 
• 
Involving an experienced environmental and social safeguards specialist through the specific planning, design and 
implementation processes. 
• 
Ensuring the project officers (forestry, livelihoods, agriculture and water) recruited onto the project are sufficiently 
experienced in safeguards relevant to their specialist technical areas. 
• 
Establishing methodologies for the environmental and social assessment of each of the activities under the project. 
• 
Ensuring the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) process includes adequate review of environmental and social risks 
(this will be done by an M&E specialist with specific experience in reviewing environmental and social 
considerations). 
• 
Assigning formal roles and responsibilities for environmental and social management across the project team. 
• 
Establishing a reporting procedure for environmental and social concerns related to the interventions. 
• 
Incorporating environmental and social safeguard considerations in the training, capacity building and technical 
assistance delivered through the project. 
 
The environmental and social management processes will draw upon the following documents: 
• 
Green Climate Fund Environmental and Social Management System; 
• 
UNEP safeguards systems; 
• 
UNHCR safeguards systems; 
• 
summaries of stakeholder consultations; 
• 
ESMP and stakeholder management plan; 
• 
Policy and regulatory environment; and 
• 
Gender Assessment and Action Plan. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)

=== PAGE 159 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 155 
 
 
 
 
During project preparation, a gender assessment was conducted to understand the differential vulnerability to, and 
impact of, climate change on women and men in Kigoma. From the findings of this assessment, and an analysis of the 
proposed project solution, a gender action plan (GAP) was developed. The process to produce these components 
included a desktop review of available literature and an analysis of relevant legislation, policy and programmes in the 
country, as well as interviews and consultations with project and beneficiary stakeholders.  
 
The gender assessment and problem analysis identified causes and effects related to land tenure, participation in 
agricultural activities, access to knowledge and financial services, and broad participation in income-generating 
activities. A critical factor affecting women’s adaptive capacity to climate change is related to insecure land tenure and 
exclusion from access to and control over land. This ultimately results in lower productivity and income generated from 
natural resources. Women’s vulnerability to climate change is also exacerbated by their central role in collecting 
firewood and water and engaging in rain-fed agricultural activities. Gender-blind policies, and discriminatory social and 
cultural norms related to land use, agriculture, water and forestry activities, results in women having limited participation  
in income-generating activities and involvement in farmers’ groups, as well as being underrepresented in forest 
management activities. 
 
Women from refugee and host communities are also susceptible to protection issues like sexual and gender-based 
violence (SGBV) when they travel outside of their settlements, particularly to collect firewood. A 2015 field report from 
Refugees International found that 25% of 224 SGBV incidents reported by Burundian refugees in Tanzania over a five-
month period occurred during firewood collection trips, and 90% of these incidents were rape or sexual assault 233. 
Although culturally a gendered role, women refugees are also forced into this activity as they pose a lesser risk to host 
communities, whereas male refugees collecting firewood are perceived to be ‘stealing’ and may be violently attacked. 
While host community-refugee meetings had been reportedly effective in reducing incidences of SGBV, respondents 
during September 2020 consultations noted that SGBV during fuelwood collection remained an ongoing challenge. 
Other dynamics which have also been known to increase instances of SGBV are increasingly bei ng experienced by 
refugees, including family conflict — particularly regarding returning to country of origin —, firewood collection beyond 
the 4km camp buffer zone and restrictions of freedom of movement and livelihood activities. 
 
To mitigate against biasing against women as project beneficiaries during implementation and subsequent to project 
completion, the gender action plan outlines several interventions to ensure the project does not unintentionally 
contribute to perpetuating or worsening gender equality and gender-based climate vulnerability in Kigoma. The GAP 
seeks to promote gender equality by including activities which will increase women’s representation and awareness, as 
well as ensuring that training programmes are gender-sensitive and -inclusive. It includes clear targets, sex-
disaggregated data collection, gender-sensitive design features and quantifiable performance indicators to promote 
women’s participation and benefits from the project. 
 
The actions of the GAP include: 
• 
promoting women’s inclusion in all project aspects, including training and employment opportunities; 
• 
pursuing representative participation in all consultations and workshop events; 
• 
advancing gender diversity and challenging negative stereotyping in public awareness activities; and 
• 
designing and implementing gender-sensitive training that considers the different learning methods and training 
accessibility of men and women. 
 
The full Gender Assessment and project-level Gender Action Plan are included as Annex 8.  
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The financial management and procurement within the Programme will be guided by applicable UN financial 
regulations, rules and practises. The financial rules of UNEP, which follow International Public Sector Accounting 
Standards (IPSAS), are promulgated pursuant to the Financial Regulations and Rules of the UN. Within this context, 
funding allocation mechanisms are managed in accordance with applicable UN rules and procedures, including 
eligibility criteria, proposal evaluation processes, quality assurance and control, project monitoring and supervision. 
UNEP is audited annually by the UN Board of Auditors and has established dedicated trust funds for Green Climate 
Fund resources. 
 
In line with UNEP reporting procedures outlined in section E.7, reports to summarise the disbursement and projected 
demands for Programme funding will be prepared and submitted to a UNEP Programme Officer who will conduct 
 
233 Vigaud-Walsh, Women and Girls Failed: The Burundian Refugee Response in Tanzania, 2015. Available at: 
http://static1.squarespace.com/static/506c8ea1e4b01d9450dd53f5/t/5678aee07086d7cddecf1bab/1450749707001/2015122
2+Tanzania.pdf.

=== PAGE 160 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 156 
 
 
 
 
Programme supervision, in line with reporting standards and methodologies applied in past projects, such as those 
implemented using GEF modalities.  
 
UN financial regulations and rules require the segregation of duties, and safeguards to ensure compliance with UN 
financial rules and regulations. All procurement will be undertaken in line with applicable UN procurement regulations, 
rules and policies. In line with UN regulations, rules and policies, funds will be transferred in tranches to the Executing 
Entities (EEs) once the EEs has satisfied the conditions that are defined under the Subsidiary Agreements to be signed  
between UNEP and the Government of Tanzania Vice-President’s Office (Project Cooperation Agreement) and 
between UNEP and UNHCR (UN-to-UN Agreement) The Agreements will include specific obligations for the EE on 
financial management and reporting and will require periodic reporting from the EE.  The Government of Tanzania Vice-
President’s Office (VPO), as the lead EE, will be responsible for the submission of consolidated financial reports to 
UNEP, including funding for activities executed by VPO and UNHCR. The coordination mechanisms to deliver 
consolidated reports will be specified in the Memorandum of Understanding signed between VPO and UNHCR. 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
• 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
• 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 161 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 157 
 
 
 
 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g.  Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☒ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☒ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☐ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☒ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☐ 
Annex 22  Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting (for mitigation and 
cross cutting-projects)234 
☒ 
Annex X 
Other references 
Annex 22.1 Tanzania country refugee response plan. 
Annex 22.2 UNHCR Financial Management Manual.

=== PAGE 162 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 158 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
 
234 Annex 22 is mandatory for mitigation and cross-cutting projects.  
Annex 23.   Letter of support Danish Embassy of Tanzania. 
Annex 24.   Government of Tanzania Vice President’s Office capacity assessment certificate

=== PAGE 163 ===
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 164 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Building climate resilience in the landscapes of Kigoma 
region, Tanzania 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
No 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
Location – specific location(s) 
of project or target country 
or location(s) of programme 
United Republic of Tanzania 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website 
Wednesday, September 6, 2023 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Kiswahili (or Swahili)  
Explanation on language 
English and Swahili are the official languages of Tanzania. 
They serve as working languages in the country, with 
Swahili being the official national language. 
Within the camps, Swahili and Kirundi are widely spoken 
as well as French. At the request of the Government, 
Swahili has been chosen as the local language for 
disclosure because it is the official language for the 
Government authorities, and it is widely spoken in the 
camps. 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://open.unep.org/docs/gcf/Annex_6_Kigoma_GCF_ES
MS_English_rev23_08_2023_clean.pdf 
 
Kiswahili (or Swahili): 
https://open.unep.org/docs/gcf/Annex_6_Kigoma_GCF_ES
MS_Kiswahili_rev23_08_2023_clean.pdf  
 
Other link(s) 
https://open.unep.org/project/GCF-GCF-Tanzania-FP 
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management System (ESMS)”. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website 
Wednesday, September 6, 2023 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English and Kiswahili (or Swahili)  
Explanation on language 
English and Swahili are the official languages of Tanzania. 
They serve as working languages in the country, with 
Swahili being the official national language. 
Within the camps, Swahili and Kirundi are widely spoken 
as well as French. At the request of the Government,

=== PAGE 165 ===
Swahili has been chosen as the local language for 
disclosure because it is the official language for the 
Government authorities, and it is widely spoken in the 
camps. 
Link to disclosure 
English: 
https://open.unep.org/docs/gcf/Annex_6_Kigoma_GCF_ES
MS_English_rev23_08_2023_clean.pdf 
 
Kiswahili (or Swahili):  
https://open.unep.org/docs/gcf/Annex_6_Kigoma_GCF_ES
MS_Kiswahili_rev23_08_2023_clean.pdf 
 
Other link(s) 
https://open.unep.org/project/GCF-GCF-Tanzania-FP 
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category 
B project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Management System (ESMS)”.   
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on accredited 
entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
The UNEP Environmental, Social and Economic Review 
Note (ESERN) is appended as addendum 2 of the 
“Environmental and Social Management System”. 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Tuesday, September 5, 2023 
Place 
Swahili Summaries of the Environmental and Social 
Management Systems were made available to stakeholders 
during the stakeholder consultations. The full translated 
copies in Swahili and English were first posted by February 
15, 2021 in District Offices of Kibondo, Kakonko, and Kasulu 
and the Kigoma Regional Administration Secretariat as well 
as in Nduta, Mtendeli, and Nyarugusu refugee camps. 
Following the update of the ESMS in November 2021, 
revised copies of the ESMS in Swahili and English were 
posted on January 5, 2022. 
 
Following the revision of the ESMS in August 2023, the 
ESMS Swahili and English version were posted on

=== PAGE 166 ===
September 6, 2023 in the District Offices of Kibondo, 
Kakonko, and Kasulu, the Kigoma Regional Administration 
Secretariat as well as in several locations in the Nduta and 
Nyarugusu refugee camps. (Mtendeli camp was closed in 
January 2022). 
The following are the contact details of the District Offices 
and Regional Administration Secretariat: 
Kibondo District Office 
P.O.BOX 43, Kibondo, 
Kibondo District Council, Kibondo Township Ihulilo 
Street 
Telephone: +255 028 282 0084 
Mobile: +255 028 282 0084 
Fax: +255 028 282 0084 
Email: ded@kibondodc.go.tz  
Kakonko District Office 
P.O.BOX 3 
Halmashauri ya Wilaya ya Kakonko 
Telephone: +255 028 282 0137 
Mobile: +255 075 747 0800 
Fax: +255 028 282 0137 
Email: ded@kakonkodc.go.tz  
Kasulu District Office 
S.L.P 97
Halmashauri Ya Wilaya Ya Kasulu
Telephone: +255 028 281 0339
Mobile: +255 028 2810339
Fax: +255 028 2810339
Email: ded@kasuludc.go.tz
Kigoma Regional Administration Secretariat Office 
Mkoa Wa Kigoma 
Postal Address: S.L.P 125 
Telephone: +255 028 280 2330 
Mobile: +255 738 192 977 
Email: ras@kigoma.go.tz / 
ras.kigoma@tamisemi.go.tz / info@kigoma.go.tz 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
N/A 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting 
Monday, October 23, 2023 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 167 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 167 
 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP218 
Proposal name: 
Building climate resilience in the landscapes of the Kigoma 
Region, Tanzania 
Accredited entity: 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
Country/(ies): 
United Republic of Tanzania 
Project/programme size:  
Small 
I. 
Overall assessment of the Secretariat 
1. 
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks: 
Strengths 
Points of caution 
The project seeks to address the climate 
vulnerability of host communities in degraded 
landscapes occupied by displaced populations 
facing unique challenges and layered 
vulnerabilities in a shared landscape. The 
project intends to bridge the gap of the 
development–humanitarian–climate nexus.  
The overall project risk rating is high, driven 
by the political risks of the project. The 
project necessitates close monitoring by the 
executing entities, accredited entity and GCF 
from the start of project implementation 
following early-stage active adaptive 
management.  
The project is firmly anchored in government 
structures and ownership. The project will 
establish a team working through 
Government: Vice President’s Office, Division 
of Environment, the Ministry of Home Affairs 
will play a key role in overseeing the 
implementation of activities in the refugee 
camps; The Regional Administration, which 
operates under the President’s Office, 
Regional Administration and Local 
Government, oversee the Local Government 
Authorities’ activities providing supervision 
and administrative instructions; The Tanzania 
Forest Service under the Ministry of Natural 
Resources and Tourism; and The National 
Environmental Management Council will 
ensure compliance with relevant 
environmental laws and regulations as well as 
providing technical advisory and compliance 
guidance on all environmental aspects of the 
project. 
 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal with the terms and 
conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XXI, titled “List of proposed 
conditions and recommendations”.

=== PAGE 168 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 168 
 
 
 
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment 
2.1 
Project background 
3. 
The project will focus on the surrounding host communities and refugee camps of Nduta 
and Nyarugusu, and the former Mtendeli camp,1 in the Kigoma Region of the United Republic of 
Tanzania. These communities are nature-dependent, living in an increasingly degraded 
landscape, with complex and varied needs. Using an integrated landscape approach, the project 
intends to complement the already existing development and humanitarian efforts in the area 
by focusing on climate change-related impacts.  
4. 
The Kigoma Region covers about 37,000 km2 in the north-west of the country and has a 
population of about 2.3 million people. Situated on a plateau, the region hosts about 280,000 
refugees from neighbouring countries. The Kigoma Region is composed of a mosaic landscape, 
surrounded by areas of global biodiversity importance, with a predominance of Miombo forests 
and patches of agricultural areas covering varied landscape continuum features. In the north of 
the region, agropastoralist Sukuma people pass through in search of grazing land.  
5. 
Historical climate trends show more intense and erratic precipitation events leading to 
an increasing frequency of flood events. Indeed, the project makes a relevant distinction 
between the pluvial flood risks (from extreme precipitation events) and the fluvial flood risk 
(from rivers and streams). The Nyarugusu camp is mainly affected by the pluvial flood risks, 
while the former Mtendeli camp and the Nduta camp are exposed to both pluvial and fluvial 
flooding. Pluvial flood risk will increase because the intensity of hourly rainfall is projected to 
rise from about 1 mm/hour (Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5) to about 1.5 mm/hour 
(Representative Concentration Pathway 8.5) at the end of this century.  
6. 
Fluvial flood risk is expected to increase by substantially more, because climate change 
has altered, and will continue to alter, vegetation. The roughness index of land surfaces will 
decrease, resulting in higher erosion and flood risks. This is compounded by the fact that 
hydrological processes are highly non-linear. For example, an increase in rainfall of 10 per cent 
can result in an additional flood risk of 50 per cent. It is reasonably justified to assume that 
climate change is a major factor in increased flood risk, leading to secondary impacts such as 
gully erosion. The changes in the rainfall profile of the Kigoma Region show more prolonged dry 
spells. There is also evidence regarding mean annual temperature increase, leading to increased 
evapotranspiration and evaporation of surface water resources. These drying trends are 
affecting local livelihoods that rely on rainfall and ecosystem goods and services in the Kigoma 
Region. This climate context, compounded with the landscape degradation threats and impacts 
(described below), justifies the proposed interventions. 
7. 
The project consists of two components with four outputs that will be implemented by 
two executing entities (EE): the Tanzania Vice-President Office (VPO) as lead EE and the United 
Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) as co-EE. According to the environmental and 
social safeguards (ESS) categorization provided by the United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP), which is the accredited entity (AE), this is a Category B project.  
8. 
Component 1: Increased resilience of ecosystems and people to climate change threats: 
(a) 
Output 1: Participatory Climate-resilient Land Use Plans developed (C-LUP) to support 
ecosystem-based adaptation; 
 
1 At the time of the Secretariat review, the Nduta and Nyarugusu camps are in existence, and the Mtendeli camp was 
closed in January 2022. Refugees in Mtendeli camp, except for those opting for voluntary repatriation, were 
relocated to Nduta camp after the Mtendeli camp has been decommissioned.

=== PAGE 169 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 169 
 
 
 
(b) 
Output 2: Degraded ecosystems restored to support climate change adaptation in host 
and refugee communities; and 
(c) 
Output 3. Climate-resilient livelihoods practised to increase the capacity of host 
communities and refugees to better adapt in changing climatic conditions. 
9. 
Component 2: Strengthened policies for climate-responsive planning and development: 
(a) 
Output 4: Information on climate change adaptation disseminated and mainstreamed 
into policies, plans and strategies in the United Republic of Tanzania and in 
humanitarian programmes. 
10. 
All activities will be executed, overseen and managed by the Division of Environment of 
VPO. UNHCR will execute activity 2.3, and subactivities 3.2.1 and 3.2.2. Most activities in outputs 
2 and 3 will be co-implemented by the district councils and relevant technical and local partners 
in coordination with VPO.  
11. 
The project is seeking only grant funding from the GCF, with a mix of co-financing in the 
form of an in-kind contribution from UNHCR, with a co-financing ratio of 1:0.24. Considering the 
least developed country (LDC) status of the country and the extreme political, social, economic 
and climate vulnerability of the target beneficiaries, this can be considered satisfactory.  
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis 
Component 1: Increased resilience of ecosystems and people to climate change threats (total cost: 
USD 21,196,079; GCF USD 16,728,786, or 79 per cent) 
12. 
The starting point for all project interventions will be the development of C-LUPs to 
support climate-resilient and ecosystem-based adaptation measures. This is proposed as a 
fundamental step in determining how the interventions described later in outputs 2–4 will be 
planned and delivered. Key steps will include the identification of the specific adaptation 
measures for each village and the intervention designs to account for climate change: activities 
2.3 (flood and erosion control) and 3.2 (rainwater harvesting and irrigation) are clear 
illustrations of this. As each C-LUP identifies village forest areas, it is also an entry point for the 
preparation of community-based forest management (CBFM) plans and for agroforestry 
interventions (output 2).  
13. 
Output 1: Participatory climate-resilient land-use plans developed to support 
ecosystem-based adaptation (total cost: USD 1,602,805; GCF USD 1,602,805, or 100 per 
cent): Land-use planning activities will support overcoming challenges related to the 
relationships between the agropastoral communities (such as the Sukuma people), host 
communities, and refugees. While the host communities in the project areas are composed of 
farmers and livestock keepers (about 70 per cent) and are more tied to the land, the Sukuma 
people are generally not part of community planning and awareness-raising processes. This is 
due to their transient lifestyle and non-inclusion as part of the local social fabric. Currently, the 
lack of land-use planning and management of customary land can lead to conflict between 
farmers and pastoralists. For example, the lack of land assigned for grazing can also lead to 
encroachment onto village and national forest reserves outside camps and villages. The project 
will engage with the Sukuma people and other land-use groups in the land-use planning 
process, and in activities relating to environmental education and strengthening environmental 
management committees with overall processes reflected in the stakeholder engagement plan. 
Overall land-use planning processes at village level serve as the mechanism for designating 
appropriate land use with the participation of users and community members. 
14. 
Another important group are the refugees, who have unique needs. Refugees living in 
the camps located within the Kigoma Region have limited social and economic freedoms (i.e. 
restricted movement beyond the camp). Although they practise agricultural activities to some

=== PAGE 170 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 170 
 
 
 
extent, they are also often reliant on food aid. However, many refugees are now in protracted 
situations where the temporary camps are becoming increasingly more permanent places of 
settlement. Therefore, incorporating climate-resilient approaches and measures (i.e. measures 
to prevent and control flood and erosion, and to increase access to alternative livelihoods) in 
camp planning is key for sustainable camp management.  
15. 
Under output 1, the planning processes for host villages and camps will be separate, 
because these are discrete and well-defined areas, but will be coordinated to maximize 
landscape-level benefits (e.g. stream protection along streams in camp and host community 
land). The participatory land-use planning process under output 1 offers an opportunity to 
allocate grazing areas, in addition to land for crops, woodlots, natural forests, settlements and 
different land uses within host communities. Land-use planning processes serve as the 
mechanism to adjudicate boundaries for land uses, identify management regimes, achieve 
consensus, and negotiate across different and potentially competing interests. The stakeholder 
consultation and lessons learned from implementing these participatory planning measures 
under past initiatives suggest that increased clarity with land-use planning can: (i) successfully 
contribute to resolving community conflicts around land resource use; and (ii) enhance 
community capacity to share resources and resolve differences.  
16. 
The long-term legal outcome of the village land-use planning process is the issuance of a 
certificate of customary right of occupancy. This document specifies rights conferred to a land 
occupier and user following tribal customs and traditions. The project will support this 
relatively small incremental cost to promote project ownership, engender support, and lead to 
sustainability of project outputs and outcomes. The certificate will provide long-term security 
for the villagers, and may be used as collateral for borrowing money to conduct other future 
village-related climate-resilient investments.  
17. 
A conflict sensitivity assessment has been introduced under output 1 and will be 
conducted in the initial stages of project implementation (second quarter, first year). This will 
enable the project partners to gain a more in-depth understanding of potential conflict risks 
linked to the project delivery and to embed suitable mitigation measures in the project 
intervention design. The assessment will cover: (i) conflict related to land-use planning in host 
communities; (ii) tensions between indirect beneficiaries outside the project target area and 
direct beneficiaries; and (iii) risks related to the relocation of refugees from the camps. These 
risks have been assessed by UNHCR during project formulation (see annex 6 of the funding 
proposal).  
18. 
Output 2: Degraded ecosystems restored to support climate change adaptation in 
host and refugee communities (total cost: USD 13,038,743; GCF USD 9,978,657, or 77 per 
cent): Activity 2.1 aims at protecting natural forest systems and enhancing the value that local 
communities place on the ecosystems and their services through CBFM. It aims to reduce 
climate vulnerability and negative pressure on biodiversity in nearby areas by: (i) improving 
forest protection and patrolling; (ii) allocating areas for CBFM; (iii) establishing dedicated 
woodlots for fuelwood use; and, more indirectly, (iv) enhancing ecosystem functions and 
services. Based on the feasibility assessment and economic analysis, the impacts of project 
activities are expected to be largely positive.  
19. 
Activity 2.2 (forest monitoring) is expected to complement the CBFM interventions. 
Afforestation and agroforestry are expected to take place in the host communities. The 
afforestation labour force for the village woodlots will come from the village community 
members and will be mobilized by village leaders. Agroforestry systems are expected to mimic 
forest-like conditions in the long term. Thus, they will recover the ecosystem services that were 
initially lost when forests were converted to agricultural lands. The afforestation and 
agroforestry interventions are also expected to reduce the pressure on the native Miombo 
forests and allow them to regenerate so that they can resiliently experience climate change-
related impacts such as ecological range shifts and alteration of the phenological cycles. Both

=== PAGE 171 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 171 
 
 
 
native and non-native forest species are expected to be used for afforestation. Native species 
will be used for recovery of degraded areas, while non-native species are preferred by locals as 
fodder trees and due to their fast-growth and multipurpose characteristics. While the 
integration of trees and shrubs in crop systems reduces economic vulnerability by diversifying 
production, it also acts as security against total crop failure.  
20. 
Activity 2.3 (flood-reduction infrastructure) is integral to protecting the people living in 
and around the refugee camps. The feasibility study includes a rigorous and detailed analysis of 
flood risks based on the information available. It is reasonably justified to assume that climate 
change is a major factor in increased flood risk. The proposed impact infrastructure measures 
encompass: (i) micro-scale, stone-pitched drainage channels; and (ii) sustainable drainage 
systems. Flood and erosion control measures will also be implemented in the land area of the 
camps, as an integral component of the camp closure and environmental restoration plan, in 
combination of other restoration interventions implemented by UNHCR. The post-consolidation 
restoration activities are expected to result in increasing the resilience of host communities in 
terms of (i) reducing flood and erosion risk for downstream host communities; and (ii) enabling 
district government plans to use the consolidated camp infrastructure to improve host 
communities’ access to basic services.  
21. 
The beneficiaries of this activity are primarily the refugees of the former Mtendeli camp, 
and of the Nduta and Nyarugusu camps, given the local impact of this intervention. This 
complements the larger-scale agroforestry and village land afforestation interventions (activity 
2.2) that will have a wider-ranging impact. It is expected that local communities and refugees 
will be involved in planning and constructing the flood-reduction infrastructure. Building on 
previous solutions in the camps, the effectiveness of stone-pitched drainage channels will be 
enhanced by 16 stone-filled gabions. Further fine-tuning is essential, and this is foreseen during 
the implementation of the project using local institutions and knowledge. The proposed 
sustainable drainage systems involve construction using human-made materials and/or natural 
systems that: (i) tend to preserve existing open spaces; (ii) protect natural systems (including 
groundwater and surface water) for improved drainage and filtration; and (iii) make use of 
existing land-use plans and maintenance to manage stormwater flows. 
22. 
Fostering ownership will be key for ensuring continued maintenance of the proposed 
interventions and to function effectively. The operation and maintenance (O&M) costs basically 
relate to camp-based small-scale flood mitigation infrastructure that will be turned over to the 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA); the rest will be turned over to respective district and regional 
authorities. The water and sanitation humanitarian cluster development agencies will support 
the MoHA in this role. Most of the maintenance tasks required are inspection, cleaning, desilting 
and weeding (for instance, through community labour). Materials for replacement are expected 
to be procured from the local markets. Moreover, an O&M plan has been developed and 
incorporated into the project design.  
23. 
Output 3: Climate-resilient livelihoods practised to increase the capacity of host 
communities and refugees to better adapt in changing climatic conditions (total cost: 
USD 7,094,532; GCF USD 5,687,324, or 80 per cent): Climate-resilient agricultural practices 
under activity 3.1 include: (i) use of cultivars resilient to pests, drought and heat stress; (ii) 
integrated soil management; (iii) integrated soil fertility management; (iv) intercropping; and 
(v) water harvesting and management training. These practices are to be implemented as 
appropriate according to the participatory needs and capacity evaluations undertaken with the 
beneficiaries. These activities will be implemented in alignment with the climate-smart 
agriculture approach and support the farmer field schools on climate-resilient agricultural 
practices. This also includes the use of traditional knowledge through training sessions co-
designed between farmers, district officers and extension schools. Activity 3.1 will also support 
capacity-building of the savings association management offices (SAMOs) to manage savings

=== PAGE 172 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 172 
 
 
 
associations (SAs). SAMOs will support the distribution of agricultural and forestry inputs (e.g. 
seeds, cuttings and tools) to the beneficiaries using existing SAs in host communities.  
24. 
Activity 3.2 aims at providing water for agriculture. The activity consists of four 
subactivities: (i) storing and retaining water; (ii) bringing water to the fields; (iii) training and 
awareness-raising; and (iv) strengthening institutions (water users associations). This is 
supported by an analysis of rainwater harvesting options for the project areas. A detailed 
assessment of the options will be done during implementation, because this depends on the 
micro-scale local conditions (soil, slopes, vegetation, community structure and capacity, among 
others). Treadle pumps are optimal investments given the local conditions.  
25. 
Aside from rainfall, temperature is also considered. Higher temperatures will induce 
higher evaporation from natural lands, leaving less water available for crops. Moreover, crop 
water requirements will rise with increasing temperatures. Selecting the infrastructure (i.e. run-
off harvesting micro-dams, unlined water pans, micro-ponds, micro-solar, and treadle pumps) is 
straightforward because the technologies are simple and easily maintained.  
26. 
Ownership is essential in terms of maintenance and, thus, sustainability. It is 
recommended that training (component 2) concentrates on useful, practical, technical and 
hands-on lessons and practices so that sustainability and maintenance of the infrastructure will 
be secured. 
Component 2: Strengthened policies for climate-responsive planning and development (total cost: 
USD 469,554; GCF USD 469,554, or 100.0 per cent) 
27. 
Output 4 (total cost: USD 469,554; GCF USD 469,554, or 100 per cent): Climate 
change adaptation knowledge and experience will be disseminated and mainstreamed into 
policies, plans and strategies in the United Republic of Tanzania and in UNHCR humanitarian 
programmes. The results of the planning process and physical interventions implemented 
under outputs 1–3 will be used to demonstrate the economic, environmental and social benefits 
and value, thus contributing to the sustainability and scalability of the results and impacts. 
Activities under output 4 include: (i) gathering evidence of the economic benefits of ecosystem-
based adaptation to host communities and refugee populations for use by policymakers and 
planners; (ii) developing communication products for policy and planning mainstreaming; and 
(iii) strengthening the development–humanitarian–climate nexus through the ecosystem-based 
adaptation model.  
28. 
Monitoring and evaluation (total cost: USD 1,421,283; GCF USD 1,421,283, or 100 
per cent): The monitoring and evaluation cost is about 6 per cent of the total project costs and 
is compliant with the Evaluation Policy for the GCF.  
29. 
Project management (total cost: USD 531,730; GCF USD 387,730, or 73 per cent): 
The GCF portion of the project management cost is less than 5 per cent of the total requested 
GCF funding and is compliant with the GCF policy on fees. 
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria 
3.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
30. 
The project aims to reach 1.9 per cent of the total national population and 
approximately half of the population in the Kigoma Region. The project’s direct beneficiaries are 
estimated at 570,341 people who will benefit from the adoption of diversified, climate-resilient 
livelihoods based on the sustainable management, conservation and restoration of ecosystems, 
as well as on climate-smart agriculture practices and CBFM in the Kigoma landscape. These 
interventions will be anchored in land-use planning processes that aim to improve incentives 
for climate resilience for their effective implementation. An additional 711,516 people in the

=== PAGE 173 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 173 
 
 
 
region are also expected to benefit from enhanced knowledge and learning in climate-resilient 
activities as well as from the replication potential of local financial structures such as the SAs. 
The total expected beneficiaries amount to 1,281,857 people. Specific criteria for activities are 
to be used to realize project benefits. For example, the specific villages and land area to be 
included in the CBFM system (as well as for the afforestation and agroforestry under activity 
2.1) will be chosen through the land-use planning process under output 1 following important 
environmental- and social-related indicators. For activity 3.3 (mushroom growing and 
beekeeping activities), vulnerable populations from the host communities will be targeted (e.g. 
female-headed households, people with disabilities). The criteria are deemed to be appropriate 
and are in line with the GCF investment criteria indicators. 
31. 
On the basis of the information provided in the feasibility study, it has been shown that 
the Kigoma Region is experiencing rising temperatures as well as increased rainfall intensity 
and variability, which will contribute to an increase in the frequency and severity of floods and 
prolonged droughts, as well as heat and water stress. Already, observed changes in weather 
patterns have produced climate impacts that have compounded environmental degradation, as 
well as negatively affecting agricultural outputs, the incidence of pests and diseases, forest 
resources and deforestation, surface- and groundwater availability, and soil erosion and 
fertility. Projected climate changes will further exacerbate these problems, together with non-
climatic development drivers of degradation. These changes are threatening local rain-fed and 
ecosystem-reliant livelihoods in the region. In support of these arguments, annex 2 to the 
proposal includes climate information based on the observational data that was used to validate 
the CORDEX regional climate models used for assessing projected climate changes. The 
validation2 assessed seasonal signal, magnitude and discrepancies of the 10 models compared 
with the station data.  
32. 
The climate analysis described in annex 2 notes that the current observational trends 
are projected to increase into the future. The most notable trends are the lowering of early 
season rainfall, and the focusing of rainfall into the mid and, particularly, late season. There is 
also a general increase in extreme precipitation days, leading to an increase in potential flooding 
events. The meteorological drought index (the Standard Precipitation Evapotranspiration 
Index) indicates that the variability in the rainfall will likely lead to more frequent and severe 
drought events. The average maximum and daily extreme temperatures are increasing in all 
seasons. The projections anticipate that the current climate exposure in the camps and host 
communities will continue and will further expose the area to enhanced climate impacts.3  
33. 
The severe gully erosion problem in former Mtendeli camp has significantly increased 
flood risk for downstream communities. The camps are at the top of the watershed.  Hydraulic 
analysis shows that flooding in Kizuvu, Kasanda and Kakonko Districts occurs primarily a result 
of precipitation falling within the camp area itself and flowing down. Both host communities 
and refugee camps reported the occurrence of flooding events and subsequent riverbank and 
other land erosion. Current land use state under the RCP4.5 2050 precipitation future shows an 
average of ~4% additional inundation area. Under the no adaptation scenario, this increase will 
be 4.9% or 380 ha of additional flooding (Annex 2, section 2.2.2). 
34. 
The expected adaptation benefits for host population surrounding Mtendeli include: 
(a) 
Flood risk reduction in villages located downstream of the degraded Mtendeli camp 
area; 
 
2 The validation process determined that the Institut Pierre Simon Laplace IPSL-CM5A-MR was the best-performing 
overall model. This model was therefore used to assess future climate change. 
3 Further information related to climate analyses can be found in the document describing the AE’s discussion with 
independent Technical Advisory Panel.

=== PAGE 174 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 174 
 
 
 
(b) 
Protection of downstream agricultural lands and soils from further flooding, erosion and 
siltation, thereby improving food security; 
(c) 
Reduced siltation in surface water resources in the catchment thus improving water 
quality; 
(d) 
Protection of roads and services infrastructure in the decommissioned camp area and in 
downstream villages; and 
(e) 
Opportunities for expansion of climate resilient productive activities in the restored 
former camp area.  
35. 
Through this project, it is expected that the landscape and ecosystems of the Kigoma 
Region can continue to support their residents, including host communities, refugees and 
agropastoralist groups that pass through the region as this territory faces climate change 
impacts and environmental degradation. Overall, USD 14,191,680, which account of 83 per cent 
of GCF funding, will be spent on targeted interventions in the host communities within a 10-15 
km radius surrounding the camps. 
36. 
Project benefits for the host communities and the agropastoralist groups include: (i) 
improved tenure arrangements and clear land-use demarcation; (ii) increased provision of 
ecosystem services and land productivity; (iii) increased water availability for irrigation during 
dry periods; and (iv) improved food security through improved crop production.  
37. 
Project benefits for the population within the refugee camps include: (i) increased flood 
protection of crops, settlements and assets; (ii) improved health and safety from flood 
protection; (iii) improved nutrition from alternative livelihoods such as mushroom and honey 
production; and (iv) increased income and savings through climate-resilient agriculture.  
38. 
This project aims to enhance the protection of 42,000 hectares of natural ecosystems, 
and to strengthen their response to climate change and environmental degradation. This 
includes 30,000 hectares of forests (dominated by Miombo forests) under CBFM, 2,000 hectares 
under afforestation, and 10,000 hectares under agroforestry (mainly current agriculture lands). 
The project activities (activities 2.3 and 3.2) also expect to have indirect positive impacts in 
terms of increases in ecosystem resilience, given the expected benefits from the flood 
management and rainwater harvesting interventions. These benefits relate to improved 
ecosystem health for the provision of ecosystem services, including: (i) enhanced infiltration; 
(ii) soil nutrient retention; (iii) freshwater ecosystem function; (iv) reduced surface run-off; and 
(v) reduced soil erosion and siltation. Valuation of these benefits and quantification of benefit 
streams is expected to be conducted under output 4 during project implementation. The 
sustainable management and restoration of these ecosystems is deemed critical for enhancing 
the connectivity of the landscape, given that the region hosts high conservation value 
ecosystems that are currently under fragmentation stress. As clearly shown in the baseline and 
supporting evidence, climate change has contributed to the range shift of the Miombo forests. 
These forests are critical for provision of non-timber forest products and ecosystem services for 
the local populations.  
39. 
The project estimates mitigation co-benefits because of the emission reductions 
generated through the avoided deforestation, improved agricultural practices, afforestation and 
agroforestry practices. This estimation has been made using the Ex-Ante Carbon-balance Tool 
(EX-ACT). Sequestration of 762,073 t CO2 eq and emission reductions of 3.2 million t CO2 eq are 
expected throughout the project’s lifetime. These are not included in the logical framework 
(logframe) because the emission reductions are not expected to be reported during project 
implementation. Given the complex setting for project implementation (i.e. refugee camps’ 
priorities and vulnerability conditions), the required investments in resources to track carbon 
sequestration and emission avoidance for reporting purposes may detract resources and focus 
from the core project activities; namely, delivering adaptation interventions to generate

=== PAGE 175 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 175 
 
 
 
sustainable and resilient landscapes. During project implementation, and as part of the forest 
and agroecological monitoring activities, it is recommended that areas be identified where 
carbon accountability could potentially be incorporated or reported through proxies.  
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential  
 
 
 
 
40. 
The project presents a robust climate rationale for adaptation. The climate baseline 
information includes well-referenced scientific information and sources. It also demonstrates 
how the project activities would help reduce vulnerabilities to climate change impacts, and how 
the climate hazards will affect the project’s geographical area (the Kigoma Region, and three 
refugee camps) in terms of value of physical assets and livelihoods, and their nuanced impacts 
to specific beneficiary groups, given the shared landscape. Appropriate geographical and 
temporal scales have been used for planning the project activities; namely, observed historical 
climate trends and expected future climate change combined with the local data available and a 
timescale that matches the project’s lifespan. The project also distinguishes between the drivers 
directly related to climate change (e.g. changes in precipitation and temperature) and non-
climatic drivers (e.g. land-use change).  
41. 
In relation to the interventions, the paradigm shift is demonstrated through different 
project features inherent to the climate, development, and humanitarian contexts, especially in 
community benefit-sharing. Fostering local integration, the project is expected to augment the 
recognition of refugee contributions to sustainable and resilient landscape management in the 
Kigoma Region. Mindful of post-project sustainability, the project intends to incentivize shifts in 
the forestry–water–agriculture sectors within the Kigoma landscape. In the long term, the 
sustainability of the project’s activities is supported by high financial profitability. It is expected 
that farmers will use the Savings Associations support to purchase seedlings from the existing 
tree nurseries once they realize the benefits of including trees in their farming systems.  
Furthermore, to promote livelihood activities that preserve forestry resources the project will 
support beekeeping groups in improving product quality, packaging and marketing to facilitate 
access to the existing honey value chains in the Kigoma region. Such strong financial viability 
contributes to scalability of the activities and increases the potential for future replication by 
private sector sources of finance. Although the exit strategy is backed by the economic and 
financial models and linked to the income-generating activities, a more compelling financial 
mechanism can be developed to further incentivize communities and refugees to continue the 
resilient livelihood activities after the project ends.  
42. 
A key delivery mechanism for the project’s interventions is the use of SAs. These have 
the potential to improve access to sustainable funding mechanisms and to use grant financing in 
a more catalytic way, while also incentivizing smallholder farmers to continue the resilient land-
use practices after the project in the host communities. The SAs operate the accounts or hold the 
money that is not lent or granted to members through physical cash boxes, mobile money, and, 
rarely, in in-bank accounts. SAMOs support the SAs and will be managed by implementing 
partners (e.g. Good Neighbours, Care International, or the United Nations Capital Development 
Fund). It is expected that the project procurement officer will also support the capacity-building 
and monitoring of SAs. Strengthening SAs through the project will build on the experience of the 
United Nations Capital Development Fund in developing digital platforms for data in SAs. The 
lack of penetration of private financial institutions in the project area can be addressed by 
working with the SAs, which typically serve as cooperatives in the region. The SA expansion 
model will ensure that communities have improved access to farm inputs, collectively negotiate 
prices improve marketing of products and have access to microfinance for the continuous 
implementation of climate-smart agriculture. Using SAs will also facilitate tax collection. It is 
recommended that the potential role of SAs and SAMOs for forestry-related activities be 
explored, because these are already locally legitimized models that allow for sectoral 
replication.

=== PAGE 176 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 176 
 
 
 
43. 
In terms of land-use planning, the proposal has an innovative approach, as the long-
term, legal outcome of the VLUP is the issuance of a CCRO. This document specifies rights 
conferred to a land occupier and user following tribal customs and traditions on land. The CCRO 
will provide long-term security for the villagers and may be used as collateral for borrowing 
money to conduct other future village-related, climate-resilient investments. Moreover, by 
adopting a landscape approach with coordinated land-use planning across the project area, the 
project offers innovation and potential to generate new lessons learned in the practice of VLUPs 
in the country. 
44. 
The project will also facilitate the generation of evidence that will then favour scaling up 
and replication based on concrete results and impacts from ecosystem-based adaptation 
interventions in host communities and refugee camps. The valuation of ecosystem services and 
of business models related to non-timber forest products, under different climate conditions as 
a result of implementation of the project activities, is seen as a strategic tool to further catalyse 
private and public funding; and also to inform policies and in particular those related to 
displaced populations and the opportunities for their formal inclusion in the local economy. It is 
seen as a positive that, for project implementation, the AE will work with VPO and UNHCR as 
EEs. The EEs will work through local government agencies and institutions such as the district 
councils as implementing partners. UNHCR remains committed to strengthen approaches and 
interventions that cut across the climate-humanitarian-development nexus. In addition, 
linkages and coordination with the regional administration, local governments, the National 
Land Use Planning Commission, the Tanzanian Forest Service (TFS) and other relevant agencies 
will be involved in all project activities, including the various policy activities under output 4.  
45. 
In summary, the project also has potential for scaling up and replication within the 
target area, in other regions of the country, and in other countries facing similar challenges in 
relation to displaced populations. GCF grants are to be invested in knowledge management and 
sharing, and capacity-building. It is expected that, based on such knowledge management and 
capacity-building, the project will create a positive enabling environment for regional (local and 
subnational) and national stakeholders to replicate and scale up some of the market-based 
solutions and models for income-generating activities. It is also important to better understand 
the role and potential involvement of the private sector in agricultural and forestry value chains 
(including non-timber forest products), expanding opportunities for smallholder farmers and 
refugees to add value to their products and create sustainable financing opportunities, which 
may gradually reduce the need for full grant support in the future. Therefore, this project is not 
seen as a temporary humanitarian relief project but as a long-term strategy to ensure that the 
landscape and ecosystem of the Kigoma Region can continue to support its residents, including 
refugees and host communities. 
3.3 
Sustainable development potential   
 
                     
46. 
The project will create several economic, environment, social and gender benefits. In 
terms of environmental benefits, the project will promote the conservation, restoration and 
sustainable management of 42,000 hectares of ecosystems, encompassing 30,000 hectares of 
forests under CBFM approaches, 10,000 hectares of agroforestry systems implemented, and 
2,000 hectares of lands afforested. These interventions are expected to generate mitigation co-
benefits through the sequestration of 762,073 t CO2 eq and emission reductions of 3.2 million t 
CO2 eq over 20 years. Moreover, the project will deliver significant benefits related to the 
enhancement and maintenance of key hydrological services.  
47. 
The  project aims to reach 35 per cent of the agricultural/crop land in the project area at 
a density of 500/ha for a total of 10,000ha. Spatial land use analysis indicates that there are 
around 28,000 ha of agricultural/crop land. The selection of species to be planed will be made in 
discussion with farmers, in consideration of farmers’ preference of certain non-native species

=== PAGE 177 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 177 
 
 
 
Leucaena (Leucaena diversifolia, Leucaena trichandra) and Calliandra (Calliandra calothyrsus) as 
fodder trees. A species suitability assessment will be carried out further to inform the final 
species selection. 
48. 
The preservation of ecosystem services has wide benefits over the multiple dimensions 
of sustainable development. The project will deliver positive impacts on food security and 
current levels of malnutrition. Greater access to inputs and enhanced water and soil 
management, as supported by the project, will increase agricultural production and reduce 
farmers’ vulnerabilities to climate shocks and stresses. By improving agricultural production, 
increasing the availability of food locally, and by improving households’ income from 
agriculture, access to food will be improved by enabling these beneficiaries to purchase more 
diverse food items. Moreover, through the development of mushroom and beekeeping activities, 
both host communities and refugees will increase their local diet diversity. Project activities 
such as strengthening farmer field schools, establishing market linkages, providing agricultural 
inputs and on-training, and strengthening SAMOs and agroprocessing activities through 
secondary transformation, as well as access to microfinance, will contribute to increased food 
security.  
49. 
Social benefits for host communities include improved tenure arrangements and clear 
land-use demarcation. For refugees, they include improved health and safety through flood 
protection, as well as reduced risk of water- and vector-borne diseases during flood events. 
Overall social benefits relate to improved social cohesion among host communities, refugees 
and agropastoralists.  
3.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
 
50. 
The project targets an LDC with high vulnerability to climate change, as evidenced in the 
funding proposal and feasibility study. The project will be implemented in the Kigoma Region, 
which is one of the poorest regions in the United Republic of Tanzania, with more than 32 per 
cent of its population living below the poverty line and with more than 34 per cent of the 
region’s population underemployed. Moreover, 90 per cent of the region’s population is 
engaged in agriculture, and most smallholder farmers are dependent on rain-fed agriculture, 
which is highly vulnerable to climate change impacts such as damage to crops, soil nutrient loss, 
water availability for irrigation, occurrence of pests and diseases, and crops being pushed 
beyond their thermal limits.  
51. 
The protracted refugee situation began more than 20 years ago, and is unlikely to 
change. Identified recipient needs include the need to address refugees’ unique vulnerabilities, 
as they are almost universally excluded from national or local adaptation plans, education and 
development interventions. Therefore, the project intends to develop a model for meeting the 
climate change adaptation needs of refugees, host communities and agropastoralists sharing the 
same landscape. It is worth noting that repatriation is encouraged but voluntary and remains 
regulated by the Tripartite Commission including the Government of Tanzania, Government of 
Burundi and UNHCR. It is understood that the closure of Mtendeli camp was motivated by 
resource efficiency for service provision in the camps considering the current reduction in 
refugee population in both Mtendeli and Nduta camps. 
52. 
There are several factors limiting the capacity of the United Republic of Tanzania to 
adapt to climate change. These include the need for improved economic opportunities, the need 
to address environmental degradation in rural areas such as the Kigoma Region, and the need 
for financial services and institutional strengthening. The project will improve access to 
financial services by strengthening SAs to deliver climate-resilient interventions and by scaling 
up financial inclusion. The project will address the overarching institutional capacity deficit in 
climate-resilient and land-use planning through capacity-building and transfer of best practices

=== PAGE 178 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 178 
 
 
 
in order to support institutionalization and capitalization of lessons learned and results from 
local to national levels.  
3.5 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
  
 
 
53. 
The project is firmly anchored in government structures and ownership. The 
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania has actively participated in the project design, 
ensuring alignment with its relevant policies and plans. Exchanges and discussions between the 
Secretariat and the national designated authority confirm prioritization by the Government. The 
project will be aligned with the following policies and plans: the intended nationally determined 
contribution of the United Republic of Tanzania; the National Development Plan (2016–2021); 
the National Adaptation Programme of Action (2007); the National Climate Change Strategy 
(2012); and the Guidelines for Integrating Climate Change Adaptation into National Sectoral 
Policies, Plans and Programmes (2012). In particular, the project will contribute with the 
adaptation contributions of the intended nationally determined contribution – aiming to reduce 
climate change impacts related to the spatial and temporal variability of declining rainfall, and 
the frequent droughts and floods, which have long-term implications for all productive sectors 
and ecosystems, particularly the agriculture sector.  
54. 
Although the project does not include separate co-financing from the Government, the 
national designated authority (VPO) has expressed its continued support for and prioritization 
of the project. VPO is the lead EE for this project, working with UNHCR. As mentioned in the 
previous section, both VPO and UNHCR will work through local government agencies and 
institutions such as the district offices to implement this project. The Ministry of Home Affairs 
(MoHA) will play a key role in overseeing the implementation of activities in the refugee camps. 
The Government of the United Republic of Tanzania will be represented at ministerial and 
district levels in the project steering committee, providing oversight and guidance. 
Furthermore, The National Environmental Management Council (NEMC) will ensure compliance 
with relevant environmental laws and regulations as well as providing technical advisory and 
compliance guidance on all environmental aspects of the project. 
55. 
Recently, the United Republic of Tanzania has developed its own Climate-Smart 
Agriculture Guidelines, which identifies several areas where capacity-building interventions are 
required. These areas are well aligned with the interventions proposed by the project. In turn, 
the Guideline contributes to the country’s commitment to create a resilient, climate-smart 
agriculture sector by 2030.  
56. 
The policies of the United Republic of Tanzania towards refugees have been more 
restrictive in recent years. However, globally, it is important to note that the country has, for 
decades, accepted a comparatively high number of refugees compared with the rest of the 
world, particularly given its status as an LDC. While refugees do not currently form part of the 
formal economy, the Kigoma Region will probably continue to host refugees in the long term. 
Given its international legal obligations, the Government is committed to protecting refugees 
and asylum seekers.  
57. 
Risk mitigation measures are in place, particularly to ensure the Government’s capacity 
to continuously adhere to best practices on international refugee. The country’s Refugee 
Response Plan (2019–2020) acknowledges the need for wider efforts within the environment 
and energy sectors, and for strengthened links with climate change adaptation and mitigation 
interventions. For this to materialize, it is crucial to collect evidence on project benefits in terms 
of climate change adaptation and sustainable landscapes in the region.  
58. 
The Government of Tanzania foresees ensuring sustainability thanks to the enhanced 
capacity of local stakeholders built by the project as well as provisions to the District budgets

=== PAGE 179 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 179 
 
 
 
towards financial sustainability of interventions requiring government funding, both during and 
beyond the project duration.   
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
     
59. 
The proposed level of concessionality (based on a GCF grant plus a minimum level of in-
kind co-financing from UNHCR) is based on three underlying characteristics of the proposed 
investment: (i) high poverty level of the recipient country; (ii) the targeted group, which is 
extremely resources-constrained; and (iii) the “public good” nature of the target group. For this 
project, it is not appropriate to make use of reimbursable grants as a financial instrument. A 
limited amount of the GCF funding requested is to be spent on equipment with the potential to 
directly generate revenue. Even then, the benefits will be primarily for subsistence or to 
supplement the incomes of very poor, vulnerable populations, particularly in districts that host 
and share resources with refugees. Any increases in income and revenue will be re-channelled 
back to the operation of SAs in the host communities as well as to support maintenance costs of 
rainwater harvesting and irrigation infrastructure. In the face of climate shocks and their 
impacts, such as low crop yields and damage to property, savings offer an important safety net 
for very poor households. The level of concessionality is properly justified in the economic and 
financial analysis.  
60. 
The project is primarily considered as one to create public goods. It is to be co-financed 
by UNHCR through an in-kind contribution of USD 4.61 million. Non-cash additional funding will 
be generated. It is to be noted that the GCF Co-financing Policy does not set any requirement 
from the Government of the host country to provide co-financing to the project. The project will 
generate substantial positive externalities, including carbon dioxide sequestration and 
reduction in carbon dioxide emissions. However, these are not included in the economic 
analysis, given the scope and approach of the project. The returns generated by the project are 
expected to be high enough to justify the investment from both a financial and an economic 
point of view. The proposal demonstrates the economic viability of the project, with an 
increased net present value (NPV) of USD 6,586,348 million and an economic internal rate of 
return (IRR) of 13 per cent when the value of greenhouse gas mitigation benefits is excluded 
and 20 per cent when all the benefits are included (using the higher discount rate of 6.2 per cent 
in both cases). The results of the economic analysis are robust to sensitivity analysis on costs 
and benefits. The economic analysis shows that the proposed agroforestry activities will be 
economically viable over the 20-year project lifetime, with a high IRR of 50 per cent. The 
proposal also demonstrates cost-effectiveness using a financial model. The project is expected 
to generate an NPV of USD 17,890,067, with an IRR ranging from 16 to 787 per cent. The high 
returns across all the activities reassure the Secretariat of the financial viability in the long-run 
of the activities as well the scalability potential. A sensitivity analysis has shown that the results 
of the financial analysis are robust. 
61. 
While the project will be approximately 20 per cent co-financed, parallel financing is 
expected to be about double the project size. Letters of support from the Royal Danish Embassy 
in Dar es Salaam have been received and presented as annexes to the funding proposal. This 
support demonstrates the overall coherence and complementarity of the project with other 
investments in the Kigoma Region.   
62. 
In terms of cost-effectiveness, benchmarks are provided for water pumped using the 
proposed technology (treadle pumps), which are less expensive than solar-powered pumps (the 
alternative considered). Consequently, the project will install three treadle pumps for every 
solar-powered pump. A comparison benchmark is not reported for other activities. This is 
understandable given the inherent difficulties in providing benchmarks for the proposed 
activities. The project exhibits a cost per beneficiary of USD 33, which is at the low end of 
projects in the GCF portfolio.

=== PAGE 180 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 180 
 
 
 
63. 
In-kind and cash contributions from the Government of Tanzania have not been 
quantified in the proposal as co-finance commitment however, government are expected to be 
provided to enable project implementation and future sustainability of interventions. 
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
64. 
Environmental and social risk category. The project primarily aims to improve the 
resilience of refugee camps in the Kigoma Region and their host communities against the 
threats of climate change through an integrated landscape ecosystem approach. The project will 
have two components. Component 1 will consist of three outputs/objectives: (output 1) scaling 
up and developing new C-LUPs for villages to support ecosystem-based adaptation; (output 2) 
restoring ecosystems to support climate change adaptation by implementing CBFM, 
agroforestry and afforestation in village lands, and flood and erosion control system in densely 
populated areas; and (output 3) provision of and diversification of livelihoods for refugees and 
host communities through agricultural extension, provision of production inputs, water 
management systems, infrastructure support such as water harvesting and micro-irrigation 
systems. Component 2 will focus on strengthening policies for climate-responsive planning and 
development. In addition to mitigation benefits through CO2 sequestration, other potential 
environmental and social co-benefits include enhancing landscape biodiversity and the 
ecosystem services that it provides, and the possibility of addressing potential conflict relating 
to competing use of resources between the host communities and the refugees, such as those 
between farmers and pastoralists. 
65. 
The potential environmental and social (E&S) risks and impacts of the project will come 
mainly from activities under Component 1. The activities involve only potential limited adverse 
environmental or social risks and/or impacts that are few in number, generally site-specific, 
largely reversible, and readily addressed through mitigation measures. The AE has assigned the 
project Category B or moderate risk based on its Environmental, Social, and Economic Review 
Note tool. The Secretariat confirms the E&S risk category (Category B) of the project and that 
the level of risk of the activities is within the level to which the AE is accredited. 
66. 
Safeguards instruments. The AE has submitted an environmental and social 
management system (ESMS) document that contains an environmental management 
framework and a social assessment and management plan which identifies the risks and 
potential impacts of the project activities, and the corresponding mitigation/management 
measures to be adopted. The ESMS document also contains a detailed description of the 
stakeholder engagement plan and the grievance redress mechanism for the project. 
67. 
Compliance with GCF’s environmental and social safeguards standards. The 
paragraphs below identify the key risks/impacts regarding the GCF ESS standards and how they 
are addressed in the proposal.  
68. 
ESS 1: Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and 
impacts.  The AE’s E&S risk screening tool, augmented by items relevant to the GCF ESS 
standards, was used for undertaking the E&S risk screening of the project proposal, which 
underwent adequate assessment and mitigation planning. The ESMS document includes 
substantive descriptions of the environmental and social profile of the project area, assessment 
of the E&S risks and impacts, and the corresponding mitigation/management plans. For the site-
specific project activities, the ESMS outlines the process for screening and assessing the 
project’s individual site-specific ground activities. During project implementation, each site-
specific project activity under outputs 2 and 3 would be subject to: (i) E&S risk screening using 
the AE’s Environmental, Social and Economic Screening process augmented with requirements

=== PAGE 181 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 181 
 
 
 
for GCF projects; (ii) review and continuous validation (every six months) of the screening 
results by the Safeguards and Gender Officer; (iii) securing the necessary permits and 
certifications from the Government of Tanzania; (iv) determining the need for and preparation 
of, specific activity-level assessments and management planning; and (v) implementing 
mitigation measures and reporting.  
69. 
ESS 2: Labour and working conditions.  The GCF standard on labour and working 
conditions applies to activities under output 2 such as implementing CBFM schemes, 
agroforestry, afforestation and construction of small-scale water management structures; and 
under output 3, which may involve construction of small structures for beekeeping and 
mushroom production. The risks including prevalent labour issues in the project area, and 
occupational health and safety concerns, have been adequately assessed and corresponding 
mitigation measures have been identified. “Labor Management Guidelines” have been 
incorporated into the ESMS which include the assessment of contractors’ processes and 
capacities for managing health and safety, and for protecting labour and other rights. 
70. 
ESS 3: Resource efficiency and pollution prevention. The project would involve use 
of water resources for irrigation of farmland and nurseries. There is thus a risk of reduced 
water resources in the project area due to water pumping, surface run-off and rainwater 
harvesting. However, this risk is assessed to be low because the small water infrastructure to be 
installed would generally be aimed at efficiently managing water resources by increasing water 
availability, reducing flooding and increasing infiltration through restoration of degraded lands, 
improving soil stability and providing rainwater harvesting infrastructure to reduce the 
pressure on surface and groundwater resources. In terms of pollution, the small-scale 
construction activities could result in temporary generation of dusts, noise and sediments that 
may pollute the waterways during construction, while nursery operations and agroforestry may 
require the use of pesticides and/or agrochemicals. These risks have been adequately assessed 
and mitigation measures are identified in the ESMS. Although the project will not promote the 
use of pesticides/herbicides and none will be provided by the project to community members, a 
“Pesticide Management Guidelines” has also been prepared and incorporated into the ESMS.  
71. 
ESS 4: Community health, safety and security. The project’s risks and potential 
impacts on community health, safety and security include: (i) potential exposure of project 
communities to water-based and/or vector-borne from water capture/impounding structures 
and the forests; (ii) exposure of communities to communicable diseases from workers carrying 
out the small-scale construction works; (iii) potential increase of incidence of gender-based 
violence (GBV) and sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment; (iv) possible conflicts between 
host villagers and refugees in relation to project delivery, resulting in security concerns; (v) 
exposure of residents, especially children, to safety hazards relating to project water 
management structures and accident hazards during construction; and (vi) possible exposure of 
communities to pesticides. All of these risks/impacts have been adequately addressed in the 
ESMS. A pre-approval conflict sensitivity analysis was conducted that will be further detailed at 
the start of project implementation during the land-use planning process and to assess and 
mitigate conflicts related to tensions between the indirect beneficiaries outside the project 
target area and direct beneficiaries within the target area. The analysis will also be evaluated at 
project mid-term to assess the effectiveness of the conflict mitigation measures. 
72. 
ESS 5: Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement. Although the project will not 
pursue activities that would intentionally cause physical displacement (i.e. loss of homes) or 
economic displacement (i.e. loss of a substantial portion of livelihood), the following risks may 
remain: 
(a) 
Possible loss of access to land due to formalization of land tenure. The project will support 
formalization of traditional tenure (i.e. issuance of Certificates of Customary Rights of 
Occupancy). The formalization of ownership rights is expected to improve tenure 
security for current occupants/users (including refugees) who are engaged in informal

=== PAGE 182 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 182 
 
 
 
land-use arrangements with recognized landowners. However, the risk of displacement 
remains for current informal occupants/claimants who might be displaced in favour of 
the deemed rightful claimant. This risk is related to the risk of setting off new or stirring 
up old land boundary conflicts. The village-based process of formalization within the 
highly participatory C-LUP process, plus the village-based land adjudication system, will 
greatly manage and reduce this risk; 
(b) 
Possible economic/income loss due to land use restrictions under C-LUP. The purpose of all 
land-use plans is inevitably to restrict or regulate land use for a particular site or zone. 
Hence, some existing land uses, such as pasture areas and sloping land plots, may be 
restricted or changed. Baseline information and the stakeholder consultation also 
indicate that there are current land uses along the riverbanks that may be changed or 
restricted. Participatory planning that involves all stakeholders (i.e. farmers, pastoralists 
and other land users) reduces this risk. However, “voluntary restriction” is generally 
difficult to ascertain even in community-based planning because individual land users 
could be pressured by their peers or group leaders. The planning process has to adopt 
some objective criteria for ensuring that restriction is voluntary. The project has to 
ensure that any losses should be compensated or otherwise waived by the individual. 
The ESMS provides guidelines and options as to how individuals or groups who would 
lose access can be compensated, should this become necessary; and 
(c) 
Possible loss of land and assets attached to land due to small infrastructure. The project 
will involve construction of small public/communal infrastructure and facilities (e.g. 
water harvesting, water reservoirs, irrigation canals, drainage structures, flood control 
structures, pumps and nurseries). While these activities may not cause involuntary 
resettlement impacts (i.e. loss of homes and/or loss of livelihoods), they would likely 
require acquisition of rights-of-way, easements and piece of lands for the facilities, 
resulting in losses of land and assets. However, a compensation framework is included 
in the ESMS to address this risk.  
73. 
ESS 6: Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural 
resources. The project is aimed at restoring ecosystems to improve resilience of the landscape 
to both climate change-driven hazards and non-climate drivers and hence is expected to provide 
a positive impact on biodiversity and habitats. However, the following potential risks have been 
identified: (i) risk of invasive species or adverse impacts of introduction of non-native species in 
afforestation activities and fuelwood plantations; (ii) risk of indirect impacts of project 
interventions on the Moyowosi Game Reserve and Malagarasi-Moyowozi Wetlands, which is a 
Ramsar site, and the Kigosi Game Reserve (IUCN CAT IV); (iii) possible fragmentation of fish 
habitat due to in-stream structures; and (iv) risk of impacts on ecosystems from possible 
intensification of agricultural production. Nevertheless, the ESMS has adequately addressed 
these risks as follows: 
(a) 
Risk associated with introduction of non-native species. A species suitability assessment 
will be conducted within the first year of the project. Fast-growing and highly 
productive species will be prioritized – which will help to meet the fuelwood demand 
and, by doing so, reduce the pressure on the native Miombo forest. Options for species, 
from an SNV Netherlands Development Organization project, include Calliandra 
calothyrsus, Sesbania sesban, Leucaena leucocephala, Maesopsis eminii and Senna siamea. 
Other species to be considered include Acacia auriculiformis, A. crassicarpa, A. 
leptocarpa, A. mangium, Albizia lebbeck, Glyricidia sepium and Leucaena pallida; 
(b) 
Risk of indirect impacts on the protected areas. Restoration and conservation in forest 
reserves within a 10 km radius to the Moyowosi Game Reserve would be undertaken. 
There would be no afforestation with fast-growing species for fuelwood in this area. The 
project team will monitor any potential impacts of the rainwater harvesting structures

=== PAGE 183 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 183 
 
 
 
on streamflow into the wetlands by monitoring extraction rates and streamflow over 
time relative to a baseline that will be determined at the start of the project; 
(c) 
Risk of impact on passage of fish from in-stream structures. The in-stream structures 
would be designed to incorporate fish ramps to allow for passage of fish. This will, 
however, need to be monitored closely to ensure the effectiveness of the measures and 
provide for adaptive management should that be necessary to achieve the expected 
outcomes; and 
(d) 
Risk of impact on ecosystems from more intensive agriculture. The implementation of 
activities under activity 3.1 (climate-resilient agriculture) will be consistent with the 
Climate Smart Agriculture Guidelines of Tanzania that promote sustainable practices 
and will be done in coordination with the Agricultural District Officer. Sustainable 
practices will be promoted in the Farmer Field School approach.  
74. 
GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples. The ESMS provides 
an analysis of the different groups that might be considered under the scope of the GCF 
Indigenous Peoples Policy. It concludes that it is unlikely that these groups would be based in 
the Kigoma Region where project activities are to be undertaken, thus a separate Indigenous 
Peoples plan is not essential and the ESMS provides a sufficient framework to consider relevant 
social issues. The ESMS further highlights the presence of agropastoralists, mainly from a 
majority Sukuma community that may pass through Kigoma Region. The project will engage 
with agropastoralists and other land-users in the land-use planning process, and in activities 
relating to environmental education and strengthening environmental management committees 
and overall in the project, as will be reflected in the stakeholder engagement plan. The land-use 
planning process provides opportunity to allocate grazing areas and, by engaging in this 
process, the stakeholders, including agropastoralists, will have an opportunity to participate in 
mechanisms to adjudicate boundaries for land uses, identify management regimes, achieve 
consensus and negotiate across different interests. Crucial to the opportunity will be ensuring 
that the different community stakeholders are identified, engaged and consulted throughout the 
process, including in conflict sensitivity analyses. In line with its roles and functions, the GCF 
Indigenous Peoples Advisory Group is available to provide advice to the AE. 
75. 
ESS 8: Cultural heritage. The ESMS provides for strict avoidance of activities that affect 
cultural heritage sites or structures. Moreover, only small physical structures such as flood 
control infrastructure and small-scale irrigation infrastructure will be constructed by the 
project. Nevertheless, since there are small-scale excavation activities that are expected, a 
section on Cultural Heritage and Chance Finds Procedures has been incorporated in the ESMS to 
guide the project should it affect cultural heritage sites.  
76. 
Sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment. The revised GCF Environmental and 
Social Policy adopted by decision B.BM-2021/18 requires safeguarding from sexual 
exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEAH) in GCF-financed activities. The AE provided SEAH 
safeguarding in its submission for this funding proposal. The ESMS of the project identifies a 
number of SEAH issues including sexual and GBV that may occur in the project and put in 
measures to prevent and address/mitigate the same. Among others, the project will prevent 
SEAH and/or GBV in alignment with the United Nations policies and practices for the 
prevention of sexual and GBV and will embark on various awareness and capacity-building 
initiatives on the subject matter. These policies are complementary to the GCF SEAH provisions. 
The project will further develop project-level guidelines and contractual requirements related 
to SEAH and its investigation and disciplinary procedures. The AE recognizes that incidences of 
sexual GBV in the refugee operations in Kigoma is high, especially rape cases. Likewise, the 
inter-agency standard operational procedures and protocols will be applied in managing the 
potential risk of SEAH and to guide SEAH complaints handling and grievance mechanisms. In 
addition to this, the AE will work closely with other stakeholders including the Ministry of 
Community Development, Gender and Women as per the National Plan of Action to end

=== PAGE 184 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 184 
 
 
 
Violence against Women and Children in Tanzania; protection committees at village, district and 
national levels; and One Stop Centers for case referrals among other service providers and 
collaborators. Overall, the project is in alignment with GCF SEAH provisions. 
77. 
Implementation arrangements. In addition to the project steering committee, which 
provides the high-level project direction, a project management unit will serve as the secretariat 
at the operational level and will be staffed by technical experts including on safeguards. A 
Safeguards and Gender Specialist (including a part-time international expert consultant) will be 
engaged and will be responsible for identifying emerging risks, developing adaptive 
management and mitigation measures, including monitoring and reporting on the social and 
environment safeguards plan. The management plans will also be built into the contracts and 
agreements with contractors and implementing partners of the project. 
78. 
Stakeholder engagement and grievance redress mechanism. The AE has submitted 
a stakeholder engagement plan (annex 7 of the funding proposal “Consultations Summary and 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan”). The document describes in detail the results of the series of 
consultations conducted on the project and provides a stakeholder mapping/analysis as well as 
a detailed plan for continued engagement with stakeholders during the project implementation. 
For individual project activities during implementation, the ESMS provides for the timely 
disclosure of all project-level and activity-level safeguard instruments and other relevant 
information locally by the project’s safeguards and gender specialist. In line with the GCF 
Indigenous Peoples Policy, the GCF Indigenous Peoples focal point will be available for 
assistance at any stage, including before a claim has been made. 
79. 
The ESMS provides for the establishment of a grievance redress mechanism that will 
build on an existing UNHCR feedback and complaints mechanism. The AE also has its 
Stakeholder Response Mechanism, which allows stakeholders to provide feedback or report 
concerns, complaints or grievance issues about its projects.4 The ESMS also refers to the GCF 
Independent Redress Mechanism where stakeholders can file requests and complaints through 
a dedicated website. In line with the GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy, the GCF Indigenous Peoples 
focal point will be available for assistance at any stage, including before a claim has been made. 
4.2 
Gender policy 
80. 
The AE has provided a gender assessment and gender action plan and, therefore, 
complies with the requirements of the Gender Policy of the GCF.  
81. 
The gender assessment demonstrates the existence of an enabling environment 
conducive to promoting gender equality and women’s empowerment in the country. The 
Ministry of Community Development, Gender and Children was established, and a number of 
policies and legislative acts have been passed, such as the Land Act and the Village Land Act, as 
well as two key poverty reduction strategy papers, MKUKUTA I and II. Such development plans 
and strategies recognize the importance of gender equality and women’s empowerment. In 
addition, the National Plan of Action to end Violence against Women and Children in Tanzania 
aims to include all people, including refugees, in its effort to curb and address violence against 
women in the country and the refugee camps.  
82. 
The gender assessment was based on a desk review and stakeholder consultation 
among both the refugees and the Tanzanian communities surrounding the refugee camps. The 
assessment covered the differentiated issues for women in the refugee camps and host 
communities. It highlighted the difference in the challenges for women and men within the 
refugee camps as well as the differences in challenges in the host community between women 
 
4 Feedback and stakeholder responses can be sent through the following website https://www.unep.org/about-un-
environment/why-does-un-environment-matter/un-environment-project-concern.

=== PAGE 185 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 185 
 
 
 
and men. While in both cases women are disproportionately affected, refugee women seem to 
have many more challenges in coping with the climate change-induced challenges to their 
nearby environment. Similarly, despite a supportive policy environment, Tanzanian women 
continue to struggle in accessing land and land rights. Cultural and religious institutions tend to 
favour men and perpetuate views that men are the sole owners of the land, and have and 
control power over the income generated. This could be a source of conflict within the home if 
women attempt to control land. Such views and practices leave women with little or no 
incentive to invest and improve the land, while on the other hand women do not possess the 
resources and inputs required to ensure resilience and resilient agricultural practices. Further, 
in the refugee camps, economic activities, such as selling food aid rations, non-food items, 
tailoring/embroidering, small-trade barbering and hairstyling, cooking, soap-making, and 
repairs, are mostly done by women while men are engaged mostly in carpentry or masonry in 
addition to labour-intensive agricultural activities.   
83. 
There are GBV risks within and outside of the refugee camps. Refugees in the camps are 
exposed to violence, as well as when they leave the camps to search for work, to trade, or to 
gather firewood; and their children inside the camps are at risk of GBV, sexual exploitation and 
abuse, and early or forced marriage. Refugees are restricted and endure congested living 
conditions and face restrictions on cash-based interventions and livelihood opportunities. This 
forces some to engage in risky coping mechanisms or behaviours (transactional sex, illegally 
travelling outside of camp boundaries, or engaging in prohibited livelihoods) to support their 
households, maintain food and energy security, and obtain necessary resources. For both the 
host and refugee communities, firewood collection is the responsibility of women and, for 
refugees, with travel limited to within a 4-km buffer around the camps, which falls short of 
fulfilling their needs as a result of depletion, women are forced to travel further beyond this 
boundary.  
84. 
The assessment indicates that gender issues in forestry, agriculture and land use are 
critical challenges and need to be addressed. Regarding land, issues of insecure land tenure and 
exclusion from access and control over land exist, compounded with gender-blind policies, and 
discriminatory social and cultural norms. Further, challenges to women exist in relation to 
access to land use and agricultural practices while access to water and forestry is limited. 
Women also have fewer skills and less access to information and knowledge, which limits their 
ability to diversify their livelihoods in a manner that is climate resilient. In addition to 
productive work, women bear the burden of unpaid care and domestic work, which puts greater 
demands on time available for collecting fuelwood and water. Women tend to have lower 
productivity and incomes, rendering them economically weaker and dependent. This in turn 
forces some women to engage in behaviours and practices that they do not want to engage in. 
The assessment is thorough and clearly outlines challenges and opportunities; while the project 
puts in place mechanisms to address causes of gender inequalities within the refugee and host 
communities as they become resilient to climate change-related challenges.  
85. 
The AE has provided a gender action plan and therefore complies with the requirement 
of the GCF Gender Policy. The gender action plan includes activities addressing the challenges to 
women in the refugee camps and in host communities. The plan includes baseline, indicators, 
targets (for host and refugees), timelines and budgets. Activities will ensure women engage in 
decision-making processes and project activities. Activities aim to enhance capacities and skills 
while creating opportunities for access to assets transferred to refugee and host community 
women. In addition, activities ensure women can benefit from accessing climate-smart 
agriculture training, and inputs and irrigation investments; improved environmental 
management; and conservation of water sources. The land-use planning and forestry-related 
interventions will support women to better manage natural resources, and reduce their work 
burden and the time needed for collecting fuelwood; while providing crèche facilities and 
moving meetings to more convenient times for women to participate have been factored in to 
the project. Moreover, for refugee women, exposure to the threat of GBV and other forms of

=== PAGE 186 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 186 
 
 
 
violence is expected to be reduced when conflicts over fuelwood and deforestation have been 
mitigated, and when increased engagement in alternative livelihoods activities contributes to 
increased economic empowerment. Further collaboration with existing mechanisms and 
institutions addressing GBV will be maintained, while awareness and sensitization on GBV will 
be mainstreamed in various training programmes. The project will have a safeguards and 
gender officer who will support the implementation of the gender action plan and will engage in 
the grievance redress mechanism and its implementation, including on GBV. The AE is expected 
to ensure the officer is always available to support the implementation of the gender action plan 
and the mainstreaming of gender throughout project implementation.   
4.3 
Risks  
4.3.1. 
Overall proposal assessment (high risk) 
86. 
This project aims to address the need for climate change adaptation for both host 
communities and refugees in the Kigoma Region of the United Republic of Tanzania. The project 
targets four outputs: (i) participatory, climate-resilient land-use planning in refugee camps and 
surrounding villages; (ii) restoration of degraded ecosystems; (iii) climate-resilient agriculture 
and livelihood diversification; and (iv) information on climate change adaptation disseminated 
and mainstreamed into policies, plans and strategies in the country and in humanitarian 
programmes. The total project cost is USD 23.62 million, of which it is proposed that GCF 
provide USD 19.01 million in grants. Co-financing will be provided by UNHCR (the EE) in the 
form of an in-kind contribution of USD 4.61 million. The project is exposed to political risks 
related to government policies towards refugees. The AE has identified a high probability of 
such risks: these risks can weaken the project’s climate impact and will therefore need active 
adaptive management from an early stage.  
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current project (high 
risk) 
87. 
The AE (UNEP) has an extensive track record of implementing climate change projects 
through, for example, the Least Developed Countries Fund, the Special Climate Change Fund, the 
Adaptation Fund, and bilateral funds such as those of the European Union. UNEP has a regional 
presence and operations. At the AE level, the task manager, with the support of the portfolio 
manager, will take the lead role in monitoring risks in cooperation with the EEs. Accordingly, 
the Secretariat requires the AE to confirm that any political risks arising out of the project will 
be borne by the AE.  
88. 
VPO will act as the lead EE of the project. VPO has experience with projects of a similar 
size and scope with bilateral and multilateral donors, including the Asian Development Bank 
and the International Fund for Agricultural Development, and the AE. VPO will execute project 
activities through various mechanisms, including direct execution by the project management 
unit (PMU), and subsidiary agreements with district governments and TFS, as well as contracts 
with service providers and consultants.  UNHCR, one of the EEs, will execute the project by 
overseeing and managing the implementing partners involved in the implementation of project 
interventions. UNHCR has three field offices in the project area (in Kigoma city, Kasulu and 
Kibondo) that work with the MoHA and local government authorities. In addition to its 
humanitarian activities, UNHCR has a track record of supporting local communities with climate 
change projects, including in forestry, water conservation and sustainable energy. As reported 
by the AE, UNHCR Tanzania has provision for a senior-level, in situ risk adviser, whose work 
covers all facets of risks that the operations may face, including political risks.  
4.3.3. 
Project-specific execution risks (high risk)

=== PAGE 187 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 187 
 
 
 
89. 
Political risk: The AE and UNHCR have identified a number of risks related to 
government policy. These risks relate to implementation by the United Republic of Tanzania of 
its asylum policy in line with international standards; access for asylum seekers fleeing conflict 
from neighbouring countries; risks related to voluntary repatriation; refugee data; and an 
overall restrictive protection environment. Through its own risk analysis UNHCR notes that 
government policies towards refugees will continue to be restrictive. Materialization of political 
risk or civil unrest could create a reputational risk for the AE, UNHCR and GCF. Options for 
halting disbursements in the event of adverse circumstances could be limited because of the 
humanitarian consequences of stopping the flow of funds. Some comfort can be derived from 
the assessment by the AE that the project will, upon completion, contribute to the recognition 
that refugees can contribute to host communities, and from the UNHCR’s active engagement 
with local authorities. However, these points would not substantially reduce the political risk. 
The project implementation period is five years; any adverse changes in government policies 
pertaining to refugees before the project implementation has been completed could erode the 
project’s climate impact. The lead EE of the project is a government entity, which could reduce 
political risks but could also add complexity in case of political risks materializing. The 
Secretariat has undertaken an interdivisional analysis and acknowledges that the project needs 
an active adaptive management approach from the outset.  
90. 
O&M: post-implementation O&M costs are not included in project costs and are to be 
borne by the asset owners. Constructed assets such as small-scale flood mitigation 
infrastructure in the camps will be turned over to MoHA. Water-harvesting infrastructure in the 
host communities will be turned over to district and regional authorities, with regular 
maintenance activities to be performed by water users’ associations, which will rely on SAs or 
devise schemes for small user fees to support O&M. Payment structures and viability of these 
schemes will be determined during project implementation. 
91. 
Land use: Formalization of land tenure could lead to the disturbance of informal 
arrangements between refugees and host communities. However, the EE does not foresee this 
because host communities will have better knowledge of where they can enter into agreements 
with refugees on diverse land-use practices in respect of village by-laws. In addition, there may 
be risks of displacing economic activities and livelihoods that are incompatible with climate 
adaptation and environmental objectives, such as farming along floodplains and within national 
and village forest reserves. Suitable alternative areas will be identified, such as communal 
village land, and affected populations will have the option to be engaged in project activities 
under output 3 and employment on the small-scale water infrastructure that is to be built. The 
benefits received by host communities in the project could create a source of tension with other 
communities outside the project area. Close monitoring is advised on progress on land-use 
agreements.  
4.3.4. 
Compliance (medium risk) 
92. 
The United Republic of Tanzania is not the subject of any current United Nations 
Security Council (UNSC) resolutions. UNEP, as the AE, has confirmed that no individual or entity 
that is listed on any UNSC sanctions list, including the United Nations Consolidated Sanctions 
list, will be involved in any manner with the project or its activities, either as a counterparty or 
implementer, or as a beneficiary.  
93. 
UNEP has stated that the project will be operated in accordance with United Nations 
regulations, rules and policies, including the Anti-Fraud and Anti-Corruption Framework of the 
United Nations Secretariat and UNEP’s Misconduct and Anti-Fraud Policies. The financial 
management and procurement for the project will be guided by United Nations financial 
regulations, rules and practices, as well as UNEP’s Operations Manual. UNEP will also closely 
monitor the financial management of the project using the established monitoring and evaluation

=== PAGE 188 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 188 
 
 
 
procedures and financial reporting mechanism, including an annual audit. UNEP will also 
establish internal controls and project fund management.   
94. 
According to UNEP, the risk of GCF proceeds being utilized for money laundering or 
terrorist financing has been assessed as low, and will be mitigated through appropriate legal 
instruments which will include warranties and caveats by the EEs (i.e. VPO and UNHCR).  
95. 
Project cooperation agreements (PCAs) between UNEP and VPO, and between UNEP and 
UNHCR, will include warranties and caveats by the EEs on required anti-fraud and anti-
corruption safeguards, guided by the Anti-Fraud and Anti-Corruption Framework of the United 
Nations Secretariat, as well as the GCF Policy on Prohibited Practices. In turn, VPO and UNHCR 
will require its implementing entities to ensure compliance with the same policies. 
96. 
UNEP has also explained that, in line with the standards of its internal practices, it will 
provide training on prohibited practices, anti-money laundering and counter-financing of 
terrorism to the EEs as part of the project inception.  
97. 
VPO will act as the lead EE for this project, ensuring alignment with national policies and 
plans as well as complementarity with other existing adaptation projects and Tanzania’s 
national adaptation plan (NAP) process. As the lead EE, VPO will oversee overall project 
implementation and will be accountable to UNEP for the effective use of resources during 
project implementation.  
98. 
The PCA signed between VPO and UNEP will serve as a legal instrument (the Subsidiary 
Agreement) to regulate the obligations of the parties. VPO will be responsible for the efficient 
disbursement of financial resources for the implementation of the designated project activities 
and responsible for the coordination with relevant partners, and compilation of the required 
information from all implementing partners, including UNHCR as secondary EE, to provide 
consolidated project progress reports and expenditure reports to UNEP. 
99. 
Execution by UNHCR is necessary to leverage its mandate on refugee and host 
community relations and its convening power among the different actors on the ground. As 
secondary EE, UNHCR will execute GCF-funded project activities in collaboration with MoHA 
and VPO. UNHCR will be responsible for overseeing and managing the partners involved in 
implementing the designated project interventions, prioritizing implementation by local 
government authorities where possible. 
100. 
UNHCR has in place a Strategic Framework for the Prevention of Fraud and Corruption 
and a policy on anti-money laundering, which also encompasses counter-terrorism financing 
measures. Although fraud and corruption remain as risks, mitigation measures are in place and 
constantly strengthened. UNHCR Tanzania is one of the UNHCR operations with senior-level 
risk management capacity in situ as a means to ensure the operation strengthens anti-fraud and 
corruption measures. 
101. 
UNEP has provided its capacity assessment of VPO in its position as lead EE on the 
project. Although Tanzania has adopted dedicated legislation against money laundering and 
terrorist financing (ML/TF), UNEP’s assessment of “moderate risk” for anti-money laundering 
and counter-financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) due diligence is of some concern. 
102. 
VPO appears to have sufficient capacity at the organizational level and in the capital city, 
Dodoma, to support project implementation. However, most activities will be conducted in 
Kigoma, 690 km away from Dodoma, which is why the funding proposal states that the PMU will 
be based in Kigoma and supported by VPO staff in Dodoma. Furthermore, experience with 
previous UNEP projects with VPO indicates challenges related to recruitment, staff replacement 
and backstopping.

=== PAGE 189 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 189 
 
 
 
103. 
According to the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) Mutual Evaluation Report (MER) 
on Tanzania5 published in June 2021, and based on the National Risk Assessment (NRA) Action 
Plan6 conducted by Tanzania in 2015–2016, national “AML/CFT policies to address identified 
ML/TF risks and its activities do not adequately address the identified ML/TF risks.” The NRA 
Action Plan is divided into three categories: high priority; medium priority; and quick wins. 
Within the high priority category are the following planned activities:  
(a) 
Create AML awareness; 
(b) 
Amend the AML Act; 
(c) 
Amend the Anti-Money Laundering and Proceeds of Crime Act (for Zanzibar) 
(AMLPOCA); 
(d) 
Amend the AML and AMLPOCA Regulations; 
(e) 
Review the AML/CFT Guidelines; 
(f) 
National Identification Authority to fast-track issuance of national identification 
documents; 
(g) 
Employ adequate AML/CFT supervision staff; 
(h) 
Collect the required AML/CFT data and statistics for mutual evaluation; and 
(i) 
Formulate policy and conduct a national ML/TF risk assessment.  
(j) 
URT has conducted AML/CFT awareness for reporting entities; 
(k) 
LEAs, judiciary, and Members of Parliament. 
104. 
Overall, the FATF MER has identified significant gaps in the legal framework, and the 
NRA Action Plan has not put much focus on areas of high ML/TF vulnerabilities and risks 
identified. Notwithstanding this, competent authorities have continued to take action to address 
some of the identified risks. In an effort to address the abovementioned capacity gaps, UNEP has 
confirmed that it will ensure that the PCA requires VPO to: 
(a) 
Take steps to ensure compliance with the Anti-Fraud and Anti-Corruption Framework of 
the United Nations Secretariat, as well as the GCF Policy on Prohibited Practices; and 
(b) 
Seek clearance from UNEP prior to final selection or contracting of personnel (including 
subcontractors). 
105. 
UNEP confirms that there will be no planned disbursements or distribution of cash, 
vouchers, commodities, or other items of value directly or indirectly to beneficiaries as part of 
any activities in this project. Materials for the project implementation include agricultural hand 
tools, seeds, construction of small-scale flood infrastructure, environmental monitoring devices, 
and the like. These have low likelihood of being misused. Drone equipment will be provided to 
TFS, a government agency. Use of equipment and prevention of misuse will be embedded in a 
memorandum of understanding with TFS. 
106. 
The PCA obliges VPO and UNHCR to ensure that any materials or technology procured 
are utilized in line with the approved GCF project. In turn, VPO and UNHCR agreements with 
implementing entities will include the same requirement. UNEP, VPO and UNHCR’s reporting 
and review mechanisms are expected to identify any unauthorized use of funds. 
107. 
UNEP states that it adheres to United Nations regulations, rules and policies related to 
whistleblower protection, as documented in “Administrative issuance on addressing 
discrimination, harassment, including sexual harassment and abuse of authority” 
 
5 Available at https://www.fatf-gafi.org/media/fatf/documents/reports/mer-fsrb/ESAAMLG-Mutual-Evaluation-
Report-Tanzania-June-2021.pdf. 
6 Available at https://www.fiu.go.tz/TanzaniaNRA(Main)ReportDec2016.pdf.

=== PAGE 190 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 190 
 
 
 
(ST/SGB/2019/8).7 UNHCR’s policies are also compliant with United Nations rules, regulations 
and policies. Specifically, UNHCR handles allegations of misconduct through its independent 
Inspector General’s Office. 
108. 
The UNEP Environmental and Social Sustainability Framework and Stakeholder 
Response Mechanism provide an avenue for stakeholders to provide feedback or report 
concerns, complaints or grievance issues on proposed or ongoing UNEP projects.  
109. 
UNEP has confirmed that it is committed to avoiding or minimizing unintended harm to 
stakeholders that may directly or indirectly result from its work. Stakeholders are strongly 
advised to make an effort to raise any concerns, complaints or grievances to the relevant UNEP 
Project Manager, its local project partners, consultants or the related UNEP Regional Office. 
Stakeholders may also submit their grievance through the UNEP website. 
110. 
Recommended risk rating: The Secretariat has conducted a review of the project in 
accordance with relevant GCF Board approved policies and does not find any material issue or 
deviation with respect to compliance issues. Based on available information for this funding 
proposal, the Secretariat has determined a compliance risk rating of “medium” and has no 
objection to this proposal proceeding. 
111. 
Although the FATF MER and NRA Action Plan suggest potential concern regarding 
Tanzania’s (and hence the VPO’s) capacity with respect to AML/CFT risks, UNEP has identified 
such risks through its capacity assessment of VPO and provided sufficient assurance that 
compliance-related risks can be appropriately mitigated via PCAs, with warranties and caveats 
supporting transparency and oversight.  
4.3.5. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk) 
112. 
In the event of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration 
in terms of results areas and single proposal would not be material.  
4.3.6. 
Recommendation 
113. 
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision. 
Summary risk assessment 
Risk assessment  
Overall project/programme 
High 
Driven by the political and 
reputational risks of the project, the 
project necessitates close 
monitoring by the EE, AE and GCF 
from the start of project 
implementation. 
AE/EE capability to implement the 
project/programme 
Medium 
Project-specific execution 
High 
GCF portfolio concentration 
Low 
Compliance 
Medium 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
114. 
UNEP will be the AE, and the United Republic of Tanzania acting through its VPO and 
UNHCR will function as the EEs for this project. 
 
7 Available at https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/3827518.

=== PAGE 191 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 191 
 
 
 
115. 
As the AE, UNEP will carry out fiduciary and safeguards oversight and provide the 
necessary scientific expertise and technical support to the project formulation, start-up, 
implementation, evaluations and closure. 
116. 
VPO will act as the lead EE of the project, ensuring alignment with the country’s national 
policies and plans as well as complementarity with other existing adaptation projects and 
Tanzania’s NAP process. As the lead EE, VPO will oversee overall project implementation and 
will be accountable to the AE for the effective use of resources during project implementation. A 
PCA signed between VPO and UNEP will serve as the Subsidiary Agreement to regulate the 
obligations of the parties. Compliance with applicable United Nations rules, regulations and 
policies will be reflected in the Subsidiary Agreement. VPO will be responsible for the efficient 
disbursement of financial resources for the implementation of the designated project activities, 
and for the compilation of the required information from all implementing partners, including 
UNHCR as second EE, to provide consolidated project progress reports and expenditure reports 
to the AE. VPO will execute project activities through different mechanisms including direct 
execution by PMU, cooperation agreements with district government (known as district 
councils) and TFS as well as contracts with service providers and consultants. The district 
councils, under the supervision of VPO, will execute delegated activities as the district-level 
directly and may be authorized to contract NGOs, SAMOs and service providers. 
117. 
As the EE, UNHCR will execute the project by overseeing and managing the 
implementing partners involved in the implementation of project interventions, prioritizing 
implementation by local government authorities where possible. UNHCR will be accountable to 
the AE for the effective use of resources during project implementation. All operating policies 
and procedures will follow United Nations rules, regulations and policies, which include 
provisions for financial management and procurement. UNHCR will be responsible for the 
efficient disbursement of financial resources for the implementation of all project activities. The 
transfer of funds between the AE and EE will be governed by a “United Nations to United 
Nations” agreement.  A memorandum of understanding between VPO and UNHCR will define 
the principles of collaboration, team coordination and information-sharing mechanisms 
between the two EEs. 
118. 
The flow of funds between UNHCR and implementing partners such as NGOs and other 
service providers is governed by a Project Partnership Agreement or, in the case of firms or 
individuals, other applicable contracting arrangements. The flow of funds between VPO and 
NGOs will be governed by cooperation agreements.  
119. 
Coordination mechanisms will be put in place to ensure lessons learned are leveraged in 
the project. Following the engagement of implementing partners, UNHCR will implement risk-
based approaches to implementation, including a strong monitoring framework for financial 
management and procurement by implementing partners, options for UNHCR to procure on 
behalf of implementing partners, and adequate controls on ensuring resources are used for 
their intended purposes and right-of-use agreements.  
120. 
The financial management and procurement within the programme will be guided by 
United Nations financial regulations, rules and practices. The financial rules of UNEP, which 
follow International Public Sector Accounting Standards, are promulgated pursuant to the 
financial regulations and rules of the United Nations. Within this context, funding allocation 
mechanisms are managed in accordance with United Nations rules and procedures, including 
eligibility criteria, proposal evaluation processes, quality assurance and control, and project 
monitoring and supervision.  
121. 
UNEP is audited annually by the United Nations Board of Auditors and has established 
dedicated trust funds for GCF resources. United Nations financial regulations and rules require 
the segregation of duties, and safeguards to ensure compliance with United Nations financial 
rules and regulations.

=== PAGE 192 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 192 
 
 
 
122. 
All procurement will be undertaken in line with applicable United Nations procurement 
regulations, rules and policies. In line with these regulations, rules and policies, funds will be 
transferred in tranches to an EE once the EE has satisfied the conditions that are defined under 
the Subsidiary Agreement (i.e. the PCA) to be signed between UNEP and VPO and between 
UNEP and UNHCR. The agreements will include specific obligations for each EE on financial 
management and reporting, and will require periodic reporting from the EE. VPO, as the lead EE, 
will be responsible for the submission of consolidated financial reports to UNEP, including 
funding for activities executed by VPO and UNHCR. The coordination mechanisms to deliver 
consolidated reports will be specified in the memorandum of understanding signed between 
VPO and UNHCR. 
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
123. 
The funding proposal is an adaptation project focusing on three results areas of the 
Integrated Results Management Framework: (i) most vulnerable people and communities, (ii) 
Health and well-being, and food and water security and (iii) ecosystems and ecosystem services. 
Through application of integrated landscape approach in Kigoma region of Tanzania, the project 
aims to benefit a total of 1.28 million beneficiaries, of which 0.57 million are direct and 0.71 
million are indirect beneficiaries. 
124. 
The theory of change (TOC) clearly defines the ultimate project goal and explicitly states 
the causal logic that informs the project’s design, interventions and stated outcomes. Hence, the 
TOC itself has been crafted in a manner that is clearly supportive of meeting the ultimate project 
goals. The “if, then, because” logic is clearly shown in the diagram provided in the funding 
proposal. The ToC diagram identifies co-benefits, which can be achieved along the way towards 
climate results and captures the causal relationship between outcomes and co-benefits. The 
assumptions capture the most important factors underlying the achievement of results, 
including how the project’s benefits will diffuse to indirect beneficiaries. The barriers and risks 
that may hinder the achievement of these changes are identified and linked to pertinent 
activities. 
125. 
The logical framework is structured in alignment with the GCF integrated results 
management framework. It shows how the project can contribute to three GCF adaptation 
results areas with project outcomes and outputs, including paradigm shift potential and 
enabling environment indicators as well as core outcome indicators. Relevant GCF core and 
supplementary indicators have been chosen for monitoring and reporting the key performance 
of the project. The project-specific indicators also seem to be adequate to measure the progress 
of project implementation along with project deliverables.  A continuous feedback mechanism 
has enabled refinement of the elements of the logical framework in terms of identification of 
results areas, indicators, means of verification, targets, assumptions, etc. They are found to be 
adequate and are expected to allow smooth monitoring and reporting of project results. 
126. 
The implementation timetable has been provided in the required structure and format. 
The milestones and deliverables that are envisaged at different stages of project 
implementation are adequately planned and they are consistent with the logframe. Adherence 
to the proposed implementation timetable will facilitate smooth implementation of the project 
as well as timely delivery of the results at planned intervals.  
127. 
The arrangements for monitoring, evaluation, and reporting (annex 11) have been 
strengthened with the introduction of a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) specialist who will 
work with the M&E officer to create and implement the M&E Plan. The overall monitoring and 
evaluation budget has been identified in the budget plan, and it is in the range of 2–5 per cent of 
the total programme budget as requested by the GCF Evaluation Policy. It is also confirmed that 
the costs of interim and final evaluations will be covered by the AE fee.

=== PAGE 193 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 193 
 
 
 
4.6 
Legal assessment 
128. 
The original AMA was signed with the Accredited Entity on 15 December 2016, and 
became effective on 20 February 2017. The Accredited Entity’s first term of accreditation 
expired on 20 February 2022. The Accredited Entity was re-accredited by the Board pursuant to 
decision B.33/10. The first amendment and restatement agreement amending and restating the 
AMA was signed on 13 July 2023 and it became effective on 2 August 2023. 
129. 
The Accredited Entity has provided a certificate confirming that it has obtained all 
internal approvals and that it has the capacity and authority to implement the project.  
130. 
The proposed project will be implemented in the United Republic of Tanzania, a country 
in which GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, among other 
things, GCF is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, the risks of which 
need to be further assessed. The GCF Secretariat provided a draft agreement on privileges and 
immunities and a background note to the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania on 13 
November 2015. The latest communication was sent by the GCF Secretariat to the Government 
of the United Republic of Tanzania on 24 August 2016. 
131. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism and Independent Integrity Unit have 
both expressed the view that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress activities 
and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where GCF is not provided with relevant 
privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by GCF be made 
only after GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and expropriation in the 
United Republic of Tanzania, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities. 
4.7 
List of proposed conditions (including legal) 
132. 
To address the matters raised in this section, it is recommended that any approval by 
the Board be made subject to the following conditions:  
(a) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board approval; and 
(b) 
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 194 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 194 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP218 
Proposal name: 
Building Climate Resilience in the Landscapes of the Kigoma 
Region, United Republic of Tanzania 
Accredited entity: 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
Country/(ies): 
United Republic of Tanzania 
Project/programme size: 
Small 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
                   Scale: N/A 
1. 
Note: This project proposal was evaluated by the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
(independent TAP) for the twenty-ninth meeting of the Board (B.29). However, the Government 
of the United Republic of Tanzania decided to withdraw the project just before the publication 
deadline for the Board meeting. Since then, the project changed some relevant aspects, 
including: (i) the inclusion of the Vice President’s Office (VPO) of the United Republic of 
Tanzania (the GCF national designated authority) as lead executing entity (EE), which will hire 
and supervise the project management unit (PMU); (ii) the change of the role of the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), which will only execute some components 
of the project related to refugee camps; (iii) the definition of the roles of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs (MoHA) and the National Environmental Management Council (NEMC) in the project; 
(iv) the closure of one of the three refugee camps, transferring the refugees from the Mtendeli 
camp to the Nduta camp; (v) the removal of both the savings association (SA) opportunity and 
the funding of livelihood alternatives (mushroom and bee keeping) with GCF resources from the 
refugees; (vi) the removal of the inclusion of land-use planning activities inside the refugee 
camps; (vii) the inclusion of a technical partner to enhance project quality; and (viii) the change 
in budget and overall indicators in different components. The effects of these changes are 
addressed in the different sections of this assessment.  
2. 
Kigoma is a region with a population of about 2.3 million people, out of a total of 56.3 
million in the United Republic of Tanzania. The region spans about 37,000 square kilometres 
(km2) in the north-west of the country. Refugees have been present in the region since the early 
1960s. About 86 per cent of the refugee population in the country are accommodated in the 
three camps supported by the UNHCR in the Kigoma Region. The region hosts about 280,000 
refugees from neighbouring countries, the majority of whom are living in the refugee camps of 
Mtendeli, Nduta and Nyarugusu. These settlements have added to the pressure of the already 
densely populated region on the surrounding degraded agroecological landscapes.  
3. 
The Government of the United Republic of Tanzania has decided to close the 
Mtendeli camp and relocate the refugees to Nduta camp, with the exception of those 
opting for voluntary repatriation. Therefore, the final beneficiaries of the project will be 
defined as the refugees in the Nduta and Nyarugusu camps and host communities.

=== PAGE 195 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 195 
 
 
4. 
About 90 per cent of the host community1 population in the areas adjacent to the 
refugee camps and a substantial number of refugees are engaged in small-scale agriculture. As a 
result, they rely heavily on the goods and services provided by the region’s ecosystems. Climate 
and non-climate drivers have degraded and are further degrading these ecosystems. Easing 
tensions and misunderstandings between the refugee/migrant population and the host 
population has been part of the focus of the humanitarian–development response from United 
Nations agencies.  
5. 
The project strategy is to ensure that the landscape and ecosystem of the Kigoma Region 
can continue to support its residents, including refugees and host communities. The project 
proposes responding to the climate change impacts affecting an already vulnerable and 
degraded landscape, while considering the complex needs of host communities and refugees in 
an environment where climate, humanitarian and development approaches to problems and 
solutions intersect. 
6. 
The project consists of four components. Component 1 aims to increase the resilience of 
ecosystems and people to climate change threats. It proposes the development of participatory, 
climate-resilient land-use plans and adapting the existing village land-use plans (VLUPs) by 
acknowledging and addressing the role of the changing climate in shaping local ecosystems and 
landscapes. The planning processes for host villages and camps will be separate, as these are 
discrete and well-defined areas, but coordinated to maximize landscape-level benefits. 
However, the objective of developing them in a participatory manner is to ensure the most 
effective use of land resources through negotiation between different interest groups. The 
project proposes to scale up the VLUPs to other villages and to result in the issuance of a 
certificate of customary right of occupancy (CCRO) that specifies rights conferred to a land 
occupier and user following tribal customs and traditions on land. It is also aiming to build the 
capacity of local and regional government officials to support ecosystem-based adaptation 
(EbA) and landscape restoration, improve public awareness of climate change and support 
district, ward and village-level environmental management committees (EMCs).  
7. 
In the proposal prepared for B.29, there was a component to support climate-resilient 
refugee camp land-use planning, but MoHA objected to the inclusion of land-use planning 
activities inside the camps. In the absence of land-use plans in camps, the location and type of 
flood and erosion control measures inside the camps and surrounding areas (activity 2.3) will 
be informed by consultations with relevant stakeholders and the refugee population as well as 
the results of a technical assessment.   
8. 
Component 2, which focuses on restoring degraded ecosystems to support climate 
change adaptation in host and refugee communities, aims to protect natural forest systems and 
enhance the value that local communities place on the ecosystem services that supports them. It 
will establish and manage 30,000 hectares (ha) of village land forest reserves (VLFRs), including 
dedicated lots for fuelwood in forest areas such as the Miombo woodlands near beneficiary host 
communities. Pressure upon natural forest systems is predominantly driven by the local 
demand for fuelwood, which is the main source of energy for cooking in both the refugee and 
host communities. In Kigoma Region, 98 per cent of households rely on fuelwood for cooking, 
with 81 per cent using firewood and the remainder using charcoal. 
9. 
This component will involve providing equipment and training for 10 forestry and 
natural resources officers for forest monitoring in national forest reserves. It also plans to 
implement 12,000 ha of agroforestry and village land afforestation to increase the resilience of 
 
1 The local Tanzanian communities living within 10–15 km of the camps. To clarify, the host community includes 
various groups, such as farmers, agropastoralists and other groups engaged in various livelihood activities. In other 
words, the term host community refers to all groups, including agropastoralists, that are not formally settled in 
villages.

=== PAGE 196 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 196 
 
 
land use, including the establishment of nurseries in target villages. district councils, in 
collaboration with the Tanzania Forest Service Agency (TFS), will lead the implementation of 
this activity with support from the technical partner and local non-governmental organizations 
(NGOs)/community-based organizations for community facilitation. Moreover, it will involve 
undertaking afforestation on 2,000 ha of village land to (i) restore critical ecosystem services to 
meet climate adaptation needs and improve ecosystem services such as flood control; and (ii) 
establish a sustainable supply of fuelwood that will take some of the pressure off the native 
Miombo forest and allow it to regenerate so it can provide its ecological and livelihood support 
functions. To mitigate the increasing risk of wildfire and human-induced fires in the afforested 
area, TFS will conduct an assessment, establish the necessary firebreak areas through casual 
labour and provide fire management training for patrol teams and communities. 
10. 
The second part of this component is to implement flood and erosion control in densely 
populated areas of the refugee camps to reduce the exposed and flood-prone ferrosol-type soils, 
which have little or no vegetation cover. As the camps were established rapidly, within a context 
of humanitarian pressures, land-use planning was suboptimal, involving the removal of 
vegetation to provide space for the camps. The increased pressure of development combined 
with increased intensity of climate change-induced rainfall events resulted in gully erosion, soil 
loss and degradation in and around the camps. The proponents aim to construct 10 km of 
micro-scale, stone-pitched drainage channels and sustainable drainage system interventions – 
including 16 stone-filled gabions and micro-infiltration trenches/ponds/soakaways – in the two 
refugee camps and in the lands of the consolidated camp.  
11. 
In the Mtendeli decommissioned camp area, the flood and erosion control measures will 
be conducted after the camp closure in combination with other restoration interventions 
implemented by UNHCR. According to the proponents, the post-closure restoration will result in 
adaptation benefits for the host community in terms of (i) reduced flood and erosion risk for 
downstream host communities; and (ii) potential for expansion of agricultural and agroforestry 
activities in the camp area. The land administration will be handed back to the Kakonko district 
government, which has the intention to use various camp facilities for the provision of services 
such as education and healthcare as well as to host district offices. Other areas of the 
decommissioned camp may be used by the surrounding villages as communal land for 
agriculture, grazing or forestry activities. To the independent TAP, it is still unclear why GCF 
should spend resources in erosion and flood control measures for an empty camp, especially if 
UNHCR is tasked with developing the camp rehabilitation plan for its handover to the 
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania, including soil conservation and reforestation. 
The independent TAP believes that the original motivation for accepting this investment was to 
support the adaptive capacity and the quality of life of the refugees in the camps, but in the 
absence of refugees, this investment with GCF resources is not sufficiently justified under 
climate change adaptation rationale. Moreover, there is a risk that the Government of the United 
Republic of Tanzania could decide to close the other two camps, in which case the investments 
from GCF will not have a solid climate change and humanitarian rationale. 
12. 
Component 3 on climate-resilient livelihoods, which is to be implemented by the district 
councils in coordination with the VPO, aims to increase the capacity of host communities and 
refugees to better adapt to changing climatic conditions. The goal is to promote modern 
technologies and management practices to strengthen the capacity of farmers, district officials 
and agricultural extension workers in climate-resilient agriculture through farmer field schools 
(FFS) and the provision, through SA management offices, of resilient seeds, tools and necessary 
equipment for implementing climate-resilient agricultural practices.  
13. 
Component 3 also aims to increase water availability and use efficiency through water 
harvesting and efficient irrigation interventions. The project expects to construct micro-
rainwater harvesting systems, including 94 check dams, 20 runoff harvesting microdams 
(charco dams, 120 unlined water pans and 120 lined microponds). The proponents expect to

=== PAGE 197 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 197 
 
 
establish water pumping and irrigation through 50 microsolar and 172 treadle pumps that will 
draw water from the rainwater harvesting locations and pump it to where it is needed. 
14. 
This component will conduct training and awareness-raising for 400 members of water 
user associations (WUAs) and farmers on water management and efficient water use through 
FFS. It will also support the establishment of new and strengthen existing WUAs through 
organizing and conducting 20 meetings/trainings. 
15. 
Furthermore, component 3 aims to promote climate-resilient livelihood diversification 
to strengthen food security and nutrition as well as increase livelihood options. The district 
councils, in coordination with the VPO, will implement the livelihood interventions in the host 
communities with resources from GCF, but decided to remove the support to refugees using GCF 
resources. The project states that UNHCR, through the project co-funding, will implement 
livelihood interventions in the camps, opening them up to host communities if and where 
possible, with the final livelihood activities to be coordinated and agreed with MoHA. The 
livelihood alternatives include the promotion of (i) beekeeping to incentivize forest 
conservation in the forests surrounding the camps and villages by providing 52 beehives, 
equipment and training for 850 people; and (ii) mushroom cultivation for marginalized groups 
with training and mushroom-growing facilities by providing equipment and training to 26 
mushroom groups. However, the proposal is not explicit with regard to the number of livelihood 
interventions and the resources needed to support the refugee communities, all subject to the 
approval of MoHA.   
16. 
Component 4 focuses on information and on mainstreaming climate change adaptation 
in policies, plans and strategies in the United Republic of Tanzania. It will use the results of the 
planning processes and physical interventions implemented under output 1.3 to demonstrate 
the economic, environmental, and social value of this model to stakeholders. This approach will 
contribute to the sustainability and scalability of the outputs and GCF fund-level outcomes at the 
national level. The benefits of scaling the model up to global level are less clear in terms of 
humanitarian programming through UNHCR, as the project has substantially lowered support 
to the refugees using resources from GCF. 
17. 
The project beneficiaries (drawn from both the host communities and refugee camps) 
are estimated at 1,281,800 people, consisting of approx. 570,300 direct (292,800 women and 
277,500 men) and approx. 711,500 indirect beneficiaries (366,635 women and 344,865 men).2 
Of the direct beneficiaries, 36 per cent are refugees, with a population in November 2021 of 
205,596 persons. The estimate is that 15,000 additional households (approx. 80,000 people, 
mostly from host communities) adopt, at the end of the project, diversified, climate-resilient 
livelihoods in agriculture, beekeeping and mushroom-growing. 
18. 
The project’s approach to adaptation is, on the one hand, building small-scale 
infrastructure to support flood control, water harvesting and efficient irrigation interventions, 
and, on the other hand, adopting ecosystem-based approaches that support ecosystem functions 
and services. In terms of flood control interventions, as mentioned above, the development of 
the camps was done within the context of humanitarian pressures, with suboptimal land-use 
planning. Therefore, these proposed interventions respond both to a failure in initial planning 
and to an increase in precipitation intensity due to climate change. 
19. 
In terms of ecosystem-based adaptation at the landscape level, it is well noted that 
climate change and variability in the United Republic of Tanzania – in combination with land use 
drivers, such as deforestation and forest encroachment – have resulted in the alteration of 
 
2 Considering the 51 per cent women population in the three camps (UNHCR Tanzania Refugee Situation Statistical 
Report, September 2021) and 51.5 per cent women population in the three target districts (United Republic of 
Tanzania population and housing census, 2012). Calculations can be consulted in Annex 4– Detailed assumptions or 
sources.

=== PAGE 198 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 198 
 
 
ecosystem functions and agroecological systems, consequently affecting livelihoods across the 
country. In the case of Kigoma Region, host communities expressed the view during 
consultations that the establishment of refugee camps had contributed to this accelerated 
deforestation as a result of increased fuelwood harvesting and illegal cultivation. The host 
communities are also expanding the agricultural areas, driving deforestation, putting pressure 
on the ecosystems and exacerbating drought and flood impacts, thus resulting in lower 
agricultural yields.  
20. 
The project proponents developed an accurate analysis to provide a sound climate 
change rationale. The observational station that serves Kigoma Region was used to validate the 
CORDEX (Coordinated Regional Climate Downscaling Experiment) regional climate models used 
in the assessment of projected climate changes. After a validation assessment of seasonal signal, 
magnitude, and discrepancies of 10 models to the station data, the proponents selected the 
IPSL-IPSL-CM5A-MR model as the best-performing model overall. Therefore, this model was 
used to assess future climate changes. 
21. 
The past and current observational trends were used to project the climate trends into 
the future. These notable trends are the decline in early season rainfall and the concentration of 
rainfall in the mid-season and late season. There is a projected general increase in extreme 
precipitation days (ninety-fifth percentile), leading to an increase in potential flooding events. 
The meteorological drought index of the Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index 
indicates that the variability in the rainfall will probably lead to more frequent and severe 
drought events. The average maximum and daily extreme temperatures (ninety-fifth percentile) 
are projected to increase in all seasons. 
22. 
The overall analysis indicates that the current climate exposure noted in Kigoma Region 
is a result of current climate changes. The projected future anticipates these will continue and 
further expose the area to enhanced climate impacts. Therefore, all project interventions 
respond to present and projected climate impacts. 
23. 
Finally, the adaptation measures in the areas where the host communities live are well 
designed to ensure practical adaptive capacity under a landscape approach. The integrated set 
of interventions will build local resilience to climate change by avoiding land degradation and 
soil erosion and by improving hydrology, landscape restoration and water quality, resulting in 
more-resilient livelihoods for the host communities. However, the erosion and flood control 
interventions in the Mtendeli decommissioned camp area are not fully justified in terms of 
climate change. Moreover, as the refugees from this camp will be transferred to the Nduta camp, 
there is a risk of having less space per family to ensure adaptative livelihood conditions. The 
revised funding proposal after consultation with the Government of Tanzania has diminished 
the livelihood alternatives for the refugees with resources from GCF and has a narrower nexus 
between climate change and humanitarian support to ensure the adaptive capacity of refugee 
communities. Overall, the climate change impact is medium to high. 
1.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
 
          Scale: N/A 
1.2.1. 
Innovation 
24. 
The project acknowledges the mosaic of land uses in the project site as well as the 
complex and varying relationships between the human settlements (refugees and host 
communities) and the ecosystems available, taking into consideration the increased challenges 
associated with climate change. 
25. 
The landscape-level approach to project design and the challenges of both host 
communities and refugees to support their livelihoods while adapting to the changing climate 
are well analysed in the project. However, as explained above, the current funding proposal has

=== PAGE 199 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 199 
 
 
reduced support to refugee communities and therefore the majority of the interventions in land 
use, agriculture, water and livelihoods will end up mostly benefiting the host communities. 
Moreover, there is a risk that the refugee camps will end up closing as was the case with the 
Mtendeli camp. Therefore, the paradigm shift of having the first GCF project with a significant 
humanitarian–climate nexus is not as promising or transformational as in the original FP 
assessed by iTAP back in February 2021. 
26. 
The sustainability of the project interventions needs further refinement and thought. 
The project is relying on external technical support to deliver some of the interventions and is 
staffing the project management unit (PMU), including district officers, with resources from 
GCF. Moreover, the project lacks viable marketing alternatives to support the communities with 
agroforestry interventions.  
27. 
Due to the encampment policy in the United Republic of Tanzania, refugees are legally 
required to remain in the camps, and they are not allowed to be engaged in formal employment 
either within or outside the camps, thus having to rely on humanitarian assistance or the 
informal economy.  
28. 
The United Republic of Tanzania has been generous in accepting refugees, mainly from 
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo since the 1960s. However, the country has 
the right to open or close refugee camps based on its own policies towards refugees. It has also 
experienced an increased influx of refugees when neighbouring countries have faced political 
instability. On some occasions, it has closed camps due to the repatriation of refugees. For 
example, in 2012, some camps in Kigoma Region were closed, and then reopened in 2015. 
Between February 2021 and now, the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania decided 
to close one camp. The permanence of these camps in the future will depend on the regional 
refugee situation and on the willingness of the government to maintain them.  
29. 
Although the refugee camps are relatively well situated topographically, Tanzanian 
authorities and camp planners were probably unable to account for long-term development 
pressures and climate change impacts when designating the area for the settlements. 
Increasingly frequent floods are damaging the shelters, roads and communal facilities. These 
floods cause latrine pits to overflow, resulting in standing water, with negative impacts on 
health and sanitation. Floods also lead to deep gully erosion, which places community safety at 
risk of unstable ground. Consequences are being felt at the landscape level with increasing soil 
erosion. To respond to this challenge, the project provided detailed plans and designs to 
implement flood and erosion control infrastructure on public lands in and around the camps. 
30. 
This opens a question to the Board in terms of investing GCF resources in public 
goods for temporary humanitarian relief projects. In response to the question of the 
independent TAP on the strategy of the project in the event that refugee camps are either closed 
or reallocated, the project proponents answered that livelihood activities would be absorbed by 
host communities, and the flood and erosion control measures would help to protect future 
occupants against climate-driven flood events. However, in the case of the Mtendeli camp, the 
future occupants are yet to be defined, and even if they end up in the hands of the district 
authorities for health or educational purposes, there is a disconnection with the original 
purpose of the investments, which is to support the adaptive livelihood of refugee communities. 
31. 
The productive activities proposed for vulnerable host and refugee communities, such 
as beekeeping and mushroom-growing, are well thought out in that they support healthier diets 
on reduced land area and ensure some income generation. Participants will receive training as 
well as inputs and shared facilities managed by the beekeeping and mushroom-growing groups. 
According to the proponents, in the stakeholder consultations, refugees showed a lot of interest 
in these activities, seeing that the knowledge to be gained will continue to help them if/when 
they return to their country of origin, thus positively contributing to their self-reliance. 
However, the current funding proposal has erased the GCF funds allocated to these activities in

=== PAGE 200 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 200 
 
 
refugee camps, which now rely on co-financing at a more limited scale. Therefore, the 
beneficiaries of the GCF-funded livelihood interventions will mainly be host communities. 
32. 
In terms of land-use planning, the proposal has an innovative approach, as the long-
term, legal outcome of the VLUP is the issuance of a CCRO. This document specifies rights 
conferred to a land occupier and user following tribal customs and traditions on land. The CCRO 
will provide long-term security for the villagers and may be used as collateral for borrowing 
money to conduct other future village-related, climate-resilient investments. Moreover, by 
adopting a landscape approach with coordinated land-use planning across the project area, the 
project offers innovation and potential to generate new lessons learned in the practice of VLUPs 
in the country. 
33. 
The agroforestry component is based on the need to ensure basic subsistence crops, 
such as casava and beans, and less focused on achieving regenerative agriculture that takes 
climate change into account. The project proponents argue that these crops were selected based 
on climate resilience, potential to increase incomes and contribution to food security. The 
farmers will have access to seeds and FFS, aiming to transfer better productive technologies as 
well as sustainable and conservation practices. This will be complemented with agroforestry, 
afforestation and forest conservation activities that contribute to erosion control and limit the 
loss of topsoil rich in organic material.  
34. 
Benefits to refugee and host communities from the landscape interventions would come 
in the form of common ecosystem services, such as restored critical forest ecosystem services to 
manage floods and a sustainable supply of fuelwood to relieve pressure on the native Miombo 
forest. These restored ecosystem services would facilitate ecological and livelihood support 
functions. 
35. 
The project will implement community-based forest management (CBFM) measures for 
resilient ecosystems. Under CBFM, villagers take full ownership and management responsibility 
for an area of forest as a VLFR. Following this legal transfer of rights and responsibilities from 
central to village government, villagers may harvest timber and forest products, collect, and 
retain forest royalties and undertake patrols (including arresting and fining offenders). 
Ensuring that villagers take ownership and responsibility for their natural resources, instead of 
there being a centralized “command and control” type of arrangement, is one of the key 
paradigm shift elements in the proposal.  
36. 
The establishment of VLFRs is a provision of the Forest Act of 2002. However, most of 
the VLFRs in Kakonko, Kasulu and Kibondo Districts are still in the stage of declaration by the 
village council. The project aims to facilitate the establishment and management arrangements 
of 20 village forest reserves over 30,000 ha. 
37. 
In Kigoma Region, 98 per cent of households rely on fuelwood for cooking, with 81 per 
cent using firewood and the remainder using charcoal.3 The project proposes establishing 2,000 
ha of forest lots producing a sustainable supply of fuelwood. This will take some of the pressure 
off the native Miombo forest and allow it to regenerate so that it can provide its ecological and 
livelihood support functions, benefiting both refugee and host communities. 
38. 
The project presents a good mix of alternatives (micro-rainwater harvesting systems, 
run-off harvesting microdams, unlined water pans and lined microponds) to increase water 
availability and use water efficiently through water harvesting and efficient irrigation 
interventions, thus supporting the nursery, agroforestry and afforestation interventions. These 
water systems are common and do not constitute an innovation per se. However, if they are well 
 
3 Kigoma Region Basic Demographic and Socio-Economic Profile 2016.

=== PAGE 201 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 201 
 
 
placed and managed, they could be one of the most important activities for ensuring landscape 
restoration under climate change conditions.  
39. 
The project is also proposing the use of SAs as a key delivery mechanism for the project. 
They allow individuals to pool financing together to save and borrow money based on the 
consensus of members. This project will seek to strengthen and scale up existing structures by 
channelling funds through SAs for the purchase of climate-resilient equipment. The 
independent TAP believes that strengthening these organizations with knowledge on climate 
change and allowing them to reach the communities will be a key component in the 
sustainability of this project. However, in the revised proposal, this alternative is not made 
available to the refugee communities, which will have no financing options. 
40. 
Finally, benefit-sharing schemes would be based on agreements among four parties: the 
host community; the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania represented by MoHA; 
UNHCR; and the refugee communities, with the involvement of TFS. Representation of the host 
community and refugees will be based on existing governance structures, such as village 
leadership in the host community. The development of appropriate benefit-sharing agreements 
will be facilitated by representatives from all three levels of EMCs established under subactivity 
1.1.4. The independent TAP believes that a key parameter of success of the project is related to 
the benefit-sharing arrangements, ensuring peaceful coexistence between the host and refugee 
communities. 
41. 
The project’s theory of change does not include any assumptions about the fact that the 
refugee camps could be closed, thus making the project a common EbA project for Kigoma 
Region. Therefore, the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania, together with the United 
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and UNHCR, should consider the real expected long-
term changes of the project, including the option of a region with no refugee camps.  
1.2.2. 
Potential for knowledge and learning 
42. 
The project will support the transfer and adoption of low-carbon agroforestry and 
forestry systems to change the current deforestation and landscape degradation patterns.  
43. 
Project interventions will include extensive training and capacity-building, which will 
allow knowledge of the benefits of these activities, such as resilient agriculture and alternative 
livelihoods, to be sustained and expanded to wider communities. 
44. 
The project will use FFS as a methodology to share knowledge on EbA. The FFS will 
involve the village-level EMCs, with clear mechanisms for capacity-building. Moreover, the 
project has clear targets in terms of the number of people trained in FFS and the number of 
people (host and refugee communities) trained in beekeeping and mushroom-growing facilities. 
1.2.3. 
Contribution to the creation of an enabling environment and regulatory 
framework 
45. 
The project will conduct training and awareness-raising on climate change and good 
environmental management practices while involving district governments. The training will 
include the understanding of projected climate changes, impacts such as wildfire risks, 
adaptation strategies and the importance of local ecosystems and the services they provide. 
46. 
Public awareness-raising will also target Sukuma agropastoralist communities that 
contribute to deforestation and ecosystem degradation in the project area but are not currently 
included in wider community conservation or land-use planning processes. The training that 
would be conducted by project staff and district governments, in coordination with land-use 
planners and consultants, would contribute to having a better inclusion strategy to allow these 
groups to be part of the landscape restoration goals and solutions.

=== PAGE 202 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 202 
 
 
47. 
The project will support district, ward and village-level EMCs and improve coordination 
between the different levels. This will be achieved through the development of coordination 
protocols and structures, regular reporting and monitoring systems, and the provision of 
upskilling to EMC members at all levels. Training on conflict resolution and benefit-sharing will 
also be provided to EMCs to ensure that the project contributes to reduced potential for conflict 
between natural resources users. 
48. 
In terms of water management, the Lake Tanganyika Basin Water Board, which foresees 
and plans the use of water resources (surface water, rivers and lakes), will support the 
establishment and capacity development of the WUAs through a participatory process.  
49. 
The EMCs/village land-use management committees and the WUAs are currently not 
performing as they should. This is largely due to a lack of capacity and support linked to 
underfunding at the district level to provide the foreseen support functions. The project will 
provide capacity-building on planning and activities to safeguard shared natural resources, 
including ensuring community adherence to the village environmental bylaws, during the 
project duration and beyond. Targeted training will be provided to support conflict resolution 
capacities, roles in supporting benefit-sharing arrangements, and coordination protocols 
between WUAs, EMCs and relevant institutions at the local level.  
1.2.4. 
Scalability and replicability 
50. 
The project’s EbA approach in the host communities could be scaled to other regions in 
the United Republic of Tanzania. However, the sustainability and scalability of the project 
interventions will require financial investments by the Government of Tanzania and the 
regional district offices. Moreover, since a technical partner and NGOs will provide training and 
technical advisory services to the local government and forestry officials in the technical design, 
implementation and monitoring of agroforestry systems, there is a need to ensure that TFS and 
the Kigoma officials ultimately have the skills and capacity to scale the model to other regions in 
the country as well as maintain and scale the interventions in the Kigoma region after project 
completion.  
51. 
In its original version, the project had the potential to address adaptation needs of host 
communities and refugees in an integrated way. However, the current proposal has a limited 
climate–humanitarian nexus, with few components within the refugee camps that could be 
documented to replicate the experience and approach by UNHCR in other countries.  
52. 
Overall, the project has a limited paradigm shift in terms of the climate–humanitarian 
nexus, but it has an interesting EbA approach in the selected Kigoma landscape that needs more 
thought in terms of sustainability and scalability.   
1.3 
Sustainable development potential  
 
  
        Scale: N/A 
1.3.1. 
Environmental co-benefits 
53. 
The benefits associated with the EbA approach will include the functionality of the 
overall ecosystem services. Some of these ecological services include the retention of water that 
will support the evapotranspiration regime, the limiting of the effects of floods, and the 
reduction of soil erosion. Moreover, if assisted restoration is done with a variety of species, it 
could increase biodiversity. It could also support natural habitats to allow forest species to 
regrow, enable animal species to increase, and ensure ecosystem services as important as 
pollination, pest control and the provision of food and non-timber products.  
54. 
The project will establish forestry and agroforestry systems that will supply wood and 
food to selected communities, thereby preventing the expansion of the agricultural frontier and

=== PAGE 203 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 203 
 
 
allowing the regeneration of ecosystems at the landscape level. It will also reduce the pressure 
on forests and the consequent fragmentation of the fauna habitats of these ecosystems, thus 
contributing to the conservation of biodiversity.  
55. 
The agroforestry and forestry systems promoted could significantly increase soil 
fertility. However, the selection of trees is very important. As scientists from the Royal Botanic 
Gardens, Kew, point out, tree planting is a brilliant solution to tackle climate change and protect 
biodiversity, but the wrong tree in the wrong place can do more harm than good.4 In a 
biodiversity-rich country such as the United Republic of Tanzania, the selection of tree species 
matters. Therefore, there is a need to ensure the planting of native species with the potential to 
restore degraded soils and maintain essential ecological services. 
56. 
Controlling soil erosion with flood control interventions and reforestation will improve 
water retention, which will in turn serve to ensure ecosystems restoration. At the same time, 
working on flood control will lower the risk of waterborne diseases, including diarrhoea, 
malaria, bilharzia and urinary tract infections, during the rainy season.  
57. 
The geographic information system (GIS)-based forest monitoring data management 
system will support TFS in monitoring forest cover and fire risk management. The system will 
assist in controlling illegal deforestation activities in the national forest reserves (approx. 
219,642 ha) in the target districts and assessing the impact of VLUPs.  
58. 
The independent TAP asked about the selection of beans and cassava as the main crops 
to be used in implementing agroforestry systems. The proponents replied that the selection was 
based on an assessment of the main options for climate-adaptive agricultural technologies and 
practices, and the market potential of the two crops. Cassava performs well in poor soils and dry 
conditions but is also able to tolerate increased rainfall. Studies examining the impacts of 
predicted climate change on cassava production in Africa indicate that it is likely to be positively 
impacted under most climate change scenarios. Beans have high nutritional value and 
contribute to soil fertility. While most common varieties of the crop are susceptible to both 
drought and heat stress, improved varieties with resistance to these climate stressors are 
available and will be provided to local communities as part of the proposed project’s 
interventions. However, it will be advisable to involve a wider variety of choices to restore soils 
and ensure crop diversity and nutrition. 
1.3.2. 
Economic co-benefits 
59. 
The project expects to create livelihood alternatives with agroforestry systems and 
small endeavours such as mushroom-growing facilities and beekeeping, thus creating decent 
direct and indirect green jobs, most of which are expected to persist even after the end of the 
project. However, these alternatives will mostly benefit the host communities. The refugees will 
have the possibility to have some livelihood alternatives with the support of the UNHCR co-
financing, but these will be limited and based on agreements with MoHA. Improved and 
diversified agricultural production systems will ensure food security and provide opportunities 
to connect to markets, thus generating revenues to achieve a better quality of life for the 
communities. By diversifying crop production, the communities would be able to have more 
stable incomes throughout the year.  
60. 
The project will result in ecosystem services that would be supporting (e.g. nutrient 
cycling and soil formation); provisioning (e.g. timber and non-timber forest products); 
regulating (e.g. water regulation and flood control); and cultural (e.g. recreation and education). 
 
4 BBC. 2021. Scientists address myths over large-scale tree planting. Available at 
<https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-55795816>.

=== PAGE 204 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 204 
 
 
All of these services will serve to support income generation and job creation and ensure long-
term rural livelihood sustainability. 
61. 
The economic value of ensuring water availability through harvesting systems, which 
provide members of the host communities with access to a more reliable source of water, is 
potentially very high. This will allow communities to extend the growing season and ensure 
their crop production and revenues. The infrastructure put in place for these purposes will also 
have the added benefit of reducing the impacts of floods through water retention and soil 
conservation. 
62. 
The project will also support the SAs in allowing individuals from the host communities 
to pool finances together to save and borrow money and maintain their agroforestry systems. 
This will ensure the long-term sustainability of the initial investments by the project, allowing 
the communities to continue the activities beyond the end of the project. 
1.3.3. 
Social co-benefits 
63. 
The project expects to ensure social cohesion between host and refugee communities, 
enabling a more peaceful and safer environment while creating a sense of “belonging” and 
respect for nature. However, the options for refugee communities are limited as the project 
provides few options to support their quality of life and they are obliged to stay within the camp 
limits. 
64. 
The host households could ensure increased food security with the implementation of 
agroforestry systems, and they will have a better standard of living from increased income. 
Having village plans in place will allow the communities to work together and ensure long-term 
landscape arrangements that will benefit the population at large.  
65. 
Communities will have greater knowledge of climate change and be able to decide on 
their productive systems and the conservation of natural resources. When forest and 
agroforestry systems are restored, the effect on microclimates will benefit the community 
livelihoods around the selected areas.  
66. 
The project will improve the quality of life of host and refugee communities by helping 
to avoid the diseases related to water contamination and storage, thus reducing risks of water- 
and vector-borne illnesses during flood incidents. Moreover, the project will help reduce 
exposure to tsetse flies and the risk of contracting sleeping sickness.  
1.3.4. 
Gender-sensitive development 
67. 
In the United Republic of Tanzania, gender inequality is a salient issue. Although the 
overall labour-force participation rate (including the informal sector) of women in the country 
is 88.7 per cent, only 29 per cent of women participate in the formal economy. 
68. 
Women also participate in low-productivity sectors. Specifically, women account for 
most of the agricultural workforce, with about 90 per cent of women living in rural areas 
participating in the sector. 
69. 
A five-year National Plan of Action to End Violence Against Women and Children 
(2017/18–2021/22) has been developed by consolidating eight different action plans 
addressing violence against women and children to create a single, comprehensive, national 
plan of action to eradicate violence against women and children in the country. 
70. 
The Village Land Act introduced in 1999 has broken new ground in women’s rights, with 
some sections rendering invalid any customary practices that discriminate against women. The 
act upholds the right of every woman to acquire, hold, use, and deal with land; voids the role of 
customary law in determining land tenure; and recognizes women’s rights to land in the event

=== PAGE 205 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 205 
 
 
of the death of their spouse or upon divorce. There are also requirements for female 
representation in key decision-making bodies. The project will make sure that the law is 
effectively implemented through the support of village plans.  
71. 
Despite efforts by UNHCR and its partners, refugee women and children continue to be 
exposed to a range of risks. These include sexual and gender-based violence, child abuse and 
early and forced marriages. Some of these risks relate to existing negative cultural norms and 
practices related to power imbalances that bring about gender inequality. 
72. 
The gender action plan has an overall impact statement to “improve land management 
and increased resilience of host communities and refugees, including poor and female-headed 
households, to climate change through land-use planning, land use and forestry interventions, 
resilient agriculture and livelihood diversification and improved water management and 
drainage.”  
73. 
The project involves the following outcomes: (i) women are represented, and participate 
meaningfully, in land-use planning at the village and camp levels; (ii) CBFM and agroforestry 
practices engage women in resilience-building and decrease their vulnerability; (iii) the 
adaptive capacity of women farmers is increased and women’s resilience to climate change is 
increased both economically and through increased food security; and (iv) women and their 
needs, interests and knowledge are meaningfully captured in mainstreaming climate change 
adaptation in policies, plans, strategies and programmes. The plan is well developed and has 
specific activities, indicators and a budget to ensure its development.  
74. 
Overall, the plan is more oriented to support women of the host communities. The 
project is operating in the context of an increased population of the Nduta refugee camp, with 
the negative impacts of densely populated camps on the security and livelihoods of women. 
Moreover, refugee women and men will not have access to the SAs and will have just a few 
livelihood alternatives facilitated through resources from UNHCR (if agreed with the 
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania). The plan includes refugee women in the 
agroforestry and afforestation trainings, but it is not clear if they will be able to benefit from 
these trainings to support their livelihoods.   
1.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
  
 
       Scale: N/A 
1.4.1. 
Vulnerability of the country and vulnerable groups 
75. 
The United Republic of Tanzania is a country in East Africa with an area of about 
945,000 km2. Following two decades of sustained growth, the country reached an important 
milestone in July 2020 when it formally graduated from low-income country to lower-middle-
income country status.5  In 2019, it was one of the top three growth performers in East Africa, 
enjoying a stable economy. However, pandemic-induced shocks slowed its gross domestic 
product (GDP) growth rate from 5.8 per cent in 2019 to an estimated 2.0 per cent in 2020, as 
shocks to export-oriented sectors such as tourism, manufacturing and related services 
diminished business revenue and labour income, which adversely affected domestically 
oriented firms of all sizes across all sectors.6  
76. 
President Samia Suluhu Hassan was sworn in on 19 March 2021 to serve as the United 
Republic of Tanzania’s sixth, and first woman, president, following the death of President John 
 
5 World Bank Group. 2021. Economic Outlook of Tanzania. Available at 
<https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/tanzania/overview#1>. 
6 Ibid.

=== PAGE 206 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 206 
 
 
Magufuli on 17 March 2021.7 The government is prioritizing the implementation of a new 
strategy to contain the COVID-19 pandemic and has a renewed approach to regional trade and 
cooperation and a commitment to domestic policy reforms designed to improve the business 
environment.  
77. 
In the period 2011–2018, the agriculture sector’s contribution to GDP grew much more 
slowly than those of the rest of the economy, averaging 4.4 per cent a year, or 1.4 per cent per 
capita. With about 25 per cent of the population of about 56.3 million living below the poverty 
line, of which 75.5 per cent of the poor are dependent on agriculture for their livelihoods, 
agriculture sector growth is crucial for poverty reduction. Despite having fertile land and water 
resources, the agriculture sector is hampered by low productivity and persistent poverty. 
78. 
Rural areas such as Kigoma Region face unique developmental challenges, including 
changing climate, socioeconomic inequality and a fluctuating population of refugees from 
neighbouring countries, in particular from Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 
Moreover, infrastructure constraints, low agricultural productivity, a limited fiscal base, 
insufficient human capital and environmental factors contribute to inhibiting the region’s 
development.  
79. 
The country has been one of the most generous to refugees, not only in East Africa, but 
also globally. The country has received refugees mainly from Burundi and the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo. The United Nations estimates that by 2003, 500,000 refugees were living 
in camps. However, in 2012 some of the camps in Kigoma Region closed and the remaining 
37,000 refugees living there returned to Burundi. In 2015, political instability again resulted in 
civil war in Burundi, with a mass influx of refugees from there into the United Republic of 
Tanzania. To meet this increased demand, refugees were transferred to the Mtendeli and Nduta 
camps, which were reopened in 2016 and 2015, respectively.  
80. 
About 25 per cent of the current refugees come from the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo.8 The Nyarugusu camp hosts the largest proportion of refugees from the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo:  about 82,000 in 2018.9 Although several drivers of conflict in Burundi 
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo remain present, there is no certainty as to the lifetime 
of the refugee camps. The project proponents believe that it is unlikely that all the refugees 
currently accommodated in the three camps will return to their own countries in the long run. 
However, the United Republic of Tanzania is actively encouraging the repatriation of refugees, 
and is signalling, with the closure of the Mtendeli camp and the reduced support in this project 
to the refugee communities, that the refugees should not receive special support. 
81. 
Furthermore, the three camps do not follow the exact parameters for the classification 
of refugee accommodation as camps or settlements. Refugees living there are restricted in terms 
of movement beyond the borders of the camps. They must rely on food aid to a large extent, and 
there are restrictions placed on their socioeconomic freedoms. In terms of policy response, the 
locations are officially considered camps. However, for many refugees, the camps are 
permanent places of residence rather than merely temporary places of safety or transit centres. 
82. 
The regional instability, with persistent ethnic tensions and an enduring culture of 
violence within communities, can be exacerbated by chronic poverty, malnutrition, low levels of 
development and the countries’ young populations (especially in Burundi). In addition to these 
 
7 Ibid. 
8 Ibid. 
9 UNHCR. 2018. Congolese Situation: Responding to the Needs of Displaced Congolese and Refugees. Annex - The United 
Republic Of The Tanzania. Supplementary Appeal, January - December 2018. Available at 
<http://reporting.unhcr.org/sites/default/files/2018%20Congolese%20Situation%20SB%20-%20Tanzania.pdf>.

=== PAGE 207 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 207 
 
 
challenges, several environmental drivers of conflict remain in the region due to the scarcity of 
land and the overexploitation of resources, which are mainly used for subsistence agriculture.  
83. 
In terms of livelihoods and economic activity, refugees are compelled by ever-
decreasing funding to engage in activities to support themselves financially. Although there 
have been efforts by the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania to reduce the economic 
activity within the camps, the Government has been lenient in enforcing restrictions on the 
refugees about working outside the camps. The feasibility study explains that many people – 
Burundians in particular – work on farms in the surrounding communities, and that laws 
against employment are not always enforceable in practice. 
84. 
The project places a priority on supporting the host communities neighbouring the 
camps, namely those directly impacted by the establishment of the camps. Despite the 
encampment policy of the United Republic of Tanzania, interactions between refugees and host 
communities occur. There are informal employment arrangements and agricultural land-
lease/land-use agreements. Interactions take place through some trade activities despite the 
closure of common markets. Refugees leave the camps frequently to collect fuelwood from the 
land of the host communities. 
85. 
The host community population in the project consists of farmers and livestock keepers. 
About 70 per cent of the population in the region are engaged in small-scale farming, with 
others involved in livestock keeping. Community members access non-timber forest products, 
such as food, medicines, fuelwood and other items from village forests, especially in Miombo 
woodlands. The current lack of land-use planning and management of customary land can lead 
to conflict between farmers and pastoralists, especially pastoralist groups that pass through 
Kigoma, such as the Sukuma people, in search of fertile grazing land towards the south. 
86. 
Climate and non-climate drivers have degraded, and are further degrading, the 
ecosystems in Kigoma Region. According to the feasibility analysis, Kigoma is experiencing 
rising temperatures as well as increased rainfall intensity and variability. These will contribute 
to an increase in the frequency and severity of floods and prolonged droughts, as well as heat 
and water stress. Observed changes in weather patterns have already produced climate impacts 
that have compounded environmental degradation and negatively affected agricultural outputs, 
the incidence of pests and diseases, forest resources and deforestation, surface- and 
groundwater availability, and soil erosion and fertility. Projected climate changes will further 
exacerbate these already noted climate problems, together with non-climatic development 
drivers of degradation. These changes are threatening local rain-fed and ecosystem-reliant 
livelihoods in the region. 
87. 
In conclusion, the needs of the recipients are high, as both vulnerable host and refugee 
communities need to find sustainable livelihood alternatives in the same landscape, sharing 
scarce resources under climate change.  
1.5 
Country ownership 
  
 
 
  
 
         Scale: N/A  
1.5.1. 
Alignment with the national climate strategy 
88. 
The Government of the United Republic of Tanzania has put in place sectoral policies 
and legislation that focuses on enhancing agricultural growth, natural resources management 
and climate change interventions. These include the National Agriculture Policy (2013), which 
aims to develop the agriculture industry through practices that sustain the environment. 
89. 
The country has several policies in place to support the project and its climate goals. The 
Agriculture Climate Resilience Plan (2014–2019) proposes a range of adaptation options, 
including, but not limited to: improving agricultural land and water management; accelerating

=== PAGE 208 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 208 
 
 
the uptake of climate-smart agriculture; reducing impacts of climate-related shocks through risk 
management; and strengthening knowledge and systems for targeted climate action. Moreover, 
the goal of the Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture Programme 2015–2025 is to have an 
“agricultural sector that sustainably increases productivity and enhances climate resilience and 
food security for national economic development’’. The programme focuses on six core 
objectives, including increasing the productivity of the agricultural sector through (appropriate) 
climate-smart agriculture practices that consider gender and enhance climate resilience of 
agricultural and food systems.10 
90. 
The country’s intended nationally determined contribution identifies adaptation as a 
national priority. The severity of climate-related disasters and the impacts associated with 
spatial and temporal variability of rainfall and droughts and higher incidence of floods are all 
recognized. The interventions outlined in the project are aligned with the country’s National 
Adaptation Programme of Action (2007), the National Climate Change Strategy (2012), the 
Guidelines for Integrating Climate Change Adaptation into National Sectoral Policies, Plans and 
Programmes of Tanzania (2012), the country’s intended nationally determined contribution 
(2015) and the Tanzania Development Vision 2025. 
91. 
The National Five-Year Development Plan 2016/17–2020/21 defines specific sectoral 
interventions in natural resources management and agricultural development. In particular, the 
document refers to a number of key interventions, including having in place participatory 
climate change adaptation measures at catchment/WUA level and introducing and adopting 
crop and livestock varieties suited to adverse conditions brought about by climate change. 
92. 
The Tanzania Country Refugee Response Plan (January 2019–December 2020)11 for 
refugees from Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo includes: “wider efforts within 
the environment and energy sector and associated links with climate change adaptation and 
mitigation. This will be undertaken in the context of both the host community and the refugee 
community. Implementation priorities in this regard will include climate-smart agriculture, 
forest landscape restoration, sustainable forest management, community-based natural 
resource management, land-use planning, water conservation though the promotion of water 
harvesting technologies, Integrated Water Resource Management, river catchment conservation 
and the adoption of renewable energy technologies.”  
93. 
In the project area, the Regional Commissioner and the Regional Administrative 
Secretary of Kigoma have identified the region’s highest priorities for development. These 
priorities include improving extension services to farmers to increase productivity and 
community participation in forest management and reforestation, both of which are addressed 
through this project. 
94. 
However, the independent TAP has noted that the project does not include any type of 
co-funding by the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania. This appears unusual as 
many entities will be engaged to support activities. In response to the question of the 
independent TAP on this matter, the proponents have explained that the project is very 
cognizant of investments made by district and regional authorities, TFS and other government 
entities.  
95. 
In the United Republic of Tanzania, all public funds are centrally controlled. District 
budgets encompassing the various sectors are submitted for consideration to the central 
government through the district executive director, and are then confirmed and allocated 
annually. The district, regional and TFS budget requirements for environment- and forestry-
 
10 Tanzania Climate Smart Agriculture programme. Available at 
https://marlo.cgiar.org/data/ccafs/projects/56/caseStudy/TANZANIA-CSA-PROGRAM-Final-version-3-August-
2015.pdf. 
11 Available at <https://data2.unhcr.org/en/documents/details/68448>.

=== PAGE 209 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 209 
 
 
related activities are reported to be quite modest in the three districts concerned. However, the 
actual amounts allocated are believed to be even smaller due to the government’s competing 
priorities and limited financial resources. Due to the annual public budgeting cycles, the various 
government entities contributing to environmental issues, and the related administrative 
complications of having these contributions reflected as co-financing in the project budget, it is 
suggested that the government contribution be considered as parallel financing. 
96. 
However, this parallel financing from the government is not identified and valued in the 
proposal, so it cannot be considered as official co-financing. The project sustainability will 
greatly depend on the ability of the VPO to allocate human and financial resources increasingly 
over the time of the project to allow the district offices, TFS and other relevant institutions to 
gradually manage and scale up the project interventions without the financial support of GCF 
and technical support from NGOs and technical partners. This includes the management and 
operation of flood and water harvest interventions, the GIS system and the forestry and 
agroforestry landscapes.   
1.5.2. 
Capacity of accredited entities and executing entities to deliver 
97. 
UNEP will be the accredited entity (AE). The VPO of the Government of the United 
Republic of Tanzania will act as the lead EE of the project, ensuring alignment with the national 
policies and plans as well as complementarity with other existing adaptation projects and the 
country’s NAP process. As the lead EE, VPO will oversee overall project implementation and be 
accountable to the AE for the effective use of resources during project implementation.   
98. 
VPO will execute project activities through different mechanisms including direct 
execution by PMU, cooperation agreements with district governments and TFS, as well as 
contracts with a technical partner, service providers and consultants and, if and when required, 
the engagement of technical experts and national/international NGOs. The district governments, 
under the supervision of VPO, will execute delegated activities at the district level directly and 
may be authorized to contract NGOs, Savings Association Management Offices (SAMOs) and 
service providers. The selection of the technical experts and national and international NGOs 
will be undertaken with UNEP guidance to ensure that United Nations requirements are met 
and with the aim of accelerating project implementation. 
99. 
The new project proposal includes the engagement of a technical partner with expertise 
in landscape approach, agroforestry, afforestation and GIS to provide technical advisory and 
capacity-building services to district officials, TFS officials and participant communities in the 
implementation of Output 1 and Output 2. The independent TAP believes that there is a need to 
have a careful technical and knowledge transfer plan in place to ensure that the national entities 
end up having the capacity to manage and scale up the project activities after project 
completion. 
100. 
UNHCR will be the EE for the project activity 2.3 (Implement flood and erosion control 
within and in the vicinity of the of the Nduta and Nyarugusu refugee camps and the Mtendeli 
decommissioned camp) and subactivities 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 (Construct micro-rainwater harvesting 
systems and establish water pumping and irrigation through approx. 50 micro-solar and 172 
treadle pumps). Through committed co-financing, UNHCR will implement activities in the camps 
targeting the refugee population (contributing to activities 2.2 (forestry) and 3.3 (livelihoods)). 
However, the livelihood support needs to be further explained in the current proposal, which 
has eliminated investments from GCF in these activities for the refugee camps.  
101. 
MoHA will play a key role in overseeing the implementation of activities in the refugee 
camps by coordinating the planning and monitoring of camp activities with UNHCR. This will 
include consultation on the location and design of infrastructure in the camps. MoHA will also

=== PAGE 210 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 210 
 
 
provide technical guidance and oversight on the performance of NGOs and service providers 
executing activities in the camps. 
102. 
The VPO and UNHCR will be accountable to the AE for the effective use of resources 
during project implementation. All operating policies and procedures will follow applicable 
United Nations rules, regulations and policies, which include provisions for financial 
management and procurement.  
103. 
As the AE, UNEP will oversee the efficient and effective delivery of the project’s 
objectives. UNEP has a broad global portfolio of climate change projects funded through 
different funds including the Adaptation Fund, the Least Developed Countries Fund, the Special 
Climate Change Fund, and bilateral funds such as those involving the European Commission. 
The goal of the climate change-related activities of UNEP in Africa includes supporting countries 
to reduce vulnerability and build resilience to the impacts of climate change through EbA. The 
UNEP knowledge base is derived from completed and ongoing projects that support: 
(i) methods and tools for decision-making; (ii) prioritizing, designing and implementing 
adaptation interventions; (iii) enhancing climate resilience by restoring vulnerable ecosystems 
that underpin community livelihoods; and (iv) monitoring the socioeconomic and 
environmental benefits of adaptation interventions.  
104. 
UNHCR has a long history in managing refugee camps. In the United Republic of 
Tanzania, it has managed refugee and host community relations with good convening power 
among the different actors on the ground.  
105. 
UNHCR has been working to address climate change issues in refugee contexts, 
especially through promoting the inclusion of refugees in local climate change adaptation 
programming. UNHCR has three field offices in the project area (in Kigoma town, Kasulu and 
Kibondo), which work with MoHA and local government authorities. In addition to its 
humanitarian activities, UNHCR also supports local communities with a large portfolio of 
relevant projects that include forestry, water conservation and sustainable energy.  
106. 
In line with the principles of the Global Compact on Refugees, UNHCR United Republic of 
Tanzania has forged partnerships with a range of development partners, United Nations 
agencies and the private sector to address energy and environment challenges in the camps and 
those faced by the host communities. UNHCR will build on these experiences and partnerships 
while implementing the project. Project compliance with the UNHCR Policy on Age, Gender and 
Diversity12 is mandatory. UNHCR applies an age, gender and diversity approach to all aspects of 
its work, applying participatory methodologies to promote the roles of women, men, girls and 
boys of all ages and backgrounds as agents of change in their families and communities. 
107. 
The new institutional arrangement allows for better country ownership as the VPO will 
work with the district councils that have the mandated authority in land-use planning and 
development at the district level and will therefore ensure that the project is anchored in local 
governance processes and that results are sustainable beyond the project duration. VPO will 
also sign one cooperation agreement with TFS, the authority responsible for forestry 
interventions and forest monitoring, for the implementation of activities 2.1 and 2.2 in 
coordination with the respective district councils. 
108. 
NEMC, particularly the NEMC office in Kigoma, will be responsible for ensuring 
compliance with relevant environmental laws and regulations as well as providing technical 
advisory and compliance guidance on all environmental aspects of the project to the two EEs 
and the implementing partners. 
 
12 <https://www.unhcr.org/protection/women/5aa13c0c7/policy-age-gender-diversity-accountability-2018.html>.

=== PAGE 211 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 211 
 
 
109. 
The Kigoma Regional Authority will host the PMU, provide support to the delivery of 
activities in the region and oversee the implementation of activities delegated to the district 
councils. The Kigoma Regional Authority where the PMU will be located, will convene all 
technical officers, including land-use planning officers, agriculture officers (representatives of 
the Ministry of Agriculture and food security at district level), engineering officers, etc., at 
regular intervals to inform the project’s annual workplan and discuss project implementation 
progress and adaptive management approaches. 
110. 
The project steering committee will be formed during the inception of the project and be 
responsible for high-level project direction. It will be composed of nominated representatives 
from the VPO as the national designated authority and lead EE, MoHA, the President’s Office – 
Regional Administration and Local Government, the Ministry of Water and Irrigation, the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, the Ministry of Community Development, Gender and 
Children, the Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Human 
Settlements, the Ministry of Tourism and Natural Resources, NEMC, TFS, district government 
representatives and refugee leaders, UNHCR and UNEP. 
111. 
Overall, the new proposal has a better institutional arrangement, with more country 
ownership and a mix of national and international specialized entities working together with 
the national and regional governments to ultimately deliver the project at the community level.  
1.5.3. 
Engagement with civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders 
112. 
The project design has been based on prior consultations, including with national and 
district government officials, communities and partners. The first round took place in March 
2017 and involved key stakeholders in the project area, including the government, NGOs, 
implementing partners and potential beneficiaries. The first visit to the three refugee camps 
also involved focus groups with potential beneficiaries as well as meetings with each camp 
commander and delivery partners currently responsible for implementation interventions in 
each camp. 
113. 
The second round of consultations was carried out during the feasibility study visit in 
September 2018. The purpose of the visit was to assess the technical feasibility of interventions 
and gather information about necessary management and arrangements structures for the 
implementation of the project.  
114. 
The third round of consultations took place in November 2018. It involved a series of 
strategic meetings with stakeholders, including the Permanent Secretary and senior officials 
within the VPO. The VPO outlined the review process and issuance of a no-objection letter. 
115. 
A fourth round of community consultations with project beneficiaries was undertaken 
between 7 and 11 September 2020 to validate the project design. Consultations sought to: (i) 
introduce beneficiary communities to the project and validate the relevance and applicability of 
project interventions (socioeconomic consultation); and (ii) ensure the validity of the technical 
and environmental assumptions (technical consultation).  
116. 
The fifth round of consultations started on 9–10 September 2021, when representatives 
from the VPO, UNHCR, MoHA and UNEP met in person in Dar es Salaam to discuss the project 
execution arrangements and the necessary project proposal revisions. The parties agreed on the 
changes in the proposal, as explained in this assessment. Consultations with TFS officers took 
place on 25 October 2021 to gain further understanding of the forest monitoring systems in 
place and the existing gaps in terms of equipment and information management systems, as 
well as to identify the appropriate investments in fire risk management. Between 15 September 
and 25 October, several meetings took place between VPO, UNHCR and UNEP to review the 
funding proposal and annexes based on the agreements reached in Dar es Salam and 
subsequent meetings.

=== PAGE 212 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 212 
 
 
117. 
However, during 2021, no consultations were undertaken with the communities (both 
host and refugee communities), and the changes in the project were decided using a more top-
down approach. 
118. 
The project has presented socioeconomic questionnaires used during consultation, 
including the answers by relevant stakeholders. However, it has not presented numbers on the 
men and women consulted and involved in each focus group. 
119. 
The objective of the stakeholder engagement and social inclusion plan is to engage all 
relevant stakeholders early in the land-use planning processes. It lists objectives and has a 
stakeholder engagement table. However, based on the consultation that has already taken place, 
the plan is very basic and it does not specify the roles of the communities and refugees. 
120. 
The project will need to design a more robust consultation process at the beginning of 
project implementation and continue the consultations on an ongoing basis, while including 
women’s groups, refugee groups, farmers’ groups, implementing partners, supporting 
organizations (e.g. the Kibondo Beekeeping Cooperative) and district officials.  
1.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
  
 
        Scale: N/A 
1.6.1. 
Cost-effectiveness and efficiency 
121. 
The total project cost is estimated at USD 23,618,646, of which GCF is expected to 
provide USD 17,198,340 as grant resources. UNHCR will be the only co-financier, providing USD 
4,467,293 of grant resources.  
122. 
Component 1 on VLUPs involves an investment of USD 1,062,805 from GCF, 
representing a reduction in the costs of developing climate-resilient refugee camp land-use 
planning that was included in the February 2021 proposal. Component 2, to restore ecosystems 
and deliver flood reduction infrastructure, will require USD 13,038,743 (USD 9,978,657 from 
GCF). Component 3, on intercropping systems and water harvest interventions, is estimated to 
cost USD 7,094,532 (USD 5,687,324 from GCF). Finally, Component 4, on mainstreaming climate 
change in plans and policies, is estimated to cost USD 469,554 in GCF funding.  
123. 
The new proposal is investing more resources in (i) equipment and training for forest 
monitoring; (ii) a technical partner to support 10,000 ha of agroforestry and 2,000 ha of 
afforestation systems; (iii) fire risk management and FFS; and (iv) efforts to increase the 
coverage of farmers targeted from 16 per cent to 25 per cent, resulting in the increase of 
agricultural input beneficiaries from 10,000 to 15,000 households and the provision of more 
improved seeds (revised upwards from 1 kilogram to 20 kilograms). 
124. 
It is noted that the erosion and flood infrastructure for the three camps account for 
USD 3,084,315, or 13 per cent of the requested amount from GCF. Even though this is not a big 
proportion of the project, it is important to realize that if the refugee camps are closed, the use 
of these resources might not be justified on climate change grounds.    
125. 
In general, the budget is well balanced and provides good value for money. The 
independent TAP enquired about the low costs of the forestry and agroforestry systems. The 
proponents responded that the costing was based on actual local costs from the field or 
benchmarked against existing projects. 
126. 
The cost of protecting village forest reserves is estimated at USD 420,000 for 20 villages 
(estimated at 30,000 ha), or USD 21,000 per village and USD 14/ha. It is noted that these are 
facilitation costs for establishing reserves and their management arrangements, and that no 
input and labour costs are included. Therefore, there is a need to understand whether the 
government will pay for labour costs, and how they are to be accounted for in a parallel budget.

=== PAGE 213 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 213 
 
 
127. 
A financial analysis of key project activities and subactivities was carried out, along with 
an economic analysis of the full project. The project proposal presents the internal rate of return 
for subactivities, with all of them having a positive internal rate of return as shown in the 
following table. 
Table. 1 
Project subactivity 
Internal 
rate of 
return 
Increase in net present value 
(NPV) for scenario with project 
relative to scenario without 
project (USD) 
NPV 
NPV per hectare 
2.2.1. Establish and maintain (a) agroforestry 
systems; and (b) nurseries for production of tree 
seedlings 
98% 
9,828,099  
343  
2.2.2. Undertake afforestation on village land to 
(a) restore critical ecosystem services; and (b) 
establish a sustainable supply of fuelwood 
50% 
2,933,973  
1,467  
3.1.2. Provide inputs for climate-resilient 
agriculture 
541% 
5,877,457  
19,592  
3.2. Increase water availability and use efficiency 
through water harvesting and efficient irrigation 
interventions 
197% 
3,509,447  
8,158  
3.3.1. Promote beekeeping to incentivize forest 
conservation in the forests surrounding the camps 
and villages 
Undefined  
996,463  
N/A   
3.3.2. Promote mushroom cultivation for 
marginalized groups with training and mushroom 
growing facilities. 
787% 
553,763  
N/A   
128. 
The overall project’s economic internal rate of return is estimated to be 13 per cent 
when the value of greenhouse gas mitigation benefits are excluded and 18 per cent when they 
are factored in.   
129. 
The project involves an operation and maintenance plan that is well developed, 
explaining the arrangements to maintain interventions during and after project completion. 
130. 
In terms of project sustainability, the project’s most important strategies include:  
(a) 
SAs, which are critical to the financial sustainability and reinvestment in productive 
interventions in the project. The SAs are proposed as a key delivery mechanism for the 
project. They allow individuals to pool finances together to save and borrow money 
based on the consensus of members. This project seeks to strengthen and scale up these 
existing structures by channelling funds through SAs for the purchase of climate-
resilient equipment. However, the SAs will not be offered to the refugee communities, 
losing out on an opportunity to give them some economic relief. 
(b) 
Long-term land-use plans and landscape interventions; and  
(c) 
Support for the mainstreaming of climate change adaptation in policies, plans and 
strategies in the United Republic of Tanzania.

=== PAGE 214 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 214 
 
 
131. 
However, the absence of co-financing from the Government of the United Republic of 
Tanzania might hinder the sustainability of the interventions after project completion. 
Moreover, the project will need to design a plan to gradually ensure that the district councils, 
TFS and other relevant institutions have the technical and financial capacity to manage and 
scale up the project in order to avoid the dependency on the technical partner and NGOs hired 
with GCF resources to support the project implementation.  
132. 
Finally, and as explained above, the investments in flood and erosion control in areas 
that will no longer be refugee camps poses a question relating to the climate and humanitarian 
rationale of the interventions. Moreover, the reduction of options for the refugee communities, 
including the lost opportunity for access to SAs and the lack of livelihood alternatives funded by 
GCF resources, diminished the effectiveness of the interventions to support the adaptive 
capacity of refugees. 
133. 
In conclusion, the independent TAP raises a point of precaution in relation to the 
infrastructure investments with GCF resources for temporary refugee camps, and the lack of 
GCF resources to support livelihood alternatives of refugee communities. Moreover, although 
the project provides good value for money, the project proponents need to further analyse the 
sustainability of the project interventions during and after project completion.  
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
134. 
The independent TAP would like to stress the fact that the interventions in the refugee 
camps will be subject to political decisions around the closure of the camps, as it is happening 
with the Mtendeli camp. Moreover, the restrictive policies of the Republic of Tanzania towards 
refugees, might hinder the overall spirit of the project to respond to the climate change impacts 
of hosts and refugee in an environment where climate, humanitarian and development 
approaches to problems and solutions intersect. Therefore, with the aim of safeguarding GCF 
investment in activities to be implemented within the camps’ boundaries, the independent TAP 
points out to the Board that the investments made on flood and erosion control measures might 
not be validated under a climate-humanitarian nexus rationale, in the event of the camp’s 
closure.   
135. 
The independent TAP recommends that the board approves the project, subject to the 
following conditions: 
136. 
Prior to the second disbursement of funds by GCF under the funded activity agreement, 
the AE shall deliver, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat: 
(a) 
An updated stakeholder engagement plan including:  
(i) 
Detailed direct beneficiary mapping in the host communities and in the refugee 
camps situated in the project area, and evidence of the effective consultations 
and participation of project beneficiaries -drawn from both the host 
communities and refugee camps- in the project activities;  
137. 
Prior to the third disbursement of funds by GCF under the funded activity agreement, 
the AE shall deliver, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat: 
(a) 
A sustainability plan, including: 
(i) 
the human resources and financial arrangements with governmental bodies at 
national and sub-national levels, to ensure the effective implementation of the 
project activities during and after project completion. 
(ii) 
the benefit-sharing arrangements in host communities and refugee camps that 
evidence how the benefits derived from the project are accrued and shared

=== PAGE 215 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 215 
 
 
among the host community beneficiaries and among refugees within the camps 
in the project Area.

=== PAGE 216 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 216 
 
 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP218) 
Proposal name: 
Building Climate Resilience in the Landscapes of the Kigoma 
Region, United Republic of Tanzania 
Accredited entity: 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
Country/(ies): 
Tanzania 
Project/programme size:  
Small 
 
Impact potential 
We thank the independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) for the review. UNEP is in general 
agreement with the points raised, with some clarifications, as follows: 
1. UNHCR executes activity 2.3, which includes flood and erosion control measures within the 
refugee camps and surrounding host community villages as well as activities 3.2.1 (micro-
rainwater harvesting systems) and 3.2.2 (irrigation) which are implemented in host 
community villages. 
2. As described in Point 7, land use planning processes will not take place in the camps. 
Participatory plans will be drawn up for the flood and erosion control outlining the locations 
and mix of grey and green interventions in the camps and immediate surrounding areas. 
3. Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA) and UNHCR rehabilitation plans after camp 
decommissioning do not have the sufficient scale to address the severe gully erosion problem 
in Mtendeli camp, which has significantly increased flood risk for downstream communities. 
This requires an investment to prevent further gully erosion, given climate change. The FP 
describes how the land degradation associated with the presence of refugee camps has 
significantly increased exposure of surrounding host communities to climate change risks, 
particularly flooding, jeopardizing climate resilience of host communities downstream. 
Therefore, the impact of the camps on the surrounding host population (364,745) remains and 
needs to be addressed as part of the integrated landscape approach to enhance resilience. 
4. The project before and after restructuring was designed to support communities living in 
the Kigoma region, whether outside or inside the camps, considering the ecosystem 
connectivity between communities and overall vulnerability to climate change.  Overall, USD 
14,191,680 (83% of GCF project intervention grant) will be spent on targeted interventions in 
the host communities within a 10-15 km radius surrounding the camps.  The project will 
directly benefit 364,745 people in the host community (64% of the target population) and 
205,596 people in refugee camps (36% of the target population). 
5. The type and coverage of livelihoods is contained in the logical framework in the FP (e.g 
15,000 people practicing climate-resilient farming). UNHCR co-finance for livelihood support 
to refugees under Output 3 is estimated at 1,047,183 USD in the Detailed budget (Annex 4). 
6. The amount of project funding for the refugee community remains the same.  The smaller 
GCF grant to refugees is compensated by a higher investment co-financing by UNHCR for the 
refugee community.  UNHCR continues to hold a high interest in disseminating learning and

=== PAGE 217 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 217 
 
 
 
benefits from this integrated landscape approach to inform its humanitarian programming 
globally.   
7. The FP sets out the climate rationale for the camp areas and surrounding communities. The 
camps are at the top of the watershed.  Hydraulic analysis shows that flooding in Kizuvu, 
Kasanda and Kakonko Districts occurs primarily a result of precipitation falling within the 
camp area itself and flowing down. Both host communities and refugee camps reported the 
occurrence of flooding events and subsequent riverbank and other land erosion. Current land 
use state under the RCP4.5 2050 precipitation future shows an average of ~4% additional 
inundation area. Under the no adaptation scenario, this increase will be 4.9% or 380 ha of 
additional flooding (Annex 2, section 2.2.2). The expected adaptation benefits for host 
population surrounding Mtendeli include: 
• 
Flood risk reduction in villages located downstream of the degraded Mtendeli camp 
area. 
• 
Protection of downstream agricultural lands and soils from further flooding, erosion 
and siltation, thereby improving food security. 
• 
Reduced siltation in surface water resources in the catchment thus improving water 
quality. 
• 
Protection of roads and services infrastructure in the decommissioned camp area and 
in downstream villages.  
• 
Opportunities for expansion of climate resilient productive activities in the restored 
former camp area.  
8.  Nduta has a capacity for 130,000 refugees and with the consolidation of Mtendeli refugees 
the camp population is estimated at 80,000 refugees, therefore still under capacity.  UNHCR co-
finance will support same small-scale livelihood activities that promote refugee households’ 
food security in Nduta camp, including refugees reallocated from Mtendeli. Only the support to 
the saving associations in the camps with GCF grant funding has been removed in the revision.  
Paradigm shift potential 
1. There are currently 205,000 refugees in the camps covered by the project. In the unlikely 
event of refugee numbers dramatically decreasing, closure of the camp(s) and re-allocation of 
the land to the host communities or change to other land use, project activities are designed to 
anchored to the landscape and benefit communities living in that landscape. 
2. It is expected that farmers will use the Savings Associations loans to purchase seedlings from 
the existing tree nurseries once they realize the benefits of including trees in their farming 
systems.  Furthermore, to promote livelihood activities that preserve forestry resources the 
project will support beekeeping groups in improving product quality, packaging and marketing 
to facilitate access to the existing honey value chains in the Kigoma region.  
3. The original purpose of the investment is to enhance resilience of communities at the 
landscape level and in so doing to address the climate adaptation needs of both refugees and 
host communities living in that landscape. Flood and erosion control interventions in the 
decommissioned Mtendeli camp area address the most critical adaptation need (reduced 
exposure to flood risk) of host communities located downstream of the camp.  
4. The long-term assumption is that Tanzania will continue to be refugee hosting country. As a 
stable and peaceful country in a volatile region, Tanzania’s long history of hosting refugees is 
expected to remain intact for the future. With regards to the current population, while ongoing 
repatriation to Burundi supported by both governments is ongoing, there is a reasonable

=== PAGE 218 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 218 
 
 
 
assumption and shared understanding that a large refugee population will remain in the 
foreseeable future. 
5. Skills and capacity will be strengthened with the inclusion of a technical partner, a chief 
technical advisor, a water resources expert and a climate resilient land use planning expert that 
will provide continuous technical advisory and skills transfer.  
6. The integrating factor between host and refugee communities is ecosystem connectivity and 
services to mitigate floods and droughts.  Livelihoods, forestry and flood and erosion control 
components within the refugee camps and surrounding areas have been maintained in the 
revised proposal. UNHCR remains committed to strengthen approaches and interventions that 
cut across the climate-humanitarian-development nexus. Experiences and lessons learned 
from this project would feed into wider organizational efforts to expand understanding and 
impact in this domain. 
Sustainable development potential 
With respect to the comment in paragraph 73 (i) women are represented, and participate 
meaningfully, in land-use planning at the village and camp levels: Kindly note that land use 
planning will not take place at camp level.  
Needs of the recipient 
Repatriation is encouraged but voluntary and remains regulated by the Tripartite Commission 
including the Government of Tanzania, Government of Burundi and UNHCR. The closure of 
Mtendeli camp was motivated by resource efficiency for service provision in the camps 
considering the current reduction in refugee population in both Mtendeli and Nduta camps. 
Country ownership 
The project is firmly anchored in government structures and ownership.  The project will 
establish a team working through Government:   
• 
Vice President’s Office, Division of Environment (DoE) which has the mandate to  
implement climate change actions in the country and is the designated lead agency for 
environment and climate change-related activities in the country.  
• 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA) will play a key role in overseeing the 
implementation of activities in the refugee camps 
• 
The Regional Administration, which operates under the President’s Office, Regional 
Administration and Local Government (PO-RALG), oversee the Local Government 
Authorities’ (LGAs) activities providing supervision and administrative instructions. 
• 
Kibondo, Kakonko and Kasulu districts and all technical district officers including land 
use planning officers, agriculture officers, engineering officers, etc. at regular 
intervals, to inform the project annual workplan and to discuss project 
implementation progress and adaptive management approaches. 
• 
The Tanzania Forest Service (TFS), a semi-autonomous organisation under the 
Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism. 
• 
The National Environmental Management Council (NEMC) will ensure 
compliance with relevant environmental laws and regulations as well as

=== PAGE 219 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 219 
 
 
 
providing technical advisory and compliance guidance on all environmental 
aspects of the project. 
The Government of Tanzania foresees ensuring sustainability thanks to the enhanced capacity 
of local stakeholders built by the project as well as provisions to the District budgets towards 
financial sustainability of interventions requiring government funding, both during and 
beyond the project duration.  This will be detailed in the sustainability plan (condition B).   
Efficiency and effectiveness 
1. Kindly note the total grant requested to GCF is $ 19,007,353 USD and UNHCR co-finance 
amount is $4,611,293 
2. In the unlikely event that the refugee camps do close, the flood and erosion control 
infrastructures will be absorbed by the host communities.  Please refer to the responses 4 and 
7 under ‘Impact Potential’. 
3. Regarding the development of technical and financial capacity to manage and scale up the 
project, please refer to response under ‘Country Ownership’. The shift towards greater 
involvement of the government through direct execution is believed to be a strong factor in 
ensuring future sustainability of the project.  In-kind and cash contributions from the 
Government of Tanzania have not been quantified in the proposal as co-finance commitment 
at the time of the proposal, however, government contributions (ex. human resources time and 
District budget allocations) will be provided to enable project implementation and future 
sustainability of interventions.  Please refer to response under ‘Country Ownership’. 
4. The proposal has a strong climate and humanitarian rationale.  There are clear adaptation 
benefits to both the refugee and host communities. Please refer to responses 6 and 8 under 
‘Impact Potential’ and responses 4 and 6 under ‘Paradigm Shift’. 
5. The recommendation to further analyse the sustainability of the project interventions after 
project completion is well received and will be addressed in the sustainability plan (in response 
to the proposed ITAP condition B).  
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
 
We note the iTAP’s concern related to the closure of the Mtendeli camp. Kindly note that the 
Mtendeli camp closure responds to a change in the size of the refugee population and the need 
to optimize limited humanitarian resources.  Furthermore, we note that the refugee population 
is subject to increase or decrease as a result of changes in the regional context. Tanzania is 
expected to continue to play an important role as a refugee hosting country, and the full closure 
of all camps in Kigoma is not foreseeable.   
We thank the ITAP for its careful review of the funding proposal and we accept the following 
conditions. 
(a) 
Prior to the second disbursement of funds by GCF under the funded activity 
agreement, the AE shall deliver, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF 
Secretariat: 
(i) 
An updated stakeholder engagement plan including:  
1) 
Detailed direct beneficiary mapping in the host communities and in 
the refugee camps situated in the project area, and evidence of the 
effective consultations and participation of project beneficiaries -

=== PAGE 220 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.09 
Page 220 
 
 
 
drawn from both the host communities and refugee camps- in the 
project activities;  
(b) 
Prior to the third disbursement of funds by GCF under the funded activity agreement, 
the AE shall deliver, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF Secretariat: 
(i) 
A sustainability plan, including: 
1) 
the human resources and financial arrangements with governmental 
bodies at national and sub-national levels, to ensure the effective 
implementation of the project activities during and after project 
completion. 
2) 
the benefit-sharing arrangements in host communities and refugee 
camps that evidence how the benefits derived from the project are 
accrued and shared among the host community beneficiaries and 
among refugees within the camps in the project Area.

=== PAGE 221 ===
Building climate resilience in the landscapes of Kigoma 
Region, Tanzania 
Annex 8 
Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan 
FP0009_UNEP_Tanzania_2023 06 30 
Gender Documentation for FP218

=== PAGE 222 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
2    Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
Contents 
1. Introduction 
3 
1.1. The context: gender issues in Tanzania 
3 
1.1.1. Kigoma region 
4 
1.2. Legal and administrative framework for women and gender equality 
5 
1.3. Gender issues in land, agriculture and forestry 
6 
1.3.1. Gender and land access 
6 
1.3.2. Gender and agricultural activities 
7 
1.3.3. Gender and forestry 
8 
1.3.4. Access to finance, information and decision-making 
9 
1.3.5. Risks of Sexual and Gender-based Violence 
11 
1.4. Gender considerations in the project design 
15 
1.4.1. Approach and problem analysis 
15 
1.4.2. Gender mainstreaming in the project design 
16 
1.4.3. Project expected benefits promoting gender equality 
17 
2. Gender Action Plan 
19

=== PAGE 223 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
3    Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
1. Introduction 
1.1. The context: gender issues in Tanzania 
Gender inequality is a salient issue in Tanzania. Over the last decades, the government has 
enacted and promoted a series of legislation and policies aimed at achieving gender equality. 
These policies have focused on greater representation of women in government and business, 
the importance of gender equality to the country’s development and land rights for women. 
However, implementation has been challenging, due in large part to cultural norms and the 
application of customary law. 
There is significant discrepancy in the economic roles of men and women. Although the overall 
labour force participation rate (including the informal sector) of women in Tanzania is 88.7%, 
only 29% of women participate in the formal economy. Gender segregation is ubiquitous, with 
women accounting for the majority of the workforce in the agriculture (52%) and the trading 
sector (55%) whilst being in the minority in the manufacturing, construction, transport and 
finance sectors. Important gender differences persist in the remuneration of workers, 
whereby only 4% of employed women in Tanzania are in paid jobs in either the formal or 
informal sector and women on average earn 35% less than their male counterparts.  
Women are also participating in low productivity sectors, specifically women account for the 
majority of the agricultural workforce, with approximately 90% of women living in rural areas 
participating in the sector. However, returns in the agriculture sector have declined over time, 
with the real growth rate of the sector declining from 7.5% in 2008 to 3.4% in 2013. Low 
productivity in the sector is largely a consequence of inadequate investment and lack of access 
to farm inputs, extension services, credit, modern technology application, trade and 
marketing support. Heavy dependency on rain-fed agriculture and unsustainable use of 
natural resources also play a role in reducing productivity1.  
Presently in Tanzania, women are responsible for the majority of domestic work. Men have 
traditional expectations of women’s role in household chores. Women who have jobs outside 
of the home are still expected to take responsibility of domestic work. This gendered division 
of labour begins early, with young girls, even those in school, being expected to shoulder their 
share of household chores. The same is not expected of their brothers.2 Women in Tanzania 
spend 28.8% of their time on unpaid care work whereas men spend 9% of their time on such 
work.3 
 
1 Hali ya Uchumi wa Taifa katika Mwaka 2014; Bank of Tanzania Annual Report 2013/14 
2 Fienstein et. al, “Gender Inequality in the Division of Household Labour in Tanzania,” African 
Sociological 
Review, 
Vol. 
14, 
No. 
2, 
2010. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.ajol.info/index.php/asr/article/viewFile/70239/58428 
3 UN Joint Programme for Kigoma

=== PAGE 224 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
4    Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
25% of Tanzanian households are headed by women, approximately half of whom have been 
widowed. In rural areas, 24% of all households are female-headed versus 27% in urban areas.4 
Female headed households (FHHs) have a larger number of dependents than male headed 
households (MHHs) with an average of 1.6 dependents in rural areas as compared to 1.3 for 
MHHs.5 The wellbeing of a household is linked with the education level of its head; higher 
levels of education correlate with better wellbeing conditions. This is critical for rural women, 
49% of whom have no educational attainment at all, as compared to 40% of rural men.6 
Because FHHs in Tanzania typically have lower levels of education than MHHs, FHHs have 
poorer wellbeing conditions. This pattern continues for members of FHHs, who have, on 
average, fewer years of education than members of MHHs.7  
Women in Tanzania face additional prejudice and, in some cases, violence. According to UN 
Women, discrimination, abuse and Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) is rife in 
Tanzania, owing to “patriarchal and traditional norms.” Two out of 15 women between the 
ages of 15 to 49 have experienced physical violence and one out of ten women of the same 
age range has experienced rape. 
In terms of needs, women farmers require increased access to capital and educational 
resources to increase their adaptive capacity. Land tenure is also a critical limitation on 
women’s ability to become climate resilient.  
1.1.1. Kigoma region 
Kigoma is among the poorest regions in Tanzania, with a poverty rate of 34,5%.8 76% of the 
population are farmers.9 Many of the trends seen at the national level are evident in Kigoma. 
The percentage of FHHs in Kigoma is higher in both rural and urban areas at 34.8% and 38.5% 
respectively.10 The average size of FHHs is 7.8 as compared to 4.0 for MHHs. The 2011/2012 
Tanzania Household Budget found that larger household sizes correlate with increased 
poverty rates, suggesting that FHHs in Kigoma are likely to be poorer than MHHs.11 The literacy 
rate is higher amongst men (71%) than women (67%).12  
Nearly 25% of people in Kigoma have never attended school. There is a significant gender gap 
with regards to school attendance. According to the 2012 census, 28.1% of females in Kigoma 
have never attended school versus 21.5% of males. 28.1% of girls were attending school as 
compared to 32.6% of males.13  National level trends suggest that educational attainment is 
 
4 Osorio et al., “Gender Inequalities in Rural Employment in Tanzania Mainland,” 2014. Available at: 
http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4083e.pdf 
5 Ibid. 
6 Ibid. 
7 Ibid. 
8 Tanzania National Bureau of Statistics, Household Budget Survey 2017/18 
9 Ibid. 
10 Kigoma Regional Profile 
11 Ibid. 
12 Ibid. 
13 Ibid.

=== PAGE 225 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
5    Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
positively linked to wellbeing at the household level. 14 Thus it is likely that FHHs will have 
lower levels of wellbeing than MHHs. 
Adherence to traditional gender roles results in women and girls assuming responsibility for 
domestic work, whereas, men are recognized as breadwinners expected to provide for their 
families. Women and girls are responsible for the collection of water and firewood as well as 
farming activities. Consequently, their risk of exposure to sexual and gender-based violence is 
high. The risk increases as these resources become scarcer, requiring women and girls to travel 
ever greater distances.15 Additionally, dependency on firewood for cooking fuel negatively 
impacts women. Inefficient cooking practices result in poor indoor air quality and affect the 
health of all household members, but especially women, who are responsible for food 
preparation 16 and the related challenge of obtaining cooking fuel, often in the form of 
fuelwood.  
 
1.2. Legal and administrative framework for women and gender equality 
At the policy level, Tanzania has demonstrated a significant commitment to achieving gender 
equality. In 1990, the Ministry of Community Development, Gender and Children (MCDGC), 
formerly known as the Ministry of Community Development, Women Affairs and Children 
(MCDWAC) was established.  
Over the following years, a number of policies and legislative acts have been passed to this 
effect, emphasizing non-discrimination and the use of affirmative action. These include:  
• The Land Act and Village Land Act of 1999 repealed customary and traditional 
practices with the aim of increasing gender equality in land tenure, use and 
management.   
• A year later, in 2000, legislation was passed to increase the number of women in 
government positions to 30% by 2005. At present, women hold 36% of parliamentary 
seats and 20% of ministerial positions. 17 33% of local government seats are also 
reserved for women.18 
• The Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) Development Policy of 2003 highlights the 
significance of women’s role in SMEs and includes provisions to support women 
entrepreneurs.19  
• Two key poverty reduction strategy papers, MKUKUTA I and II (2005 and 2010, 
respectively), recognized the significance of gender equality and women’s 
 
14 Osorio et al., “Gender Inequalities in Rural Employment in Tanzania Mainland,” 2014. Available at: http://www.fao.org/3/a-
i4083e.pdf 
15 UN Joint Programme for Kigoma 
16 Ibid. 
17 World Bank, Tanzania, Gender Data Portal, http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/country/tanzania  
18 Ministry of Health, Community Development, Gender, Elderly and Children, Women Political 
Empowerment, 
http://www.mcdgc.go.tz/index.php/issues/women_political_empowerment_and_decision_making  
19
 UNIDO, 
Tanzania 
SME 
Development 
Policy 
2003, 
2012. 
Available 
at: 
https://open.unido.org/api/documents/5403996/download/TANZANIA%20SME%20DEVELOPMENT%20POLICY%202
003%20-%20%E2%80%9Cten%20years%20after%E2%80%9D%20-%20Implementation%20Review

=== PAGE 226 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
6    Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
empowerment and identified both as key national development concerns. 
Additionally, the plans include gender-specific objectives to reduce poverty and 
achieve equality. 
• The Five-Year National Development Plan emphasizes women’s economic 
empowerment as a driver of economic equality between genders. 
• Tanzania Vision 2025 highlights equality between genders, in reference to Tanzania’s 
Constitutions. Additionally, equality between genders is recognized as a key strategy 
for achieving the path outlined in the document.   
The Tanzanian government has undertaken a number of additional activities to promote 
gender equality. Gender responsive budgeting was introduced with the aim of ensuring that 
public funds advance gender equality. In 2010, Tanzania became a signatory to the Southern 
African Development Community Protocol on Gender and Development, which calls for 50/50 
representation in all decision-making bodies. 20 A five-year National Plan of Action to End 
Violence Against Women and Children (NPA-VAWC 2017/18 – 2021/22), has been developed 
by consolidating eight different action plans addressing violence against women and children 
to create a single comprehensive, National Plan of Action to eradicate violence against women 
and children in the country. The NPA-VAWC addresses the problem of violence against women 
and children by focusing on building preventive systems and responding to the needs of 
survivors. The implementation of this Plan is the direct responsibility of the Ministry of Health, 
Community Development, Gender, Elderly and Children (MoHCDGEC).  
The National Plan of Action to end Violence against Women and Children in Tanzania 
envisages to include all persons in Tanzania including refugees.  Under this initiative, Gender 
Desks manned by the Tanzania Police Force have been established in all 3 refugee camps and 
Social Welfare Officers have been deployed from the District to support case management in 
both the camps and surrounding host community villages. 
1.3. Gender issues in land, agriculture and forestry 
1.3.1. Gender and land access 
Access to land and productive resources are essential to empower women economically. 
However, in Tanzania, women continue to face discrimination in land rights, in spite of positive 
reforms. Though laws may not formally discriminate against women, societal norms interfere 
with their implementation. Gender discrimination in land access is evidenced by low levels of 
land ownership amongst women: only 20% of Tanzanian women owned land in their own 
names.21 Women who do own land often have smaller plots and less livestock. They also have 
less access to critical financial, educational and technological resources.  
The Village Land Act (VLA) was introduced in 1999 with the aim of negating customary laws 
that discriminated against women’s land tenure. The VLA breaks new ground in women’s 
rights with Section 3(2) and Sections 3, 18, 22, and 20(2) rendering as invalid any customary 
practices that discriminate against women. It also states (Section 3(2)): “The right of every 
 
20
 United 
Nations 
Tanzania, 
“Gender 
Issues”. 
http://tz.one.un.org/who-we-are/7-un-programmes/87-
gender?showall=&start=2  
21 Ibid.

=== PAGE 227 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
7    Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
woman to acquire, hold, use and deal with, the land shall be to the same extent and subject 
to the same restrictions treated as a right of any man.” The Act also voids the role of customary 
law in determining land tenure and it recognized women’s rights to land in the event of the 
death of her husband or upon divorce. There are also requirements for female representation 
in key decision-making bodies. In the Land Tribunal Act (No. 2/2002) and its regulation (of 
2004), it is clearly stated under Section 5 that at least three of the seven members of a Village 
Land Council should be women. The Land Use Planning Act states that land adjudication 
committees should be composed of at least four female members out of nine, and there 
should be at least 25% female representation on VCs (as in the Local Government Act). 
Despite a supportive policy environment, Tanzanian women continue to struggle to access 
land rights. Cultural and religious institutions tend to favour men and may perpetuate the 
view that men are the sole owners of the land and that they should control the income 
generated from it. Should a woman attempt to claim her right to land, household and 
community conflicts may arise, discouraging women from seeking such rights.22 Social norms 
perpetuate the patriarchal view that men are the primary decision-makers and as such, should 
have disproportionate influence in land related decisions and practices related to ownership 
and control of the land. 
Insecure land rights offer women little incentive to improve the resilience of their 
agriculture.23 Without any assurances, women are hesitant to make investments that would 
enhance their land’s productivity. 
1.3.2. Gender and agricultural activities 
The agriculture sector is a mainstay of Tanzania’s economy, employing nearly 67% of the 
labour force.24 90% of rural women are employed in agriculture and they are the main 
producers of food and cash crops.25 26 In all regions in Tanzania, rural women have lower 
earnings than rural men despite being more active within the sector.27 Nearly 50% of women 
work as unpaid family labour in agriculture.28 Agriculture accounts for nearly a quarter of 
Tanzania’s GDP. The sector is underperforming in part due to prevailing gender inequality in 
land rights and in access to and control of resources (assets, capital, extension services, etc.). 
Farming is practised by men and women of all ages, but due to the physical nature of work, 
elderly people, and people with health problems do not typically participate. 
Women in Tanzania are more vulnerable to climate change than men, especially within the 
agricultural sector. This is due to the gender roles and norms but also because of a 
dependency on rain-fed agriculture. Women’s vulnerability to climate change is also 
exacerbated by their central role in water collection. Increased water scarcity will increase the 
 
22 UNA Tanzania, “Land rights in Tanzania- A Gender Issue,” http://una.or.tz/land-rights-tanzania-gender-issue/ 
23 Ibid. 
24 CIA, “Tanzania,” The World Factbook, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/tz.html. 
25 UNA Tanzania, “Land rights in Tanzania- A Gender Issue,” http://una.or.tz/land-rights-tanzania-gender-issue/ 
26 https://www.climatelearningplatform.org/sites/default/files/resources/tanzania_country_climate_risk_assessment_repor
t_-final_version.pdf  
27 UNA Tanzania, “Land rights in Tanzania- A Gender Issue,” http://una.or.tz/land-rights-tanzania-gender-issue/  
28 UN Joint Programme for Kigoma

=== PAGE 228 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
8    Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
time women spend traveling to collect water and result in opportunity costs, including less 
time to attend school, vocational training, or engage in income generating activities.29 
The economy and livelihoods of the population in Kigoma region rely on natural resources, in 
particular agricultural production. About 90% of the region’s population, including refugees, 
are engaged in rainfed, subsistence agriculture. Farmers groups in Kigoma region, especially 
in the targeted districts, are generally in need of further capacity development and extension 
support. The group leader is usually male, whereas supporting leadership (treasurer and in 
some cases the secretary) are women. Some groups supported by NGOs have more female 
membership - especially those cultivating cassava.  
As noted, refugees also engage in agriculture activities. Within the camps, land plots allocated 
per household are small. Families engage in small gardening projects around their plots to 
supplement monthly food rations received. Home gardening in the camp has been restricted 
to kitchen gardening whereby maize crops are banned. Women play a key role in tending to 
the kitchen gardens both by way of taking charge of gardening operations including weeding, 
harvesting, post-harvest handling (including drying) and to a small extent sale/exchange of 
the excess food that is not consumed by the household. Irrigation and watering of the gardens 
is also largely carried out by women in the household. They are supported to practice 
innovative ways of producing vegetables through the use of sacks/ basins and kitchen gardens 
to improve dietary diversity.30  
Refugees also engage in agriculture activities outside the camps. As Tanzania follows a strict 
encampment policy, these are informal land use/land lease arrangements which mainly 
involve renting a farm or farming for Tanzanians. Refugee agricultural labourers include both 
men and women and Congolese and Burundians.  
1.3.3. Gender and forestry 
Women tend to be underrepresented in forest management activities. 31 Gender relations 
shape patterns that in turn reinforce women’s vulnerability to deforestation and forest 
degradation. In order to develop appropriate interventions such as Community Based Forestry 
(CBF) that address the location-specific vulnerabilities and are context specific, there is need 
to understand how men and women are affected by deforestation and degradation32. Despite 
the accepted role that gender plays in determining a person’s vulnerability to deforestation 
and forest degradation in Tanzania there has been limited emphasis specifically on the 
linkages between forestry and gender. The hardship brought by deforestation and forest 
 
29 Ibid. 
30 A full-time agronomist is employed by UNHCR’s implementing partner Danish Refugee Council to provide technical support, 
conduct demonstration gardening sessions and worked closely with project animators (whose main role are to educate and 
sensitize the refugee community on the importance and management of kitchen gardens, including disease management). 
31  Sellers, “Gender and Climate Change: A Closer Look at Existing Evidence,” November 2016. Available at: 
https://wedo.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/GGCA-RP-FINAL.pdf 
32 FAO (2017). Training Manual on Community Forest Management and Diversification

=== PAGE 229 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
9    Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
degradation affects men and women differently and exacerbates the already existing 
inequalities between the sexes33.  
In the host community villages where land use planning has been undertaken, women are 
represented in village environmental management committees. With regard to ongoing tree 
planting and forest related activities in the refugee camps, these are undertaken in close 
collaboration with women.  Through annual distribution of seedlings, women are involved in 
the distribution plans as well as in the tree seedling preparation and planting phases. 
As noted, refugee women bear the primary responsibility of collecting fuelwood. In host 
communities it is also the women are mostly involved in the collection of fuelwood34 and 
other non-forest timber products (NFTPs) such as mushrooms. In some cases these activities 
serve as an adaptation strategy or as an effort to secure an additional income when normal 
income generating activities cannot be undertaken. Men, however, are becoming increasingly 
involved in NFTP collection, as their traditional livelihood activities are under increasing 
climate-related stress.35 
Women also face cultural barriers when engaging in forest-related livelihood activities, such 
as beekeeping. As part of Enabel’s work in the Kibondo area, women have been supported to 
become beekeepers. Some of them raised issues related to cultural prejudices towards 
women engaging with hives, as traditionally they are believed to damage bees by touching 
the hives.36  
During community consultations conducted in September 2020, many of the women, from 
both populations, expressed interest in the forest-related activities aimed at supporting 
sustainable alternative livelihoods and were enthusiastic about the idea of mushroom farming 
and beekeeping. In a number of the group discussions, women expressed their particular 
enthusiasm for mushroom farming. When probed they indicated that beekeeping is 
considered an activity more likely to be undertaken by men.  
1.3.4. Access to finance, information and decision-making 
Rural women in Tanzania have limited decision-making power and access to credit, and thus 
face challenges investing in resilience measures.37 Only 13.2% of FHHs have access to credit, 
as compared to 86.7% of MHHs.38 Women dominate the informal economy, resulting in their 
limited control over land. The resulting inability to provide collateral affects their ability to 
secure finance. At the village level, women are involved in women-only village savings 
associations.  
 
33 Sangeda et al. (2016). Understanding the Driver-Commodities – Gender Nexus in Tanzania. Project Report. Sokoine University 
of Agriculture, Tanzania and IIED, UK. 
34 National Forest Resources Monitoring and Assessment of Tanzania Mainland (2008) 
35 Ibid. 
36 Source: Enabel’s video https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IInw5pZN71k  
37 Irish Aid, Resilience and Economic Inclusion Team, Policy Unit, Tanzania Country Climate Change Risk Assessment Report, 
February 2018. Available at:  
https://www.climatelearningplatform.org/sites/default/files/resources/tanzania_country_climate_risk_assess
ment_report_-final_version.pdf  
38 Ibid.

=== PAGE 230 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
10    Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
Rural women have limited access to educational and technological resources. Literacy rates 
are lower in rural areas of Tanzania, with 39% of women being illiterate and 23% of men.39 
49% of rural women have no educational attainment at all, as compared to 40% of rural men.40 
Though there is evidence to suggest that there are equal levels of participation in climate 
change awareness raising activities, discrepancies in literacy levels and ability to access 
information between genders suggest that “it is unlikely that there is equality in awareness.”41   
During community focus group discussions notable variations were evident in the level of 
participation in and the financial contributions and gains obtained from the savings 
associations. In the host communities, many respondents indicated to be members of one of 
the numerous savings associations. Particularly women appeared to be well represented in 
these savings groups. Amounts obtained through the savings groups in some cases are quite 
substantial with women indicating to have received amounts of up to TZs 800,000. The 
finances obtained through the savings associations are frequently spent on expenses such as 
school fees, household expenditures, small business enterprises and agriculture inputs.  
The picture obtained in the camps differs slightly. For instance, in Nduta camp the men 
interviewed were notably more actively participating in the savings associations than women. 
There may be some cultural aspects at play whereby one hypothesis is that saving associations 
in Tanzania were traditionally initiated and used by women only. Tanzanian men may give 
money to or allow their wives to invest their money in savings associations, whereas refugee 
men may prefer to be participating directly themselves. In the camps it was noted that in some 
cases, mostly by the men, substantial investments were made, though not at the scale as 
noted in the host communities. Investments made included agriculture activities (e.g. land 
leasing) and livestock trading. Women in Mtendeli remarked that the importance and strength 
of the savings associations has decreased substantially since the closure of the common 
markets in early 2019. The women explained that food rations are sometimes monetized to 
be able to participate in the savings associations. In some cases, women pool portions of their 
rations and take turns in selling the food thereby obtaining some cash. Recent cuts in WFP 
food rations are expected to further erode the functioning of these savings groups, without 
additional interventions to support livelihoods.42  
The community leadership structures in the camps are yet to achieve gender parity in decision 
making positions even if the current refugee leader in Nyarugusu is a Congolese woman. At 
the household level, decision making power also tends to be skewed in favour of men. 
Community consultations revealed that intimate partner conflicts occur with some regularity 
between husbands and wives on how household money is being spent. Refugee women in 
Mtendeli camp remarked on the impact of life skills trainings that the refugee community, 
both men and women, had received, stating that this improved women’s position in the 
household and decision-making power. Women in both host community villages and within 
 
39 Osorio et al., 2014 
40 Ibid. 
41  Hepworth, Climate Change Vulnerability and Adaptation Preparedness in Tanzania, 2010. Available at; 
http://www.tzdpg.or.tz/fileadmin/_migrated/content_uploads/TZ_CC_Adaptation_Preparedness_-
HBS_2010_02.pdf  
42 As of November 2020, WFP food rations in the camps stand at 72%

=== PAGE 231 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
11    Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
the camps indicated that should their incomes increase, or even surpass that of their 
husbands, they do not fear strained relationships or increased violence within the household.  
1.3.5. Risks of Sexual and Gender-based Violence  
Kigoma is home to three refugee camps: Nduta, Mtendeli and Nyarugusu. As of September 
2021, the camps host 205,596 refugees, 78 percent of whom are women or children and just 
over half (55 percent) are children.  According to UNHCR 54.3 percent of refugee households 
in Tanzania are female headed households.43  
The major economic activity within the camps is the selling of food rations and non-food items 
received from aid agencies. There is some skills-based economic activity in the camps which 
includes tailoring/embroidering, barbering and hairstyling, cooking, soap-making, repairs, 
carpentry or masonry (done primarily by men) and small trade (women).44 Refugees also 
undertake labour-intensive activities, which are largely centred around agriculture. Both 
women and men engage in farming.45  
Despite efforts by UNHCR and its partners, refugee women and children continue to be 
exposed to a range of risks including SGBV, child abuse, early and forced marriages. Some of 
these risks relate to existing negative cultural norms and practices related to power imbalance 
that bring about gender inequality. Gender discrimination often sustains systems that 
perpetuate GBV against women and girls in the refugee camps. Typical culturally driven 
harmful traditional practices include physical abuse (wife beating) as a form of disciplining, 
child marriages, and forced marriages among others. UNHCR GBV reports between January 
and September 2020 indicate over 1,700 women and girls suffered from different forms for 
GBV including physical abuse (intimate partner violence), rape, emotional/psychological 
abuse, denial of resources and opportunities and forced/child marriages. The risk of GBV are 
faced both within and outside of the refugee camps. UNHCR and partners have established 
GBV multisectoral referral systems to support all GBV survivors based on their needs. 
Refugees living in the camps are particularly exposed to violence, including GBV when they 
leave the camps to search for work, to trade, or to gather firewood in the villages near the 
camps. In the zones around the camps both host communities and refugees fear and 
experience occasional violence, leading to conflict and mistrust, although this is more acute 
for the Burundians than for the more-established Congolese. Refugee children inside the 
camps are further at risk of GBV, sexual exploitation and abuse, and early or forced marriage 
due to the congested living conditions especially in collective shelters, and the limited 
opportunities for post-primary education. The existing restrictions on freedom of movement, 
restrictions on cash-based interventions and the limited livelihood opportunities have further 
complicated the search for self-reliance among refugees, consequently increasing their 
vulnerability. Women and girls may become compelled to engage in risky coping mechanisms 
or behaviours (such as sex work/transactional sex, illegally travelling outside of camp 
boundaries, or engaging in prohibited livelihoods) to support their households, maintain food 
and energy security, and obtain necessary resources. Firewood collection is considered a 
 
43 UNHCR Tanzania Refugee Situation Statistical Report as of 30 September 2021 
44 Socioeconomic Assessment of North West Tanzania 
45 Ibid.

=== PAGE 232 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
12    Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
particular risky activity and exposes women to protection issues, especially SGBV. Firewood 
collection is a gendered activity and is mostly undertaken by women. Although refugees are 
technically only permitted to travel within a 4km buffer around the camps to collect wood 
fuel, these areas cannot presently meet the supply needs for the camp populations, forcing 
women to travel further beyond this boundary and exposing them to risk of GBV. Women 
engaged in collection risk violence, torture, rape and murder perpetrated by locals.46  A 2015 
field report from Refugees International found that 25% of 224 GBV incidents reported by 
Burundian refugees in Tanzania over a five month period occurred during firewood collection 
trips, and 90% of these incidents were rape or sexual assault.47 Although culturally a gendered 
role, women refugees are also forced into this activity as they pose a lesser risk to host 
communities, whereas male refugees collecting firewood are perceived to be ‘stealing’ and 
may be violently attacked. Men who sometimes accompany the women during firewood 
collection for security purposes, rarely report any assaults as culturally this would make them 
seem weak and incapable of defending themselves as well as their loved ones. As such, 
statistics in this regard are not readily available. 
Within the camp setting, a number of other factors can be identified that exacerbate the risk 
of GBV amongst refugees, which include: 
• Alcohol use and abuse 
• Family conflict and intimate partner violence, particularly where there is dissent about 
voluntary return to country of origin 
• Households practicing polygamy 
• Poor lighting in camps leading to insecurity 
• Restrictions of freedom of movement and livelihood activities, which contribute to 
negative coping mechanisms such as sex work and transactional sex 
• Empowerment projects where female household members begin to earn money, or 
save through VSLA, which can trigger inter-partner violence from men 
Peaceful co-existence meetings are held on a quarterly basis between representatives from 
the refugee community and the host communities. These meetings systematically address 
GBV issues and incidences, often related to fuelwood collection, and have contributed to 
sensitizing the host and refugee communities and mitigating any conflict that could jeopardize 
the relationships between the two communities. Issues relating to the apprehension of 
perpetrators also feature in the peaceful coexistence meetings as the local law enforcement 
officers with jurisdiction outside the camps are also invited to these forums. Camp law 
enforcement officers are also present during these meetings to ensure cooperation with local 
authorities. 
Preventive measures in place include promotion of lockable doors in shelters use of partitions 
to improve privacy, proper design of sanitary facilities, and engaging men and community 
leaders in creating safe spaces for women’s participation in economic programs. Increase in 
food rations are reported to reduce engagement in risky coping strategies. While limited at 
 
46 Ibid. 
47  Vigaud-Walsh, Women and Girls Failed: The Burundian Refugee Response in Tanzania, 2015. Available at: 
http://static1.squarespace.com/static/506c8ea1e4b01d9450dd53f5/t/5678aee07086d7cddecf1bab/14507497
07001/20151222+Tanzania.pdf.

=== PAGE 233 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
13    Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
the moment, long-term investments in livelihood activities for income generation and 
alternative fuel sources are expected to reduce SGBV risks. 
Inter-agency standard operating procedures and protocols (SOPs) exist for managing risks of 
sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV)48 and sexual exploitation, abuse, and harassment 
(SEAH) 49 .  The SEAH protocol covers roles and responsibilities, task force membership, 
procedures for receiving complaints and reports, conducting investigations, confidentiality, 
reporting to national authorities, interagency code of conduct and other processes. 
A community-based feedback mechanism has been set up in all the camps where help desks 
are staffed by different humanitarian partners. Refugees can report incidents as well as obtain 
information on services and assistance. Complaints can be made in person, in writing, or by 
email depending on the preference of the complainant. Complaint boxes have been 
established in all three camps to receive feedback from persons of concern and are managed 
by UNHCR and Partners. Referral pathways to address incidents including feedback from 
complaint boxes have also been established and are operational. 
Data is collected in an information management system. Incidents of sexual exploitation and 
abuse have been reported by persons of concern where the perpetrators are security 
personnel. Incidents that involve humanitarian workers and refugee incentive workers are 
also treated as sexual exploitation and abuse. UNHCR is also starting to develop disability 
inclusion in SGBV programming, such as developing tools to support non-verbal 
communication with a view to make SGBV referral pathways more accessible to people with 
disability. 
Moreover, UNHCR activities prioritized for 2021 include mobilizing the refugee community in 
awareness-raising campaigns on SGBV prevention and response. In addition, capacity building 
will be provided to police, judicial and partner staff to strengthen Survivor’s access to legal 
recourse including mobile courts. To address psycho-social needs SGBV survivors will be 
provided with counselling. These are parallel activities that will be done by UNHCR, and that 
will be complemented by the gender action plan in the project by reinforcing messages on 
SGBV in training activities and increasing awareness on incident reporting mechanisms. 
Outside the camps in host community settings, the Kigoma Joint Programme has undertaken 
and planned under the theme “Violence Against Women and Children (VAWC)”, under the 
leadership of the International Organization for Migration (IOM), UN Population Fund 
(UNFPA), UNICEF, and UN Women.  
The VAWC theme obtained funding of $1,129,617 in 2019-2020. Under this funding, the main 
achievements include: 
 
48 The inter-agency standard operating procedures for prevention and response to gender-based violence in 
Nyarugusu, Nduta and Mtendeli refugee camps, Tanzania, was updated in April 2018 and is periodically revised.  
49 The inter-agency protocol for protection from sexual exploitation and abuse was endorsed on October 24, 
2018. Parties to this protocol include UNHCR, WFP, UNICEF, IOM, Plan International, Medecins Sans Frotieres, 
International Rescue Committee, Caritas Kigoma Diocese, ICRC, Norwegian Refugee Council, Danish Refugee 
Council, OXFAM International, Good Neighbors, World Vision, Water Mission, Tanzanian Red Cross Society, 
HelpAge International, African Initiatives for Relief and Development, Tanzanian Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Women’s Legal Aid Center, REDESO, Baba Watoto Centre, and Tanganyika Christian Relief Services.

=== PAGE 234 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
14    Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
- 
around 12,410 community members were trained on the effects of child marriage and 
GBV; 
- 
60,971 people were reached with VAWC messages and advocacy materials; 
- 
Active Protection Committees in 4 districts were established; 
- 
105 victims of trafficking and survivors of domestic violence were accommodated in 
safe house and provided with basic needs; 
- 
201 women and children received legal aid services. 
Priorities include strengthening of coordination structures, developing online training, 
improving response services, continued prevention advocacy activities with focus on men as 
actors to prevent violence. In support of these activities, the project’s gender action plan will 
include activities to include SGBV modules for women and men participants of training 
activities, including how to access support and incident reporting mechanisms. Moreover, the 
lessons learned from the community feedback mechanism and complaints boxes within the 
camps will be extended to the host community setting with the support of the Protection 
Committees established in the districts.  
In the local communities of Kigoma Region, the most commonly reported types of SGBV are 
physical violence, emotional violence, economic violence, human trafficking and child labour. 
Several factors contribute to the drivers of SEAH in the Kigoma region: traditional gender roles 
and cultural norms perpetuate practices like early marriage and gender-based violence; high 
poverty levels and limited livelihood opportunities increase vulnerability; insufficient 
infrastructure, limited access to services, and low awareness of support services hinder 
survivors' ability to seek help; overcrowding, resource scarcity, and tensions between 
communities contribute to the risk.  
The government of Tanzania has taken measures to prevent and address SGBV and SEAH at 
all levels. This includes adopting a National Plan of Action and establishing Women and 
Children Protection Committees at various levels, staffed by professionals from different 
backgrounds. These committees serve as primary points for collecting cases of violence 
against women and children. One Stop Centers, including four in the Kigoma region, act as 
referral points and provide services to survivors. However, more centers are needed 
throughout the country. 
To raise awareness, sensitization programs are conducted by various entities, including 
Women and Children Protection Committees, the Ministry of Social Affairs, Gender and 
Children Desks, and civil society organizations. Reporting mechanisms are in place, allowing 
victims to report to the committees, social welfare officers, police, and health officers. There 
is also a Toll-Free number available for reporting SGBV cases, ensuring confidentiality and 
anonymity. 
For case management and referral, victims are referred to receive clinical and psychosocial 
support through One Stop Centers, Police Gender and Children Desks, Women and Children 
Protection Committees, and social welfare officers. Psychological counselling is provided by 
professionals in healthcare facilities or One Stop Centers.

=== PAGE 235 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
15    Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
1.4. Gender considerations in the project design 
1.4.1. Approach and problem analysis 
Without a thorough understanding of the specific roles, responsibilities and opportunities that 
are ascribed to women and men, the project’s activities may add to women’s ‘time poverty’ 
(the opportunity cost of the non-remunerated hours women spend performing 
domestic/care/household work, which could have otherwise been spent on economically 
remunerative activities). From the overview of gender issues above, it becomes clear that 
women, both from the refugee as well as the host communities, are bearing the responsibility 
for a substantial number of household tasks. This entails productive and reproductive tasks 
and includes agriculture production and post-harvest activities, collecting fuelwood and 
water, food preparation and child care. Through the implementation of the project activities, 
women are expected to adopt climate-resilient agricultural techniques, sustainable forest 
management practices and alternative livelihoods – altering and in some cases increasing their 
time-use.   
The assessment of gender issues prevalent among host communities and refugees in Kigoma 
region, and the considerations on gender-related issues for forestry, agriculture and land use 
have been used to identify the main problems related to gender. The table below provides a 
problem analysis with regards to gender issues, while the following sections describe how 
these are mainstreamed into the project design.   
Root causes 
Insecure land 
tenure and 
exclusion from 
access and control 
over land 
Gender-blind 
policies, 
discriminatory 
social and cultural 
norms related to 
land use, 
agriculture, water 
and forestry 
Gender gaps in 
skills and access to 
information and 
knowledge 
Women and girls’ 
burden of unpaid care 
and domestic work 
Causes 
Limited 
and 
inadequate 
adaptation 
to 
climate change and 
insufficient 
resilience measures 
Women’s 
low 
participation 
in 
decision-making 
processes related to 
land, 
agriculture 
and water. Limited 
participation 
in 
farmers groups 
Lack of knowledge 
and 
skills 
to 
diversify livelihoods 
in 
a 
climate-
resilient way 
Greater demand 
on 
their time to collect 
firewood 
and 
fetch 
water for domestic use 
and irrigation 
Immediate 
effects  
Land 
and 
forest 
degradation, 
compromised 
agriculture yield 
Limited access to 
markets 
and 
to 
income-generating 
opportunities 
Lower 
adaptive 
capacity 
Women have limited 
time 
to 
engage 
in 
income 
generating 
activities 
Effects 
Lower productivity 
and 
income 
generated 
from 
natural resources 
Lower productivity 
and 
income 
generated 
from 
Individual 
and 
household 
resilience to climate 
change 
is 
compromised,  food 
Women 
have 
less 
opportunity to earn an 
income 
and 
are 
economically

=== PAGE 236 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
16    Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
agricultural 
activities 
insecurity 
is 
exacerbated 
disadvantaged 
and 
more dependent  
1.4.2. Gender mainstreaming in the project design 
Gender mainstreaming means deliberately giving visibility and support to both women's and 
men's participation, contribution and benefit, and its ultimate goal is to achieve gender 
equality. The rationale for considering gender issues in the project is that men and women 
not only play different roles in the communities, with distinct levels of control over resources, 
but they often have different needs too. It is, therefore, important to treat gender issues in 
an integrated development strategy intended to reverse natural resource depletion in general 
and address ecosystem services too. Thus, to address gender inequalities, it is of crucial 
importance to take into account the particular needs of women in the framework of 
ecosystem-based adaptation activities. 
It is also necessary to remain sensitive to not exposing women to greater risk as a result of 
their empowerment through project activities. UNHCR identified that, if managed poorly, 
empowerment projects where refugee women begin to earn income/engage in SAs, can 
expose them to inter-partner violence, as male partners struggle to accept these changes. The 
project interventions under the action plan should remain cognisant and sensitive to these 
dynamics, to ensure women are sufficiently capacitated to exercise their agency and 
empowerment, and that male community members are not ‘left behind’ but are engaged 
participants in women’s empowerment.   
The gender assessment and problem analysis identified gaps in access and control over 
resources and opportunities. Mainstreaming gender in the project design is achieved through 
the use of sex-disaggregated data, together with developing strategies and actions to close 
those gaps, devoting resources and expertise for implementing equality strategies and 
monitoring results using gender sensitive indicators. 
The VLUP processes supported by the project in host communities under output 1 are 
participatory in nature and the national guidelines provide suggestions to ensure that women 
are represented in the decision-making process. These will be followed, and additional efforts 
are detailed in the gender action plan. The VLUP seeks to include agreements that change 
traditional land management practices, thus improving the position of women in controlling 
land and natural resources.  
Mainstreaming gender considerations in forestry-related activities can be done at different 
levels50 51 and the project’s gender mainstreaming activities under output 2 will build on good 
practices that have proven effective. The project will ensure that staff who provide training 
(i.e. extension staff) also receive gender training, in order to avoid that they follow socio-
cultural norms that inhibit women’s participation in the project forestry activities.  Also, 
project aims to set aside land for jointly managing forests for sustainable harvest of fuelwood 
 
50 FAO (n.d.) How to mainstream gender in forestry. A practical field guide. 
51 Gender and sustainable forest management: entry points for design and implementation. 
https://www.climateinvestmentfunds.org/sites/cif_enc/files/knowledge-
documents/gender_and_sustainable_forest_management.pdf

=== PAGE 237 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
17    Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
that will be accessible to refugees and host communities. Consultations among both groups 
have found interest by women in this activity among both refugees and host communities.  
Gender mainstreaming will consider the capacity building activities provided under Output 3 
(e.g. Farmer Field Schools), and are geared towards improving women’s access to inputs and 
resources delivered under the project (e.g. access to agriculture inputs and provision of 
beekeeping equipment). The project will include awareness raising and skills to extension 
officers in promoting gender equity throughout the training and agricultural support activities. 
The project will ensure that both men and women extension officers are equipped with 
participatory tools and skills to manage diverse cultural contexts and power dynamics. The 
project agriculture support will prioritise two crops – cassava and beans – and will focus on 
increasing their productivity. In the analysis of crops’ supply chains, cassava and beans scored 
the highest in terms of market potential, potential for promoting gender equity and women’s 
economic empowerment, contributing to food security, and income potential.52 Agriculture 
support activities under the project only target host community members. The project will 
learn from successful practices in Tanzania where extension services and FFS have effectively 
performed gender-sensitive training and access to information (such as Farmers’ Groups 
Network (MVIWATA).53 
The project acknowledges the intersectional systems of privilege and access that operate 
within the target sites, that may exclude women — particularly refugees or poor farmers —
from consultative and decision-making processes and spaces. Additionally, women’s needs, 
interests and knowledge are often marginalised when planning for, and implementing 
adaptation interventions. To address this inequality, the project will work to ensure women 
are included in the activities of Output 4, their needs, knowledge and interests are captured, 
and communication products are gender-sensitive in their content, design and distribution.  
1.4.3. Project expected benefits promoting gender equality 
The project’s gender sensitive approach seeks to achieve practical and tangible benefits to 
women as well as bring about strategic changes in gender relations. For women to 
meaningfully benefit from the project intervention it is crucial they are included in the various 
decision-making processes. The gender action plan outlines concrete steps and activities that 
will ensure inclusion of women in decision making processes and project activities. Through 
enhanced capacities, skills, access to assets transferred to refugee and host community 
women by the project, they will be capacitated to improve their decision-making power both 
at the household and the community level. This effect is expected to extend beyond the 
duration of the project.     
Women rely heavily on natural resources to be able to fulfil their various productive and 
reproductive tasks. Women, like men, engage in agriculture activities and by ensuring they 
 
52 Enabel Programme’s document: Sustainable Agriculture Kigoma Regional Project (SAKIRP) - comparative analysis of the 
main crops 
53 Mbo’o-Tchouawou, M. and Colverson, K. 2014. Increasing access to agricultural extension and advisory services: How 
effective are new approaches in reaching women farmers in rural areas? Nairobi, Kenya: International Livestock Research 
Institute (ILRI).

=== PAGE 238 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
18    Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
are able to benefit from accessing agriculture trainings and inputs and irrigation investments, 
women in the host communities will increase their resilience to current and projected future 
climate change impacts. Furthermore, for women in the host communities, improved 
environmental management including conservation of water sources will improve their year-
round access to water for domestic and productive uses and thereby reducing the burden on 
women who have to fetch water.  
The land use planning in host communities and forestry related interventions are expected to 
lead to better managed natural resources which will substantially reduce women’s work 
burden as less time will be spend collecting fuelwood. Moreover, and particularly for refugee 
women, the exposure to threat and GBV or other forms of violence will be reduced as they 
will no longer be compelled to move far from the camp boundaries in search of fuelwood. 
Finally, host community and refugee relations will improve as existing and expected future 
conflicts over fuelwood and deforestation will be mitigated. 
Pro-actively targeting women in the project’s alternative livelihoods activities and enabling 
their full participation, is expected to contribute to their economic empowerment. The 
strengthening of Savings Association is expected to bring positive externalities as, particularly 
in the host communities, women are generally well represented in these groups. Money 
obtained by women in host communities through these savings associations is not only used 
to invest in productive assets and activities, but also to meet household needs and pay for 
school fees. Increased incomes may enable some women to purchase fuelwood or other 
energy sources to meet (part of) their cooking energy requirements.

=== PAGE 239 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
19       Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
 
2. Gender Action Plan  
 
 
54 The project will promote this target to the extent possible, but recognizing that the Village Councils are independently organized and the project may not be able to influence this process. 
Impact Statement: Improved land management and increased resilience of host communities and refugees, including poor and female-headed households, to 
climate change through land use planning, land use and forestry interventions, resilient agriculture and livelihood diversification and improved water management 
and drainage. 
Outcome Statement: The project will catalyse a paradigm shift by mainstreaming climate change adaptation concepts into the planning functions of multiple 
bodies whose mandate includes agriculture, water use, flood prevention and forestry and through the introduction of much-needed integrated land use planning 
tools. 
Project Outcome 1 
Women are represented in and participate meaningfully in land use planning at the village level 
Project Output 1 
      Participatory Climate-resilient Land Use Planning (C-LUP) to support ecosystem-based 
adaptation 
Project Activity 
Gender Activity 
Indicator  
Target 
Cost 
 
1.1 
Support climate-resilient 
village land-use planning 
1. Ensure women are represented at all levels and 
during all stages of the land use planning processes. 
This includes village leadership roles relating to land 
use planning (Village Land Councils (VLCs); newly 
formed District-level Participatory Land-Use 
Management (PLUM) teams; Village Land Use 
Management (VLUM) committees and District, Ward 
and Village level Environmental Management 
1.a % of Village Councils 
adhering to gender 
participation requirements 
(quotas) outlined in national 
legislation54. 
1.a 100% by end 
of year 1  
1.b 50% (for each) 
by end of year 1 
 
$ 45,600 / year annual cost of 
Safeguards and Gender Officer) 
 
$19,800 /year part-time cost of Social 
& Environmental safeguards expert (IC) 
 
$ 25,000 / year (implementation of 
ESMS and Gender action plan)

=== PAGE 240 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
20       Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
 
 
55 Final number to be determined through assessment. 
Committees (EMCs). (Year 1 Q3 – Year 2 Q2).   Sub-
activities will include: 
• 
Assess current levels of women’s 
participation in these structures  
• 
Identify the specific barriers to women’s 
participation 
• 
Propose measures to ensure full and equal 
participation of women  
• 
Develop and implement a strategy to 
assess whether LUPs fully capture 
women’s needs and priorities (e.g. through 
focus group discussions, key information 
interviews). 
 
2. Include women’s needs and interests in finalising 
the number and distribution of interventions under 
Outputs 2 and 3 as part of the participatory land use 
planning process.  (Year 1 Q3 – Year 2 Q2). Sub-
activities may include: 
• 
Hold separate meetings to capture 
women’s views during the LUP process and 
have representatives of women’s groups 
publicly represent their voices during 
decision-making processes.  
• 
Organize meetings at a time of day and 
location conducive to their schedules and 
sensitive to their domestic responsibilities.  
• 
Ensure the LUP includes agreements that 
change traditional land management 
practices, thus improving the position of 
women in controlling land and natural 
resources.  
• 
Facilitate dialogue between men and 
women during the LUP process to address 
cultural barriers to women’s involvement, 
1.b % of VLUM committees and 
EMCs representatives that are 
women. 
2 % of VLUPs that reflect 
women’s needs and interests 
3. Gender capacity assessment 
completed and number of 
trainings conducted 
2. 100% by end of 
year 1 
3. 1 gender 
capacity 
assessment 
completed and x55 
number of 
trainings 
conducted by the 
end of year 1 
Other costs are embedded in activity 
costs, particularly in workshops, 
meetings, and training amounting to $ 
156,000 for Output 1.1

=== PAGE 241 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
21       Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
 
and ensure women are not perversely 
affected by these actions 
• 
Promote awareness among women and 
men on incidence of and avoiding gender-
based violence as well as access to 
community feedback mechanisms, 
complaints boxes, and referral pathways to 
obtain support  
• 
Ensure awareness raising activities are 
sensitive to the different learning and 
language dynamics and preferences of 
men and women 
• 
Provide appropriate information to women 
regarding their rights to access to 
resources under the project (e.g. 
distribution of agricultural inputs). 
3. Safeguards and gender officer to assess capacity 
of district staff to address gender issues in the 
project and conduct trainings accordingly to ensure 
that gender expertise is present at the district level, 
and that the District PLUM team has sufficient 
awareness of gender equality related to land access, 
participation in decision-making processes, control 
over resources.  (Years 1, 2 and 3) 
4. Conflict sensitivities around Village Land Use 
Planning that could heighten SEAH risk will be 
mitigated through a participatory, conflict sensitive 
and gender responsive approach to Village Land Use 
Planning.  that includes different different different 
stakeholder groups such as pastoralists, 
agropastoralists, farmers and other land users. 
5.Reduce the risk of intimate partner violence by 
involving male partners in beneficiary selection 
processes from the outset to promote understanding 
of the positive impact of empowering women and 
the benefits to the family. Continuous monitoring of

=== PAGE 242 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
22       Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
 
women’s risks at the beneficiary level will be 
implemented in carrying out activities. 
6.The project will mitigate SGBV/SEAH incidents by 
applying SEAH due diligence in selecting personnel, 
contractors, and partners. Contracts will include 
provisions against SGBV/SEAH, and training will be 
provided to ensure awareness and accountability. 
7. The project will ensure target groups are aware of 
and have access to the SGBV and SEAH protocols in 
place inside the camps and in the host 
villages/districts, which include prevention, 
protection, management and referral measures. 
 
 
Project Outcome 2 
Community based forest management (CBFM) and agroforestry practices engage women in 
resilience building and decrease their vulnerability 
Project Output 2 
Degraded ecosystems restored to support climate change adaptation in host and refugee 
communities  
Activity 
Gender Component 
Indicator  
Target 
Cost 
2.1  
Implement Community 
Based Forest Management 
(CBFM) for resilient 
ecosystems 
1.Ensure women are included in and meaningfully 
participate in CBFM activities. The Safeguards and 
Gender expert will support the local government 
authorities in the development of inclusive work 
plans to ensure women’s participation in planning 
and 
execution 
of 
community-based 
forestry 
management (CBFM). (Year 2 and Year 3) This may 
include: 
• 
Organise women-only training sessions and 
where possible invite female extension 
1. % of villagers (host 
community) involved in CBFM 
are women 
 
1.50% at project 
completion 
 
 
 
$ 45,600 / year (annual cost of 
Safeguards and Gender Officer) 
 
$19,800/year part-time cost of 
Social & Environmental safeguards 
expert (IC) 
 
 
$ 25,000 / year (implementation of   
ESMS and gender action plan)

=== PAGE 243 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
23       Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
 
workers to allow participants to feel 
comfortable to express their ideas and 
needs. Include training modules for 
women and men training participants on 
GBV for women and men and access to 
community feedback mechanisms, 
complaints boxes, and referral pathways to 
obtain support for survivors of GBV. 
• 
Implement capacity development activities 
by ensuring that all participants have the 
same knowledge to work together more 
effectively. Activities can also be targeted 
to the needs of the women participants, in 
particular considering women’s use of 
NFTPs.  
• 
Engage women stakeholders by planning 
activities and meetings at a time of day 
and in a location conducive to their 
schedules and sensitive to their domestic 
responsibilities. 
• 
Hold trainings in locations with childcare 
services, or in spaces where children may 
be accommodated during training. 
 
2. Reduce the risk of intimate partner violence by 
involving male partners in beneficiary selection 
processes from the outset to promote understanding 
of the positive impact of empowering women and 
the benefits to the family. Continuous monitoring of 
women’s risks at the beneficiary level will be 
implemented in carrying out activities. 
 
3.The project will mitigate SGBV/SEAH incidents by 
applying SEAH due diligence in selecting personnel, 
contractors, and partners. Contracts will include 
provisions against SGBV/SEAH, and training will be 
provided to ensure awareness and accountability. 
 
Other costs are embedded in 
activity costs, particularly in 
workshops, meetings, and training 
amounting to $ 18,750 for Output 
2.1

=== PAGE 244 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
24       Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
 
4.The project will ensure target groups are aware of 
and have access to the SGBV and SEAH protocols in 
place inside the camps and in the host 
villages/districts, which include prevention, 
protection, management  and referral measures. 
2.2 
Implement 12,000 hectares 
of agroforestry and village 
land afforestation to 
increase resilience of land 
use 
1. Provide agroforestry and village land afforestation 
training to women (Year 2) 
2. Support women farmers to increase their 
resilience through agroforestry and village land 
afforestation. The Safeguards and Gender expert will 
support the local government authorities in the 
development of inclusive work plans (Years 2, 3, 4 
and 5) to ensure women’s participation in 
agroforestry activities following the following 
principles: 
• 
Organise women-only training sessions and 
where possible invite female extension 
workers to allow participants to feel 
comfortable to express their ideas and 
needs. Include training modules for 
women and men training participants on 
GBV and access to community feedback 
mechanisms, complaints boxes, and 
referral pathways to obtain support for 
survivors of GBV 
• 
Implement capacity development activities 
by ensuring that all participants have the 
same knowledge to work together more 
effectively. Activities can also be targeted 
to the needs of the women participants, in 
particular considering women’s 
responsibility in collecting fuelwood 
• 
Engage women stakeholders by planning 
activities and meetings at a time of day 
and in a location conducive to their 
1. % of women receiving 
training 
 
2 % of women benefitting from 
agroforestry activities 
 
3  % of men and women 
beneficiaries with reduced time 
devoted to fuelwood collection 
 
 
1. 50% of women 
(including host 
community and 
refugee population) 
receiving training at 
project completion  
2. 50% of women 
(including 
host 
community 
and 
refugee 
population) 
benefitting 
from 
agroforestry activities 
at project completion  
3. 20% at project 
completion (including 
host community and 
refugee population) 
$ 45,6000/ year (annual cost of 
Safeguards and Gender Officer) 
 
$19,800/year part-time cost of 
Social & Environmental safeguards 
expert (IC) 
 
 
$ 25,000 / year (implementation of 
ESMS and gender action plan)

=== PAGE 245 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
25       Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
 
schedules and sensitive to their domestic 
responsibilities. 
• 
Hold trainings in locations with childcare 
services, or in spaces where children may 
be accommodated during training. 
3.Reduce the risk of intimate partner violence by 
involving male partners in beneficiary selection 
processes from the outset to promote understanding 
of the positive impact of empowering women and the 
benefits to the family. Continuous monitoring of 
women’s risks at the beneficiary level will be 
implemented in carrying out activities. 
 
4.The project will mitigate SGBV/SEAH incidents by 
applying SEAH due diligence in selecting personnel, 
contractors, and partners. Contracts will include 
provisions against SGBV/SEAH, and training will be 
provided to ensure awareness and accountability. 
 
5.The project will ensure target groups are aware of 
and have access to the SGBV and SEAH protocols in 
place 
inside 
the 
camps 
and 
in 
the 
host 
villages/districts, 
which 
include 
prevention, 
protection, management and referral measures. 
 
2.3 
Implement flood and 
erosion control in densely 
populated areas to reduce 
the exposed and flood-
prone ferrosol-type soils 
which have little or no 
vegetation cover 
1.Ensure participation of women in flood and 
erosion control investment planning during the 
stakeholder consultations that will be held in Year 2, 
Q3. Separate meetings with women will be held to 
ensure women are consulted on the investments are 
flood and erosion control measure are prioritized 
based on their contribution to reducing women’s 
vulnerability to climate change. The Safeguards and 
Gender Officer will develop and support the 
implementation of an assessment (e.g. through focus 
group discussions or interviews with key informants) 
to determine the impact of the flood and erosion 
investments on women’s vulnerability to climate 
change 
1.% of people consulted in 
flood and erosion investment 
planning   
1.50% of refugee and 
host population 
consulted are women 
by year 3  
$ 45,600 / year (annual cost of 
Safeguards and Gender Officer) 
 
$19,800/year part-time cost of 
Social & Environmental safeguards 
expert (IC) 
 
 
$ 25,000/ year (implementation of 
ESMS and gender action plan)

=== PAGE 246 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
26       Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
 
 
 
 
2.The project will mitigate SGBV/SEAH incidents by 
applying SEAH due diligence in selecting personnel, 
contractors, and partners. Contracts will include 
provisions against SGBV/SEAH, and training will be 
provided to ensure awareness and accountability. 
 
3.The project will ensure target groups are aware of 
and have access to the SGBV and SEAH protocols in 
place inside the camps and in the host 
villages/districts, which include prevention, 
protection, management and referral measures.

=== PAGE 247 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
27       Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
 
Project Outcome 3 
Adaptive capacity of women farmers increased and women’s resilience to climate change increased 
economically and through increased food security 
Project Output 3 
Climate-resilient livelihoods practiced to increase the capacity of host communities and refugees to better adapt 
in changing climatic conditions 
 
Activity 
Gender Component 
Indicator 
Target 
Cost 
3.1 
Promote modern 
technologies and 
management practices to 
strengthen the capacity of 
farmers, district officials 
and agricultural extension 
workers in climate-
resilient agriculture 
1.  Build gender capacity of extension staff. The 
Safeguards and Gender Officer will be tasked to 
assess the capacity staff who provide training (i.e. 
extension staff) to address gender issues and will 
provide gender training as required, to equip them 
with the knowledge and skills to target and 
support men and women farmers equitably (Year 2 
Q1) This will include:  
• 
Assess the capacity the SAMOs to 
address gender issues and will provide 
gender training as required, to equip 
them with the knowledge and skills to 
target and support men and women 
farmers equitably. 
• 
Support to the development of gender-
responsive communication and outreach 
materials for the community trainings to 
ensure communities are aware of the 
benefits of participating and expected 
results, etc.  
• 
Identify preferred and trusted 
communication channels and methods 
for women. 
2. Build women’s capacity in climate resilient 
agriculture and increase their productivity through 
targeted training in Years 2- 5, including through 
the following: 
1. Number of extension staff that are participating 
in gender training 
2. % of FFS training that are women 
3.a. % of direct beneficiaries receiving agriculture 
inputs that are women 
3.b # and % of women practicing climate smart 
agriculture. 
 
1. X extension staff are 
given gender training by 
Year 2  
 
2. 50% of beneficiaries 
receiving FFS training are 
women at year 5 (host 
community) 
 
3.a 50% at project 
completion (host 
community) 
 
 
3.b 750 (50%) by mid-
term; 7,500 (50%) by and 
of project (host 
community) 
 
 
$ 45,600 / year (annual cost 
of Safeguards and Gender 
Officer) 
 
$19,800/year part-time cost 
of Social & Environmental 
safeguards expert (IC) 
 
 
$ 25,000/ year 
(implementation of ESMS and 
gender action plan) 
 
Other costs are embedded in 
activity costs, particularly in 
workshops, meetings, and 
training amounting to $ 
207,550 for Output 3.1

=== PAGE 248 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
28       Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
 
• 
Take a flexible approach in forming the 
groups for coordination and capacity 
building, considering both mixed-sex 
groups and single – sex groups. 
• 
If deemed beneficial, organise women-
only training sessions and where possible 
invite female extension workers to allow 
participants to feel comfortable to 
express their ideas and needs.  
• 
Schedule training at times when women 
can attend. This may include organizing 
training outside of lunch hours to avoid 
conflicts with women’s household 
responsibilities and limiting the length of 
training so that women could attend and 
still see to other activities.  Include 
training modules for women and men 
training participants on GBV and access 
to community feedback mechanisms, 
complaints boxes, and referral pathways 
to obtain support for survivors of GBV. 
• 
Provide transportation if travel distances 
would hamper their participation.  
• 
Organize childcare services, or in spaces 
where children may be accommodated 
during training.  
• 
Ensure the location of the demo plots 
allows women to easily access these 
without spending too much time 
travelling also considering any 
protection/GBV risks that may arise from 
travelling to and from the demo plots.   
3. Ensure women are receiving agricultural inputs 
and are participating in climate smart agriculture 
activities (Years 2 -5 ), including through the 
following actions: 
• 
Ensuring women are fully able to 
participate in the saving associations

=== PAGE 249 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
29       Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
 
• 
Ensuring women are equally benefitting 
from the distribution of agriculture 
inputs, including vulnerable women who 
may not be part of a savings association. 
 
4.Reduce the risk of intimate partner violence by 
involving male partners in beneficiary selection 
processes from the outset to promote 
understanding of the positive impact of 
empowering women and the benefits to the 
family. Continuous monitoring of women’s risks at 
the beneficiary level will be implemented in 
carrying out activities. 
 
5.The project will mitigate SGBV/SEAH incidents by 
applying SEAH due diligence in selecting personnel, 
contractors, and partners. Contracts will include 
provisions against SGBV/SEAH, and training will be 
provided to ensure awareness and accountability. 
 
6.The project will ensure target groups are aware 
of and have access to the SGBV and SEAH 
protocols in place inside the camps and in the host 
villages/districts, which include prevention, 
protection, management and referral measures. 
 
3.2 
Increase water availability 
and use-efficiency 
through water harvesting 
and efficient irrigation 
interventions 
1. Ensure women are benefitting from water 
harvesting and irrigation schemes.  The Safeguards 
and Gender Officer will support inputs to designing 
the exercise to determine the beneficiary profile 
and select the technologies to ensure these are 
appropriate to address specific needs of women in 
year 2, Q3 This may include having separate 
meetings with women to determine their needs 
and discuss various technology options and how 
they would benefit them. The Safeguards and 
Gender Officer will develop and support the 
implementation of an assessment (e.g. through 
1. % of women that were targeted by 
the water harvesting and/or irrigation 
schemes that have experienced 
improved water availability  
2. % of WUA members are women. 
 
 
1. 100% at project completion 
(host community) 
 
 
2. 50% at project completion 
(host community) 
 
 
$ 45,600 / year (annual cost of 
Safeguards and Gender Officer) 
 
$19,800/year part-time cost of 
Social & Environmental 
safeguards expert (IC) 
 
 
$ 25,000/ year (implementation 
of ESMS and gender action plan) 
 
Other costs are embedded in 
activity costs, particularly in

=== PAGE 250 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
30       Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
 
focus group discussions or interviews with key 
informants) to determine the impact of water 
harvesting and irrigation schemes on water 
availability and women’s access to water in year 5. 
2. Ensure women are able to participate in Water 
User Associations. Efforts will include: 
• 
As required, implement capacity 
development activities specifically 
targeting women to ensure that all 
participants have the same knowledge to 
work together more effectively. Include 
training modules for women and men 
training participants on GBV and access 
to community feedback mechanisms, 
complaints boxes, and referral pathways 
to obtain support for survivors of GBV. 
• 
Schedule training/meetings at times 
when women can attend. This may 
include organizing training outside of 
lunch hours to avoid conflicts with 
women’s household responsibilities and 
limiting the length of training so that 
women could attend and still see to 
other activities.  
• 
Provide transportation if travel distances 
would hamper their participation.  
• 
Organize childcare services, or in spaces 
where children may be accommodated 
during training.  
3.The project will mitigate SGBV/SEAH incidents by 
applying SEAH due diligence in selecting personnel, 
contractors, and partners. Contracts will include 
provisions against SGBV/SEAH, and training will be 
provided to ensure awareness and accountability, 
workshops, meetings, and 
training amounting to $ 76,400 
for Output 3.2

=== PAGE 251 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
31       Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
 
 
56 Beekeeping may be an activity traditionally associated with men in the target communities. Targets will be revised at the baseline / inception phase of the project. 
4.The project will ensure target groups are aware 
of and have access to the SGBV and SEAH 
protocols in place inside the camps and in the host 
villages/districts, which include prevention, 
protection, management and referral measures. 
3.3 
Promote climate-resilient 
livelihood diversification 
to strengthen food 
security and nutrition, 
provide alternative 
income as a safety net, 
and to sustain the 
implementation of 
climate-resilient 
agricultural and forest 
management practices 
1. Target women participants in beekeeping.  The 
Safeguards and Gender Specialist will work with 
implementing partners, including the Tanzania 
Forest Service, to develop selection criteria are 
targeted to vulnerable and marginalised groups, 
including women. Female headed households will 
be specifically targeted, particularly as the 
alternative livelihood activities are considered to 
have a relative low workload. (Year 3 Q1) 
2. Target women participants for mushroom 
growing.  The Safeguards and Gender Specialist will 
work with implementing partners, including the 
Tanzania Forest Service, to develop selection 
criteria are targeted to vulnerable and marginalised 
groups, 
including 
women. 
Female 
headed 
households will be specifically targeted, particularly 
as 
the 
alternative 
livelihood 
activities 
are 
considered to have a relative low workload.  (Year 3 
Q1) 
3. Provide training to women (Years 2-5), taking 
the following into consideration: 
• 
Take a flexible approach in forming the 
groups for coordination and capacity 
building, considering both mixed-sex 
groups and single – sex groups. 
1. # and % of participants in beekeeping 
that are women 
2. # and % of participants in mushroom 
growing activities that are women 
3. % of beneficiaries trained in 
diversified livelihood activities are 
women 
1. 40 (50%) by mid-term; 425 
(50%) by end of project56 (host 
community and refugee 
population) 
 
 
2. 25 (80%) by mid-term; 250 
(80%) by end of project (host 
community and refugee 
population) 
 
3. 50 % of beneficiaries trained 
in diversified livelihood activities 
are women by end of project 
(host community and refugee 
population) 
$ 45,600/ year (annual cost of 
Safeguards and Gender Officer) 
 
$19,800/year part-time cost of 
Social & Environmental 
safeguards expert (IC) 
 
 
$ 25,000 / year (implementation 
of ESMS and gender action plan) 
 
Other costs are embedded in 
activity costs, particularly in 
workshops, meetings, and 
training amounting to $ 19,590 
for Output 4.1

=== PAGE 252 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
32       Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
 
• 
If deemed beneficial, organise women-
only training sessions and where possible 
invite female extension workers to allow 
participants to feel comfortable to 
express their ideas and needs.  Include 
training modules for women and men 
training participants on GBV and access 
to community feedback mechanisms, 
complaints boxes, and referral pathways 
to obtain support for survivors of GBV. 
• 
Schedule training at times when women 
can attend. This may include organizing 
training outside of lunch hours to avoid 
conflicts with women’s household 
responsibilities and limiting the length of 
training so that women could attend and 
still see to other activities.  
• 
Provide transportation if travel distances 
would hamper their participation.  
• 
Organize childcare services, or in spaces 
where children may be accommodated 
during training.  
4. Reduce the risk of intimate partner violence by 
involving male partners in beneficiary selection 
processes from the outset to promote 
understanding of the positive impact of 
empowering women and the benefits to the 
family. Continuous monitoring of women’s risks at 
the beneficiary level will be implemented in 
carrying out activities. 
5.The project will mitigate SGBV/SEAH incidents by 
applying SEAH due diligence in selecting personnel, 
contractors, and partners. Contracts will include 
provisions against SGBV/SEAH, and training will be 
provided to ensure awareness and accountability.

=== PAGE 253 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
33       Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
 
 
57 https://www.iascgenderwithagemarker.com/en/home/ 
6.The project will ensure target groups are aware 
of and have access to the SGBV and SEAH 
protocols in place inside the camps and in the host 
villages/districts, which include prevention, 
protection, management and referral measures. 
Project Outcome 4 
Women and their needs, interests and knowledge are meaningfully captured in mainstreaming climate change 
adaptation into policies, plans, strategies and programmes. 
Project Output 4 
Information on climate change adaptation disseminated and mainstreamed into policies, plans and strategies in 
Tanzania and in humanitarian programmes  
Activity 
Gender Component 
Indicator  
Target 
Cost 
4.1 
Generate evidence of the 
economic benefits of 
ecosystem-based 
adaptation to host and 
refugee populations, for 
use by policymakers and 
planners 
1. Include gender consideration, emphasising 
women’s empowerment and gender equality in 
reports and recommendations in Years 4 and 5 
through: 
• 
Ensuring women are represented in 
working sessions for report distribution, 
by encouraging participation and 
scheduling and locating meetings that 
are sensitive to women’s duties and child 
minding responsibilities. 
• 
Ensuring women are represented in 
providing inputs to the modelling 
methodology to value ecosystems, by 
encouraging participation and scheduling 
and locating stakeholder engagements 
that are sensitive to women’s duties. 
• 
Ensuring women are represented in 
working sessions for report distribution, 
by encouraging participation and 
1. Full and summary reports include 
sections on ‘Gender Considerations’ 
with gender-sensitive reporting, and 
recommendations for enhancing 
women’s empowerment and gender 
equality in the application of findings.  
1. b IASC Gender with Age marker score 
for all project reports 57 
 
 
1. a 100% by end of project 
1.b All project reports have a 
IASC GAM score of 3 or higher.  
 
$ 45,600 / year (annual cost of 
Safeguards and Gender Officer) 
 
$19,800/year part-time cost of 
Social & Environmental 
safeguards expert (IC) 
 
 
$ 25,000/ year (implementation 
of ESMS and gender action plan) 
 
Other costs are embedded in 
activity costs, particularly in 
workshops, meetings, and 
training amounting to $ 33,900 
for Output 4.1

=== PAGE 254 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
34       Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
 
scheduling and locating meetings that 
are sensitive to women’s duties and child 
minding responsibilities. 
• 
The Safeguards and Gender Officer will 
screen all full and summary project 
reports for the IASC GAM score (using 
the IASC online tool) and will provide 
inputs and advise to ensure they reach 
the agreed rating. 
2.The project will mitigate SGBV/SEAH incidents by 
applying SEAH due diligence in selecting personnel, 
contractors, and partners. Contracts will include 
provisions against SGBV/SEAH, and training will be 
provided to ensure awareness and accountability. 
3.The project will ensure target groups are aware 
of and have access to the SGBV and SEAH 
protocols in place inside the camps and in the host 
villages/districts, which include prevention, 
protection, management and referral measures. 
4.2 
Develop communication 
products to disseminate 
project results  
1.Ensure that communication products (policy 
briefs and guidelines) prepared in Years 4 and 5 
are gender-responsive in their content, design and 
distribution, including through the ensuring that: 
• 
Women, and their interests, needs and 
knowledge, are represented in 
consultations to compile lessons-learned, 
project outcomes, and guidelines.  
• 
Women, women’s groups and 
institutions working in women’s interests 
are represented in targeted stakeholders 
for receiving communication products. 
• 
2.The project will mitigate SGBV/SEAH 
incidents by applying SEAH due diligence 
in selecting personnel, contractors, and 
partners. Contracts will include 
1.Sections on ‘Gender Considerations’ 
included in every communication 
product developed and distributed, with 
recommendations for including women 
in scaling project interventions.  
  
1.100% by end of project 
 
 
$ 45,600 / year (annual cost of 
Safeguards and Gender Officer) 
 
$19,800/year part-time cost of 
Social & Environmental 
safeguards expert (IC) 
 
 
$ 25,000 / year (implementation 
of ESMS and gender action plan) 
 
Other costs are embedded in 
activity costs, particularly in 
workshops, meetings, and 
training amounting to $ 22,000 
for Output 4.2

=== PAGE 255 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
35       Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
 
provisions against SGBV/SEAH, and 
training will be provided to ensure 
awareness and accountability. 
4.3 
Draft revisions to key 
plans and policies and 
support their integration 
into national and district 
government planning 
processes, to promote 
up-scaling of the EbA 
model 
1.Draft guidelines and other inputs prepared in 
Years 4 and 5 to be gender-responsive in their 
content, design and distribution, by taking the 
following actions: 
• 
The Safeguards and Gender Officer will 
support the design of the review 
methodology for reviewing key plans, 
policies and processes to ensure 
women’s adaptation needs and interests 
are fully considered.   
• 
Women and women’s groups are 
represented in stakeholder consultations 
for conducting the review of key plans, 
policies and processes, including women-
specific focus groups and/or workshops.  
• 
The Safeguards and Gender Officer will 
screen all project guidelines or other 
inputs to be produced for the IASC GAM 
score (using the IASC online tool) and will 
provide inputs and advise to ensure they 
reach the agreed rating. 
• 
The lead consultant for Activity 4.3, in 
collaboration with the Safeguards and 
Gender Officer will lead the development 
of evidence based advocacy messages 
that showcase the effects of the project’s 
gender responsiveness and women’s 
participation and how it is contributing 
to the protection and realization of 
women’s rights. 
• 
2. The project will mitigate SGBV/SEAH 
incidents by applying SEAH due diligence 
in selecting personnel, contractors, and 
 1. a ‘Gender Considerations’ sections 
are included in the outputs of the 
reviews of key plans, policies and 
processes, as well as in guidelines and 
other inputs developed.  
1.b. IASC Gender with Age marker score 
for all project guidelines or other inputs 
 
1. a 100% by end of project, 
with integrated evidence-based 
advocacy messages 
 
 
 
 
1.b All project reports have a 
IASC GAM score of 3 or higher 
at project completion. 
 
$ 45,600 / year (annual cost of 
Safeguards and Gender Officer) 
 
$19,800/year part-time cost of 
Social & Environmental 
safeguards expert (IC) 
 
 
$ 25,000 / year (implementation 
of ESMS and gender action plan) 
 
Other costs are embedded in 
activity costs, particularly in 
workshops, meetings, and 
training amounting to $ 39,000 
for Output 4.3

=== PAGE 256 ===
Gender Assessment and Action Plan 
36       Climate resilient development in refugee camps and host communities in Kigoma, Tanzania  
 
 
Progress on the implementation of the Gender Action Plan will be reported in the Annual Performance Reports (APR), including: 
- 
Description of gender activities implemented.  
- 
Gender and population type disaggregation of activity beneficiaries and progress towards the gender targets. 
 
__________ 
partners. Contracts will include 
provisions against SGBV/SEAH, and 
training will be provided to ensure 
awareness and accountability 
 
Sub-total of dedicated 
costs for Safeguards and 
Gender Officer, 
Safeguards expert 
consultant and operating 
costs of ESMS and Gender 
Action Plan 
The Safeguards and Gender Officer will oversee the implementation of the Gender Action Plan and the implementation of the 
Social and Environmental Management System (ESMS) with the technical advisory support of a Social and Environmental 
Safeguards international expert engaged part-time in support of the PMU.  The Safeguards and Gender Officer will ensure that the 
project-level grievance redress mechanism (GRM) (See Annex 6: ESMS) will be accessible to women and men, including to women 
who are subject to SGBV, SEAH and sensitive to their special confidentiality and protection needs and refer cases to existing 
protection mechanisms accordingly.    
 
$ 452,000 
 
 
Sub-total of project 
activity costs including 
workshops, training and 
meetings 
 
$ 573,190 
 
Total amounts related to 
implementation of 
gender action plan 
 
$ 1,025,190
