=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sanghyun Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Microsoft® Word for Microsoft 365
producer: Microsoft® Word for Microsoft 365
creationDate: D:20231002205508+09'00'
modDate: D:20231002205508+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Meeting of the Board 
23 – 26 October 2023 
Tbilisi, Georgia 
Provisional agenda item 12 
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
2 October 2023 
Consideration of funding proposals – 
Addendum VII 
Funding proposal package for FP216 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following seven parts: 
a) A funding proposal titled "Scaling up climate resilient flood risk management in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina"; 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal 
point(s);  
c) Environmental and social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Secretariat’s assessment;  
e) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment;  
f) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment; and 
g) Gender documentation.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity 
3 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s) 
119 
Environmental and social report(s) disclosure 
120 
Secretariat’s assessment 
125 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment 
 
145 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel's 
assessment 
157 
Gender documentation 
167

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
Country(ies): 
Accredited Entity: 
Date of first submission: 
Date of current submission 
Version number 
Scaling up climate resilient flood risk management in Bosnia 
and Herzegovina 
Bosnia and Herzegovina (B&H) 
United Nations Development Programme 
2021/07/01 
2023/08/01 
[V.010]

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.    
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 1 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Project 
A.2. Public or 
private sector 
Public 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
GCF  
contribution 
Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Energy generation and access 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Low-emission transport 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Buildings, cities, industries and appliances 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐  Forestry and land use 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Adaptation total 
100 % 
100 % 
☒  Most vulnerable people and communities 
24.3 % 
13 % 
☒  Health and well-being, and food and water security 
24.3 % 
12.6 % 
☒  Infrastructure and built environment 
7.7 % 
37.7 % 
☒  Ecosystems and ecosystem services 
43.7 % 
36.7 % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided or 
removed / sequestered) 
Indicate greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emission reductions or 
removals in tCO2eq over total 
lifespan of the 
project/programme2 
A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached) 
Total number of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries : 2.777 million (1.42 
Million females; 1.36 million men)  
799,445 Direct 
beneficiaries 
(407,717females, 
391,728 males)  
1.977 Million 
people Indirect 
beneficiaries 
(1.01 Million 
females; 0.97 
Million males) 
25% of total 
population 
80% of total rest 
of population 
A.7. Total financing (GCF 
+ co-finance3)  
72.69 Million USD  
A.9. Project size 
Medium (Upto USD 250 
million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested  
14.4 Million USD 
 
 
 
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition 
to the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or 
programme described in the funding proposal. 
2 The total lifespan of the project/programme is defined as the maximum number of years over which the outcomes of the 
investment are expected to be effective. This is different from the project/programme implementation period. 
3 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 2 
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
 
☒  Grant 
14.4 Million USD  
☐  Loan 
Enter number 
☐  Guarantee 
Enter number 
☐  Equity  
 
    Enter number 
☐  Results-based payment    Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
6 years 
A.12. Total lifespan 
20 years 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
17 June 2021 
 
A.14. ESS category  B  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.16. Has 
Readiness or PPF 
support been used 
to prepare this FP? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP 
included in the 
country 
programme? 
Yes ☐    No ☒ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g. GEF, AF, CIF, 
etc.)? If yes, please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
UNDP 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 3 
 
1. Climate change in Bosnia and Herzegovina (B&H) has been observed through continuous rise of the mean annual 
temperature and significant seasonal and spatial changes in precipitation, that have become more pronounced 
over the last fourteen years4. As a result of these changes in climate, years with damaging floods have become 
very common. The Third National Communication (TNC) shows that the temperature is expected to increase further 
until the end of the 21st century, and the variability of rainfall regime and extreme precipitation will further intensify 
under warmer climate conditions. 
 
2. Approximately 26% of the B&H population is highly vulnerable to climate change induced flood risk5. The increasing 
intensity and variability of rainfall driven by climate change have been causing more frequent and intensive floods 
resulting in significant impacts on people, their property and critical infrastructure. The most important economic 
sectors at risk include agriculture, water management and hydropower. Between 2006 and 2012 flooding 
accounted for 62% of damages from all-natural disasters in most of the B&H territory. In 2010, the second largest 
flood on record resulted in damages of US$ 200 million or approximately 1% of GDP6. In May 2014, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina experienced its worst flooding in 150 years which affected 25% of its territory and resulted in 26 deaths 
and US$2.7 Billion worth of damages (15% of GDP). The most damaging floods have had devastating impacts on 
the most vulnerable groups including the rural poor, war returnees and displaced persons who generally occupy 
the cheapest and most risk-exposed land on the floodplain. For example, in several municipalities up to 100% of 
affected households have been identified as war returnees or displaced persons and are least equipped to cope 
with and recover from floods. This has led to a deepening of poverty in flood affected areas. The 2014 flood was 
the most extensive, affecting 5 of the 7 major rivers, compared to previous floods which generally impacted only 1 
major river. In the last two decades, B&H experienced 10 major flood events (2001, 2004, 2006, 2009, 2010, 2014, 
2017, 2018, 2019, 2020), compared to 8 major flood events in the preceding 75 years (1925 to 2000)7. In each of 
the last four years 2017, 2018, 2019 and 2020, flooding occurred in at least two of the seven major river basins. 
Socio-economic and climate risk modeling conducted during the feasibility study, demonstrate that by mid-century, 
due to climate change, 13% more people would be affected by floods leading to 12.5% higher losses of household 
assets compared to baseline scenario. 
 
3. In order to adapt to the intensifying climate-induced flood risk, B&H needs to move towards a more proactive 
integrated approach to flood risk management that prioritizes risk reduction, risk prevention and preparedness 
through enhanced use of climate information, establishment of a national flood forecasting and early warning 
system and enhancement of adaptive capacity and resilience of at-risk communities.  
 
4. Objective of the project Scaling up climate resilient flood risk management in Bosnia and Herzegovina (hereinafter 
referred to as the project) is to address increasing vulnerability of B&H communities and livelihoods to intensified 
climate-induced flood-related disasters. The project will establish an integrated and innovative gender-responsive 
climate-resilient flood risk management (FRM) approach, strengthen institutional, technical and financial capacity 
to implement long-term FRM strategies, including a combination of structural and non-structural measures and 
ecosystem-based approaches. The project will strengthen the use of climate information, flood forecasting, early 
warning and emergency response systems to enhance adaptive capacity and resilience of at-risk communities. 
The project is aligned with the new UN multi-partner initiative “Early Warnings for All (EW4All)” announced by the 
UN Secretary-General in March 2022 with the aim to promote universal coverage of the early warning, and will 
contribute to the implementation of EWS4All Executive Action Plan developed in March 2023.  
 
5. The project will scale-up successful FRM solutions and technologies tested through a UNDP/SCCF project8 in 
Vrbas River Basin, promote and implement technological, institutional and financing innovations in FRM sector, 
and will leverage considerable public and private investment into resilient FRM.  The latter will be achieved through 
the development of an FRM investment framework supported with incentives, risk transfer products and private 
sector partnership models, The willingness of the B&H private sector to engage with the intervention is reconfirmed 
through the materialized co-financing commitments (Annex 13), surveys and consultations carried out during the 
project design phase (Annexes 2 and 7).  The project has two Outcomes, and three Outputs as follows:  
 
Outcome 1: Climate informed gender-responsive impact-based FFEWS and increased generation and 
use of climate data reduce vulnerability to flood related disasters 
Output 1: Fully integrated impact-based Flood Forecasting and EWS facilitates timely preparation 
and response  
Outcome 2: Vulnerable communities in B&H including women, children, disabled and elderly are better 
protected from and less exposed to climate induced flood risks through a combination of structural and 
non-structural flood risk reduction solutions 
Output 2: Non-structural flood risk reduction measures and nature-based solutions mainstreamed in 
sectoral policies and plans and effectively contribute to protection of people and livelihoods from 
climate-induced flood risk

=== PAGE 8 ===
A 
 GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 4 
 
Output 3:  Climate-proof flood protection measures scaled-up through new and improved national 
and local investment frameworks increasing resilience of the most vulnerable groups to climate 
induced flooding. 
 
6. Socio-economic risk modelling undertaken to assess potential adaptation benefits of the proposed project 
intervention for baseline and climate change (2050) scenarios for each of the five most vulnerable sub-basins in 
B&H (Una-Sana,  Vrbas, Bosna, in the Sava basin, and Neretva and Trebišnjica in the Adriatic Sea basin)9, shows 
that 799,445 people and 272,811 households are currently at risk from floods (Section 2.3 and Annex E of FS). 
Under climate change, by 2050 the number of affected people and households will increase to 902,906 people and 
306,907 households. The total damage to household assets is expected to increase from US$ 3.2 Billion (baseline) 
to US$ 3.6 Billion (2050), while flood affected agriculture areas and agricultural damages  are expected to increase 
from 12,896 ha and US$ 3.34 Billion to 15,064 ha and US$ 3.7 Billion. Currently, 2,825 business sector assets 
across B&H with a total value of US$ 3.2 Billion  are at risk of flooding and would sustain US$ 548 Million in asset 
damages in an extreme flood event10.   
 
7. The project targets 799,445 direct beneficiaries by the end of the project (25% of the total population). It will prevent 
loss of life, property, critical infrastructure, and economic assets and will build resilience to flooding in the most 
vulnerable communities. It will achieve this by:  
 
(i) 
developing institutional capacity to generate climate risk information for long-term strategic climate-resilient 
flood risk management (FRM);  
(ii) 
scaling up successful innovative FRM technologies and implementing a nationwide impact-based Flood 
Forecasting and Early Warning System (FFEWS), which will result in improved warning times and reduced 
losses;  
(iii) 
empowering local communities to undertake local flood risk reduction and response measures, including 
community-based early warning systems (CBEWS) that complement the centralized national EWS system.  
(iv) 
enhancing the capacity to identify, plan and implement long-term climate resilient flood risk management 
strategies at the basin and sub-basin scale by introducing combined structural and non-structural methods 
including ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) measures; 
(v) 
promoting innovative EbA strategies and nature based FRM solutions, which enhance the environmental 
and ecological protective functions of the river basins.  
(vi) 
enhancing long-term flood risk investment planning and enabling environment for climate risk financing to 
secure long-term sustainability of interventions and adequate operations and maintenance of the enhanced 
climate information and early warning services;  
(vii) 
engaging private sector in climate information services and FRM activities and facilitating an increased use 
of climate risk information in their operations.  
 
 
4 TNC for Bosnia and Herzegovina.  See also Section 2.1 of the FS 
5 Based on flood socio-economic risk modelling undertaken for this proposal (See Section 2.3, Table 2.6 of FS).  In addition, the 2014 flood 
event impacted 25% of the polulation of BiH (PDNA) 
6 Based on up-to-date flood event information recorded by HMIs and WA’s in Bosnia.  See Sections 2.2.1 and 2.2.2 (and tables 2.4 and 
2.5.) of FS. 
7 Ibid. 
8 “Technology transfer for climate resilient flood management in Vrbas River basin” (Vrbas project, 2015-2020) 
9 See Section 2.3 and Annex E of the FS. 
10 The analysis of socio-economic impact of floods in B&H under current and climate change conditions, was carried out using the PFRA 
map and the Vrbas detailed EUFD flood mapping as the basis. In the Vrbas basin detailed climate change flood hydrological and hydraulic 
modelling resulted in the increased flood extent throughout the basin. In other basins (apart from Vrbas), flood plains were defined through 
PFRA (developed in 2010 and 2012) without hydrologic and hydraulic modelling and without flood probability of occurrence. Considering that 
Vrbas river Basin is located on 12% of the territory and borders with all other basins, it is assumed that the change in flood extent calculated 
for the Vrbas climate change scenario will be similar in other basins. Hence given the lack of hydraulic and hydrologic modelling for other 
basins, their CC scenarios were constructed by increasing flood zones defined in PFRA by the same % increase as Vrbas.

=== PAGE 9 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 5 
 
 
 
11 UNDP Human Development Index Report (2018) 
12 Chapter 4 of the FS provides a detailed description of all major sub-basins 
13 Bosnia and Herzegovina is a member of the International Commission for the Protection of the Danube River (ICPDR). 
14 A pluvial, or surface water flood, is caused when heavy rainfall creates a flood event independent of an overflowing water body.  
There are two common types of pluvial flooding:1) Intense rain saturates an urban drainage system. The system becomes overwhelmed and 
water flows out into streets and nearby structures and 2) Run-off or flowing water from rain falling on hillsides that are unable to absorb the 
water. In the Balkans and Southern Europe (e.g. Spain). Torrential flooding is the term used to describe a flashflood with significant erosive 
power and which (in combination with the readily available sediments) carries heavy debris/sediment load. The modelling of torrential flooding 
requires detailed erosion mapping in order to develop torrent susceptibility and hazard mapping which is used for strategic management of 
torrent flooding.  With regard to hazard modeling and mapping of torrents, because they generally occur on small headwater catchments, the 
density of the rainfall observation network is important.     
15 The Forth National Communication to UNFCC is currently in an advanced state of preparation but not yet officially submitted.   
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Climate Change Problem 
Geophysical and Developmental Context 
8. B&H is a sovereign state with a decentralized political and administrative structure consisting of two Entities: The 
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FB&H) and the Republic of Srpska (RS) and Brčko District. B&H is a middle-
income country with an estimated 3.531 million inhabitants and total surface area of 51,209.2 km².  Agriculture 
employs 19.1% of the workforce, while industry employs 32.2% and services 48.7% (2017 est.)11. The 1992-1995 
war has had a devastating impact on human, social and economic resources of the country, leading to enormous 
challenges of the post-war reconstruction and economic and social recovery. Above all, the war affected flood risk 
management capacities of the country through the direct damage and the lack of maintenance of flood control 
facilities and hydrometric monitoring stations, and minefields around some facilities (TNC, pg. 19). This challenge 
has been further compounded by the transition towards a market economy requiring structural reforms and 
improved governance.  
 
9. There are two main river basin systems and seven major rivers in B&H12 – Sava (Vrbas, Una-Sana, Ukrina, Bosna 
and Drina) and Adriatic Sea Basin (Neretva and Trebisnjica rivers).  The Sava is the largest river of the country and 
forms its northern natural border with Croatia. It drains 76% of the country's territory into the Danube13 and then 
the Black Sea.  Sava river sub-basins are at highest risk of mainly fluvial, pluvial and torrential flooding14. The Una-
Sana and Vrbas are in the north-western region of B&H. The Bosna river gave its name to the country, and is the 
longest river fully contained within it, stretching through central Bosnia, from its source near Sarajevo to Sava in 
the north. The Drina flows through the eastern part of Bosnia, and for the most part it forms a natural border with 
Serbia. The Neretva, the largest karst river in the Dinaric Alps, is the major river of Herzegovina and the only major 
river that flows south, into the Adriatic Sea. Trebisnijca river is one of the longest sinking rivers in the world (90.5km 
of its 187km length flows underground).  Both Neretva and Trebisnijca are heavily modified by HPP dams.  These 
Adriatic Sea sub-basins face risk of flooding mainly from groundwater due to their karstic geology. 
 
Observed and Projected Climate Change in B&H  
 
10. All B&H’s National Communications to UNFCCC (INC, SNC, TNC) have identified that climate change is affecting 
B&H and will accelerate during the remainder of the twenty-first century. According to the TNC, meteorological 
observations over the period of 1961–2014 demonstrated continuous rise of the mean annual temperature across 
the entire territory of B&H. Trends in annual temperatures on all analyzed stations were found to be statistically 
significant, while the changes are more pronounced in the continental part. The increase in annual air temperature 
ranges from 0.4 to 1.0°C, while the increase in temperature during the growing season (April– September) reaches 
1.2°C. Analysis of air temperature during the period 1961-2014 found that all indices of warm temperature extremes 
have positive trends, while indices of cold temperature extremes have negative trends. The most significant change 
in this period was observed in the number of cold days (FD) and the number of warm days (SU). In all the 
meteorological stations the number of cold days (FD) has a negative trend. In the central mountain areas the 
number of cold days has decreased by 4 days per 10 years, while in the south of the country the decrease is slightly 
less and it ranges around 2 days per 10 years. The number of warm days (SU) has a positive trend and it is 
statistically significant.    
 
11. In the period from 1961 to 2014 most of the B&H territory was characterized by a slight increase in the amount of 
observed annual rainfall (TNC).  Analysis of historical records carried out for the  FNC15 (draft) show that, compared

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 6 
 
 
 
16 See Section 2.2.1 of FS 
17 B&H SNC based on SPI analysis of precipitation and drought (Section 3.1.4) states:  Six out of eight stations marked the last decade as a 
decade with the largest number of dry summers, which indicates that the last decade saw an increase in frequency of summer droughts. 
Nevertheless, if wet summers are taken into consideration, it is evident that five stations marked the last decade (independently or combined 
with another) as a period with the largest number of wet summers. Hence, in addition to dry summers, the last decade also saw an increase 
in frequency of wet summers, which contributed to the fact that in six stations the 2001- 2010 decade had the largest number of extreme 
summers in terms of precipitation quantity. 
18 B&H TNC 
19 Three climate scenarios for the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina have were used in producing the TNC report), and these have been 
carried out with two different regional models, nonhydrostatic regional NMMB model and related hydrostatic regional model EBU-POM.  
Regional model NMMB is a nonhydrostatic atmospheric model, while Regional climate model EBU-POM is fully linked atmospheric and 
oceanic model (Djurdjevic and Rajkovic, 2008; Djurdjevic and Rajkovic, 2010). The atmospheric component of the model is Eta model and 
oceanic component is the Princeton Ocean Model (POM).  With the NMMB Model the regionalization of climate scenario RCP8.5 was made 
(Moss et al., 2008), as defined in the fifth report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC – AR5), while the EBU-POM model 
was used for regionalization of the scenarios A1B and A2 (Nakicenovic and Swart, 2000), as defined in the fourth report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC– AR4). Horizontal resolution of the NMMB model was 8 km, and the resolution of EBU-
POM model was 25 km. The selected reference period was the period from 1970 to 2000, while the future climate ntegrations covered the 
period from 2011 to 2100. For the boundary conditions in the integration of RCP8.5 scenario, the results of global climate model CMCC-CM 
were used (Scoccimarro et al. 2011), while for the boundary conditions for the scenarios A1B and A2 the results of the global climate model  
ECHAM5 were used (Roeckner et al, 2003).   
to the reference period 1961-1990, there was an increase in annual maximum rainfall in the Sava Baisn of 16.4%, 
22.55% and 22.5% for the periods of 1991-2010, 1991-2014 and 1991-2018 respectively (the largest flood was in 
2014).   In the Adriatic Basin, the  annual maximum rainfall increased by 25.4% for all the above periods against 
the reference period. The records also show that changes in the amount of rainfall are more pronounced by seasons 
than annually. In the central part it is negative during spring and summer (the most pronounced in the area of 
Herzegovina – up to 20%), while during autumn the increase in rainfall was observed, especially in the north-
western and central parts. The records show that significant floods in the last two decades have occurred in DJF 
(2010,2019); MAM (2004, 2018, 2019); JJA (2014, 2019); SON (2014, 2015). Prior to this, floods were recorded in 
JJA (1975, 1976) and SON (1925, 1934). Hence floods have become more frequent in late winter/early spring and 
in late spring16. The results of observed flow data trend analysis (FNC) demonstrate strong changes in seasonal 
regime and extreme events, with the most significant change being the increase in runoff during the winter season.  
 
12. Analyses (TNC, FNC) show that there has also been a reduced amount of snowfall in winter months due to 
increased daily winter temperatures. Hence, winter precipitation falling as rain instead of being stored as snow, is 
contributing to an increase in flood risk, which has been a contributing factor in many of the major flood events of 
the last decade. Furthermore, late spring snowfalls have  been observed, which resulted in flooding in spring 
months when subjected to rapid melting due to large differences in daily temperature from one day to the next. 
These observed  changes in the precipitation regime, including increasing maximum annual rainfall, decrease in 
winter snow fall, increase in spring snowfall, when combined with temperature increases, resulted in an increased 
likelihood of floods due to the increased runoff and an increasing intensity and frequency of rain events17. According 
to the TNC, the increased intensity and variability of rainfall and the increased share of heavy rains in the total 
amount of rainfall resulted in an increased risk of flooding especially in the north-eastern part of B&H, where the 
most disastrous floods in history were recorded during May 2014. 18 All these changes in climate have been 
observed in the project target basins, but the most flood damages have been caused by the increases in rainfall 
intensity and frequency.  
  
13. B&H TNC projections19 show that extreme precipitation will intensify under warmer climate conditions. Scenarios 
RCP8.5 and A2 anticipate an increase in annual precipitation for the time horizon 2011-2040 in relation to the 
reference period 1971–2000 (+5% for most of the B&H territory). Precipitation is projected to increase in winter, 
spring and autumn on greater part of B&H during 2011-2040, while summer precipitation is projected to decrease  
for all time horizons. Scenario A1B, A2 and RCP8.5, downscaled for B&H, also anticipate further increase in 
variability of the rainfall regime. The draft FNC confirms that projected changes in rainfall are complex with possibly 
both positive and negative changes relative to the reference period.  For all four scenarios (RCP8.5, RCP 2.6, RCP 
4.5, RCP6.0) the FNC projections show that possible changes are in the range from -5 to + 5% for the near future 
time horizon relative to the reference period values. 
 
14.  Whilst climate change projections from the TNC and FNC for the periods beyond mid-century show that some 
annual precipitation anomalies are negative in relation to the reference climate period, all scenarios show a positive 
change in rainfall amounts for the near future periods considered, which justifies the assumption that within the 
project climate change horizon (up to 2050), there will be an increase in rainfall amounts (annual and seasonal for 
all seasons except summer), contributing to increased flood risk.  Furthermore, changes of indices of extreme

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 7 
 
 
 
20 Section 2.2.1 of the FS 
21 https://www.icpdr.org/main/sites/default/files/nodes/documents/icpdr_flood_report_2010.pdf 
22 https://ec.europa.eu/fpi/sites/fpi/files/pdna/pdna_bih_2014_-_final_report_0.pdf 
23 https://ec.europa.eu/fpi/sites/fpi/files/pdna/pdna_bih_2014_-_final_report_0.pdf 
precipitation indicate that there might be an increase in the daily accumulations in the days with precipitation greater 
than 20 mm or greater than the 95th percentile. In some cases, the increase of the total precipitation during the 
days with extreme precipitation can result in a positive anomaly on significant parts of the territory, with a change 
of up to several dozen percentages for some seasons compared to the reference period. This situation is consistent 
with the fact that warmer air can carry a greater amount of water vapor, which, under favorable synoptic situations, 
primarily through convective processes, can be a source of abundant precipitation. 
 
Climate Change Impacts 
Historical flooding in B&H 
15. The increased intensity, frequency and variability of rainfall due to climate change observed in the past decades 
resulted in more frequent, more intensive and more geographically extensive floods.  Years with floods have 
become increasingly common. In the last two decades, Bosnia and Herzegovina were hit by several extreme floods,  
with 10 recorded major flood events (2001, 2004, 2006, 2009, 2010, 2014, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020) compared to 
8 major flood events in the preceding 75 years (1925 to 2000)20. In April 2004 significant floods affected 48 
municipalities (out of a total of 142) in the basins of Una, Vrbas, Bosna and Drina. About 20,000 hectares of 
agricultural land and 300,000 people were endangered by floods, of which several hundred families were 
evacuated. In December 2010 over 140,100 hectares of land in FB&H were flooded including approx. 91,360 
hectares of agricultural land; 1261 landslides were recorded. In the Republic Srpska about 100,649 hectares of 
land were flooded, 48 houses were destroyed, 1513 objects were damaged. Moreover, 15 bridges were destroyed, 
40 bridges were damaged, and 156 landslides were recorded21.  
 
16. In May 2014 extreme floods occurred affecting B&H and the wider region with up to three times the normal May 
total and half the annual average rainfall falling in a 5 day period22.  The country was hit with the most intense 
precipitation ever recorded since the beginning of the organized hydrometeorological observations, i.e. in the last 
120 years. A combination of this prolonged extreme rainfall and snowmelt resulted in the extreme increase of water 
levels in an exceptionally short period of time, especially on rivers Bosna, Sava and Drina and their tributaries. On 
17-18 May 2014, dams were breached on several sites along the Sava River and its main tributaries, causing floods 
and significant damage to property in the areas of Middle Posavina, Odžačka Posavina and Semberija. Additional 
damages to the basin were caused due to numerous landslides, some of which have completely transformed the 
environment. Flooding, erosion, flash floods and landslides marked 2014.  After the May floods, further precipitation 
caused flooding again in July, August and September 2014, in areas already devastated by the May floods. 
Damages and losses incurred in critical sectors due to 2014 floods were as follows: Agriculture – EUR 187.2 Million; 
Education – EUR 8.7 Million; Energy – EUR 102 Million; Health – EUR 53 Million; Flood protection infrastructure – 
EUR 49.2 Million; Housing and household items – EUR 453. 2 Million; Public Services and Facilities – EUR 27.4 
Million; Transportation and Communications – EUR 347.7 Million, Water and Sanitation – EUR 7.5 Million23.   
 
17. In the Adriatic basin in B&H the hydrological regime has been significantly altered with a multifunctional water 
management system of hydropower plants (HPP) dams. As a result, flooding has been less severe, although annual 
prolonged groundwater flooding occurs. In December 1999, a great flood wave on the Neretva River caused 
enormous damage in Mostar, but also in the entire lower course of Neretva. In 2004, when large river overflows 
were recorded in the Sava River basin in B&H, in the Neretva River basin particularly high-water levels were 
recorded with sporadic overflows.  
 
18. The events of the last decades show that floods have been escalating in B&H due to strong regional precipitation, 
which has caused catastrophic floods. The flood risk has also been increasing due to mild winters with scarce snow 
but heavy and prolonged rainfall, or when there is abundant snow with extreme temperature oscillations. An 
analysis of the numbers of significant flood events and fatalities from 1925 to the present, shows that of the 40 total 
life losses recorded since 1925, 28 (70%) occurred since 2010 (see Section 2. 2 of the Feasibility Study). The 2014 
event on its own, accounts for 26 deaths.   
Flood risk under baseline and climate change conditions 
19. Of the two main river basin systems in B&H – Sava (Vrbas, Una-Sana, Ukrina, Bosna and Drina rivers) and Adriatic 
Sea Basin (Neretva and Trebišnjica rivers) - Sava river basin is at highest risk of flooding, while Adriatic Sea Basin

=== PAGE 12 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 8 
 
 
 
24 Section 2.3 of FS 
25 https://ec.europa.eu/fpi/sites/fpi/files/pdna/pdna_bih_2014_-_final_report_0.pdf 
faces a lower risk of flooding due to its karstic geology and heavily modified hydrology from hydropower dams. The 
main flooding sources in B&H are fluvial, pluvial, torrents and groundwater, with high flood risk identified in five 
sub-basins - the Una (in B&H 9,130 km2), Vrbas (6,386 km2), Bosna (10,457 km2), Neretva and Trebišnjica (10,110 
km2).  
 
20. Modelling of the socio-economic risk of flooding for baseline and climate change (2050) scenarios has been 
completed as part of the feasibility study for each of the five most vulnerable sub-basins (Section 2.3 of FS). In 
these basins under current conditions 799,445 people (22.5% of total B&H population) and 272,811 households 
(23.5% of total households) are at risk from floods. Under current conditions the expected damages to household 
assets is US$ 3.2 Billion. Under climate change conditions, 902,906 people and 306,907 households will be 
affected, which is 25.6% of total B&H population or 26.6% of total households in B&H. The total expected damages 
to household assets under climate change come to US$ 3.6 Billion. The Bosna River basin is the most vulnerable 
to flood risk under climate change with approx. 50% of total estimated damages or US$ 1.824 Billion, followed by 
the Vrbas river basin (24% of total estimated damages) and the Una river basin (17% of total estimated damages). 
Current flood risk to agriculture is expected to increase from 12,896 ha and US$ 3.34 Billion in damages to 15,064 
ha and US$ 3.7 Billion in damages under climate change. Agriculture in the Neretva River basin is expected to be 
most affected24, with 35% of total modelled agricultural damage. With regard to the vulnerability of the public sector 
infrastructure (including  health, education, judiciary, administration, social welfare, police and defense, cultural and 
historical facilities), 505 public sector buildings/facilities are exposed to flood risk, with estimated damages of 
US$ 31.2 Billion. These estimates do not include economic losses from loss of business continuity, loss of income 
generation, loss of production, etc. A total of 2,825 business sector assets of US$ 3.2 Billion in total value are 
currently at risk of flooding and would sustain US$ 550 Million in asset damages in case of an extreme flood event, 
57% of which would be in the Bosna River basin.    
 
21. Based on the risk assessment under current and future climate change, the five highest risk basins in B&H – Bosna, 
Neretva, Trebisnjica, Una-Sana, and Vrbas – have been selected as the target basins for project intervention. In 
addition, Drina River basin (7,283 km2 in B&H) where flood risk management studies (focused on optimizing HPP 
dam operations) have been undertaken by the World Bank, has also been identified as a target basin. The project 
interventions will complement the WB study. Overall, the project target basins comprise 85% of the total surface 
area of B&H. 
     
22. It is clear that more frequent and intensive floods in B&H due to climate change will result in significant impacts on 
people, their property and critical infrastructure. In addition to climatic drivers, land use change such as 
deforestation is affecting watershed functions - drainage control, erosion processes and landslide susceptibility - 
that may increase exposure and aggravate consequences of flooding in vulnerable watersheds. 
Social and Economic vulnerability  
23. Climate-induced floods have a significant impact on the most important economic sectors including agriculture, 
water management, and hydropower, and limit B&H already low adaptive capacity. As outlined above, changes in 
annual rainfall distribution and increasing rainfall extremes have been driving increased frequency and intensity of 
floods and increasing economic damages from floods have been significant, especially in the water, agricultural 
and housing sectors. The total economic impact of the 2014 floods is estimated to have reached EUR 2.04 billion, 
or 15% of B&H's GDP in 201425. 
 
24. Agriculture employs approximately 20% of the total work force and 46% of land use in B&H and is the most 
vulnerable sector to climate change. Agricultural losses due to floods can be substantial depending on the timing 
of the flood during the growing period (see Section 2.2, Annex E and Section 18.5 of FS). In addition, agricultural 
land suffers from pollution following floods and must be left uncultivated until rehabilitated. In torrent catchments, 
the sediment load and debris carried by flash floods to agricultural land result in significant losses and abandonment 
of productive land.  Socio-economic risk modelling shows that  in the most vulnerable sub-basins in B&H (Una-
Sana,  Vrbas, Bosna, in the Sava basin, and Neretva and Trebišnjica in the Adriatic Sea basin), a single extreme 
flood event would impact 12,896ha of agricultural land and result ing $3.33 Million USD in damages in the 
agricultural sector. This increases to 15,064ha and $3.71 Million USD under climate change (2050).

=== PAGE 13 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 9 
 
 
 
26 NAP project – Economic assessment of HPPs 
27 TNC page 16:  The annual increment in the forests is relatively low, because so-called economic forests (forests that can be managed 
on an economic basis) cover only about 13,000 km2 (approximately 25% of the BiH territory), and even these forests have low timber 
reserves (as low as 216 m3/ha with an incremental increase of timber of almost 5.5 m3/ha from half of the potential of the habitat). There are 
about 9,000 km2 (approximately 17%) of low and degraded forests with a very low incremental increase (approximately 1 m3/ha) and with 
no economic value from the timber production perspective. Based on this increment, about 7,000,000 m3 per year was cut in BiH before the  
war 
28 Steep deforested land are the main sediment source areas for high energy torrential floods which carry a high percentage of debree, soil 
and mud. Such high energy torrential flood phenomena can damage existing infrastructure, river banks, stone/concrete embankments and 
increase annual maintenance costs of those objects 
29 IPARD 2014-2020 programme of the European Commission focus also points to afforestation and agroforestry, fire prevention and 
restoration after fire, and improving the resilience and environmental value of forest ecosystems are highlighted. 
 
25. The hydropower potential of B&H is estimated at 8,000 megawatts (MW), with technical potential of 6,800 MW 
and economic potential of 5,800 MW, placing the country among the leading hydropower production nations in 
Southern Europe.  Large hydropower plants are part of 3 existing power companies in B&H, which are joint stock 
companies, while small power companies are mainly private limited companies. More frequent and intense rain 
events lead to intensive runoff and increased peak river flows and could result in reduced power production and 
damage to hydropower infrastructure. During 2010 and 2014 floods, hydro power plants (HPPs) did not adequately 
adjust their discharge before the events, and as a result significantly aggravated the flood damage. The Adriatic 
Sea Basin is particularly heavily modified with many existing and planned hydropower dams and have already 
experienced an extensive variability in generation due to climate change. While generally designed and licensed 
to include flood alleviation functions, the HPPs in Adriatic Sea basin require improved management through 
forecasting to minimize climate change impacts on their operations (See Annex C of FS). In the Sava sub-basins 
in B&H with HPPs, there is a need to use enhanced climate risk information and consider climate induced flood 
risks in HPPs’ operations.  While increased flood risk could result in damage to HPPs the type and size of flood 
events that would result in infrastructural damage to HPPs is different to the flood events being considered for 
protection of population. Hence HPPs are included in the project in order to optimize their essential dual role in 
flood alleviation by optimizing their operations for generation and flood alleviation using climate risk information and 
forecasting.  In addition, the risk from a failing dam, although of low probability, would result in significant damages 
to property and assets  and loss of life downstream.  In terms of economics, climate change could have a net 
positive impact in the near period on the level of average annual production for the baseline in the amount of 162.2 
GWh, or an increase in average production of 7% per year resulting in an average annual additional income of € 
11.1 million26.  However, the damages and losses that may result in the downstream area could be significant. 
 
26. B&H has the highest proportion of forests and the largest variety of forest species in the Western Balkans. 
Approximately 20% of forest land is privately owned and 80% is state-owned.  Between 1990 and 2005, Bosnia 
and Herzegovina lost 1.1% of its forest cover, or around 25,000 hectares. However, taking into account  the total 
rate of habitat conversion (defined as change in forest area plus change in woodland area minus net plantation 
expansion) during 1990-2005, B&H lost 4.4% of its forest and woodland habitat.  The increase in average 
temperature (3.4 to 3.8oC by end of the century) for A2 scenario will result in extremely different forest communities 
compared to the current communities. The assumed changes in forest ecosystems indicate that drastic changes 
would occur even in the mildest scenario (TNC).  According to the TNC, climate change represents a threat for all 
four macro-regions in B&H (ecological-vegetation areas). The Dinarides Region,  a very important and rich centre 
of endemic species in Balkans, will be under particular threat from both climate change and human activity such 
as deforestation and land degradation27 which will result in shifting of water supplies and distribution of agricultural 
pests and diseases. Deforested and degraded catchments increase the vulnerability to flooding from extreme 
events and impact on people and the assets in river basins and sub-catchments (See FS Section 10.2). It also 
increases maintenance costs28 of built infrastructure in such basins. The National Communications (INC, SNC, 
TNC) have suggested a number of mitigation measures including increase in forest productivity and maintaining or 
increasing the forest area through afforestation/reforestation and rehabilitation of bare lands29. Mitigation measures 
are needed to address any climate-induced changes that will impact the structure and density of the forest cover, 
which will, in turn, greatly exacerbate flood risk in river basins. In terms of the institutional framework, there is a 
noticeable lack of integration of climate change and FRM considerations into forestry policies and strategies. 
 
27. Settlements and development/economic activities in high-risk areas: One of the root causes of increasing 
vulnerability and damage from floods is increasing exposure. Spatial planning legislation and development control 
does not take account of flood risk nor do flood zones include flood resilient land use and construction rules. As a 
result, irreversible adverse land use practices in the floodplain and the building of houses and economic activity 
(including subsistence agriculture) in the floodplain, are common practices which significantly contribute to

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 10 
 
 
exposure. Lack of a regulatory framework, as well as limited awareness of the risks and continued uncontrolled 
adverse practices, will further exacerbate the problem, and will increase the vulnerability and costs from flooding. 
In addition, due to cheap land, some of the highly exposed flood risk areas have been inhabited by the most 
vulnerable populations, such as war refugees and displaced persons. Socio-economic risk modelling shows that  
in the most vulnerable sub-basins in B&H (Una-Sana,  Vrbas, Bosna, in the Sava basin, and Neretva and 
Trebišnjica in the Adriatic Sea basin), 799,445 people and 272,811 households (23% of population) are currently 
at risk from floods (Section 2.3 and Annex E of FS). Under climate change, by 2050 the number of affected people 
and households will increase to 902,906 people and 306,907 households (26% of population). The total damage 
to household assets is expected to increase from US$ 3.2 Billion (baseline) to US$ 3.6 Billion (2050). 
 
Institutional, Legislative and Policy Context 
28. B&H is a sovereign state with a decentralized political and administrative structure.  B&H consists of two Entities 
and one district: The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FB&H) and the Republic of Srpska (RS) and 
Brčko District. The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina is sub-divided into 10 Cantons. Decision-making 
involves the Council of Ministers, the two Entities and Brčko District. The two entities and Brčko District manage 
environmental issues through laws, regulations and standards. The State of Bosnia and Herzegovina as the central 
authority has only limited and specific powers with regard to the water sector and environmental protection: The 
Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations (MoFTER) has water-related competencies at the level of Bosnia 
and Herzegovina. Due to the lack of a State-level framework and the constitutional character of B&H and its entities, 
the current state of affairs is complex and heterogeneous, and the responsibilities for water management rest with 
the Entities (Ministry for Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management of RS and Ministry for Agriculture, Water 
Management and Forestry of FB&H). The B&H constitutional and legal framework does not contain specific and 
clear principles to guide the constitutive elements of the State in their management of shared water resources 
across entity or district borders. The State-level authorities therefore have no responsibility for regulating these 
inter-entity relations.  
 
29. The two Entities and the Brčko District have relevant political, administrative and legal jurisdiction in their own 
territories, with some coordination and cooperation between them. Furthermore, the FB&H is divided into 10 
Cantons which have their own authorities (ministries) with responsibilities in the water sector, including adoption of 
their own relevant laws. This complex administrative structure results in a number of different institutions in charge 
of water management issues and increases the need for coordination at the B&H level. The legal framework is not 
unified across the country and there are certain discrepancies in legislation between Entities (FB&H and RS) and 
even among Cantons within FB&H. 
 
Federal ministry of Agriculture, 
Water Management and Forestry 
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry 
and Water Management RS

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 11 
 
 
Figure B-1:  Institutional framework for water management in B&H 
30. The Law on Water of Republika Srpska was aligned with the EU Floods Directive in 2017 to provide the legal 
basis for better flood risk management and defines the method of flood risk assessment and management.  In 
FB&H the Draft Amendment of the Water Law was officially submitted to the FB&H Parliament at the end of 2017 
and is not yet passed. 
 
31. The FB&H Environmental Protection Strategy 2022‒2032 whose integral part is water management strategy 
and the Republika Srpska Strategy for Integral Water Management (2014–2024) both acknowledge climate 
change but do not identify concrete adaptation measures to address it. These entity strategies require coordination 
and harmonization in order to provide an aligned B&H-wide strategy.   
 
32. B&H’s Climate Change Adaptation and Low Emission Development Strategy (adopted in 2013) is of key 
importance to defining and planning adaptation action. As one of the worst impacts of climate changes in B&H the 
Strategy identifies more frequent and severe floods, including more frequent flood-related damage to HPP and 
damage to agriculture and forest eco-systems caused by changes in rainfall and weather extremes.  The lack of 
reliable data on climate risks has been identified in the Strategy as a critical limiting factor for the adaptation action. 
The Strategy also identified the need for improvements in infrastructure (both flood protection and water storage 
infrastructure) and in the mechanisms for better water management. Hydrological modelling and flood mapping 
were identified as priority research projects. Strengthened hydro-meteorological monitoring, establishment of the 
early warning system, water information system, natural disaster data bases are identified as priority actions in the 
Strategy. However, its implementation has been slow mainly due to lack of knowledge and institutional capacity to 
identify and attract required finances and undertake adaptation measures. The Climate Change Adaptation and 
Low Emission Development Strategy was updated in 2020 and includes adaptation priorities for 2020 to 2030, with 
4 expected outcomes.  Outcome 1: Climate change risks, vulnerabilities and opportunities are reliably identified, 
quantified and effectively communicated, supporting evidence-based policy development; Outcome 2: An effective 
institutional and regulatory framework supporting adaptation, coupled with delivery capacity, is addressing climate 
change risks and opportunities across sectors; Outcome 3: Adaptation approaches are mainstreamed into decision-
making, implemented and their objectives and planned delivery are understood by an informed society; Outcome 
4: A well-resourced Adaptation Strategy being implemented on time, effectively, and delivering the expected 
outcomes.  
 
33. In 2017, B&H submitted its Third National Communication (TNC) to the Conference of the Parties to the 
UNFCCC, which summarizes information on vulnerabilities to climate change, steps taken to adapt to climate 
change, measures related to public awareness and education, research and observation and technology transfer. 
TNC highlights that “due to the increased intensity of rainfall and its greater variability, as well as due to the 
increased share of heavy rains in the total amount of rainfall, there is the increased risk of flooding especially in the 
north-eastern part of B&H.” B&H’s Climate Change Adaptation and Low Emission Development Strategy is of key 
importance to the national adaptation process. The 4th National Communication is currently under preparation.   
 
34. The Government has initiated the development of the National Adaptation Plan, which should lay out specific 
activities with timeframes, indicative costs and implementing entities, necessary to combat climate change 
consequences in the most vulnerable sectors: water management, agriculture, forestry, biodiversity, hydro-energy, 
human health and tourism. It is anticipated that the National Adaptation Plan will be ready for UNFCCC submission 
by the end of 2020. 
 
35. Key strategic documents in B&H including water management strategies and rural development strategies point 
out that climate changes affect their sectoral operations, but these documents do not propose measures to mitigate 
future risks or adapt to climate change. The water management institutional framework is also fragmented and 
lacks vertical and horizontal cooperation.  
 
36. At the state level, the system for civil protection is headed by the Ministry of Security through the Sector for 
Protection and Rescue. It leads policy design. However, because of the decentralized nature of the system, the 
brunt of the responsibility for measures taken to deal with protection and rescue is placed on the entities and Brcko 
District. The Ministry of Security and the Coordinating Body of B&H (composed of the Council of Ministers, five 
representatives from the Federation of B&H, five from RS and two from Brcko District) take the leading role only in 
the event of a large-scale accident with trans-boundary effects or which cannot be resolved at the entity level. Local 
governments lack capacity and resources to fulfil even basic DRR functions. Civil protection centers are organized 
on municipal, cantonal and entity levels. There is an emergency warning center being organized on B&H (country) 
level, but it is still not in operation. Split responsibilities in the past have already led to artificially triggered floods

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 12 
 
 
(e.g., 1999 floods in Neretva river basin were triggered by the erroneous opening of the gates on several dams as 
a result of the lack of coordination among various electricity agencies). 
 
 
 
Figure B-2:  Institutional arrangement for Civil Protection in Republika Srpska (RS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HQ  Goverment of 
Republika Srpska 
Ministry of Agriculture, 
Forestry and Water 
Management RS 
Republic HMI 
PI Vode Srpske 
Municipality / City 
Republic Civil 
Protection unit 
Chief flood 
defence manager 
Deputy Chief flood 
defence manager 
District flood 
defence manager 
Other personnel  
HQ 
HQ 
HQ 
District department 
Banja Luka 
District department 
Bijeljina 
District department 
Doboj 
District department 
Sokolac 
District department 
Trebinje 
Sector flood 
defence manager 
Flood defence 
manager 
IN CASE OF 
EMERGENCY 
Republika Srpska

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 13 
 
 
 
30 See Section 3.6 of FS 
 
Figure B-3:  Institutional arrangement for Civil Protection in Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FB&H) 
37. Following the devastating 2014 floods, B&H Council of Ministers adopted in November 2015 an Action Plan for 
Flood Protection and River Management for the period 2014-2017. The Action plan focuses on the following 
activities: recovery of the infrastructure damaged in 2014 floods, transposing of EU flood directive, establishment 
of the flood forecasting system, adoption of new technologies, capacity development and coordination among 
institutions. However, due to very low implementation of this Action plan, in Mar 2018, its implementation period 
was extended till the end of 2021.   
 
38. The proposed project is aligned with the Climate Change Strategy and TNC. Project activities are also in line with 
B&H Action Plan for Flood Protection and River Management adopted in 2014 for the period 2014-2017, extended 
till 2021. B&H government has been in the process of updating its NDC since 2019 in order to include priorities on 
adaptation to climate change.   
 
Baseline Investments 
Government investment in flood risk management30 is scarce and is mainly focused on ongoing maintenance of 
very old flood defense structures. The condition of flood control facilities is very poor as a result of wartime damage, 
many years without maintenance, and minefields around some facilities (TNC). The total annual budget for climate 
adaptation and resilience activities in B&H related to flood risk management averages US$40 Million comprising 
mainly donor grants (40%) and loans (60%). After the 2014 floods, flood risk management has been undertaken 
through many donor-funded projects implemented by, or in partnership with, relevant ministries.  The baseline 
projects are listed below and elaborated in the feasibility study. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HQ  Goverment of 
Federation BiH 
Federal ministry of 
Agriculture, Water 
Management and Forestry 
Federal HMI 
Water Agency 
Sava/Jadran 
Municipality / City 
Federal Civil 
Protection HQ 
Chief flood 
defence manager 
Deputy Chief flood 
defence manager 
District flood 
defence manager 
Other personnel  
Cantonal department  
Sector flood 
defence manager 
Flood defence 
manager 
IN CASE OF 
EMERGENCY 
Federation BiH 
Cantonal department  
Cantonal department  
Cantonal department  
Cantonal department  
Cantonal department  
Cantonal department  
Cantonal department  
Cantonal department  
Cantonal department  
HQ 
HQ 
HQ 
HQ 
HQ 
HQ 
HQ 
HQ 
HQ 
HQ

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 14 
 
 
Baseline Projects 
Chapter 7 of the FS provides a description of the baseline projects and detailed discussions of the baseline project 
being scaled up.  It is summarized in the next paragraph. 
39. Technology Transfer for Climate Resilient Flood Risk Management (Vrbas project), USD 5 million SCCF grant 
implemented by UNDP in 2014-2020: This project represents the key prototype/baseline project for the proposed 
GCF intervention. The SCCF funds were used to enable the communities of the Vrbas basin (12% of B&H) to adapt 
to flood risk through the transfer of adaptation technologies for climate resilient flood management including 
legislative and policy amendments, upgrade and rehabilitation of the hydrometric monitoring network and the 
harmonisation and centralisation of the hydrometric database, development of state-of-the-art hydrological and 
hydrodynamic models and GIS tools for the Vrbas River Basin incorporating climate change predictions and 
producing flood hazard maps as the basis for spatial planning and long-term strategic FRM, development of a flood 
forecasting and  enhanced the existing early warning system within the VRB , development of emergency response 
plans  and provision of training in flood-specific civil protection, implementation of non-structural measures, and 
capacity development of over 100 practitioners and decision makers. Further, an institutional capacity development 
plan for the long-term development of capability and capacity in FRM was developed. The project worked closely 
with affected communities to introduce climate resilient community-based non-structural measures and provided 
training to local communities in climate resilient FRM. The Vrbas project carried out a review of land use and spatial 
planning regulations and recommended revisions to strengthen the legislation that govern activities influencing 
flood hazards, to provide comprehensive floodplain management and spatial planning.  A floodplain zoning policy 
was developed which focuses on the promotion of floodplain zoning as a means of efficient flood risk management, 
in order to retain the natural functions of the floodplain, minimize loss of life and property damage due to flooding. 
It uses the hazard maps to define flood zones and vulnerability categories.  Under the Vrbas project a range of 
non-structural measures utilizing eco-system-based approaches, or interventions that encourage natural 
floodplain functions were successfully designed and implemented for the first time in B&H. The proposed project is 
scaling up the successfully implemented Vrbas project and extending its many achievements to the rest of B&H.  
Chapter 7 (Sections 7.2 to 7.11) of the feasibility study (FS) provides detailed discussion of the Vrbas project main 
interventions, all aspects of which are being scaled up to other basins in B&H.   
 
40. Other relevant projects are presented in the table below with a discussion on the relevant lessons,  synergies with 
the proposed project, best practices that can be adopted/scaled up and the gaps that can be filled by the proposed 
GCF interventions: 
 
 
 
 
Project 
name 
Key outputs / Lessons 
learned  
  
Synergies 
with GCF 
proposal 
Best practices,  upscale potential and gap filling 
1 
Emergency 
Flood Relief 
and 
Prevention 
Project, 
EUR 55 mil 
EIB loan 
(2012-2020) 
The purpose of the project 
is to safeguard the 
agriculture, industrial and 
housing areas prone to 
flood impacts and to 
enable a stable basis for 
future development. The 
project focused on 
construction and 
rehabilitation of hard 
engineering structures, 
mainly along the Sava 
River. The project has also 
made an inventory of 
damages to flood 
protection infrastructure 
within the Sava river basin.  
 
 
-flood risk 
management 
measures 
within Sava 
river basin 
Upscale - project will use the experience of structural flood 
protection and building-back better to scale up approach to 
implementation of flood risk management measures.  
Gap filling –Climate hazard and risk modelling data was not 
available for the design of these protection measures.   
Through Project activities 2.2. (FS pg. 241-247) the Project 
will Implement and mainstream new ecosystem-based flood 
risk reduction and climate change adaptation methods, while 
through Activity 3.3 (FS pg. 260-263) the project will Implement
climate-proof structural flood risk reduction and anti-erosion 
interventions in Vrbas, Una-Sana, Bosna and Drina river 
basins.  Furthermore, the Project will develop the hazard and 
risk modelling which will provide the climate risk data for 
designing climate-proofed flood protection measures, and 
enable damage and loss calculations by sectors to identify 
strategic safeguarding measures of key sectors such as 
agriculture (Activity 1.2, FS pg. 199-202).

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 15 
 
 
2 
B&H Floods 
Emergency 
Recovery 
Project, 
USD 100 
mil WB loan 
The goal of this project is 
to restore functionality of 
infrastructure essential for 
public services and 
economic recovery after 
2014 floods. The project 
was focused on:  
- emergency disaster 
recovery goods 
- rehabilitation of key public 
infrastructure 
- capacity building. 
 
   
-structural and 
non- structural 
measures 
within Sava 
river basin 
-capacity 
building for 
flood risk 
management 
Upscale - The Project will build on lessons learnt in flood 
recovery using non-structural measures approach and use the 
experience and lessons learnt on capacity building.  
Gap filling – Climate hazard and risk modelling data was not 
available for the design of restoration measures for this critical 
infrastructure.  
The Project will develop the hazard and risk modelling which 
will provide the climate risk data for designing climate-proofed 
critical infrastructure (Activity 1.2). The Project will develop risk 
mapping, forecasting and climate information required to 
climate-proof future structural investments and risk reduction. 
The Project is developing floodplain zoning policy and 
legislation which will ensure that critical infrastructure with 
vulnerable use will be zoned away from high risk areas (Sub-
Activity 2.1.2, FS pg. 235-239), and where critical infrastructure 
has to be placed in high risk areas, the project is embedding 
the use of climate risk information in the design of new and the 
rehabilitation of old critical infrastructure (Sub-Activity 2.1.3, FS 
pg. 239-240) to ensure flood resilience.  
Through sub activity 1.3.4 (FS pg. 220-221); project will 
develop and implement a capacity development plan for 
embedding flood hazard and risk modelling approaches and 
FFEWS into appropriate institutions in B&H. 
Through Activity 1.4 (FS pg. 221-228) project will develop and 
implement protocols and SoPs on data generation, data 
management and communication for effective impact based 
FFEWS and flood risk management. 
Through Project activities 2.2 (FS. Pg. 241-247) project will 
Implement and mainstream new ecosystem-based flood risk 
reduction and climate change adaptation methods (which 
improve eco-system function of catchment, thus reducing flood 
risk), while through Activity 3.3 (FS pg. 260-263) project will 
implement climate-proof structural flood risk reduction and anti-
erosion interventions in Vrbas, Una-Sana, Bosna and Drina 
river basins. 
3 
Advance 
the National 
Adaptation 
Plan (NAP) 
process for 
medium-
term 
investment 
planning in 
climate 
sensitive 
sectors in 
Bosnia-
Herzegovin
a (2018-
2021) 
This GCF funded project is 
advancing adaptation 
planning in B&H with a 
focus on sectoral 
approaches, upgrading the 
knowledge base for 
adaptation, prioritizing 
adaptation interventions for 
the medium term, building 
institutional capacities for 
integrating climate change 
adaptation and 
demonstrating innovative 
ways of financing 
adaptation at the sub-
national/local government 
level.  
Key outputs will include: 
- enhancement 
of climate data 
exchange 
- analyses of 
CC impact on 
HPP and 
agriculture 
 
 
The proposed GCF investment will work in coordination with 
NAP project and facilitate the integration of CC adaptation and 
flood risk management at national and sub-national levels. 
The NAP project will help develop data sharing protocols for 
data/ information exchange between water and other sectors 
relevant for integrated water management and climate change 
(agriculture, forestry, environment, spatial planning, and hydro-
energy sectors). 
The NAP project will also study economic impacts of climate 
change on the hydropower sector in Republika Srpska, and 
identify additional monitoring needs to support improved HPP 
system operations and will provide essential input observation 
data for the more detailed model of the basin.   
Knowledge gained on CC impact on HPP electricity production 
and agriculture will be of help for modelling and early warning 
system activities. 
Monitoring and evaluation system will set a base for data 
exchange protocols.

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 16 
 
 
- monitoring and evaluation 
system for climate change 
adaptation 
- climate change data 
management system 
accessible to all 
stakeholders 
- vulnerability assessments 
for key priority sectors  
- municipal level 
investment financing 
instruments with 
public/private sector 
engagement in selected 
municipalities  
- building national, sub-
national and sectoral 
capacity to integrate and 
mainstream risk informed 
planning and budgeting. 
Upscale – Through Activity 1.2 (FS pg. 199-202) the Project 
will develop hazard and risk models and maps.  In particular, 
the methods for incorporating improved HPP operations, as 
well as economic studies on CC impacts will be scaled up. 
Through Activity 1.4 (FS pg. 221-228) project will develop and 
implement protocols and SoPs on data generation, data 
management and communication for effective impact based 
FFEWS and flood risk management. 
Gap filling - Through Activity 3.1 (FS. pg. 253-258)  project 
will develop investment framework and budgeting mechanisms 
for climate induced flood risk reduction and management  
Through sub-activity 3.2.1 (FS pg. 259) project will develop 
municipal investment plan for climate resilient FRM planning 
for 10-12 highest risk communities and 1 canton. 
4 
UN Floods 
Recovery 
Programme 
"Danas Za 
Nas",  USD 
22.6 mln 
financed by 
28 bilateral 
donors 
This project was to 
reestablish normal living 
conditions in more than 60 
communities most affected 
by 2014 floods via 
infrastructure rehabilitation, 
short-term employment 
opportunities, restoring 
water, sanitation and 
sewage facilities, education 
of citizens etc. 
- structural and 
non -structural 
measures 
- education 
and public 
awareness 
 
Upscale - The Project will use the experience and lessons 
learned on reduction of flood risk using non-structural 
approach and will build on the public awareness activities. 
Through Activity 1.4 (FS pg. 221-228) project will develop and 
implement protocols and SoPs on data generation, data 
management and communication for effective impact based 
FFEWS and flood risk management. 
Gap filling - Under Activity 2.1.2 (FS pg. 235-238) floodplain 
zoning will be developed to zone future development away 
from high risk areas while under 2.1.3 (FS pg. 239-240) 
climate proofing methods, standards and guidelines will be 
developed for critical infrastructure.   
Through Project activities 2.2. (FS. pg. 241-247) project will 
Implement and mainstream new ecosystem-based flood risk 
reduction and climate change adaptation methods, while 
through Activity 3.3 (FS pg. 260-263) project will Implement 
climate-proof structural flood risk reduction and anti-erosion 
interventions in Vrbas, Una-Sana, Bosna and Drina river 
basins.

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 17 
 
 
5 
EU flood 
recovery 
program,  
EUR 43.52 
mln, 
implemente
d in 2014-
2016 by 
UNDP,  
UNICEF 
and IOM 
This Programme 
contributed to the recovery 
after the 2014 flood and 
included rehabilitation of 
4,000 dwellings for 
approximately 14,000 
people, 100 local roads 
and bridges, 90 
educational institutions 
(including pre-school 
facilities), 10 water and 
sanitation facilities, three 
municipality buildings, four 
Centres for social welfare, 
and four healthcare 
facilities.  
The Program recognized 
the importance of investing 
in future risk informed 
decision making and it 
initiated the development 
of a Flood and Landslide 
Risk Assessment for the 
Housing Sector in B&H. 
The Assessment focuses 
on the flood and landslide 
risk for the housing sector 
in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, prioritizes 
locations based on risk 
ranking and makes 
recommendations for risk 
reduction 
- structural and 
non-structural 
measures 
-capacity 
building 
 
 
 
Upscale - The GCF investment will use the experience and 
lessons learned on reduction of flood risk using structural and 
non-structural approach and will build upon the approach of 
risk informed decision making. 
Gap filling - Through activity 1.2 (FS pg. 199-202) project will 
enhance climate-induced flood hazard, risk and vulnerability 
information for strategic management and sound decision 
making for climate induced flood risk management. 
Under Activity 2.1.2 (FS pg. 235-238) floodplain zoning will be 
developed to zone future development away from high-risk 
areas while under 2.1.3 (FS pg. 239-240) climate proofing 
methods, standards and guidelines will be developed for 
critical infrastructure. 
Furthermore, through activities 2.2.  (FS pg. 241-247)) project 
will Implement and mainstream new ecosystem-based flood 
risk reduction and climate change adaptation methods, while 
through activity 3.3 project will Implement climate-proof 
structural flood risk reduction and anti-erosion interventions in 
Vrbas, Una-Sana, Bosna and Drina River basins. 
6 
West 
Balkans 
Drina River 
Basin 
Manageme
nt Project,  
USD 8.74 
mln funded 
by 
GEF/SCCF 
and 
implemente
d by the 
World Bank 
(2017-2020) 
This regional project 
improved planning and 
implementation for 
integrated, cooperative 
management of the trans-
boundary Drina River basin 
via capacity development, 
public awareness 
campaign, small grant 
schemes. 
It strengthened regional 
network of hydro-
meteorological stations and 
implemented pilot 
investments for increased 
climate change resilience 
to floods and droughts.  
-integrated 
river basin 
management 
approach 
-flood risk 
management 
- capacity 
building 
- public 
awareness 
raising 
Upscale - The proposed GCF intervention will use the 
experience on integrated water management approach with 
multiple stakeholders. 
Build up on strengthening of Hydro-meteorological institutes 
and awareness raising on flood risk management.  
Through activity 1.1 (FS pg. 192-198) project will upgrade and 
expand the coverage of the hydrometric network for enhanced 
monitoring of climate variables in Category I catchments and 
torrential streams. 
7 
Flood 
Hazard and 
Flood Risk 
Maps of 
B&H, WBIF 
The purpose of the project 
was to develop flood 
hazard and flood risk maps 
for all river basins in B&H 
except Vrbas. Started in 
2017, after almost two 
years delay due to delay in 
-flood hazard 
and risk 
mapping 
 
Upscale - Use the experience and lessons learned on 
reduction of flood risk by enhancing existing flood risk and 
flood hazard maps. 
Learn from the project’s constraints and enhance stakeholders’ 
engagement during the project implementation.

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 18 
 
 
finalization of Terms of 
Reference for map 
development, when they 
agreed to use Vrbas flood 
mapping methodology. 
Even though methodology 
for maps were good, 
developed maps have 
been rejected by 
stakeholders several times 
requesting further 
improvements, due to 
insufficient level of details, 
as well as incorrect 
overlapping of flood lines 
with settlements 
boundaries, therefore 
incorrect riskThe above 
issues are result of 
insufficient stakeholders’ 
involvement and 
overreliance on external 
experts.  
Gap filling - Through activity 1.2 (FS pg. 199-202) project will 
enhance climate-induced flood hazard, risk and vulnerability 
information for strategic management and sound decision 
making for climate induced flood risk management.  
The GCF will enhance the developed WBIF hazard models 
and maps by: 
1) 
Extending the WBIF models to ensure whole basins 
approach and not just AFAS modelling 
2) 
Modelling Category II tributaries and not only main 
river. 
3) 
Modelling torrents flooding mechanisms  
4) 
Enhanced hydrological modelling  
5) 
Inclusion of reservoir operations and flooding from 
potential dam failure 
8 
Capacity 
Developme
nt for the 
Integration 
of Global 
Environmen
tal 
Commitmen
ts into 
National 
Policies and 
Developme
nt Decision 
Making, 
USD 1.5 
mln, GEF 
The project facilitated 
cross-sectoral and 
participatory approaches to 
natural resource 
management planning and 
implementation, including 
developing individual and 
institutional capacities to 
better adapt and apply 
global environmental 
management indicators as 
a monitoring tool to assess 
the intervention 
performance and 
institutional sustainability. 
The project focused on 
environmental data 
exchange and capacity 
building for environmental 
reporting. It developed 
Environmental 
Management Information 
System, which has never 
been used in practice by 
local institutions. The 
reason for that is that the 
Project never identified 
exact data and channels 
for their exchange.   
- improvement 
of climate 
change data 
exchange 
Upscale - Use the experience and lessons learnt to develop 
clear protocols on data exchange. 
Through Activity 1.4 (FS pg. 221-228) project will develop and 
implement protocols and SoPs on data generation, data 
management and communication for effective impact based 
FFEWS and flood risk management.  
 
41. As shown above, flood risk management in B&H has been undertaken mainly through donor-funded projects 
implemented by or in partnership with relevant ministries. Most baseline projects have been focused on post-event 
recovery and do not take an integrated ex-ante approach nor do they consider climate change impacts.  
Furthermore, many of the baseline projects were limited in scope and/or geographical extent and budget, which in-
turn, limited their transformational potential The proposed Project is therefore scaling up the capacities established 
by the Vrbas project (described in para 38 above and  in detail in Sections 7.2 to 7.11 of the FS), and will learn

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 19 
 
 
lessons and scale up interventions from other baseline projects to implement a nation-wide integrated proactive 
risk informed and climate-responsive approach to flood risk management.  It will develop and introduce new 
technologies and innovations such as Impact-based forecasting (IBF), scaled up forecast-based financing (FbF), 
blended risk financing and risk transfer mechanisms (such as IFI loans, state funds, commercial loans, private 
finance leveraged through the GCF intervention ), establish key public-private sector partnerships to leverage and 
scale up investments, and  will embed methods for, and implement climate resilient structural measures as well as 
eco-system based non-structural measures. This Project will represent the first time that investment will be made 
available at the scale that ensures nation-wide transformation in Flood Risk Management.  
 
Barriers to climate resilient flood risk management in B&H 
1. Limited institutional capacity (technical, legislative, and financial) for nation-wide Flood Forecasting and 
Early Warning System (FFEWS):   
42. Gaps in the hydrometric observation network and capacities: Financial and human resource constraints coupled 
with a severely reduced monitoring network since the 1992-1995 war limit B&H’s ability to monitor important 
hydrometeorological variables at the appropriate spatial and temporal scales, to provide adequate input to strategic 
flood risk management, and to implement an effective national FFEWS.  
 
43. Gaps in flood hazard and risk modelling and mapping capacities: There is, as yet no comprehensive flood hazard, 
risk or vulnerability mapping for B&H. Ongoing projects undertaking EU Flood Directive (EUFD) mapping are  
severely delayed and will only be done for selected high-risk areas within river basins. Technical capacities related 
to hazard and risk identification, assessment, modelling and mapping, risk prevention/reduction and risk transfer 
are weak across institutions and governance levels. Hence climate risk information for effective risk management 
is lacking. 
   
44. Gaps in FFEWS capacities: FFEWSs for most of the main watercourses are under development, but these systems 
do not cover tributaries or torrents. Existing FFEWSs are not integrated into a country-wide system, and there is 
limited relevant institutional capacities and community-based approaches. Interagency communications during and 
after natural disasters are cumbersome and inefficient. The regulatory framework for FFEWS is incomplete as it 
lacks protocols/SOPs on climate data generation, data management and communication. There is no national 
protocol on early warning system. The lack of horizontal (between entities and among sectors within the same 
entity) and vertical (among state, entity, cantonal and municipal levels) communication within the water 
management sector further limits effective cross-sectoral climate risk management.  
 
2. Lack of a strategic integrated FRM approach, insufficient technical knowledge, and capacities on 
ecosystem-based and non-structural approaches to climate resilient flood risk reduction:  
45. There is a lack of strategic integrated flood risk management approaches in B&H that identify the best combination 
of structural and non-structural measures to address climate induced risks. Flood protection currently relies on 
limited structural measures that are becoming increasingly ineffective in terms of the Standards of Protection they 
provide in the face of climate change, have high cost, can sometimes result in the problem being moved elsewhere, 
lack basin-scale appraisal-led approach to the identification of flood defense needs, and lack detailed assessment 
of risk and consequence of failure. Due to the predominant use of traditional engineered structural measures, 
inherited from a pre-war communist system, there is insufficient knowledge about non-structural measures and 
limited capacity to design and implement them. Hence there is currently no strategic integrated flood risk 
management approach in B&H that identifies the best combination of structural and non-structural measures to 
address climate induced flood risk. There is a lack of knowledge and application of non-structural measures and 
ecosystem-based approaches (EbA) to flood risk management, such as the use of agro-forestry, community-based 
early warning systems, floodplain zoning, reforestation, and financial instruments such as flood disaster insurance 
and other risk transfer mechanisms as a means of minimizing the impact of flooding on communities. There is no 
sector specific flood risk management which embeds gender responsive climate resilience measures into sectoral 
development plans. The existing standards and guidance for the design and implementation of all categories of 
critical infrastructure, do not currently include climate change considerations nor are they based on the most-up-
to-date climate risk information or methods for identification, prioritization, design and implementation of climate 
proofed infrastructure. Activities within key sectors such as water management, energy, transport, agriculture, 
forestry, spatial planning, are not climate risk informed.

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 20 
 
 
3. a) Outdated non-climate-risk informed approach to flood defenses design and b) lack of capacity, knowledge 
and information for enhanced climate-proof public and private investments into flood risk reduction and 
community response:  
46. At the municipal and community levels, there is a lack of knowledge, tools, and investment to systematically 
respond and build resilience to flood risk. The population, in particular in rural areas, is lacking general 
understanding of climate induced risks and community response capacities. There is limited knowledge and 
capacities among local communities to apply climate resilient livelihoods and adaptive strategies for coping with 
climate-induced hazards. Limited awareness, and response and resilience capacities of communities is due to a 
lack of climate risk information for building such awareness and capacities.  
 
47.  There is a lack of financial resilience of communities due to a lack of climate risk-informed risk transfer instruments 
such as flood and disaster insurance, or similar financial instruments. There is a lack of engagement with private 
and productive sectors in climate responsive FRM. In order to ensure sustainability of the FRM measures, 
particularly related to the costs of operation and maintenance of equipment, information provision services, regular 
maintenance of flood defenses, and all other flood risk management activities, there needs to be an engagement 
and willingness to pay for such, from a wide range of beneficiaries including private sector, public sector, and the 
public at large. Information on the interest in, and willingness to pay is currently lacking, as are the mechanisms, 
instruments, and tools to engage the private sector in climate risk financing.   
 
48. Insufficient, outdated and poorly planned and managed flood defenses increase exposure of communities, to 
increasing flood risk. Investment in flood defenses for the protection of communities is done in a reactive manner 
and as budgets allow. The limited annual budgets are used to address urgent repairs to existing defenses, many 
of which have long exceeded their design life due to climate change and lack of maintenance.  Flood defense 
design and implementation does not currently take a strategic approach (e.g., river basin approach) nor does it 
systematically take account of climate change. There is also a lack of technical and financial capacity to design, 
operate and maintain climate resilient flood protection infrastructure. The Post-Disaster Rapid Needs Assessment 
(PDRNA) following the 2014 floods revealed that US$49.2 Million in damages to flood protection and control 
infrastructure was incurred. In addition, damages and losses forecasting and accounting, and cost-benefit analysis 
is not systematically used to inform and develop municipal investment plans, nor to undertake appraisal-led FRM 
analysis, due to the lack of methods tools, and guidelines.  Hence local level FRM investment planning is currently 
inefficient and ineffective.       
  
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram) 
49. The Project has been developed to address the barriers to integrated climate-informed flood risk management and 
is aimed at supporting the commitment of the B&H government to avoid loss of lives and to reduce economic and 
infrastructure losses caused by climate-induced flood disasters.  
 
50. In the baseline scenario, without the Project the lack of technical, institutional, and financial capacities to 
implement and maintain a fully integrated flood risk management framework will continue to result in limited (in 
terms of accuracy, skill and spatial extent) flood warnings not reaching the communities who are most affected by 
flood hazards, in a timely manner. The absence of comprehensive and definitive flood risk information and 
legislative and policy framework will continue to exacerbate weak land use, spatial planning and climate risk 
management, leading to increased exposure of communities to damages, losses and loss of lives. In addition, a 
lack of institutional and financial capacities and modern technologies will prevent the design of climate risk informed 
mitigation measures. The large proportion (26%) of the population at risk from flood hazards (902,906) will continue 
without coping capacities and adaptation strategies to adapt to climate change and the capacity to manage and 
minimize their exposure and resilience to intensifying flood hazards. Hence, in the baseline scenario without GCF 
investment, the B&H population and economy will face increasing pressures from more frequent and severe climate 
change induced flooding, including losses of lives and economic losses due to climate change-induced flood 
disasters and associated impacts on GDP. In addition, a continued lack of financial resilience will further limit 
recovery from more frequent flooding, thus keeping the affected population in a cycle of loss and diminishing 
recovery capacity, eroding and limiting further sustainable development gains. Scaling-up of tested integrated FRM 
approaches will not be possible due to the existing financial gap between DRR needs and required investments, 
as well as an underdeveloped national capacity for flood hazard and risk knowledge.  
 
51. In the adaptation alternative, this Project will support the commitment of the B&H government to avoid losses of 
lives and to reduce economic and infrastructure losses caused by climate-induced flood disasters by implementing 
a Theory of Change described below. The project will scale-up technological, institutional and financial innovation

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 21 
 
 
in flood risk management through nation-wide implementation of fully integrated FFEWS based on state-of-the-art 
modeling technologies, mainstreaming of flood risk into key sectoral policies, mainstreaming nature-based 
solutions to flood risk management into FRM policy and practice, engaging private sector, promoting new risk 
financing tools, embedding risk-informed municipal investment planning approaches and implementation of priority 
flood risk reduction measures in the highest risk communities. 
 
Theory of Change 
 
52. Project goal statement:  IF flood risk management in B&H is transformed towards a more proactive, integrated and 
climate-informed system supported by gender responsive climate risk informed FRM policies, strategies, 
technologies and practice THEN vulnerable communities in B&H will be less exposed to increasing frequency and 
intensity of climate-induced floods and will face reduced loss of assets, infrastructure and livelihoods BECAUSE of 
access to accurate and timely impact-based flood warnings, and effective climate-proof flood protection measures 
integrating structural and nature-based solutions supported with long-term investment frameworks. 
 
53. As outlined in the goal statement, the project will catalyze a paradigm shift in flood risk management in B&H by 
transforming the existing FRM practices and shifting from an ex-post facto i.e. reactionary post-disaster recovery 
approach to ex-ante i.e. risk informed preparedness approach based on adequate climate information and risk 
knowledge, as well as on climate-informed FRM policies, strategies, technologies and investment. These elements 
of the paradigm shifts are further described in Section D.2 below. 
 
54. To achieve the GCF paradigm shift and deliver the project goal, the following two high-level Outcomes are planned: 
Outcome 1: Climate informed gender-responsive impact-based FFEWS and increased generation and use of 
climate data reduce vulnerability to flood related disasters; and Outcome 2:   Vulnerable communities in B&H,  
including women, children, disabled, and elderly, are better protected from and less exposed to climate induced 
flood risks through a combination of structural and non-structural flood risk reduction solutions. Through these 
outcomes, the project’s paradigm shift will be pursued by embedding innovation and technology transfer through 
scaling up of state-of-the-art technologies in floods monitoring, modelling, impact-based forecasting and early 
warning, including “last mile” communication (Outcome 1), as well as by identification, selection and implementation 
of cost-effective EbA measures to complement traditional structural solutions, mainstreaming FRM into sectoral 
policies and introducing innovative risk financing and transfer mechanism as well as investment planning (Outcome 
2). Through its Outcome 1, the project will also contribute to the implementation of the new UN initiative EWS4All 
announced in 2022 with the aim of promoting universal coverage of early warning. 
 
55. While  pursuing these Outcomes, the project will also leverage several important social co-benefits. Co-benefits 
for health and well-being will include improved overall  health and reduced health risks within communities due to 
the reduction in the number of flood-related injuries and a reduction in the exposure to water borne diseases. The 
health co-benefits will occur primarily for the vulnerable B&H communities currently lacking access to sanitation 
and drinking water:  59% of the population in B&H are currently not connected to sewerage systems and 25% are 
without access to drinking water, and therefore at a higher risk of suffering from illness due to water borne diseases 
that arise due to flooding. In addition, the project will deliver substantive gender co-benefits as it will train and 
empower female practitioners in all aspects of FRM and establish gender-responsive risk assessments and FRM 
framework. The gender-responsive system of data collection and modelling of vulnerability to floods will underpin 
the socio-economic risk model which will guide the identification and prioritization of risk management, planning, 
preparedness and response measures in order to ensure that the most vulnerable groups are prioritized. 
 
56. The outcome-level change will be pursued through three interconnected Outputs to be delivered by the Project.  
Output 1: Fully integrated impact-based Flood Forecasting and EWS facilitates timely preparation and response;  
Output 2: Non-structural flood risk reduction measures and nature-based solutions mainstreamed in sectoral 
policies and plans and effectively contribute to protection of people and livelihoods from climate-induced flood risk; 
Output 3:  Climate-proof flood protection measures scaled-up through new and improved national and local 
investment frameworks increasing resilience of the most vulnerable groups to climate induced flooding.  
 
57. The project’s Output 1 will contribute to the delivery of Outcome 1 by enhancing the capacity for flood forecasting 
and early warning through the development and implementation of a nationwide sustainable impact based FFEWS 
which will provide improved warning times and reduced losses.  This path has been chosen by the project among 
the other outputs based on the analysis of successful comparable efforts (EWS, climate information, and 
community-based DRM) which have shown effective impact related to saving of lives, assets, and livelihoods .This 
output will be achieved through a set of four interconnected and sequenced activities required to deliver a

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 22 
 
 
functional integrated impact-based FFEWS. First, the Project will significantly improve the hydrometeorological 
network which was damaged during the 1992-1995 war and currently cannot not provide adequate spatial and 
temporal coverage for an effective impact based FFEWS. Across all river basins the project will expand the 
hydrometeorological monitoring network to cover a greater range of hydrometric variables that climate change is 
bringing to enable effective monitoring, management, forecasting and early warning of all flooding process including 
pluvial and fluvial flooding, groundwater flooding, floods from dam operations, and torrential floods (Activity 1.1). 
Further, the project will address the lack of comprehensive hazard and risk mapping of flood risk and 
vulnerability by enhancing technical capacities related to hazard and risk identification, assessment, modelling 
and mapping. The project will develop hydrological modelling and extend hydraulic modelling for all main basins, 
undertake hazard modelling for torrents, include HPPs and groundwater modelling in flood hazard, risk and 
vulnerability modelling and mapping for all relevant basins, and develop a GIS-based socio-economic risk modelling 
(Activity 1.2). To address the lack of a country-wide flood forecasting and early warning system and lack of 
comprehensive, timely, specific and actionable flood warnings to communities and high-risk sectors, the project will 
implement a countrywide FFEWS based on an impact-based forecasting approach and following the WMO 
standards, the FFEWS will include provisions for effective “last-mile” communication and the community-based 
EWSs for the highest risk communities (Activity 1.3). Finally, the project will strengthen climate risk information 
sharing and institutional coordination and communication between different agencies, through SOPs, 
Communication Protocols and Codes of Conduct to be developed for each of the institutions responsible for 
impact based FFEWS (Activity 1.4). Implementation of the Output 1 will address barriers preventing the effective 
integrated FRM in B&H related to the limited institutional capacity (technical, legislative, and financial) for nation-
wide FFEWS. The results of Output 1 form the basis of activities under Outcomes 2 and 3. 
 
58. The project’s Outcome 2 will be achieved through the Outputs 2 and 3 which together will enhance the capacity to 
identify, plan and implement long-term flood risk management strategies at the basin and sub-basin scale by 
introducing combined structural and non-structural methods including EbA measures.  
 
59. More specifically, the Output 2 will mainstream climate-informed integrated flood risk management into key 
sectoral policies and plans, enhance institutional technical capacities in all aspects of FRM, and facilitate scaled-
up implementation of nature-based and non-structural flood protection solutions, using the hazard and risk 
modelling, maps and assessments resulting from Output 1 as the basis. Through the application of nature-based 
flood risk management solutions, the output will above all result in improvements in watershed ecosystems and 
restoration of ecological flood protection functions. This output will be delivered through four complementary 
activities. First, in order to address the institutional, legal and policy framework barriers to the effective integrated 
FRM, the project will enhance the existing legislative and regulatory FRM framework by mainstreaming 
climate-induced flood risk management into sectoral policy and planning for agriculture, forestry, environment, 
hydropower, critical infrastructure and spatial planning (Activity 2.1). Then, the project will promote and scale up 
nature-based approaches to flood management which can provide added benefits such as enhanced ecosystem 
services, to be implemented in the highest risk basins in B&H.  In particular, the project will implement 21 non-
structural and EbA measures that will enhance the ecosystem services through afforestation, regressing and 
soil protection/sediment management measures (Activity 2.2). These solutions will complement structural 
measures to ensure that the combination of both structural and ecosystem-based measures provides the best 
solution to climate-resilient flood management and protection. In addition, mainstreaming climate-induced flood risk 
considerations into forestry policy is expected to establish policies which will protect the forest from the expected 
impacts of climate change and promote reforestation, afforestation, and sustainable forest use. The long-term 
impact will be enhanced forest eco-systems which will provide improved services to flood risk management and 
other biophysical functions. The project will therefore result in improvements in watershed ecosystems and 
restoration of ecological function through the use of innovative EbA strategies which will reverse the deleterious 
effects of catchment degradation and enhance livelihoods of rural communities. To fully embed these new EbA 
methods into FRM in BiH, the project will establish a knowledge framework for the application of climate resilient 
EbA methods, including guidelines, technical specifications, standards and protocols (Activity 2.3). Finally, 
to enhance institutional capacity and embed continued capacity development in all aspects of flood risk 
management the project will implement country-wide training programmes in the technical and practical areas of 
flood risk management for practitioners, decision-makers, communities, emergency responders based on the 
assessment of technical and functional capacities and the development of the long-term capacity development plan 
(Activity 2.4). Implementation of the Output 2 will address the gaps in FRM sectoral policy in B&H, the lack of a 
strategic, policy-led integrated FRM approach, and insufficient technical knowledge and capacities on ecosystem-
based and non-structural solutions for climate resilient flood risk reduction.  
 
60. Finally, Output 3 will support the enhanced long-term flood risk investment planning at the national and local levels, 
engage private sector in risk management, and implement priority climate-proof structural flood protection

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 23 
 
 
measures in high-risk areas, thus contributing to the enhanced flood protection and reduced losses from flooding. 
This output will be achieved through the implementation of three activities. First, the project will enhance the 
climate risk financing and risk transfer framework in BiH shifting from largely public sector and donor financing 
towards blended finance and public-private partnerships. The project will support development of FRM investment 
frameworks, risk transfer schemes and enabling regulatory framework (Activity 3.1).  The project will develop a 
strategy for private sector engagement in long-term climate change-induced flood risk management. It will develop 
the most appropriate mechanisms for risk transfer, risk financing and supporting cost recovery mechanisms from 
a variety of sources. This will include the development of policy and legislation for private sector engagement in 
climate risk financing and for risk transfer mechanisms such as flood insurance. The project will develop a tool for 
appraisal-led design for structural and non-structural FRM measures, FRM investment planning, climate risk 
financing mechanisms and for appraisal-led FRM options design and decision-making, based on cost benefit 
analysis (CBA) approaches, building upon flood hazard and risk modelling tools to be developed under Activity 1.2. 
Further, the project will develop and implement the national methodologies, guidelines and tools for municipal 
climate-resilient investment planning based socio-economic risk and vulnerability modelling.  Investment planning 
will include Early Action plans identifying humanitarian funding (Forecast based Financing FbF) for early 
action based on impact-based FFEWS (Activity 3.2).  The project will build upon municipal level climate risk-
informed budgeting mechanisms developed under NAP project and examine opportunities to introduce climate risk-
informed budgeting into B&H’s existing public financial management (PFM) framework leveraging on existing 
strengths and addressing any limitations of the existing budgeting processes that currently hinder climate risk-
informed budgeting for flood risk management. This will include using the damage and loss and risk modelling tools 
(developed under Activity 1.2) to provide the evidence basis of existing cost of disasters to enable allocation of 
funding to different activities within the FRM framework and the investment required FRM/disaster budget ring-
fencing mechanisms. Based on the risk financing and risk transfer strategies and tools developed in Activity 3.1, 
the project will develop municipal investment plans for climate-resilient investment planning for flood risk 
management in 10-12 municipalities and 1 canton in the Vrbas, Una-Sana and Bosna basins. Finally, the project 
will embed climate-change responsive design of flood defenses which will be supported by new standardized 
methodologies, tools, guidelines and capacity for climate resilient flood defense design and implementation 
(Activity 3.3). Hence the project Output 3 will address barriers to the effective integrated FRM in B&H related to 
the outdated not climate-risk informed  approach to flood defenses design, and the lack of capacity, knowledge and 
information for enhanced climate-proof public and private investments into flood risk reduction and community 
response. Under this Activity, utilizing appraisal-led CBA and tools to be developed under Activity 3.1 the project 
will embed CBA and appraisal-led prioritization methods in developing and implementing structural measures that 
maximize benefit, make allowance for climate change and which consider environmental impacts. Under this 
activity, 10 structural measures have been identified by Water Agencies, (See Section 2.6 and Annex A of FS) will 
be implemented in high-risk river basins - Vrbas, Una-Sana and Bosna, Neretva and Trebisnjica and Drina River 
basins. 
 
61. This flow of outcomes, outputs and activities has been designed with the view of the following assumptions about 
the external environmental, political, economic, and institutional circumstances. Success of the project in reducing 
the losses of lives, assets, livelihoods, and infrastructure relies on the assumption that the occurrence of major 
extreme weather or seismic events do not deviate from projected trajectory. Implementation of the FRM regulatory 
reform and investment frameworks promoted by the project is based on the assumption that there will be no external 
political, financial or economic shocks that may hamper implementation capacities and priorities of the government 
and private sector partners. Consequently, sustainability of the technological solutions and infrastructure, including 
FFEWS and flood protection structures, depends on the capacities and resources of key stakeholders to support 
O&M of new technologies and systems, and to maintain adequate level of staff and budgets at water agencies and 
HMI. Finally, the effectiveness of the FFEWS in improving the timeliness and accuracy of flood warning is based 
on the assumption that government institutions cooperate on the FFEWS and data management.  
 
62. Please refer to the Theory of Change (TOC) diagram below, which illustrates how the proposed sets of funded 
activities will deliver the planned Outputs, which address the barriers and risks to the desired adaptation alternative 
and contribute to the achievement of Outcomes and co-benefits.

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 24 
 
 
  
 
 
B.2 (b).   Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization 
Fill in the GCF results area table below to map each project/programme outcome identified in section B.2(a) to the contributing 
GCF results area(s) by referring to the description of eight results areas provided in the guidance note.  
Outcome 
number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation 
and access 
 
MRA 2 
Low-emission 
transport 
 
MRA 3 
Building, 
citiies, 
industries, 
appliances 
MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use 
ARA 1 
Most 
vulnerable 
people and 
communities 
ARA 2 
Health, well-
being, food 
and water 
security 
ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment 
ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and 
ecosystem 
services 
Outcome 1 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
Outcome 2 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
Outcome…  
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Outcome … 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Outcome ... 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Outcome ... 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
If any co-benefits have been identified in section B.2(a), fill in the Co-benefit table below to map each co-benefit to the 
corresponding category as defined in the FP guidance note.

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 25 
 
 
 
31 Chapter 5 of the FS provides a detailed assessment of the existing hydrometric network and page 193-195 provides WMO key technical 
considerations to be taken into account when establishing the optimized observation network.   
 
Co-benefit 
number 
Co-benefit 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
Gender 
Adaptation 
Mitigation 
Co-benefit 1:  
Improved health  
and reduced 
health risks due 
to the reduction 
in the number of 
floods-related 
injuries and 
exposure to 
water borne 
diseases 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Co-benefit 2: 
Female 
practioners 
trained in all 
aspects of FRM 
and gender-
responsive 
FRM 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
 
 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) 
63. The project objective is to address increasing vulnerability of B&H communities and livelihoods to intensified 
climate-induced flood-related disasters. The project will reduce vulnerability of the population to floods across B&H 
(pluvial, fluvial, torrential and groundwater flooding) through improved climate information and establishment of the 
impact-based flood forecasting and early warning system (FFEWS). Improved generation and use of climate 
information will enable sound decision making and investment into climate resilient flood risk reduction measures, 
including ecosystem-based, non-structural and structural measures. The proposed project aims to address the 
above barriers and shift the baseline scenario towards climate resilience through three outputs (See Chapter 10 of 
the FS for a more detailed description of the project Outputs and Activities). 
 
Output 1:  Fully integrated impact-based Flood Forecasting and EWS facilitates timely preparation and 
response 
Activity 1.1: Upgrade and expand the coverage of the hydrometric network for enhanced monitoring of climate 
variables in Category I catchments and torrential streams. (GCF Financing = $1,535,980; Co-financing =  
$ 2,869,966) 
64. Under this activity, the project will expand the hydrometeorological monitoring network to cover a greater range of 
hydrometric variables that climate change is bringing. Previous upgrades to the hydrometeorological observation 
network  have not been realized at the appropriate spatial and temporal scale to enable effective flood monitoring, 
management, forecasting and early warning. In addition to pluvial and fluvial flooding in the biggest catchments 
(category I catchments), climate change is increasing the risks from torrential streams, which are currently not 
monitored or studied but cause great damage.  The project will provide an increased density of the hydro-
meteorological network for the areas at highest risk i.e., category I rivers and torrents31. Technical assistance to 
review and integrate the HPPs hydrometric network into the national network will also be provided. The project will 
also assist in setting-up sustainable operations and maintenance (O&M) systems for the network, by identifying 
long-term financing mechanisms for the maintenance of the hydrometric network that will include private and public 
sector financing.  The expansion of the observation network will greatly enhance the ability to provide station data 
to GBON and will enable the use of observation data from stations to be integrated with regional datasets for more 
effective monitoring and forecasting.

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 26 
 
 
 
32 Section 5.4. of FS 
 
65. The optimization of the hydrometric network will include upgrading of the ICT infrastructure and capacity to 
support the telemetered and automated stations for effective data transmission, storage, sharing and management. 
It will also include strengthening of the existing systems and protocols for the collection, transmission, sharing, 
storage, management and use of the observed data and the digitization, systematization and storage of all paper 
format data within the relevant hydrometric databases.   
 
66. The following sub-activities will be implemented: 
Sub-Activity 1.1.1 –   Develop the optimised network specification, develop ICT strategy and plan for hydrometric 
network. 
Sub-Activity 1.1.2 – Procure and install equipment to increase density of the hydro-meteorological observation network 
and expand monitoring to include greater range of hydrometric variables that climate change is bringing.      
Sub-Activity 1.1.3 - Set-up sustainable operation and maintenance O&M for the network.    
Sub-Activity 1.1.4 - Develop long-term financing mechanisms for the maintenance of the hydrometric network.   
Activity 1.1 Deliverables: 
• 
Hydro-meteorological observation network expanded with 9-Groundwater monitoring stations; 24- 
rehabilitated piezometers; 18-new piezometer 100 and 200 m deep;  
• 
10- boreholes with average depth up to 50 m; 30- boreholes with average depth up to 30 m; 26-
Meteorological stations; 23-Hydrological stations;  
• 
2 strategic plans, methodologies, guidelines and manuals for the operation and maintenance of the 
optimized hydrometric network; 
• 
1 prototype mechanism for private sector cost recovery; 
• 
2 Public Sector O&M financing strategies action plans, budgetary allocation mechanisms and tools.     
 
67. The following is the proposed indicative  list of stations and equipment to be acquired by the project32. 
 
Table B-1:  Indicative Hydrometric monitoring stations and equipment to be acquired by the project 
  
Quantity 
Total Capital Cost (USD) 
Groundwater network requirements 
 
 
Groundwater monitoring stations for measuring profiles of the most significant karst 
springs 
9.00 
163,800.00 
Installation of the appropriate measuring equipment into existing piezometers which are 
out of function or never were installed with measuring equipment  
24.00 
172,800.00 
Performing piezometer 100 and 200 m deep, with installation of equipment on following 
locations, average depth of 180 m 
18.00 
327,600.00 
boreholes with average depth up to 50 m, with casing and installation of equipment  
10.00 
34,000.00 
boreholes with average depth up to 30 m, with casing and installation of equipment 
30.00 
63,000.00 
Hydrometric network requirements 
  
  
Meteorological Stations:  
GMS program  
Measurement: Temperature (t, tmin, tmax, tmin5), Humidity, Wind, pressure, 
precipitation, insulation, snow depth, soil temperature per depth:(2 cm, 5 cm, 10 cm, 20 
cm, 30 cm, 50 cm, 100 cm) 
AMS sensors: 
precipitation, temperature, wind, humidity, pressure, global radiation, snow depth, 
percentage of water in snow. 
AAS sensors: 
Soil temperature up to 1m of  (5 cm, 10 cm, 50 cm i 100 cm) 
Humidity of soil up to 1 m (5 cm, 10 cm, 50 cm i 100 cm) 
humidity of leaves 
26.00 
403,000.00

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 27 
 
 
 
33 West Balkans Investment Framework 
34 Except Vrbas which is already done 
35 Areas for Further Assessment 
36 Torrents or Torrential flooding is the term widely used in the Balkans and Southern Europe to describe a flashflood with significant 
erosiosn power and which carries heavy debris/sediment load. Such catachments are normally located in the headwaters of major rivers 
 
Automatic Hydrological stations:  
The level and depth of the water, pressure, temperature. 
23.00 
121,900.00 
Total cost 
  
1,286,100.00 
 
 
68. The expanded hydrometric network will be supported by enhanced institutional arrangements, which will be 
assessed in terms of existing roles and responsibilities, the capacity of staff to operate and maintain the optimized 
hydrometric network. Section 5.2 of the FS provides a discussion of the existing institutional capacity for 
hydrometric network management. The project will identify the manpower, resourcing and financial requirements 
as well as training needs, for the efficient O&M of the optimized network, develop the strategic plan, capacity 
development and training plan, methodologies, technical guidelines and manuals for the long-term O&M and will 
provide training for hydrometric staff in the O&M of up-graded hydrometric stations. 
 
69. Total operations and maintenance costs of the expanded hydrometric network during the project 6-year 
implementation period have been assessed as $1,633,500 and $5,445,000 for 20 years. Relevant entity 
governments and water agencies will provide O&M during the project implementation period and for up to 20 years 
after project start (See Annex 13 for co-financing letters and Annex 21 for the O&M Plan). The project will identify 
and develop a long-term financing mechanisms for the maintenance of the hydrometric network, based on  a 
review of existing public and private sector financing mechanisms for climate and flood risk management, and 
identification of key private sector players at risk from flooding with an interest in flood risk reduction. These will 
include critical Infrastructure providers/managers, such as utility companies’ communications, telecommunications, 
transportation sector (airlines/air traffic, road and rail operators), energy (hydropower) and private enterprises such 
as hotel groups, chamber of commerce or business community, insurance and micro-finance companies. The 
project will undertake awareness raising on flood risk, flood risk management approaches to fully engage private 
and public sector. 
  
70. Gender Mainstreaming Activities:  The upgrade and expansion of the coverage of the hydrometric network will 
specifically focus on ways in which climate variables affect and impact women,  assess options and propose ways 
in which women can benefit from hydrometric network expansion in terms of employment and income making 
opportunities. Participation of both men and women in consultation process during the installation of the new 
hydrometric equipment at catchments and torrents will be ensured through community consultation.  The Project 
will aim to have 40% participation of women in consultation and capacity building under this activity.   
 
Activity 1.2: Enhance climate-induced flood hazard, risk and vulnerability information for strategic risk 
management and sound decision making for climate induced flood management. (GCF Financing = $1,067,833; 
Co-financing =  $ 4,528,756) 
71. WBIF33 project developed EUFD flood hazard and risk maps for all basins in B&H34. These maps were completed 
in 2021.  . These flood hazard and risk maps only cover high risk (AFAs35 ) areas of category I rivers, will not have 
holistic river basin approach and will not include detailed hydrological modelling, which will be required for climate-
informed flood forecasting and development of climate-resilient river basin flood risk management plans. Category 
II rivers pose a significant risk to populations, particularly where there is torrential flash flooding, but there is 
currently no hazard or risk mapping of torrents, expect for Vrbas basin, and WBIF project will not develop the 
torrents flood maps. In addition, the IPA2016 has allocated funds for development of flood risk management plans 
for all basins in B&H, and this work started last year. While the WBIF hazard mapping will meet the minimum 
requires for the EUFD with regard to flood hazard and risk mapping for B&H, it will not fully enable the strategic 
assessment of risk to population, to economic activity and to future development under conditions of climate change 
which is a government priority to support and guide local municipalities to wisely and rationally manage risk 
exposure to acceptable levels.  
 
72. The project will enhance the WBIF EUFD hazard and risk modelling and maps by a) extending the WBIF models 
to ensure whole basins approach and not just modelling of high risks areas; b) modelling Category II tributaries and 
not only main river; c) modelling torrents flooding mechanisms36; d) enhancing hydrological modelling; and e)

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 28 
 
 
 
and contribute significantly to the flood risk and erosion risk.  See for example “Assessment of torrential flood susceptibility using GIS matrix 
method: case study - Vrbas River basin (B&H) in Carpathian Journal of Earth and Environmental Sciences, August 2018, Vol. 13, No. 2, p. 
369 - 382 
37 This will build upon the current NAP project “Development of study on economic impact of climate change on the hydropower sector in 
Republika Srpska – multipurpose hydrosystem Trebišnjica”, 
inclusion of reservoir operations and flooding from potential dam failure. The modelling will include future climate 
change projections. An essential task of ﬂood management in HPP modified catchments is determination of an 
effective reservoir operation strategy that minimizes downstream flood risk and damage, while maintaining dam 
safety within reasonable limits and optimizing water availability for power generation. To minimize disastrous impact 
to downstream property, human life or even to the dam itself, there needs to be an integrated approach to basin 
flood risk management which includes adequate representation of HPP operations in the basin flood hazard and 
risk modelling and mapping, as well as in flood forecasting models, to enable real-time operational decisions during 
a developing flood. To this end, the project will incorporate HPP operations into flood hazard and risk modelling (to 
strengthen the role of HPPs in flood alleviation and maximize their capacity to utilize flood forecasts in their 
operations) in all relevant basins. The project will additionally develop sector-specific climate risk information 
products for hydropower sectors with a particular focus on the Neretva and Trebisnjica sub-basins of the Adriatic 
Sea basin37 where there are large numbers of HPPs.  
 
73. The project will also develop the institutional capacity of HPPs operators to use climate risk information and 
forecasts in their operations by providing the necessary supporting protocols, guidance, tools and training. In 
addition, the ability to assess flood risks posed by dams and reservoirs in the case of overtopping or breaching will 
be strengthened by reviewing and updating dam breach modelling and mapping approaches in B&H and 
development of updated unified technical guidance and specification for dam breach modelling.    
  
74. This activity will also build on the bespoke GIS-based socio-economic flood risk and vulnerability model (which 
is based on EU Flood Directive methodology for flood socio-economics assessment) developed for Vrbas basin. 
The developed socio-economic flood risk model will be enhanced with improved receptor and socio-economic 
datasets to be acquired/established by the project, integrate various spatial socio-economic data with the hazard 
maps, to produce risk maps, which will include economic losses and damages and loss of life estimates. In addition, 
the project will develop the technical methodology and tools for the systematic collection of socio-economic 
datasets that are important to flood risk and vulnerability modelling and assessment.   
 
75. Gender Mainstreaming Activities: Datasets for socio-economic risk and vulnerability assessment that support 
gender disaggregated data as well as data on other vulnerabilities will be embedded into the GIS-based socio-
economic risk model to be developed for flood risk analyses and decision-making in the future. Secondary datasets 
from census and other existing GIS databases will be complemented by primary datasets which will be collected 
using gender-responsive socio-economic survey methods that will be designed to ensure participation of women 
(at least 40%) and all other vulnerable and socially excluded groups. A gender Advisor will be engaged to support 
gender mainstreaming activities. 
 
 
76. The following sub-activities will be implemented: 
Sub-Activity 1.2.1:  Develop hydrological modelling for all main basins (category I rivers) to complement WBIF project’s 
EUFD hazard and risk models.     
Sub-Activity 1.2.2:  Develop full basin hydraulic models.   
Sub-Activity 1.2.3: Produce country-wide maps of torrents hazard, risk and vulnerability.  
Sub-Activity 1.2.4:  HPP modelling for development of enhanced operating rules for HPPs. Incorporate HPP 
operations into flood hazard and risk modelling.   
Activity 1.2 Deliverables: 
• 
Enhanced WBIF EUFD hazard and risk modelling by a) developing hydrological modelling for all main 
basins (category I rivers), b) undertaking torrents hazard modelling, c) including HPPs and groundwater 
modelling in flood hazard,  
• 
GIS-based risk and vulnerability modelling and mapping based on enhanced hazard maps for all relevant 
basins.

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 29 
 
 
 
Activity 1.3: Develop an integrated impact-based centralized and community-based flood forecasting and early 
warning system (FFEWS).  (GCF Financing = $ 2,156,040; Co-Financing = $ 1,955,438) 
77. B&H is a member of WMO and implements all of its activities in line with WMO standards and guidelines.  
Forecasting and early warning within B&H currently includes the key principles of GFCS.  Hydro Meteorological 
Institutes in both entities collaborate on the development and delivery of forecasts to ensure a country-wide 
perspective, tailoring and delivering science-based climate predictions and services for key sectors: agriculture and 
food security, disaster risk reduction, energy, health and water management.  Both entities have access to the 
same Water Information System (server and cloud computing) and Forecasting platform server, which, in addition 
to collaboration, provides physical redundancy of the systems.  This Water Information System and Forecasting 
platform have been developed under UNDP’s Vrbas project. The project will build on the FFEWS which was 
developed for the Vrbas and Una-Sana River Basins and will enhance the ICT systems to support an integrated 
impact-based FFEWS platform, for near real time forecasting and warning dissemination. Under the project  the 
nation-wide impact-based FFEWS will cover the two hydro-energy intensive basins of Neretva and Trebisnjica, and 
the Una-Sana basin forecasting model will be updated. EU funded technical assistance for development of the 
hydrological flood forecasting system for Sava River Basin (Phase 1. Bosna River) project is implementing the 
Vrbas protype for Bosna River basin, while Drina forecasting model is being developed under the World bank Drina 
project. The forecasting system to be implemented will update and integrate all existing and new FFEWS models 
covering the whole territory of B&H. Under the Vrbas project, meteorological forecasting capabilities were enhanced 
and implemented within the upgraded forecasting platform based on two different Numerical Weather Predictions 
(NWP) models, namely WRF and COSMO.  The project will further enhance these capabilities (through the use of 
additional global or regional meteorological forecasting products within the forecasting platform for boundary 
conditions for the local meteorological models. The Global Forecasting Models (from NOAA) are used to force 
respectively the WRF and the COSMO local implementations).  The project is supporting and facilitating the 
application of B&H to  European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) membership and will pay 
the application and annual fee, cost of data and access to cloud computing for the project duration (Ministry of 
Water Management will pay thereafter, see co-financing letter – Annex XIII) (Sub-activity 1.3.1 pgs. 203-213 of 
FS).  The project is also enabling the inclusion of satellite precipitation data into meteorological forecasts (MPE, 
TRMM/GPM). This increased utilization of data from national, global and regional observation networks, models 
and RS data, will be enabled and underpinned by capacity development (Sub-activity 1.3.4 pg. 220-221 of FS), 
which will be done through partnerships with WMO regional training centers, UNESCO/ITU ICT4D and other 
relevant DRR institutions and partners.  Importantly, the project will develop a link between the flood model and the 
socio-economic risk model to be developed in Activity 1.2, to provide Impact-based forecast. FFEWS will therefore 
be based on an impact-based forecasting (IBF) approach (Pgs. 199 to 202 of FS) to enable the provision of forecast 
information about the actual impact that each event is going to cause in particular locations, and for particular 
sectors, thus enabling impact specific warnings. This will include likely loss of life, likely damages to individuals and 
communities, likely damage and loss of critical infrastructure and likely failure of protective hazard defenses.  The 
Community Based Early Warning System (CBEWS) will be developed on the basis of the prototype implemented 
in Vrbas basin and will support the centralised forecasting and early warning system to effectively minimize or 
prevent the damages from any disaster by implementing action at the local level the strengthening the last mile 
communication. Incorporating the active involvement of the people in the community with an early warning system 
aims to increase the effectiveness and sustainability of such systems, by providing better understanding of the 
value of these systems for safeguarding their lives and livelihoods. Selection of communities where CBEWS will 
be implemented will be based on the following considerations: relative risk and vulnerability, lead time of the 
extreme events (and the need for localised monitoring and warning), willingness of communities to participate, 
potential technical constraints for the central system to effectively service the community (e.g. due to remote 
location or connection problems) and cost-benefit ratio of the implementation. CBEWS’ will be managed and 
coordinated at the level of municipalities. The components of the FFEWS is described in Section 10.1 (Pgs. 202 to 
220 of FS) of the FS. The project will also develop sector specific FFEWS products for the agricultural and hydro 
power sectors.  
 
78. For the agricultural sector, this activity will examine opportunities to enhance and support the capacities of the 
Agricultural agencies and extension services through the generation and provision of tailored climate and weather 
information and advice to farmers. Through this activity the project will implement ICT-based innovations in the 
communication of forecasts and advisories; improve the use of historical data and derivations; improve medium

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 30 
 
 
and shortrange weather forecasts and longer-term predictions for agriculture (seasonal, decadal etc.) and develop 
partnerships with the private sector including internet providers and mobile companies, which were consulted 
during the project preparation and are willing to design tailored information delivery services in collaboration with 
agribusinesses, farmers’ groups and other clients to deliver timely forecasts and advisories to farmers who will 
benefit from this service.  
 
79. The project will engage the hydropower sector in the flood risk management of the basins in which they operate 
through agreement on operations of their systems during flood events. This agreement will be between hydro power 
sector, water agencies who are responsible for water management and hydro-meteorological institutes who provide 
forecast and warning information that will feed into HPP operations In parallel, the project will provide support to 
the HPP sector to enable more climate resilient operations. Extended consultations with the hydropower sector 
stakeholders have been carried out during the project design, and co-financing leveraged from the hydropower 
companies to the project (see Annex 13). Energy planning and operations in the hydropower system are markedly 
affected by meteorological events and hence climate change, on both the demand and supply side. Thus, the 
project will assess and identify feasible tailored climate services that can support increased efficiency in HPP 
operations and will develop enhanced tools and systems that provide decision-makers with the ability to analyze 
and manage risks in the face of climatic variability and change. The development and application of targeted climate 
products and services will help improve efficiency and reduce risk associated with hydro-meteorological hazards 
affecting energy systems.  -  
 
80. The project is developing a last mile communication system (Sub-activity 1.3.2, Pgs. 213-218 of FS), which will 
include design of the “last-mile” communication models, work with the government to update the communication 
protocols and SOPs (Sub-activity 1.4.1 below), work with the mobile operators on the technical implementation of 
the system, work with the NGOs and media and will provide training and capacity building in dissemination and 
warning.  According to statistics of B&H Regulatory Agency for Communications (RAK), 97% of citizens in B&H are 
mobile network subscribers, which is excellent coverage of population under risk, for the purpose of potential 
warnings by SMS in the case of a flood disaster. The main mobile network operators in B&H provide standard 
telecommunication services to their users, with possibility to introduce common/simple SMS flood alerts. The Vrbas 
project worked with mobile providers to develop an SMS warning system, which the project will scale up. The 
project will also leverage and enhance existing partnerships with mobile operators, to utilize additional technologies 
such as IoT (Internet of Things) to send data in real time, connected to the smart phone, sensor and  web service.  
This ability  can be  used for  smart application  to control  and manage  an early warning system.  The project will 
also explore opportunities to use IoT technology to monitor  and control the early detection system of flood disaster. 
By using IoT  technology, sensor data can be sent in real time from  sensor to smartphone through the internet 
network 
 
81. UNDP B&H established a cooperation with the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies 
(IFRC) in order to introduce Forecast based Financing (FbF). Based on jointly developed selection criteria, FbF 
has already been piloted in B&H, in two municipalities - Doboj and Odzak - where the UNDP supported the 
enhancement of DRR activities within the municipal plans.  For the first time in B&H the FbF approach was 
presented at the community level.  Both municipalities have monitoring stations referenced to their area and can 
obtain data from hydrological stations to define thresholds for action and danger levels necessary for triggering 
FbF.  Also, their budgets consist of accounts that can be easily used in case when natural disaster (flood) is 
forecasted and FbF mechanism is triggered. The conclusion of municipal representatives was that implementation 
of FbF concept is feasible. These pilots showed that in order to implement the FbF in the municipalities additional 
efforts are needed in order to ensure reliable and timely forecast information, define triggers for action and perform 
risk analysis, dedicate FbF specific fund within the budget, develop standard operating procedures (SOP) to ensure 
that FBF funding will not be used ad hoc for measures that might not be worth taking. The project is developing the 
methodologies, guidelines, and tools for municipal and cantonal climate-resilient investment planning (Under 
Activity 3.2 see below and also pgs. 259-260 of FS), utilizing the impact-based forecasting system being developed 
under this output, to identify the thresholds, and impacts of flood events. These thresholds will include thresholds 
for forecast based financing (FbF) of early action to reduce flood impacts and respond to flood disasters. The 
forecast thresholds that will trigger the release of resources for early action will be developed as part of the 
development of the thresholds for warning and will be embedded in the early warning protocols and SoPs also 
being developed (under Activity 1.4.1 below). The project will leverage existing relationships with Red Cross Society 
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the IFRC to understand the short-term needs for humanitarian funding for early 
action based on in-depth forecast information and risk analysis. This will enable authorities to anticipate disasters, 
prevent their impact, and if possible, reduce loss of human life and loss of assets. The forecast thresholds that 
trigger the release of resources will be developed as part of the development of the thresholds for warning under 
Activity 1.3 and will be embedded in the early warning protocols and SoPs also being developed (Activity 1.4).

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 31 
 
 
 
 
82. To consolidate and sustain the significant technical capacity development that will be achieved under this activity, 
the project will develop and implement a capacity development plan for embedding flood hazard and risk modelling 
approaches and FFEWS into appropriate institutions in B&H. Technical capacities related to risk identification and 
assessment, prevention, risk reduction, risk transfer, preparedness, climate risk management and climate change 
adaptation require further strengthening across institutions and governance levels. The institutional capacity gaps 
and training needs will be assessed, and a revised institutional capacity building plan will be developed under the 
project to address gaps in human, technical and financial FRM capacities. The project will also enhance the 
institutional arrangements for FFEWS by implementing the recommendations from the Vrbas project which 
identified the optimal instutional arrangement for an integrated, people-centred impact-based FFEWS for all of B&H 
(See Sectin 6.5 of FS). 
 
83. Gender Mainstreaming Activities:  The Project will secure equal participation and active role of women and men, 
in developing of FFEWS.  Based on the detailed surveys and assessment of vulnerabilities and intersectional 
vulnerabilities of gender and socially excluded groups, the Project will secure at least 40% participation to identify 
appropriate solutions in terms of types and methods of warnings, to ensure that no one is left behind in terms of 
access to the early warning system.  The design of the early warning system (centralised and community-based), 
will take the following key considerations for gender and social inclusion into account: 
• 
Participation and Representation: Involve women, men, and diverse social groups in the design and decision-
making processes of early warning systems. Ensure their meaningful participation, representation, and 
inclusion in planning, implementation, and evaluation stages. This can be done through engaging local 
community leaders, women's groups, civil society organizations, and marginalized communities. 
• 
Gender-Responsive Communication: Design systems that use gender-responsive and culturally appropriate 
communication strategies to disseminate early warning information. Consider different communication 
channels, languages, and formats to reach diverse groups. Tailor the messages to specific needs and 
preferences, considering literacy levels, disabilities, and cultural norms 
• 
Addressing Barriers: Identify and address barriers that prevent certain groups from accessing and 
understanding early warning information. This includes addressing language barriers, low literacy levels, lack 
of access to technology, and physical or mobility challenges. Ensure that information is provided in formats 
that are understandable and accessible to all, including audio formats, visual aids, and local languages. 
• 
Consideration of Intersectionality: Recognize that individuals may face multiple intersecting forms of 
discrimination and vulnerability based on factors such as gender, age, disability, ethnicity, and socio-economic 
status. Consider the specific needs and challenges faced by individuals who belong to multiple marginalized 
groups and develop inclusive strategies to ensure their participation and protection in early warning systems. 
• 
Safe Spaces and Privacy: Ensure that early warning systems take into account the privacy and safety concerns 
of marginalized and vulnerable individuals. Create safe spaces for women and other marginalized groups to 
access information, ask questions, and voice their concerns without fear of discrimination or reprisal. 
• 
Training and Capacity Building: Provide training and capacity-building initiatives to enhance the knowledge and 
skills of community members, including women and marginalized groups, on early warning systems. This will 
empower individuals to understand and respond effectively to warnings, take appropriate actions, and support 
others within their communities. 
• 
Monitoring and Evaluation: Integrate gender and social inclusion indicators into the monitoring and evaluation 
frameworks of early warning systems. Regularly assess the system's effectiveness in reaching and benefiting 
different groups. Engage with communities to gather feedback and make necessary adjustments to ensure 
inclusivity and effectiveness. 
 
84.    The following sub-activities will be implemented: 
Sub-Activity 1.3.1: Develop and implement impact-based FFEWS system (centralised and Community-based).  
Sub-Activity 1.3.2: Implement CBEWS for high priority communities. 
Sub-Activity 1.3.3: Review, identify and develop sector specific FFEWS products.  
Sub-Activity 1.3.4: Develop and implement a capacity development plan for embedding flood hazard and risk 
modelling approaches and FFEWS into appropriate institutions in B&H. 
Activity 1.3 Deliverables: 
• 
1 FFEWS model and platform integrating all basin FFEWS models;

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 32 
 
 
• 
CBEWS for 60 high priority communities;  
• 
develop sector specific FFEWS products for HPP and agriculture;  
• 
capacity development plan for embedding flood hazard and risk modelling approaches and FFEWS into 
appropriate institutions in B&H 
 
 
Activity 1.4: Develop and implement protocols and SoPs on data generation, data management and 
communication for effective impact based FFEWS and flood risk management. (GCF Financing = $ 336,000; Co-
Financing = $ 200,000) 
 
85. The project will revise and implement data access protocols which will be supported by extensive training and 
capacity building to ensure sustainability. Based on the work undertaken by the Vrbas project, institutional 
strengthening, coordination, communication will be enhanced by establishing clear communication lines between 
different agencies, which will avoid any duplication and inefficiencies. Based on the Vrbas recommendations SOPs, 
Communication Protocols and Codes of Conduct will be developed for each of the institutions responsible for impact 
based FFEWS. In addition, roles of regional and local authorities will be clarified and detailed. “Last-mile” 
communication protocols will be developed and implemented as part of the FFEWS.  This will include protocols 
and SoPS defining the forecast thresholds for FbF which will trigger the release of resources for early action.  
Operational maintenance procedures for hydrometric network will be established. The project will assess and 
further develop specific data sharing/communication protocols for impact based FFEWS and climate resilient FRM 
in coordination with the NAP project and will embed these protocols across relevant institutions.   
 
86. To enable access and sharing of climate risk information, a centralized information system and knowledge sharing 
platform will be developed based on the Vrbas GeoPortal GIS-based tool which integrates various spatial socio-
economic data with the flood hazard and flood risk maps, vulnerability maps including loss/damage models, real 
time hydro meteorological data, torrents sensitivity model, cadaster of torrents etc. The flood hazard information 
system to be developed under the project will consist of an integrated e-Library, databases, information systems 
and knowledge portal (web knowledge portal to increase awareness, provide interactive hazard maps, with 
integration with social media and possible mobile application to increase community engagement and allow two-
way flow of information. The Vrbas Geo-portal is mainly designed to be used by the municipalities for local level 
flood risk management to interact with communities through the PGIS tool within the platform. The expanded Geo-
portal will continue to function at the local level and will be placed in the ownership of the entity and municipal civil 
protection units who will have responsibility for maintenance and update of the system in the future. The project 
will build capacity with civil protection at all levels in the use, and O&M of the portal.  UNDP has also developed a 
Disaster Risk Analysis System (DRAS) which is an online data sharing platform for disaster data. The platform has 
already been populated with flood hazard maps for Vrbas basin and these will be updated to include all flood hazard 
maps in the future. The project will contribute to the development of the DRAS platform and the embedding of flood 
hazard and risk information as well as expansion of the platform functionality required for using the flood hazard 
and risk information at the entity and national levels.    
 
87. As required by the Sendai Framework “to establish and strengthen government coordination forums composed of 
relevant stakeholders at the national and local levels, such as national and local platforms for DRR”, the flood risk 
management platform will be a country-wide mechanism for cross-entity, multi-sectoral and inter-disciplinary 
coordination and policy guidance on flood risk management and risk reduction with public, private and civil society 
participation involving all concerned entities within B&H. The FRM platform will contribute to such coordination 
forums. The data sharing platform will coordinate all stakeholder engagement at the entity and local level and will 
pursue an all-of-society engagement in FRM. It would also have mechanisms for effective dialogue with Local 
Platforms in place in order to influence, encourage and coordinate local action. In parallel, the country-wide Platform 
will seek to understand local priorities and issues.   
 
88. Gender Mainstreaming Activities:   The Project will review national protocols and SOPs from gender point of 
view; Ensure that flood risk information and warnings are adapted to the needs and capabilities of women and 
other vulnerable groups (Roma women, children, elderly people, disabled, returnees, economically disadvantaged); 
Develop communication products considering specific needs of  man, women and other vulnerable groups, aiming  
to share information and raise knowledge on FFEWS;  Use NGOs networks to reach women and the most 
vulnerable groups. 
 
89. The following sub-activities will be implemented:

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 33 
 
 
Sub-Activity 1.4.1: 
Implement SoPs for “last-mile” warning, dissemination, and communication system. Specify 
and implement the “last-mile” system including dissemination and warning technologies. 
Sub-Activity 1.4.2: Develop protocols and SOPs on data generation and data management for FRM.   
Sub-Activity 1.4.3: Develop data sharing protocols and platform for climate data, across all government institutions 
in both entities. Develop/enhance spatial data infrastructure to ensure climate data flow/exchange.  
Activity 1.4 Deliverables: 
• 
SoPs for “last-mile” warning and dissemination and communication system, Protocols and SOPs on data; 
• 
At least 12 data sharing protocols between water management and other relevant sectors (agriculture, 
forestry, environment, spatial planning, and hydro-energy);  
• 
Cross-sectoral flood risk management platform for climate data, across all government institutions 
 
The following diagram presents conceptual designs of the impact based FFEWS to be implemented through the 
proposed project.   The diagram presents a holistic and fully integrated scope of project activities leading to the 
establishment of the impact based FFEWS as a key element of the overall flood risk management framework which 
includes Disaster Risk Knowledge, Observations and Forecasting, Dissemination and Communication, and 
Preparedness and Response.  
  
 
Result 1: Fully integrated flood forecasting EWS facilitates timely preparation and response  
• 
Climate data (hydro-meteorological, spatial and damage/loss data) gathered and analysed in line with 
international standards  
• 
Flood forecasting and EWS in place and operational for the whole country

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 34 
 
 
• 
Data management and communication protocols and SOPs for effective FFEWS and risk management 
established at all levels 
• 
Vulnerable communities have access to “last-mile” EWS 
 
Output 2: Non-structural flood risk reduction measures and nature-based solutions mainstreamed in sectoral 
policies and plans and effectively contribute to protection of people and livelihoods from climate-induced flood 
risk 
Activity 2.1: Mainstream climate induced flood risk reduction into sectoral planning (agriculture, hydropower, 
forestry, environment), critical infrastructure and spatial planning. (GCF Financing = $366,000; Co-Financing = 
$90,000) 
 
90. The project will enhance the existing legislative and regulatory FRM framework by mainstreaming climate-
responsive flood risk management into sectoral planning for agriculture, forestry, environment, hydropower, critical 
infrastructure and spatial planning.  At the state level, a cross-entity approach will be taken to integrate flood risk 
reduction into sectoral planning to ensure that a holistic approach is taken, particularly where basins are shared 
between two entities. This requires the involvement of key stakeholders, the improvement of coordination, and the 
implementation of related multilateral and regional environmental agreements. Relevant regulations and standards 
will be reviewed and adjusted to account for the impacts of climate change induced flood risk. The project will help 
the entity level governments to develop climate risk informed key strategies, policies and plans by using evidence-
based climate induced flood risk impact, vulnerability and adaptation assessments, analyses of the costs and 
benefits of adaptation options. 
 
91. In the Hydropower sector the project will support the development of climate risk informed sector strategies, 
policies and plans for the flood safety of dams and will examine the potential role of the existing and planned dams 
in flood alleviation. The policy will strengthen dam safety guidelines for B&H in line with international best practice. 
This will include development or enhancement of guidelines for the risk-based categorization of dams, the 
development of improved climate risk informed methodologies for assessing spillway discharge capacities, the 
establishment of dam safety inspection intervals, guidelines on the assessment and quantification of risks 
associated with dams, including risk of overtopping, exposure to landslides and increased sedimentation,  and the 
development of appropriate risk management plans for individual dams. The policy will also embed the requirement 
to develop dam operating rules that ensure that sufficient flood storage is provided at the start of large events, to 
provide some attenuation of the flood wave where possible, without compromising dam safety. This will require the 
involvement of dam owners and operators in the development and eventual implementation of the overall flood 
management plans for the basins and the optimization of the dam operations for the dual uses of power generation 
and flood alleviation. The policies and strategies will ensure that dams are maintained and operated in a manner 
which avoids exacerbation of the flood risk, plays a role in alleviation of flooding where possible, and which takes 
account of the increasing risks they pose due to climate change. 
 
92. With respect to the agricultural sector the project will ensure that climate change is taken into account in the 
reduction of flood risk to agriculture. Flood risk informed agricultural master planning will be introduced and will 
include the consideration of risks and opportunities for flood management in the design and development of 
agricultural infrastructure. The project will develop and mainstream a strategy for climate-smart agriculture which 
integrates climate risk and adaptation priorities into the agriculture sector plans, investments and budget 
frameworks, including the investment appraisal skills, economic valuation of climate change impacts, based on 
sector model, trade off analysis and cost-benefit assessments for a range of plausible adaptation options in 
agriculture. The project will also develop a range of incentives, such as financial, policy or environmental gains, 
that will catalyze adoption of proposed FRM agricultural measures and will consider a range of different instruments 
to achieve uptake. The project will also develop guidance documents, methodologies and technical regulations for 
the agricultural sector on flood risk assessment and management and the use of climate change induced flood risk 
information and agricultural risk management. 
 
93. In relation to the forestry sector, the project will develop catchment management strategies for climate resilient 
catchment management to reduce the exposure of communities and their physical assets, to climate-induced flood 
hazards. The project will provide technical assistance to entity forestry divisions (with agriculture and water 
management) to develop and mainstream basin afforestation/reforestation and agro-forestry strategies and other 
forestry strategies to enhance flood risk management role of forests, as well as flood risk adaptation priorities into

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 35 
 
 
the forestry sector plans, investments and budget frameworks. The project will mainstream climate and flood risk 
consideration into existing Forestry legislative and policy frameworks to ensure that Forestry sector practices do 
not increase flood risk in the future and that afforestation, reforestation and rehabilitation are prioritized to 
strengthen and ensure the eco-system services that forests provide to flood mitigation and alleviation. The project 
will also develop guidance documents, methodologies and technical regulations for the forestry sector on flood risk 
assessment and management and the use of climate change induced flood risk information in forestry 
management.   
 
94. In the area of land use and spatial planning, the project will scale up and embed nation-wide floodplain risk 
zoning policy based on risk and hazard maps (to be produced under activity 1.2) and develop the relevant 
regulations and guidance documents based on the reviews and recommendations developed by the Vrbas project. 
 
95. With regard to the critical infrastructure, the project will review climate proofing design standards, methodologies, 
procedures and practice and will introduce climate risk screening methods and embed climate risk reduction criteria 
across critical infrastructure planning, prioritization, design, construction and maintenance (for  -engineering 
facilities, protective dikes, dam spillways, highways, and railway bridges). The intervention will embed the 
systematic use of climate hazard and risk information in the identification and prioritization of critical infrastructure 
projects. At the municipal level, the project will also introduce climate risk criteria into the prioritization process and 
include other methods of measuring benefits of projects based on the introduction of appraisal-led project 
prioritization using socio-economic cost-benefit analysis methods and tools to be developed under Activity 1.  
 
96. Gender mainstreaming Activities:  The Project will ensure participation of both men and women, but also 
representation of vulnerable groups into consultative processes organized to mainstream climate induced flood risk 
reduction into sectoral planning. Conduct gender mainstreaming training and build capacity of national stakeholders 
targeted by project and responsible for various disaster risk reduction functions. 
 
97. The following sub-activities will be implemented: 
Sub-Activity 2.1.1: Mainstream  climate induced flood risk reduction into sectoral strategies, plans and technical 
guidelines for agriculture, hydropower and critical infrastructure, forestry and environment.   
Sub-Activity 2.1.2: Develop country-wide floodplain zoning policy and legislation, based on hazard, risk and 
vulnerability mapping, flood resilient building codes and embed climate change considerations in the design and 
construction standards of critical infrastructure. 
Sub-Activity 2.1.3: Update climate risk informed methodologies, standards for infrastructure design, construction 
material, use and maintenance of critical infrastructure in B&H.  
Sub-Activity 2.1.4: Deliver training and technical advice on climate resilient infrastructure design, construction and 
O&M approaches. 
Activity 2.1 Deliverables: 
• 
5 Sectoral strategies, plans and technical guidelines (for agriculture, hydropower, critical infrastructure, 
forestry and environment);  
• 
National floodplain zoning policy and legislation implemented in all basins at entity, cantonal and 
municipal levels;  Existing local/cantonal Spatial Plans updated by integration of Flood Zoning Policy and 
flood hazard and risk information into the local/cantonal Spatial Plans; Existing, local/cantonal Spatial 
Plans updated by integration of Flood Zoning Policy and flood hazard and risk information into the 
local/cantonal Spatial Plans for 10-12 municipalities and cantons;  CD in new floodplain zoning policy; 
• 
Updated climate risk-informed methodologies, standards for infrastructure design, construction material, 
use and maintenance of critical infrastructure in B&H;  
• 
Capacity development plan for climate resilient infrastructure design, construction and O&M approaches 
 
Activity 2.2: Implement and mainstream new ecosystem-based flood risk reduction and climate change 
adaptation methods. (GCF Financing = $ 5,868,747; Co-Financing = $20,247,428) 
 
98. Nature-based approaches which can provide added benefits such as enhanced ecosystem services will be 
implemented in the highest risk basins in B&H. These solutions will complement structural measures to ensure that

=== PAGE 40 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 36 
 
 
 
38 Aforestation will be conducted using only native species. Ownership of land is within government, therefore it will be closely monitored by 
its representatives. For the grassing, it will be restoration of grasslands that were previously degraded. 
the combination of both structural and ecosystem-based measures provides the best solution to climate-resilient 
flood management and protection. Non-structural measures (See Annex A of FS) will include: floodplain 
reconnection, selective bed raising/riffle creation, wash lands, wetland creation, two-stage channels, re-
meandering straightened rivers, land and soil management activities to retain / delay surface flows, woody debris 
dams on streams and tributaries, flood plain woodland, re-forestation, agro-forestry, creation or re-instatement of 
a ditch network to promote infiltration (swales, interception ditches, etc), in-channel vegetation management growth 
to maximise channel roughness.  
  
99. Under this activity the project will implement 21 non-structural measures which were identified out of 69 structural 
and non-structural measures proposed by WA’s in the course of feasibility analysis (See FS Annex A for list of 
measures and Annex E for description of appraisal and selection process). Of those, 8 non-structural 
measures will be funded by GCF resources, and 13 measures will be co-funded by the Government of B&H. Cost 
benefit analysis was carried out on all 69 measures based on the methodology described in the Economic Analysis 
annex of the proposal and projects were ranked on the basis of the benefit to cost ratio. The two highest priority 
measures from each target basin were selected (except Vrbas where several non-structural measures have already 
been implemented). A summary table of non-structural measures to be implemented by the project is provided in 
Annex A of the FS.  
 
100. 
The project will include community based EbA  as part of the solution, which will be particularly important to 
reduce the impact of torrential floods. The project will scale up successful EbA approaches piloted by the 
UNDP/SCCF Vrbas River project.  The highest priority eco-system-based measures will be implemented in the 
Vrbas basin which is the only basin in B&H with already developed torrential flood hazard maps and prioritized and 
costed EbA measures to reduce torrential flood risk.   In the Vrbas River Basin (and all other basins), one of the 
main sources of sediment production is a network of forest roads and paths for hauling logs. During the war, roads 
were cut in the forest for illegal logging and as a result, most of the deforestation happened then. The likelihood of 
expanding the roads for timber extract now is low, as there are entity legislations which prohibit cutting of such path 
(Federal law on forest, article 13 and 14 and Law on Forest Republika Srpska, article 82). During the construction 
of the road, most of the excavation material is simply pushed from the route down the slope most of which reaches 
the river network and is transported all the way to a recipient, usually the Vrbas main river.  Forest paths for 
extraction of timber are usually designed with high angle of slope (over 50%), which causes significant erosion. 
Density of these forest paths is approx. 150-200m/hA, which sums up length of approx. 21,000 km in basin area. 
This area is exposed to extensive erosion and creates torrential floods which will produce significant amounts of 
sediment. Sediment in watercourses increases the risk of floods, and rapid drainage of water from slopes reduces 
concentration time.  It is necessary to take measures to prevent erosion on forest roads and paths and to rehabilitate 
areas already affected.  In the Josavka River sub-basin of the Vrbas Basin the following EbA flood risk management 
measures will be implemented: 9 partitions, 16 wicker fields, afforestation of the basin in the amount of 200,00 ha 
and grassing of the areas of approximately 80,00 ha38. Detailed design documentation will be developed for all 
elements but outline design drawings are provided in Annex A of the FS. 
 
101. 
Gender mainstreaming Activities:  Review of the community based EbA and EbA approaches piloted by the 
UNDP/SCCF Vrbas River project by gender expert to identify gender gaps, locate mainstreaming opportunities and 
uncover specific ways in which flood risk and climate change impact women, taking into account gender specific 
vulnerabilities and intersectional issues (single parenthood, age, income levels, disability, etc.); Mainstreaming of 
gender throughout all the new ecosystem-based flood risk reduction and climate change adaptation methods being 
implemented (e.g., afforestation, agroforestry), the project will conduct an assessment to ensure adequate 
opportunities for women to equally benefit from the work, employment and income making opportunities associated 
with implementing these measures. Gender mainstreaming into EbA design methods will make following 
considerations:  
• 
Participation and Representation: Engage and involve women, men, and diverse social groups in the 
design and decision-making processes of EbA initiatives. Ensure their meaningful participation, 
representation, and inclusion in planning, implementation, and evaluation stages. Consider local 
knowledge, priorities, and perspectives, and involve community leaders, women's groups, and 
marginalized populations. 
• 
Gender-Sensitive Vulnerability and Capacity Assessments: Conduct gender-sensitive vulnerability and 
capacity assessments to understand the specific needs, roles, and experiences of women, men, and 
different social groups in relation to flood risk and ecosystem services. This will help to identify their specific

=== PAGE 41 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 37 
 
 
 
39 For example:  Space for the Rivers Policy – Netherlands; Making space for Water Policy in England; LIFE projects (Donau-Auen and 
DonauUfer) along the Danube downstream from Vienna,  
vulnerabilities, capacities, and priorities, and inform the detailed design of EbA interventions that address 
their unique circumstances. 
• 
Access and Benefit-Sharing: Ensure equitable access and benefit-sharing of ecosystem services and 
resources. Recognize and address potential gender and social disparities in access to and control over 
natural resources, such as land, water, and forests, that are essential for implementing EbA measures. 
Promote inclusive mechanisms for sharing benefits derived from EbA initiatives, considering the needs and 
rights of different groups. 
• 
Knowledge and Capacity Building: Provide training, knowledge-sharing, and capacity-building initiatives to 
enhance the understanding and skills of community members, particularly women and marginalized 
groups, in relation to EbA and flood risk management. This empowers individuals to actively participate in 
decision-making, contribute their knowledge, and take leadership roles in the implementation and 
maintenance of EbA measures. 
• 
Gender-Responsive Communication: Ensure gender-responsive communication and information sharing 
throughout the design and implementation of EbA initiatives. Use inclusive communication strategies and 
diverse channels to reach different groups, considering language preferences, literacy levels, and 
accessibility requirements. Tailor messages to address specific gender and social norms, roles, and 
interests. 
• 
Safety and Accessibility: Address safety and accessibility concerns in the design and implementation of 
EbA interventions. Consider the specific needs of women, children, elderly individuals, and people with 
disabilities, ensuring that the infrastructure and access routes associated with EbA measures are safe, 
inclusive, and accessible to all 
• 
Monitoring and Evaluation: Incorporate gender and social inclusion indicators into the monitoring and 
evaluation frameworks of EbA initiatives. Regularly assess the social, economic, and environmental 
impacts of the interventions on different groups, including their implications for gender equality and social 
equity. Engage with communities to gather feedback and ensure that the benefits and risks associated with 
EbA are distributed fairly. 
 
102. 
These considerations will be integrated into the design of ecosystem-based approaches for flood risk 
management. For the sites to be implemented with EBA solutions the above considerations will be ensured through 
the ESIA and ESMP and the ESMP monitoring plan.  This will ensure that EbA interventions address the diverse 
needs and priorities of communities, promote social equity, and contribute to long-term resilience and sustainable 
development. 
 
103. 
The following sub-activities will be implemented: 
 
Sub-Activity 2.2.1: Implement catchment management measures for reduced erosion   
Sub-Activity 2.2.2: Implement 21 selected non-structural flood risk reduction measures  
Activity 2.2 Deliverables: 
• 
Catchment management for reduced erosion;  
• 
5 Government-financed EbA measures.  
• 
13 Government-financed non-structural measures.  
• 
8 non-structural measures co-funded by GCF and government  
Please see Chapter 10, Annex A and Annex (Section 18.9) of the FS for detailed description of the measures (Chapter 
10), Design details and drawings for each measure (Annex A) and description of method of socio-economic assessment 
and options appraisal of EbA and non-structural measures. Note: there is a 79% Government to 21% GCF co-funding 
ratio of EBA and non-structural measures. 
 
Activity 2.3: Codify and mainstream “ecosystem-based adaptation” (EbA) solutions into policies and 
regulations and promote non-structural measures among decision makers and communities. (GCF Financing 
= $208,680 ; Co-Financing = $90,000) 
 
104. 
The project will set up a framework for the application of climate resilient EbA approaches to flood risk 
management in B&H and will facilitate a transfer of well-established flood management practices from countries39

=== PAGE 42 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 38 
 
 
 
40 According to the European Environment Agency: Future extreme floods are likely to be the cost drivers for the adaptation of infrastructure. 
Ecosystem-based adaptation, nature-based solutions and green infrastructure are, in many cases, key in ensuring a cost-effective approach 
to an uncertain scenario by delaying or avoiding lock-ins to classic infrastructure-building water management. The report also notes that 
although strategies for flood risk management require measures that are specific to the local circumstances, using a river basin approach 
avoids passing on negative consequences further downstream.  https://www.eea.europa.eu/highlights/floodplain-management-reducing-
flood-risks 
that have been using these methods for decades40. The project will collect lessons learned from all activities and 
facilitate codification and dissemination of successful approaches in B&H. To this end, the project will develop 
country-wide best-practice guidelines, technical specifications, standards and protocols for the application of eco-
system based non-structural climate-resilient FRM measures which will be mainstreamed into policy, and will 
undertake capacity development in the identification, prioritization, assessment appraisal, design and 
implementation of such solutions. 
 
105. 
Gender mainstreaming Activities:  Review of the existing policies and regulations by a gender advisor to 
identify gender gaps and mainstreaming opportunities to embed the above gender and social inclusion elements 
into policy and regulations; Include gender expert in the teams working on the preparation of new policies, plans 
and regulations and in promotion of new FRM concepts. 
 
106. 
The following sub-activities will be implemented: 
 
Sub-Activity 2.3.1: Develop best-practice guidelines for non-structural measures  
Sub-Activity 2.3.2: Develop technical specification, standards and protocols for design and implementation of non-
structural measures  
Sub-Activity 2.3.3: Review and implement training required for new non-structural measures  
Activity 2.3 Deliverables: 
• 
Best-practice guidelines, technical specification, standards and protocols for the application of eco-
system based non-structural measures including methodology for system evaluation; methodology and 
guidance for undertaking risk assessment and appraisal of EbA measures;  
• 
Knowledge portal and common resource center to collect, collate and share knowledge and fill these 
gaps to advance uptake of nature-based solutions and for collaboration between ecologists, or specialists 
to allow to co-working and knowledge sharing. 
• 
Capacity development in the application of methods for the identification, prioritization design and 
implementation of basin appropriate EbA solutions;  
• 
Training for 200 FRM practitioners at all levels and all relevant types of stakeholders (entity, municipal, 
community) 
 
Activity 2.4: Review and strengthen institutional capacity and develop long-term institutional capacity 
development plans for climate resilient FRM. (GCF Financing = $300,000; Co-Financing = $500,000) 
 
107. 
The activity will implement country-wide training programmes in the technical and practical areas of flood risk 
management for practitioners, decision-makers, communities, emergency responders. The project will develop the 
long-term capacity development plan and will embed training in FRM and the use of climate risk information in the 
relevant entity training institutions to improve the technical capacity and knowledge base for hazard and flood risk 
management. The project will support Training of Trainers (ToT) through the development and establishment of 
training curricula and rosters of trainers and the development of mechanisms for delivering long-term capacity 
development such as development of key partnerships with universities  and other academic research institutions 
that can be forged to ensure long-term FRM training, following initial cooperation established during Vrbas project 
The project will develop training plans, curricular, training material, guidance documents for each technical area of 
expertise related to climate-induced hazard risk assessment and management and consolidate into an overall 
capacity development plan. Under this activity the immediate priorities of the capacity development and training 
plans will be implemented. The list of proposed training and capacity building courses is presented in the Feasibility 
Study (Annex 2). 
 
108. 
The project will also assist the government of B&H in shifting from ad-hoc project-based awareness and 
education efforts to a planned, consistent and sustainable awareness raising and education for enhanced flood

=== PAGE 43 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 39 
 
 
and disaster risk management. To this end, it will develop and implement a comprehensive long-term awareness 
raising campaign.  
 
109. 
Gender mainstreaming Activities: Gender sensitive review of institutional capacity. Participation of Gender 
expert in development of national training programmes in the technical and practical areas of flood risk 
management for practitioners, decision-makers, communities, emergency responders; 
 
110. 
The following sub-activities will be implemented: 
Sub-Activity 2.4.1: Embed FRM training in existing government training programmes for long-term FRM training in 
B&H  
Sub-Activity 2.4.2: Develop a costed and prioritised institutional capacity development plan to address technical, 
functional, and human capacity gaps identified through the completed institutional capacity assessment 
Sub-Activity 2.4.3: Implement community-based training and awareness raising initiatives at community level 
Activity 2.4 Deliverables: 
• 
Capacity Development plan for Flood Risk Management 
• 
FRM CDP and training plan and programme embedded in existing government training programmes for 
long-term FRM training in B&H in the following topics: Flood hazard and risk assessment, hydrometry, 
forecasting and modelling, EWSs; Vulnerability and Risk Assessment; River basin flood risk management 
planning and the use of climate information 
 
Output 3:  Climate-proof flood protection measures scaled-up through new and improved national and local 
investment frameworks increasing resilience of the most vulnerable groups to climate induced flooding 
Activity 3.1: Develop a country-wide investment framework for climate induced flood risk reduction and 
management including provisions for private sector engagement in climate risk financing. (GCF Financing = 
$480,440; Co-Financing = $603,174) 
 
111. 
Climate risk financing and risk transfer in B&H is currently largely undertaken by the public sector with 
support from the international donor community and lacks the financing mechanisms and tools that would enable 
long-term comprehensive and consistent financing and implementation of risk management and risk reduction and 
financial resilience building measures. Willingness to pay (WTP) surveys undertaken during feasibility study found 
that, for a number of public and private sectors and different types of beneficiaries, there was willingness to 
contribute to risk financing and risk transfer, to ensure the effective long-term management of flood risk and risk 
reduction and to build financial resilience to flooding. The survey identified key private sector players with an  
interest in sector-specific climate risk information products, and their willingness to pay for tailored products that 
will be used in their operations, and their willingness to support or partially support the O&M of hydrometric 
monitoring and early warning systems, equipment and information products has been assessed and determined 
through consultation during proposal development. The WTP studies also identified key sector players with a desire 
for  natural disasters’ insurance as an adequate alternative to compensation for the damage in terms of their own 
resources, credits and donations (Annex H of FS). Significant aspect defining the demand of businesses for  natural 
disasters’ insurance have been identified.  
 
112. 
  The project will develop the Investment framework for climate induced floods risk reduction and management 
including provisions for public and private/productive sector engagement in climate risk financing and risk transfer 
mechanisms.  No GCF proceeds will be used to provide insurance. 
 
 
113. 
Under this activity the project will develop risk financing and transfer mechanisms based on detailed socio-
economic risk, damages, and losses assessment.  The work will be largely co-financed by the partners from 
national insurance sector. This activity will include: 
• 
The identification or public-sector risk financing mechanisms for flood risk management;  
• 
Identification and development of risk financing and transfer mechanisms products and tools, based on detailed 
socio-economic risk, damages and losses assessment;  
• 
Development of natural disasters’ insurance products for public institutions, businesses and agriculture   
• 
Technical advice/training to financial institutions and financiers, including micro-financing institutions, for the 
development of lending products to mainstream the use of climate-risk information into their lending

=== PAGE 44 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 40 
 
 
processes.  that maximises performance and minimises risks and to provide loans to climate 
responsive/resilient enterprises in B&H  (i.e., loans that offer better conditions than the current market 
practices to borrowers - the conditions are interest rate, loan period and easier credit criteria).  These loans 
will service Small and Medium Enterprises and will provide loans for start-up or expanding climate resilient 
enterprises, or climate proofing the enterprise.  
 
114. 
With regard to public sector risk financing, the project will build upon municipal level climate risk-informed 
budgeting mechanisms developed under NAP project and examine opportunities to introduce climate risk-informed 
budgeting into B&H’s existing public financial management (PFM) framework leveraging on existing strengths and 
addressing any limitations of the existing budgeting processes that currently hinder climate risk-informed budgeting 
for flood risk management. This will include using the damage and loss and risk modelling tools (Sub-activity 1.2) 
to provide the evidence basis of existing cost of disasters to enable allocation of funding to different activities within 
the FRM framework and the investment required, FRM/disaster budget ring-fencing mechanisms (such as 
introduction of specific budget codes), introduction of value for money (VfM) analysis and reporting based on cost-
benefit analysis and data to demonstrate the advantages (and higher VfM) of greater spending on FRM, 
preparedness and mitigation. Similarly, mechanisms to monitor whether funds indeed achieved their intended 
purpose through monitoring to enable performance-based-budgeting, integrating FRM performance objectives and 
establishing a  reporting system that enables tracking disaster related expenditure on an annual basis (e.g. as part 
of the Spending Review process). Such evaluations of key programmes will generate key evidence which should 
feed back into the budget allocation process.  
 
115. 
The project will develop and implement a programme of engagement of relevant state institutions, insurers and 
reinsurers, financial institutions, capital market institutions, forming key public-private sector partnerships to 
leverage and scale up investments. The project is also making interventions at the legislative and governance 
levels and strengthening the financial institutions to provide climate responsive financing options and products 
within the existing markets, which will ensure long-term sustainability of the mobilized investments, with the 
opportunity for future scaling up. The project will provide technical advice and training to financial institutions and 
financiers, including micro-financing institutions, for the development of lending products and to enable them to 
mainstream the use of climate-risk information into their lending processes that maximizes performance and 
minimizes risks and to provide loans to climate responsive/resilient enterprises in B&H  (i.e., loans that offer better 
conditions than the current market practices to borrowers - the conditions are interest rate, loan period and easier 
credit criteria).  These loans will service Small and Medium Enterprises and will provide loans for start-up or 
expanding climate resilient enterprises, or climate proofing the enterprise.   
 
116. 
A key risk transfer mechanism which will be supported by the project is natural disaster risk insurance.  The 
project will further develop an enabling regulatory environment and products for natural disasters insurance for 
individual households that were initiated in Vrbas project as well as  explore opportunities and identify other 
products and tools. The Vrbas project identified and developed the type of scheme that would be most appropriate 
for B&H and considered ex-ante, ex-post, index-based, and indemnity-based schemes, with various configurations 
of the roles of both private insurance sector and government. Please refer to the Feasibility Study (Chapter 10 and 
Chapter 21, Annex H) for the detailed recommendations. In addition, the draft Terms and conditions and tariff for 
mandatory property insurance from damages caused by natural disasters, was developed. Initial consultation with 
key stakeholders (community, municipality, private sector companies, insurance companies) on the proposed flood 
insurance scheme and the insurance zone designations revealed general acceptance of the proposed scheme 
(see Annex 7 for stakeholder consultations and Annex 2, Feasibility Study for the results of the WTP survey). The 
Ministry of Finance has been actively engaged in the consultations. Also, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and 
Water Management is committed to develop a flood insurance framework within EU Flood directive, which was 
included into the Law on Waters in the RS. Moreover, private sector insurance companies as well as reinsurance 
companies are providing 75% co financing to support this activity. The project will provide technical advice to 
identify potential sector-specific natural disaster (including floods) insurance product packages for each of the 
defined sectors, and provide technical advice and training of insurance sector practitioners in the development of 
insurance products packages from natural disasters adjusted to the needs of the assessed sectors and insurers. 
The project will support the introduction of micro-insurance for agricultural producers, entrepreneurs and small and 
medium-sized enterprises in different industries based on feasibility of connecting micro-insurance and 
microfinance. The micro-insurance concept is largely unknown in B&H, while the microfinance sector, is quite well-
developed and regulated, which is often prerequisite for the successful launch of microinsurance in a new market.

=== PAGE 45 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 41 
 
 
Hence the project will leverage and enhance existing micro-finance capacity in B&H to extend to include micro-
insurance.  In order for the micro-insurance program to be implemented in practice, the project will facilitate changes 
to the current regulations in the field of insurance.  In addition, the project will develop three feasibility studies which 
include, a) micro-insurance for agricultural producers, entrepreneurs, and small and medium-sized enterprises in 
different industries; b) regional disaster risk insurance program to increase the degree of diversification of risk; c) 
catastrophe bonds to transfer disaster risk to the capital market.  
   
117. 
By the end of the project the following will be achieved: public sector risk financing and budgeting mechanisms 
developed, public-private sector partnerships established, and  public-private sector climate risk financing 
mechanisms and tools developed,  natural disasters insurance model for public institutions; natural disasters 
insurance model for agriculture, natural disasters insurance model for businesses.  
 
118. 
As part of the investment framework, under this activity the project will also develop a methodology and a tool 
for appraisal-led design for structural and non-structural climate-informed FRM measures, FRM investment 
planning and decision-making, based on cost benefit analysis (CBA). The project will scale up the bespoke GIS-
based socio-economic risk model that was developed for the Vrbas project to provide a country-wide tool for flood 
socio-economic risk modelling, CBA and the identification and appraisal of climate resilient intervention measures. 
The tool will support strategic planning, development of risk financing, transfer and management strategies and 
investment planning. The GIS-based tool will be extended to include an additional module to enable identification 
of flood risk financing requirements for anticipatory, short, medium, and long-term measures, and strategies from 
which annual investment plans can be developed.   A key element of FbF is the allocation of financial resources in 
advance for the anticipatory response to disasters, based on specific forecast threshold that triggers the release of 
those resources for the implementation of early actions based on an Early Action Plan (EAP).  Under this output 
the project will develop mechanisms and tools for ensuring financing for early action interventions to be included in 
the EAP and the municipal investment plans (See Activity 3.2 below).  FRM practitioners will be trained in the use 
of the appraisal and financing methods and models and importantly, capacity will be built to enable the use of 
updating and maintenance of the models. Municipal planners and managers will also be trained in the use of the 
models for appraisal led FRM planning. 
 
119. 
Hence under this activity the project is developing innovative financing options across risk financing and risk 
transfer, enabling blended finance (state funds, loans, micro-finance, insurance, micro-insurance, regional 
insurance pool, catastrophe bonds), forming key public-private sector partnerships to leverage and scale up 
investments, and is making interventions at the legislative and governance levels and strengthening the financial 
institutions to provide climate responsive financing options. This proposal therefore represents a good example of 
finance blending and innovative adaptation finance.    
 
120. 
Gender mainstreaming Activities:  Representatives of different genders and socially excluded groups will be 
included in the teams for development of a national investment framework for climate induced floods risk reduction 
and management; Development of a gender responsive strategy and gender sensitive tools for private sector 
engagement in long-term climate-proof risk management. Development of risk financing and transfer mechanisms 
based on detailed gender sensitive assessment on socio-economic risk, damages, and losses. 
 
 
121. 
The following sub-activities will be supported: 
 
Sub-Activity 3.1.1: Develop investment framework for climate induced floods risk reduction and management 
including provisions for public and private/productive sector engagement in climate risk financing  
Sub-Activity 3.1.2: Develop risk financing and transfer mechanisms based on detailed socio-economic risk, 
damages, and losses assessment  
Sub-Activity 3.1.3: Design natural disasters insurance scheme and explore and identify other risk financing 
products and tools

=== PAGE 46 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 42 
 
 
Sub-Activity 3.1.4: Develop tool for appraisal-led design for structural and non-structural FRM measures, FRM 
investment planning, climate risk financing mechanisms and for appraisal-led FRM options design and decision-
making, based on cost benefit analysis (CBA) approaches  
Activity 3.1 Deliverables: 
• 
5 strategies and plans for long-term ongoing investment frameworks that would be required to address 
flood risk to each sector;  
• 
Sector-specific information dissemination portals as part of the information platform to be developed 
under 1.4.3; 
• 
2 risk financing and risk transfer strategy for private sector engagement in risk financing and risk transfer 
mechanisms for entity-level flood risk financing and resilience strategy;  
• 
3 natural disasters products developed; 
• 
3 Feasibility studies on micro-insurance, regional disaster risk insurance program and catastrophe 
bonds; 
• 
4 sector specific awareness campaigns; 
• 
2 tools for appraisal-led design for structural and non-structural FRM measures based on cost benefit 
analysis (CBA) approaches. 
 
 
Activity 3.2: Formulate multi-year climate resilient municipal investment plans and gender responsive 
community preparedness plans in selected municipalities and in one canton in Vrbas, Una-Sana, Bosna, Drina, 
Neretva and Trebišnjica basins. (GCF Financing = $ 525,000; Co-Financing = $ 3,097,884) 
 
 
122. 
The project will develop municipal multi-year investment plans for climate resilient FRM planning for 10-12 
highest risk communities and for one canton.  It will develop new approaches to investment planning to include: 
annual and periodic maintenance of FRM interventions; identification of financing models for investment 
maintenance costs (e.g. of community-based scheme that involve the use of tariffs or in-kind contributions to 
establish municipal maintenance programmes or engagement of private sector in infrastructure maintenance 
financing);  event-based forecasting of financing that will be required to respond to disaster events (FbF) and 
development of municipal FRM investment plans based on risk-informed project designs, including maintenance, 
and CBA..  For FbF, the investment plans will define the financial resources that will need to be made available in 
advance of flood events, based on the specific forecast threshold (See Activity 1.3) that would trigger the release 
of those resources for the implementation of early actions. The Early Action Plan (EAP) will be part of the 
preparedness response plan, and will outline the roles and responsibilities of those involved in implementing the 
early actions. The project will work with the IFRC to develop the FbF components of the municipal investment plans 
and the EAP. 
 
123. 
The project will support embedding the use of municipal investment plans in the technical justification for budget 
allocation for FRM activities; identifying and prioritizing flood risk financing, based on the principles of portfolio risk 
assessment (PRA) and associated cost-benefit analysis. Furthermore, the CBA tools to be developed by the project 
will be embedded in municipality as a standardized requirement for developing annual infrastructure investment 
plans as well as Forecast based Financing. As torrents management comes directly under municipal jurisdiction, 
these infrastructure investment plans will include detail design for torrents management. 
 
 
124. 
Using the example of Community Emergency Flood Preparedness plans (CEFP) the project will also support 
the development of community preparedness plans for the most vulnerable 10-12 communities in target basins, 
(excluding Vrbas) in line with the procedure, methodology and content of CEFP in B&H as defined by Law of 
Protection and Rescue in RS and B&H including cantons. According to the Law, the CEFP will consist of the 
following documents: Vulnerability and risk assessment, Prevention plan, Preparedness plan, Mobilization plan, 
Emergency plan, Evacuation plan. 
 
125. 
Gender mainstreaming Activities:  Both, men and women are adequately represented in municipal 
investment planning process; Men and women actively participate in formulation of community preparedness plans 
in selected municipalities; Needs of women and other vulnerable (elderly, disabled, children, Roma) groups are 
incorporated in developed plans.

=== PAGE 47 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 43 
 
 
126. 
The following sub-activities will be implemented: 
Sub-Activity 3.2.1: Develop municipal investment plans for climate resilient FRM planning for 10-12 highest risk 
communities and 1 canton.  
Sub-Activity 3.2.2: Develop preparedness plans for 10-12 highest risk communities and 1 canton  
Activity 3.2 Deliverables: 
• 
2 financing models for investment maintenance costs;  
• 
Standardized CBA tools embedded in municipality for developing annual infrastructure investment plans;  
• 
10-12 municipal FRM investment plans based on risk-informed project designs, including maintenance, 
and costs-benefit analysis based on CBA methods and models;  
• 
Multi-year climate resilient municipal investment plan and gender responsive community preparedness 
plan implemented in the highest risk municipalities (10-12) in Vrbas, Una-Sana and Bosna basins;  
• 
Community preparedness plans for the 10-12 communities in line with the procedure, methodology and 
content of CEFP in B&H as defined by Law of Protection and Rescue in RS and FB&H 
 
Activity 3.3: Implement climate-proof structural flood risk reduction and anti-erosion interventions in Vrbas, 
Una-Sana, Bosna and Drina River basins. (GCF Financing = $875,280; Co-Financing = $ 20,939,153) 
 
127. 
This activity will focus on implementation of priority structural flood risk reduction interventions for target basins 
at highest risk. The structural measures will be co-financed through EIB loan resources and Water Agencies’ 
budgets. GCF funds will provide technical assistance to develop climate proofed designs based on new climate 
risk information and design methods. The project will embed climate-change responsive design of flood defenses 
and will develop standard methodologies, tools, guidelines and capacity for climate resilient flood defense design 
and implementation. It will utilize flood hazard and risk modelling and will embed CBA and appraisal-led 
prioritization methods in developing and implementing structural measures that maximize benefit, make allowance 
for climate change and which consider environmental impacts. 10 structural measures have been identified by 
Water Agencies, for implementation (See Annex A of FS).  The risk reduction interventions will be implemented in 
high-risk river basin, which have been prioritized during the project design phase as detailed in Section 2.6 of the 
feasibility study. Based on flood socio-economic risk assessment and identification of the highest risk river basins, 
the target sites are located in Vrbas, Una-Sana and Bosna, Neretva and Trebisnjica and Drina River basins.  
 
128. 
Gender mainstreaming Activities: Both, women and men, and other vulnerable groups (elderly, disabled, 
children, Roma) will be included in processes of stakeholders’ consultation related to implementation of climate-
proof flood risk measures through the site-specific ESIA and ESMPs to be conducted for each structural measure.  
The Project will ensure that specific ways in which flood risk and erosion impact women and men are analyzed and 
considered, and that women and vulnerable group members can equally benefit from technical assistance ensured 
with GCF funds, to develop climate proofed designs based on new climate risk information and design methods. 
The Project will assess and make provisions for women to equally benefit from the work, employment and income 
making opportunities associated with implementing these measures.  
 
129. 
The following sub-activities will be implemented: 
Sub-Activity 3.3.1: Finalize detailed design of climate resilient flood protection structural measures;  
Sub-Activity 3.3.2: Implement new flood defences and the rehabilitation and upgrade of existing flood defences 
with climate proofing.  
Activity 3.3 Deliverables: 
• 
Detailed design of 10 climate-proofed structural measures; 
• 
10 EiB-funded climate-proofed structural measures implemented. 
 
COVID-19 Project co-benefits and opportunities 
 
130. The current COVID-19 global pandemic has highlighted the need for a more holistic approach to hazard 
identification and risk management when faced with systemic risks which are complex, interlinked and non-linear. 
According to UNDRR, with reference to COVID-19, there is an urgent need to change our perception of risks and 
their governance mechanisms, and apply a multisectoral and interdisciplinary approach as these mechanisms

=== PAGE 48 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 44 
 
 
 
41 Raúl Salazar, Chief of the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) – Regional Office for the Americas and the 
Caribbean.  
https://www.undrr.org/news/understanding-complexity-risk-post-covid-19-challenge 
 
become more urgent when confronted with climate-related hazards during a pandemic crisis41.  This in line with 
the approach that is being proposed for this project to address FRM in B&H. Hence, to ensure that the project 
meets the additional challenges and opportunities presented by COVID-19, the following table is list of 
opportunities and co-benefits of the project in addressing some aspects of the impacts of COVID-19 on 
communities of B&H.  A risk management matrix will be developed for the project and will include close monitoring 
of the risks and opportunities that COVID-19 will present to the project.   
 
Output/Activity 
COVID-19 co-benefits/opportunities 
Output 1: Climate-informed impact-based FFEWS and an increased generation and use of climate data to reduce 
vulnerability to flood related disasters 
Activity 1.1:  Upgrade and expand the coverage of 
the hydrometric network for enhanced monitoring of 
climate variables in Category I catchments and 
torrential streams 
Expansion of the hydrometric observation network will underly the 
impact based FFEWS which will provide timely information about 
occurrence of flood which will enable people to take early measures 
to minimise flood impact as well as measures to secure drinkable 
water, food and medicine, thus enabling health and sanitation 
conditions and reducing potential exposure to virus in emergency 
centers.  
 
Activity 1.2: Enhanceclimate-induced flood hazard, 
risk and vulnerability information for strategic risk 
management and sound decision making for climate 
induced flood management. 
 
Flood protection of critical infrastructure such as municipal health 
centers and hospitals, to ensure full operational capacity of those 
institutions in the time of pandemic.  The project, through hazard and 
risk modelling and mapping is identifying critical infrastructure by type 
including health facilities that might be at risk from flooding. 
Information collected about the facilities that relates to the capacity to 
treat COVID-19 will also be included in the hazard and risk modelling 
and mapping. 
 
The global COVID pandemic has increased the vulnerability of 
communities in B&H. Under this activity, the project is undertaking 
socio-economic risk and vulnerability modelling and mapping based 
on socio-economic factors derived from socio-economic secondary 
data and primary data from survey methods to be developed by the 
project.  Hence the relevant COVID-19-related vulnerability factors 
can be built into the surveys and reflected in risk modelling and risk 
assessment.  Opportunities will be sought to add a COVID-19 
factor/factors to the risk and vulnerability modelling methodology to 
ensure that the risk assessment methodology reflects COVID 
impacts. 
 
Based on vulnerability surveys, modelling and mapping, the project 
will help identify what additional resources Water agencies and Civil 
protection units may need to allocate to priority areas to protect at risk 
critical infrastructure (including health facilities, utilities like water 
supply, power stations etc), and to prevent cascade impacts of floods 
and spread of COVID-19. New approaches will require more 
resources of financing, human, material than ones before the COVID-
19 era. 
Activity 1.3: Develop an integrated impact-based 
centralized and community-based flood forecasting 
and early warning system (FFEWS).  
 
Proper response to flooding would reduce the spread COVID-19 and 
reduce disaster damage at the same time, thus minimising further 
human losses and economic damage. Response activities that 
include social distancing will be developed as part of the FFEWS and 
response activities, at community level. This will be particularly 
important when developing the Community-based EWS. Community 
engagement will include hygiene promotion with a focus on 
handwashing and social distancing requires full engagement of 
communities. Opportunities will be sought for tailoring warning to 
include any relevant additional COVID-19 relevant warnings.

=== PAGE 49 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 45 
 
 
This activity will also improve notification of flood risk/impacted areas 
so that emergency services, including frontline workers dealing with 
COVID, are less likely to be adversely impacted (i.e. less likely to get 
caught by floods or take routes that are likely/already to be flooded).  
Overall this will help in planning responses to emergencies, which 
include COVID outbreaks.  
 
Activity 1.4: Develop and implement protocols and 
SoPs on data generation, data management and 
communication for effective impact based FFEWS 
and flood risk management. 
 
Under this activity, the project is developing the data sharing platforms 
(scaling up the Vrbas Geo-Portal), one of which will be used for 
community climate risk information sharing and dissemination. This 
presents an opportunity to include relevant information.  Appropriate 
risk information is critical to avoid rumors and misinformation. The 
project will tailor information to include most accurate advice on the 
likely combined impacts of floods and the likely additional COVID-19 
risks.   
 
Output 2: Non-structural flood risk reduction measures and nature-based solutions mainstreamed in sectoral 
policies and plans and effectively contribute to protection of people and livelihoods from climate-induced flood 
risk; 
Activity 2.1: Mainstream climate induced flood risk 
reduction into sectoral planning (agriculture, 
hydropower, forestry, environment), critical 
infrastructure and spatial planning 
A key aim of this activity, is to strengthen cross-sectoral cooperation 
and use of climate risk information in sectoral planning, With B&H’s 
complex governance structure there are opportunities to enhance the 
level of cooperation between agencies and thereby reduce ‘gaps’ in 
services/administration. 
 
The 
project 
includes 
capacity 
building/engagement 
of 
agencies 
which 
will 
help 
increase 
cooperation and develop greater transparency between agencies. 
 
Activity 2.2: Implement and mainstream new 
ecosystem-based flood risk reduction and climate 
change adaptation methods 
  
Protection from flood risk will enhance protection of drinking water 
infrastructure, ensuring communities’ access to clean drinking water 
and adequate hygienic conditions, that will help reduce the chance of 
potential spreading of COVID-19.   Importantly, flood protective 
structures that built resilience will ensure that economic stress of the 
impact of COVID-19 are not further exacerbated during flood events.  
  
Activity 2.3:  Codify and mainstream EbA solutions 
into policies and regulations and promote non-
structural measures among decision makers and 
communities 
The types of works proposed can be delivered in a COVID safe 
manner, such that workers do not need to be in close proximity to 
each other to undertake tasks – workforce will be mostly outdoors and 
can be deployed such that contact is limited.  Any safety briefings, 
toolbox meetings, project briefings etc will be undertaken in a COVID 
safe manner i.e. either adopting social distancing or utilising electronic 
communications.  
 
Activity 2.4: Review and strengthen institutional 
capacity and develop long-term institutional capacity 
development plans for climate resilient FRM. 
Trainings and knowledge transfers to be conducted by the project will 
include training/awareness in epidemic recommendations, while 
ensuring all participants will have proper social distancing, wearing 
masks and gloves in well ventilated spaces.  Training and awareness 
raising will include, promotion of good hygiene practices, for example 
by leading awareness campaigns about COVID-19 transmission and 
care or providing material support for handwashing in high-risk 
locations. 
Output 3: Climate-proof flood protection measures scaled-up through new and improved national and local 
investment frameworks increasing resilience of the most vulnerable groups to climate induced flooding 
Activity 3.1: Develop a country-wide investment 
framework for climate induced flood risk reduction 
and management including provisions for private 
sector engagement in climate risk financing  
The investment framework which will be based on risk modelling, will 
be COVID-19 responsive once the socio-economic surveys on which 
risk modelling will be based, identify the new emerging vulnerabilities 
due to COVID-19.   
 
Opportunities would be sought to widen the type and number of 
Private and public sector players who could participate in FRM 
investment. The project will seek opportunities to build broader cross-
sectoral partnerships when developing the investment framework that 
will underpin FRM in the future to include partners with capacity to

=== PAGE 50 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 46 
 
 
provide co-benefits to the impacts of COVID-19 pandemic as well as 
FRM. 
 
Activity 3.2: Formulate multi-year climate resilient 
municipal investment plans and gender responsive 
community preparedness plans in selected 
municipalities and in one canton in Vrbas, Una-
Sana, Bosna, Drina, Neretva and Trebišnjica basins 
Ministries, Water agencies and Civil protection units should allocate 
resources to priority areas. New approaches require more resources 
of financing, human, material than ones before the COVID-19 era. 
 
Importantly 
municipality 
investment 
plans 
and 
community 
preparedness plans will be fully COVID-19 responsive and will take 
account of the need for municipalities to allocate resources differently. 
Activity 3.3: Implement climate-proof structural 
flood risk reduction and anti-erosion interventions in 
Vrbas, Una-Sana,  Bosna andDrina river basins. 
  
  
Investment in new infrastructure will create jobs and deliver tangible 
assets that will fuel long-term economic growth, reducing current 
impact of COVID-19 on local economies. 
 
By reducing impacts of floods on communities and infrastructure, the 
burden on hospitals and emergency services is reduced thereby 
maintaining capacity to deal with COVID pandemic – it is well 
recognised that overloading medical facilities is a key risk associated 
with the pandemic, therefore any activities that help reduce other 
disasters that could overwhelm hospitals are of benefit in managing 
the ongoing COVID threat. 
Protection from flood risk will enhance protection of drinking water 
infrastructure, ensuring communities’ access to clean drinking water 
and adequate hygienic conditions, that will help reduce the chance of 
potential spreading of COVID-19. Importantly, flood protective 
structures that build resilience will ensure that economic stress of the 
impact of COVID-19 are not further exacerbated during flood events 
When assessing the vulnerability of communities that will benefit from 
the flood structural measures the project will ensure the vulnerable 
get priority attention during the planning and implementation of 
measures. The elderly and infirm are most at risk to succumbing to 
the virus so consideration will be made to ensure adequate hygienic 
conditions. Low-income communities and informal settlements may 
be particularly vulnerable to spreading because of crowding and 
inadequate services. The project will take full account of such 
vulnerabilities in the site-specific ESPs and implement the necessary 
mitigation measures.   
 
 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
131. The project will be implemented by UNDP following UNDP’s Direct Implementation Modality (DIM), according to 
the Standard Basic Assistance Agreement between UNDP and the Government of B&H (SBAA, 1995) and the 
policies and procedures outlined in the UNDP  Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP) (see 
https://info.undp.org/global/popp/ppm/Pages/Defining-a-Project.aspx). UNDP will assume full responsibility and 
accountability for the overall project management, including monitoring and evaluation of project interventions, 
achievement of project outputs and specified results, the efficient and effective use of resources, and reporting to 
GCF.  
132. The Government of B&H through the GCF NDA requested UNDP to deliver this project through the DIM modality. 
DIM modality is justified given the complexity of B&H’s administrative set-up, that includes two self-governing 
entities and applies multi-layered administrative procedures. The United Nations Development Assistance 
Framework (UNDAF) for 2015–2019 and UNDP’s Country Programme Document (CPD) for 2015 – 2019 for 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the Draft CPD for Bosnia and Herzegovina (2021-2025) stipulate that all 
projects be implemented under the direct implementation modality (DIM). The DIM will be applied in a way to 
maximize cost-effectiveness and tailored capacity development of counterpart government institutions.  
133. UNDP provides a three – tier oversight and quality assurance role involving UNDP staff in Country Offices and at 
regional and headquarters levels.  This includes management of funds, programme quality assurance, fiduciary 
risk management, timely delivery of financial and programme reports to GCF and other requirements as per the 
AMA.The quality assurance role supports the Project Board by carrying out objective and independent project 
oversight and monitoring functions. This role ensures appropriate project management milestones are managed

=== PAGE 51 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 47 
 
 
 
42 At the state level the Society of Red Cross (RC) BiH is registered as nonprofit organization and is financed by state institutions on a regular 
basis and consists of members of Red Cross of RS, FBiH and Brcko district. It has only overall coordination role, with competences derived 
from international agreements and in case of emergency, for coordination of international cooperation and support. At the sub national-entity 
level, the Red Cross of Republika Srpska (RS): is registered as nongovernmental organization, even though it is financed by Ministry of Health 
of Republika Srpska on an annual basis. It is a voluntary, humanitarian organization that operates on the territory of Republika Srpska. It is 
defined as a subsidiary body of public authorities in humanitarian areas. It has a coordination role over 64 Red Cross organizations registered 
as legal entities in local communities in RS, and 9 coordination boards (with no legal status) especially during the emergency/crisis situations.  
Red Cross of Federation of BiH (FBiH) is registered as association of citizens, a voluntary, humanitarian organization that operates on the 
territory of Federation BiH. It is financed by Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Policy, by grant on an annual basis. Additional funding is for 
trainings on first aid (for drivers) and small amount from lottery. However, main source of financing is through different project activities.  It 
has coordination role over 79 Red Cross organizations registered as legal entities in local communities in FBiH and 10 cantonal organizations.   
43 There are two Associations of cities and municipalities in BIH: The Association of Municipalities and Cities of Republika Srpska (SOGRS), 
and Association of Municipalities and Cities of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (SOGFBIH). All cities and municipalities in BIH 
(143) including Brcko District, which is member of UDOFBIH, are members of the Associations. Both these Associations are independent 
organizations of voluntarily associated municipalities and cities in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska, 
respectively, established to develop local self-government and promote and protect their common interests. The mandate of SOGRS and 
SOGFBIH is to represent the interests of their members before higher authorities, other bodies and organizations, in BIH and abroad, 
represent and advocate the common interests of membership; provide services and support to members for the development of their 
capacities; Information sharing, communication and mutual cooperation of local authorities and cooperation with other actors; support to local 
authorities in international cooperation and in the process of BiH's accession to the European Union. The legal basis for the establishment of 
SOG is the Law on Local Self-Government, which regulates that local self-government units may join the Union of Municipalities and Cities, 
to promote and protect their common interests, and that SOG may join international associations of local authorities and cooperate with 
appropriate associations of local authorities in BiH and abroad, in accordance with the law. SOGs are members of recognized international 
organizations, such as the Council of European Municipalities and Regions (CEMR), the United Cities and Local Authorities (UCLG), and the 
Network of Associations of Local Authorities of Southeast Europe (NALAS). 
and completed. Project Assurance must be independent of the Project Management function; the Project Board 
cannot delegate any of its quality assurance responsibilities to the Project Manager. The project assurance role is 
covered by the accredited entity fee provided by the GCF. As an Accredited Entity to the GCF, UNDP is required 
to deliver GCF-specific oversight and quality assurance services including: (i) Day-to-day oversight supervision, 
(ii) Oversight of project completion, (iii) Oversight of project reporting.  UNDP’s responsibilities are outlined in the 
AMA that has been entered into between GCF and UNDP and will also be outlined in the FAA for this project. The 
FAA and AMA will govern UNDP’s responsibilities for GCF. The ‘Development Partner’ role of UNDP is to 
represent the interests of the parties, which provide funding and/or technical expertise to the project (designing, 
developing, facilitating, procuring, implementing)  and is covered by the accredited entity fee provided by the GCF. 
The Development Partner’s primary function within the Board is to provide guidance regarding the technical 
feasibility of the project. 
134. The implementation of the project will be carried out in collaboration and consultation with B&H GCF Focal Point 
the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations (MoFTER) and UNFCCC Focal Point, the Ministry of Spatial 
Planning, Construction and Ecology of the Republic of Srpska (MSPCEE).    
 
135. The Project Board (PB) is comprised of the following organizations: UNDP, Ministry of Foreign Trade and 
Economic Relations of Bosnia and Herzegovina (MOFTER, GCF Focal Point), The Ministry for Spatial Planning, 
Civil Engineering and Ecology (MSPCEE, UNFCCC focal point), , Ministry of Agriculture, Water Management, and 
Forestry of Federation of B&H, Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Water Resources of Republika Srpska, State,  
Entity and Canton Red Cross42,  Association of Cities and Municipalities43, Entity, Canton and municipal Civil 
Protection. The Project Board is responsible for making, by consensus, management decisions when guidance is 
required by the Project Manager. Project Board decisions will be made in accordance with standards that shall 
ensure management for development results, best value for money, fairness, integrity, transparency and effective 
international competition. In case a consensus cannot be reached within the Board, the final decision shall rest 
with the UNDP. The Project Board will meet as necessary and agreed, and at least once a year.   
 
136. The Project Manager (PM), under supervision of UNDP will run the project on a day-to-day basis within the 
constraints laid down by the Project Board. The Project Manager function will end when the final project terminal 
evaluation report and other documentation required by the GCF and UNDP has been completed and submitted to 
UNDP. The Project Manager is responsible for day-to-day management and decision-making for the project within 
the Annual Work Plan endorsed by the PB and approved by UNDP. The Project Manager’s prime responsibility is 
to ensure that the project produces the results specified in the project document, to the required standard of quality 
and within the specified constraints of time and cost. The annual work plan is prepared by the Project Manager 
and reviewed and approved by PB. The Project Manager is also responsible for managing and monitoring the 
project risks initially identified and submit new risks to the project board for consideration and decision on possible 
actions if required and update the status of these risks by maintaining the project risks log according to the DIM

=== PAGE 52 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 48 
 
 
Guidelines.  UNDP contracts the Project Manager, who should be different from UNDP’s representative in the 
Project Board. 
137. 
The Project Management Unit (PMU) will be hosted by the UNDP Country Office in BiH. The PMU will also 
include a safeguards officer who will be responsible for overseeing and coordinating the implementation of 
safeguards across the whole of the project, ensuring consistency of approach and reporting from the separate 
Water Agencies/contractors.  The Safeguards Officer will support the application of the ESMP and other project 
safeguard documents so as to meet UNDP SES Standard requirements. The Safeguard officer will also be 
responsible for ensuring that SEP/GRM is functional. 
 
138. The project organisation structure is as follows: 
 
 
 
139. The International Chief Technical Advisor (CTA) will provide regular technical guidance to the project management 
and technical teams in managerial and technical issues. He/she will be hired for a long-term during the entire 
project implementation period by UNDP based on UNDP recruitment procedures.  
140. The International Safeguard Specialist will ensure implementation of ESMP, develop, and implement site specific 
environmental and social safeguards plan, as well address grievances. 
141. Technical Advisory Working Groups (TAWG) will support the CTA and PM and will provide inputs to and 
endorsement of the design and quality of the project outputs. TAWGs members will be drawn from government, 
private sector, academia and civil society to provide guidance and technical advice on the project (hydro-
meteorological institutes, statistics institutes, agricultural institutes, local governments together with associations 
of cities and municipalities of Republika Srpska and Federation of B&H Environmental Protection Funds, the civil 
society and other local and international NGOs). A balanced representation of women and men in the TAWGs will 
be ensured.

=== PAGE 53 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 49 
 
 
 
44 Both, CP and RC in critical situations engage volunteers from local communities.  They have updated lists with contacts of volunteers, 
regularly updated and organize trainings and education for them.  In addition they contract specialized volunteer groups (such as 
mountaineering, rafting clubs), specifically for protection and rescue.  
142. A Gender Advisor will be engaged by the project and will be a member of all TAWGs to ensure that gender is 
adequately mainstreamed in all technical discussions. 
143. Local stakeholders and community members have a key role in the implementation and monitoring of the project.  
Local community consultations have been conducted during the project preparation phase (see Stakeholder 
Assessment and Engagement Plan). During the inception phase of the project, the project will additionally consult 
with all stakeholders, including vulnerable community members and local government, etc. and facilitate an 
understanding of the roles, functions, and responsibilities within the Project's decision-making structures, including 
reporting and communication lines, and conflict resolution mechanisms. Local community consultation forums will 
be established at community levels to maintain dialogue with the local beneficiaries and stakeholders throughout 
the project implementation. The stakeholders will also be engaged during the mid-term and final evaluations to 
assess the progress of the project and enable adaptive project management in response to the needs and priorities 
of the communities.  Community forums will be coordinated and managed through the partnerships with the 
Society of Red Cross (RC) B&H and its members - Red Cross of RS, FB&H and Brcko district (see footnote 39 
above), Association of Cities and Municipalities (for all cities and all 143 municipalities in B&H), Civil Protection 
(CP) and  a network of volunteer groups44 and existing civil society partners who provide flood risk management, 
preparedness and response services to municipalities.  These partnerships will support the implementation of the 
community activities and interventions of the project. As a minimum, bi-annual community forums will be organised 
in each entity, with more frequent meetings/forums as needed. 
 
 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
144. The total annual budget for climate adaptation and resilience activities in B&H related to flood risk management 
averages US$40 Million, comprising mainly donor grants (40%) and loans (60%) while the damages due to 
flooding is expected to reach US$ 749.3 Million Expected Annual Damages (EAD) for households, businesses, 
agriculture, and public buildings by mid-century due to climate change. The shortfall in expenditure on climate 
change adaptation is due to a current lack of financial capacity of the B&H Government to fund such activities

=== PAGE 54 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 50 
 
 
 
45 Without the project and in the current situation government spend on FRM is less than the expected EAD and currently there is low 
investment in infrastructure maintenance. Without action and the gap between EAD and FRM financing will widen. Government has committed 
to O&M for 20 years, for all project implemented activities and infrastructure and, in addition, the FRM financing mechanisms we will be 
identifed and established by the project, to ensure longer-term risk financing needs for O&M will be met.   
without assistance45. Bosnia can access loans to undertake structural measures and will take a loan with EIB to 
finance the highest priority structural measures, but it needs technical assistance through timely complementary 
intervention to shift the current paradigm from piecemeal, ex-post facto, project-based efforts to the adaptation 
alternative which will bring long-term transformative change. In so doing the large expected financial burden of 
damages and losses due to the climate-change induced impact of extreme hazardous flood events can be avoided 
in the long-term.  
 
145. The proposed project represents a blended finance package that leverages international climate finance from GCF 
(19.8% of the total project value), EIB loan to the Government of B&H for flood protection measures (29% of the 
total project value), B&H public funds provided by the Entities and municipalities for structural and non-structural 
measures and O&M (42.3% of the total project budget), and the national private sector funds (HPP, insurance 
sector, 7.7% of the total project budget). The GCF grant element has been critical to leverage and consolidate the 
overall project financing package and to secure scaling-up of the investment after the project completion.  The 
Government of B&H and HPP partner is committed to cover O&M costs of equipment and flood defenses installed 
within the project over the 20 years investment lifetime (Annex 13). As part of the GCF-supported intervention, the 
project will develop risk finance instruments and leverage partnerships with the productive sectors to secure inflow 
of private investment into flood risk management, including O&M of FFEWS and flood defenses beyond the GCF-
funded measures. During the project development, UNDP has conducted a series of willingness to pay studies 
which confirmed the willingness of productive sectors (HPPs, agriculture, tourism) to invest in the climate resilient 
FRM provided an adequate enabling environment is established. Thus, the proposed project will catalyze a shift 
in FRM financing in B&H from a purely public sector and donor-dependent funding towards a more elaborate 
financing strategies engaging private sector. GCF technical assistance is required to catalyze such transition.        
 
146. GCF grant resources will provide for the technical assistance and capacity building to ensure that flood risk 
management is undertaken in an integrated manner that secures the lives, livelihoods and assets of the most 
vulnerable people in B&H and reduces their susceptibility to climate -induced flood risk that they have limited 
coping mechanisms to withstand. GCF investment will not result in revenue generation or financial returns to 
private sector, rather GCF will finance public goods and will assist the government of B&H to meet its obligations 
providing flood protection and early warning services to vulnerable communities in the face of climate change. 
Thus, GCF funding will cover additional costs to the Government associated with the increasing climate change 
impacts and risks, including additional monitoring of catchments susceptible to torrential flash flooding, where 
flood risk is increasing, and which is currently missing from the monitoring network. It will also cover the additional 
costs of enhanced climate data and information for effective impact based FFEWS, enhanced capacities of public 
sector to deliver climate information services, enhanced capacities to integrate climate risks into the design and 
implementation of structural and non-structural flood protection measures, and enhanced awareness of climate 
risks and preparedness among vulnerable communities. These project activities are essential for improving 
climate risk information availability to the general public, improving community resilience, and strengthening 
institutions with mandates to strategically manage climate risks. 
 
147. There is currently limited participation of private sector in climate risk resilience building, and risk financing, despite 
the high exposure of the private sector to flood risk (US$ 3,222 billion assets at risk). The project is aiming to 
develop the mechanisms for risk sharing between public and private sector, including development of public-
private collaboration on building climate resilience in critical flood impacted sectors and technical advice to 
financial institutions to mainstream climate change risks into their business models to manage the effects.     
 
148. Through the FRM project on Vrbas basin and other past and on-going initiatives, B&H has made an important 
step toward piloting successful solutions for increased resilience to climate induced floods. However, single-project 
interventions represent only partial solutions that cannot offer the much-needed systematic approach without 
nation-wide scaling up. Currently available funds, public/private or donor driven, are not sufficient to address flood 
risk at the appropriate scale of whole territory of B&H. GCF funding offers the possibility for such systematic 
intervention by enabling different types of measures that in synergy will effectively address flood risk in the main 
river basins in B&H.  
 
Financial Analysis recommendations and conclusions

=== PAGE 55 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 51 
 
 
149. Government investment in flood risk management is mainly focused on ongoing maintenance of very old flood 
defence structures, which are in poor condition as a result of wartime damage, lack of maintenance, and the 
presence of minefields around some facilities (TNC). Funding sources for water management (including FRM) 
activities are defined by the legal regulations in effect in each entity, which set out the water use, the amount of 
charges, beneficiaries and special water charges (See Section 3.6 of FS). Revenues generated for water charges 
are allocated to various priority flood risk management activities. The total annual budget for climate adaptation 
and resilience activities in B&H related to flood risk management averages US$40 Million which currently 
comprises mainly donor grants (40%) and loans (60%).  This is well below the damages due to flooding which is 
expected to reach US$ 749.3 Million Expected Annual Damages (EAD) for households, businesses, agriculture, 
and public buildings by mid-century due to climate change. It should be noted the 2014 flood resulted in $2.7 
Million USD in damages or 15% GDP.  
  
150. Financial analysis of this project’s outputs and activities has been carried out in accordance with the Guidelines 
for the Financial Analysis of Projects of United Nations Development Program. These guidelines clearly mandate 
that a financial analysis of project cash flows be computed, and Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) calculated 
only for those proposed project activities or outputs that can clearly result in direct and quantifiable financial 
revenue generation (incremental earnings from baseline) or a direct and quantifiable financial savings potential to 
the project owners or to the project beneficiaries. These guidelines stand to ensure that GCF’s minimum 
concession policy is always protected in the proposal. 
 
151. This project’s proposed structure includes 4 outputs and 11 activities. However, none of the activities or outputs 
clearly result in direct and quantifiable earnings or direct and  quantifiable savings to the project owners or the 
project beneficiaries.  All the activities and outputs of this proposed project result only in non-attributable savings 
that are of public good in nature to the larger community of the at-risk population in B&H. Hence, a financial 
modelling-based analysis has not been conducted and an FIRR has not been calculated for any of these activities. 
 
152. However, considering the GCF’s minimum concession policy, this project’s proposed activities have been 
analysed from a macro-economic and government perspective to assess the need for GCF grant as the only 
feasible financial instrument to fund the project activities. Hence, taking into consideration factors such as the 
public good nature of benefits arising out of the project, climate change being the key driver, economic, geographic 
and demographic distribution of the target population, impact of COVID-19, B&H’s current economic situation, 
persistent fiscal risks, the World Bank’s observations and the catalytic nature of GCF grants, we recommend the 
following:  
 
• 
GCF funds will leverage co-financing in a form of grants and loan from government and private sectors 
and, at the same time, will ensure additionality in the area of climate changes while simultaneously 
avoiding diversion from development needs.There is significant co-financing from Government of B&H 
and there is no incremental ability to stretch their contributions owing to budgetary and fiscal 
consolidation reasons.  
• 
The nature of the benefits does not accommodate repayment of capital in whatever form or serviceability 
of a loan instrument. 
• 
The nature of the beneficiaries and the level of essentiality of the service do not accommodate repayment 
of capital in whatever form or serviceability of a loan instrument. 
• 
Increase in government spending to address COVID-19 pandemic has strained public finances. 
• 
Private sector willingness to pay will only cover a small percentage of costs for those services directly 
related to private sector interests. 
• 
Hence, it is recommended that in order to reduce / close the existing financing and knowledge gaps and 
barriers to improve resilience of B&H’s population to climate change-induced hazards, catalytic capital 
in the form of GCF grants are essential. 
 
153. GCF grants are critical for this proposed project given the impact of COVID-19, B&H’s current economic situation 
and the persistent fiscal risks. B&H is a transitional economy with 51.8% of the population being rural. Due to the 
war time devastation and a slow transition of the economy, a large part of B&H’s population still lives in poverty. 
The relatively slow rate of the post-war economic recovery has been compounded by the negative impacts of 
climate change on key sectors such as agriculture, energy (hydropower), the environment, in particular, due to 
the increased frequency and magnitude of flood disasters, which have tripled in the last decade.  
 
154. B&H’s economy and its state’s budgets continue to be under stress due to continued tepid growth rates and 
insurgence of COVID-19 pandemic. Due to COVID-19, GDP growth is expected to contract between -3.2% and -

=== PAGE 56 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 52 
 
 
5% from a previously projected GDP growth of 3.4% for 2020 . This is expected due to revenue shortfalls viz-a-
viz higher health, social, and economic-support spending. As per IMF’s Country Note on B&H in response to 
“Request for Purchase Under the Rapid Financing Instrument”, the impact of COVID-19 necessitates a large fiscal 
expansion to increase spending on containment and mitigation of the disease. Consequently, from a previously 
projected surplus of 2% of GDP, the fiscal position in 2020 is now estimated to be a deficit of 4.5% of GDP . The 
sovereign credit rating of B&H is “B with stable outlook” as per S&P and “B3 with stable outlook" as per Moody’s 
which makes B&H fall in speculative credit rating category with high credit risk . In the situation that has brewed 
since COVID-19’s spread, there has been a depreciation of 3% in local currency of B&H. This can be indicative of 
withdrawal of investments from domestic markets and outflow of capital.  
 
155. Before  the COVID pandemic hit the country in 2020, B&H economy growth rate slowed from 3% per annum in 
2016-2018 to 2.7% in 2019. The Industrial recession in the last years is largely related to spillovers from German 
industrial recession in 2018-19,  induced decline of B&H industrial production by 5.5% in 2019. As a consequence, 
B&H reached a deficit of foreign trade in 2019 of 8.0 billion KM, which is a record value since 2008.The EU is the 
target of 73% of B&H exports and B&H is vulnerable to output contraction in EU and CEFTA markets. In addition, 
the fundamental weakness of inward orientation / lack of export orientation with total exports to GDP ratio of 40%, 
B&H lags behind the average for small and open economies in Europe. Relatively low level of development is 
reflected in  GDP per capita at PPP (purchasing power parity) stands at 32% of EU-27 average. Public sector 
output represents particularly large share of B&H economy which in structural terms represents a weakness. 
Private remittances associated with large diaspora and a large number of workers abroad represented around 
8.5% of GDP in recent years. Current account deficit represents 31.69% of GDP in 2019 and is expected to worsen 
due to substantial reduction in remittances in 2020, which the IMF expects at two thirds of 2019 level. 
 
156. According to the ILO, a large part of the workforce is trapped in low productivity jobs in agriculture, construction, 
tourism and retail, which on average command wages that are 10 % lower than the national average. This is a 
signal that the structural transformation of the country has been slow. Private enterprise sector is small (15% of 
working age population works in the formal private sector), it is weakly capitalized and exposed to strong economic 
shocks. Large public sector buffer effectively serves as a shield for about a third of total employees.   
 
157. The COVID-related shock disrupted B&H’s already weak economic growth. The IMF expects real GDP contraction 
of 5% in 2020, which implies GDP loss of 8% compared to the pre-COVID-19 growth trend. After expected 
recovery at a rate of 3.5% in 2021, the GDP is expected to remain around 7% below the pre-crisis trend. B&H 
authorities communicated expected GDP contractions between 3% and 5% in 2020, depending on the scenario 
and entity. However, these forecasts may be overly optimistic as the negative demand shock during summer 
months has been stronger than expected.” 
 
 
158. Due to these economic risks that persist and the World Bank’s observations on the region, B&H is currently not in 
a state to raise external financing in the form of loans to replace GCF’s grant for this proposed project. In addition, 
due to the public good nature of the benefits derived from the project, the serviceability of any such loans is 
uncertain.  The shortfall in expenditure in B&H on climate change adaptation is due to the lack of financial capacity 
of the B&H Government to fund such activities without assistance. The country will take a loan from EIB to finance 
the highest priority structural measures, but it needs technical assistance through timely complementary 
intervention to shift the current paradigm from piecemeal, ex-post facto, project-based efforts to the adaptation 
alternative which will bring long-term transformative change. 
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
159. The project’s sustainability and exit strategy is rooted in the key elements of design and implementation. The 
following assures long-term sustainability beyond the project implementation period: 
 
160. 
Investment in human resources and institutions: the project is focused on strengthening institutions that 
will have skilled human resources, information, tools and technologies to effectively pursue their mandate in climate 
risk management (Sub-activity 1.3.4 and Activity 2.4). The project investments will improve availability of climate 
risk information and create effective response mechanisms. This project will incorporate lessons learned and 
benefit from the existing collaborative relationship between UNDP and all the key flood risk management partners 
and will foster strong partnerships with and among relevant institutions to ensure shared goals and shared vision 
beyond the project. The project will help ensure sustainability by supporting all relevant government ministries in 
line with government policy, programme and strategic priorities. The establishment of methods and tools for 
developing and implementing flood risk management strategies, the introduction of risk assessment methods,

=== PAGE 57 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 53 
 
 
standards, tools, guidance and regulatory documents make this project highly replicable within B&H. The 
embedding of risk assessment, risk management and risk reduction methods for flood hazards will be particularly 
important. Furthermore, this project has been developed with full awareness of other climate risk and flood risk 
related projects in the region, which makes it highly complementary, and potentially replicable to other projects 
regionally. As detailed above, this project plans to attract private sector investment – particularly in cost sharing 
regimes for long-term O&M for hydrometric equipment.  Hence, by the end of the project, the activities and 
monitoring network will be self-sustaining into the future. In addition, all activities will be conducted in ways that 
empower local stakeholders. Capacity building programs set up will ensure the ongoing transfer of skills to create 
knowledge sharing and better climate services for the future.  Hence, Sub-Activity 1.3.4: Develop and implement a 
capacity development plan for embedding flood hazard and risk modelling approaches and FFEWS into appropriate 
institutions in B&H, which in particular will conduct FFEWS training on the new system for all institutions involved 
in FFEWS as identified by institutional mapping and institutional arrangement plan for FFEWS, Activity 2.4 which 
will conduct training on proposed FRM policy and sectoral FRM, Sub-Activity 1.4.2 which will develop protocols 
and SOPs on data generation and data management for FRM Work Instructions / Directives / Standard Operating 
Procedures and Sub-Activity 2.1. which will develop country-wide floodplain zoning policy and legislation, based 
on hazard, risk and vulnerability mapping, flood resilient building codes and embed climate change considerations 
in the design and construction standards of critical infrastructure, will all ensure that strengthen institutional 
capacities and institutional arrangements, tools, technologies, enabling environments and policies, are in place 
within organizations when the project exits, thus ensuring sustainability, scalability and replicability of project 
interventions. 
 
161. Investment in development of long-term climate risk financing: The project is developing fully articulated 
long-term municipal risk management plans for 10-12 highest risk municipalities and 1 canton, and sector 
resilience plans for highest risk sectors, which will set the direction for systematic risk informed sectoral flood risk 
management in the future. In addition, the project will develop long-term risk financing mechanisms and 
investment plans. Cost-benefit assessment methodologies and a socio-economic risk model will be embedded 
into the identification and design of climate proofed structural and non-structural measures and will form the basis 
of municipal investment planning. Risk financing mechanisms to be developed by the project, will ensure that long-
term financial and economic resources are identified and available after GCF assistance ends and will ensure 
cost-effective financing of flood risk reduction measures, and investments over time.  This will result in sustainable 
financing of FRM in B&H.  
 
162. Investment in social and economic assets of vulnerable communities:  The damaging effects of extreme 
events and changes in weather patterns exacerbated by climate change will limit the potential for socioeconomic 
development in vulnerable and isolated communities. However, investing in climate resilient structural and non-
structural measures (Activities 2.2 and 3.3) can help reduce the vulnerability of these areas. Flood defenses that 
are “climate proofed” will have structural stability and functional longevity under climate change. Furthermore, the 
development and implementation of climate-proofing standards for the design and construction of critical 
infrastructure, will strengthen the reliability of infrastructure and, in turn, reduce the impact on communities during 
flood events. Investment in EbA measures provides cost efficiency and long-term sustainability as EBA 
investments  are self-sustaining in the long run, are adaptable, and require reduced OM costs. Hence, EbA 
solutions are an investment in social and economic assets that will provide sustained ecosystem services. This 
project will embed climate risk information and enhance the capacity to prioritize, budget, locate and deploy critical 
infrastructure that is functionally stable under climate hazards. This will help ensure the financial sustainability of 
critical infrastructure climate proofing efforts for the long-term.  
 
163. Investment in natural capital: Securing long-term resilience and safeguard investments and communities 
against climate induced flood risk, by ensuring functional and protected watersheds, stable, climate resilient and 
well-managed natural capital (Activities 2.2 and 2.3), the project will be investing in long-term sustainability of 
communities and their social and economic assets through the investment in EbA solutions, and the derived eco-
system service attendant benefits of improved functions of catchments through effective flood risk management.   
 
164. The project will develop an integrated river-basin development approach and will implement some of the structural 
and non-structural intervention measures in selected high priority areas. These will provide strong replicability 
impact as they will establish the methods, standards and approaches that will work across B&H and define these 
in guidance, legal and policy documents. The potential for scaling up these approaches is therefore significant. 
There is at least a threefold replication potential for the EbA measures, community based EWS, municipal risk 
management plans, natural disasters’ insurance schemes etc.  Having in mind institutional and geographical 
similarities of all Western Balkans countries, there is a regional replication potential for all aspects of the project.

=== PAGE 58 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 54 
 
 
 
 
 
165. Post-project O&M: Co-financing from government and private sector will include budgeted O&M costs for a period 
well beyond the project duration.  In terms of maintenance of the expanded hydrometric network, during and after 
the end of the project (please refer to co-funding letters, Annex 13).   
 
166. In addition, the project will assist relevant government institutions in developing long-term O&M financial planning 
to ensure hydrometric network equipment, FFEWS and all systems implemented under the project will be 
maintained in the long-term. The project interventions have also been designed to strengthen financing and 
implementation of O&M for implemented structural and non-structural measures in the long-term. To this end, the 
project will address current and future requirements for maintenance by developing and embedding CBA, asset 
management and portfolio risk management methods that ensure the systematic identification and prioritization 
of the maintenance costs over the lifespan of the infrastructure.  
 
167. Specifically, the project will provide the following safeguards to financial sustainability: 
• 
Long-term investment planning for FRM including identification of long-term O&M financing needs 
• 
Review budgetary requirements for long-term maintenance of hydrometric network and structural and non-
structural interventions based on climate risk information to be developed by the project, and development of 
a financing model for the long-term maintenance (using cost-benefit modelling to support the financing model) 
• 
Strengthening the approach to O&M for a harmonized O&M framework by implementing capacity development 
in O&M of the optimized hydrometric network 
• 
Improve private sector involvement and partnership in the area of flood risk management.

=== PAGE 59 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 55 
 
 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + 
v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
14.4 million 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) Senior loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(iii) Equity 
Enter amount 
 
 
Enter % equity 
return 
(iv) Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable 
grants 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(vi) Grants 
14.4  
 
 
 
(vii) Results-
based payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-
financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
58.288 
million USD ($) 
Name of 
institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Ministry of 
Agriculture, 
Forestry and 
Water 
Management of 
Republika 
Srpska 
(MAFWM RS)- 
EiB Loan 
Senior 
Loans 
 
21.1146 
million USD 
($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
 
Ministry of 
Agriculture, 
Forestry and 
Water 
Management of 
Republika 
Srpska 
(MAFWM RS) 
Grant 
 
3.8947 
million USD 
($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
 
Water Agency 
for Sava River 
Basin, Sarajevo 
(WA Sava) 
Grant 
 
16 
million USD 
($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
 
Water Agency 
for Adriatic River 
Basin, Mostar 
(WA AB) 
Grant 
 
5 
million USD 
($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
 
 
46 EIB loan is EUR 19 mil; exchange rate 1USD=0.9 EUR  
47 Co-financing provided EUR 3.5 mil; exchange rate 1USD=0.9 EUR

=== PAGE 60 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 56 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of 
Foreign Trade 
and Economic 
Relations  
(GCF Focal 
point) 
(MOFTER) 
Grant 
5.5648 
million USD 
 
 
 
Power Company 
of Republic of 
Srpska, Hydro 
Power Plant 
(HPP) 
Grant 
5.0 
million USD 
 
 
 
Re-insurance 
company Bosna 
RE (Bosna RE) 
Grant 
0.3349 
million USD 
 
 
 
Association of 
Insurance 
Companies 
FB&H (AOIC) 
Grant 
0.3 
million USD 
 
 
 
Ministry of 
Spatial Planning, 
Civil Engineering 
and Ecology of 
Republika 
Srpska 
(UNFCCC Focal 
point) 
(MSPCEE) 
Grant 
0.30 
million USD 
 
 
 
UNDP 
Grant 
0.8 
million USD 
 
 
 
(c) Total 
financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
72.69 
million USD ($)  
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 
words, 
approximately 
0.5 page) 
UNDP projects in B&H are exempted from VAT payment in line with conditions stipulated 
in the Standard Basic Assistance Agreement (SBAA). For activities related to 
procurement of goods and services through UNDP, according to the SBAA taxes are not 
applicable. Section 7 of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United 
Nations provides, inter alia, that the United Nations, including its subsidiary organs, is 
exempt from all direct taxes, except charges for utilities services, and is exempt from 
customs duties and charges of a similar nature in respect of articles imported or exported 
for its official use. 
 
C.2. Financing by component  
168. The Government of the B&H is requesting GCF funds to cover the additional costs (required due to the 
impacts of climate change) of technical assistance and capacity building for enhanced flood risk 
knowledge, monitoring, forecasting and warnings, for scaling up ecosystem-based and other non-
structural risk management approaches, and for facilitating climate risk-informed flood protection 
investments (Activities 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 3.1, 3.2). The Governments of FB&H and RS 
will co-finance from the Entity budget funds the upgrading and maintenance of the hydrometeorological 
observation network, implementation of FFEWS, regulatory improvements, resilience and investment 
planning and implementation of non-structural flood risk reduction measures (Activities 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 
2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 3.1, 3.2). Implementation of climate-proof structural risk reduction measures (Activity 
3.3.) will be co-financed through loan resources (EIB). Private sector (HPPs) will co-finance enhanced 
 
48 Co-financing provided EUR 5 mil; exchange rate 1USD=0.9 EUR 
49 Co-financing provided EUR 0.3 mil; exchange rate 1USD=0.9 EUR

=== PAGE 61 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 57 
 
 
 
 
flood risk monitoring, forecasting and warning and structural risk reduction investments (Activities 1.1, 
1.2.1.3, 1.4, 2.2). 
 
 
Compone
nt 
Output/Activity 
Indicative 
cost 
Options 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
Options 
Financi
al 
Instrum
ent 
Amount 
Options 
Financial 
Instrume
nt 
Name 
of 
Institut
ions 
Compone
nt 1 
1.1 Upgrade and expand the 
coverage of the hydrometric 
network for enhanced monitoring 
of climate variables in Category I 
catchments and torrential 
streams  
4,405,946 
1,535,980 Grants 
2,869,966 
Grants 
MAFWM 
RS 
WA 
Sava 
WA AB 
HPP 
1.2 Enhance climate-induced 
flood hazard, risk and 
vulnerability information for 
strategic risk management and 
sound decision making for 
climate induced flood 
management 
5,596,589 
1,067,833 Grants 
4,528,756 
Grants 
WA 
Sava 
WA AB 
MOFTE
R 
HPP 
1.3 Develop an integrated 
impact-based centralized and 
community-based flood 
forecasting and early warning 
system (FFEWS) 
4,111,478 
2,156,040 Grants 
1,955,438 
Grants 
MAFWM 
RS 
WA 
Sava 
WA AB 
HPP 
1.4 Develop and implement 
protocols and SoPs on data 
generation, data management 
and communication for effective 
impact based FFEWS and flood 
risk management 
536,000 
336,000 
Grants 
200,000 
Grants 
WA AB 
2.1 Mainstream climate induced 
flood risk reduction into sectoral 
planning (agriculture, 
hydropower, critical 
infrastructure) and spatial 
planning 
456,000 
366,000 
Grants 
90,000 
Grants 
MSPCE
E RS 
2.2 Implement and mainstream 
new ecosystem-based flood risk 
reduction and climate change 
adaptation methods 
26,116,175 
5,868,747 Grants 
20,247,42
8 
Grants 
MAFWM 
RS 
WA 
Sava 
WA AB 
HPP 
2.3 Codify and mainstream EbA 
solutions into policies and 
regulations and promote non-
structural measures among 
decision makers and 
communities 
298,680 
208,680 
Grants 
90,000 
Grants 
MSPCE
E RS 
2.4 Review and strengthen 
institutional capacity and 
develop long-term institutional 
capacity development plans for 
climate resilient FRM 
800,000 
300,000 
Grants 
500,000 
Grants 
MAFWM 
RS 
WA 
Sava 
WA AB

=== PAGE 62 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 58 
 
 
 
 
3.1 Develop investment 
framework for climate induced 
flood risk reduction and 
management 
1,083,614 
480,440 
Grants 
603,174 
Grants 
BOSNA 
RE 
AOIC 
3.2 Formulate  multi-year climate 
resilient municipal investment 
plans and gender responsive 
community preparedness plans 
in selected municipalities (10-12) 
and in one canton in Vrbas, Una-
Sana and Bosna, Drina, Neretva 
and Trebišnjica basins 
3,622,884 
525,000 
Grants 
3,097,884 
Grants 
UNDP 
MOFTE
R 
3.3 Implement climate-proof 
structural flood risk reduction 
and anti-erosion interventions in 
Vrbas, Una-Sana, Bosna and 
Drina river basins 
21,814,433 
875,280 
Grants 
20,939,15
3 
Senior 
Loans 
Grants 
MAFWM 
RS-EIB 
Loan 
MAFWM 
RS 
4.1 Project Management 
3,847,090 
680,000 
Grants 
3,167,090 
Grants 
UNDP 
(TRAC) 
MOFTE
R              
MAFWM 
RS 
WA 
Sava        
WA AB     
BOSNA 
RE 
AOIC        
HPP         
MSPCE
E 
Indicative total cost (USD) 
72,688,889 
14,400,000 
58,288,889 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building 
activities? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology 
development/transfer? 
Yes ☒    No ☐ 
Capacity Building 
169. Under Activity 1.1 the project will provide training to 50 hydrometric practitioners of HMIs and WAs in 
O&M of up-graded hydrometric stations. 
 
170. Under Activity 1.3 the project will undertake an institutional capacity assessment of FRM institutions and 
develop a capacity development plan for embedding flood hazard and risk modelling approaches and 
FFEWS into relevant institutions in B&H. Institutional capacity gaps and training needs will be assessed, 
and a revised institutional capacity building plan will be developed to address gaps (human, technical and 
financial).  The recruitment and training need to fill capacity gaps will be addressed. The project will 
develop training plans for each technical area of expertise related to climate-induced flood risk assessment 
and management, and FFEWS, and consolidate into an overall capacity development plan.  The long-
term capacity plan for B&H will be developed and will consider options such as the development of 
apprenticeships, internships and voluntary schemes for University students. To address issues of skills 
shortage, skills retention and succession planning, the project will develop approaches which will include 
examining the role of the private sector (consultants, contractors, research institutes) in filling these gaps, 
the use of Continuous Professional Development (CPD) methods involving cross-fertilizing of staff with 
skills across all organizations (e.g. through training in all technical areas before specializing), development 
of standardized and country-wide accepted guidance documents, codes and standards which will enable 
consistency and uniformity of technical approaches.

=== PAGE 63 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 59 
 
 
 
 
 
171. Under Activity 1.3 the project will also undertake capacity building and training for HPP practitioners, 
including specific training on the use of climate information products and services and the use of the new 
HPP models and climate information products in HPP operations. For the agricultural sector, the project 
will support improvement of existing agrometeorological advisory services to farmers with the focus on 
flood risk management by training and embedding training (ToT) with agricultural specialists who will work 
with local farmers to teach them how best to use the weather/flood forecasts within their farming methods, 
and help increase their understanding of how to apply it to their agricultural practices. 
 
172. Under Activity 2.3 the project will undertake training in the methodology and guidance for undertaking risk 
assessment and appraisal of EbA measures; eco-system analysis and evaluation; and eco-system 
valuation methods, and eco-system benefit assessment as part of CBA. 
 
173. 
Under Activity 2.4, the project will develop and fully embed the long-term capacity development 
strategy for all aspects of FRM in B&H.  It will establish training curricula, and rosters of trainers, 
mechanisms and financing strategies for delivering long-term capacity development such as development 
of key partnerships with universities that can be forged to ensure long-term FRM training. The project will 
deliver some of the prioritized training in the areas of:  flood hazard and risk assessment, hydrometry, 
forecasting and modelling, EWSs; vulnerability and risk assessments; river basin flood risk management 
planning and the use of climate information; Under this activity the project will also deliver an awareness 
raising campaign for capacity building at municipal and community levels;  Networking and advocacy; 
Country-wide media campaign on FRM and FFEWS. Under Sub-activity 2.4.3 (See pages 251-252 of FS) 
the project will assist the government of B&H in shifting from ad-hoc project-based awareness and 
education efforts to a planned, consistent and sustainable information and communication system for 
enhanced flood and disaster risk management at the community level.  To this end, it will develop an 
awareness raising campaign which will include the following: Capacity building at municipal and community 
levels:  Emergency response trainings for first responders in cooperation with Civil Protection; Strategic 
FRM 
planning 
and 
FRM 
intervention 
identification 
approaches 
for 
municipality 
staff; 
Development/adaptation of existing guidelines on community DRR/DRM; Development of FRM, DRR and 
DRM guidelines for specific target groups including teachers, municipal authorities, media, women’s 
groups; Capacity building and awareness raising of municipal authorities, local NGOs, CBOs or non-CBO 
community members in Community-based Risk Assessment approaches, Community-based Early 
Warning Systems and gender-responsive Community-based Flood Risk Management; Development of 
‘training of trainers’ programme and a syllabus for topics such as first aid, search and rescue and warning 
dissemination, and example standard specifications for external training providers; Working with the 
appropriate agencies to develop generic educational material and a 5year training programme on flood 
and disaster risk and emergency response for use in school outreach programmes, university courses, 
communities etc. (training material, course notes, plays etc.); Training on how to use the hazard and risk 
maps provided (paper and electronic) to raise awareness but also on how to plan development and other 
activities locally. In addition the project will implement networking and advocacy which will include: 
Organizing annual community forums on FRM and CBEWSs with participation of target communities and 
representatives of vulnerable groups to exchange information, lessons learned, successes and 
impediments; Organizing community-government and public-private dialogues around local risks and risk 
reduction strategies and their financing.  In addition a country-wide media campaign on FRM and FFEWS 
will be developed to include: Develop and deliver awareness raising messages through a number of 
methods including using social media, art and creativity to communicate FRM and FFEWS concepts to 
broader society and to disseminate project lessons and successes; Organizing TV and radio talk shows 
around FRM and FFEWS; Media coverage of project activities; Production of footages, Public Social 
Announcements (PSAs) of short documentaries around FRM and project achievement; Training for media 
on FRM and FFEWS and annual essay/media article awards competitions.  The project will utilize its 
partnerships with Society of Red Cross (RC) B&H and IFRC to develop, deliver and embed the community-
based training and awareness raising.    
 
174. 
Under Activity 3.1 the project will provide technical advice and training of insurance sector 
practitioners in the development of insurance products packages from natural disasters adjusted to the 
needs of the assessed sectors and insurers.   
 
175. Capacity development for each of the interventions/components will leverage existing and establish new 
partnerships with organizations such as the WMO regional training centers, UNESCO/ITU ICT4D and

=== PAGE 64 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 60 
 
 
 
 
other DRR institutions, as well as national and regional research institutions, universities and training 
centres. Total GCF requested funds for capacity development is approximately $300,000 USD. 
 
Technology Development/Transfer 
 
The main technology transfer and development activities under the project are as follows: 
 
176. Under Activity 1.1 the project is enhancing the technologies for hydrometric monitoring.  This will include 
the upgrade and modernization (automation) of stations, the development of the ICT systems that underpin 
the hydrometric network databases and enables the efficient use of data from all sources in the modelling, 
mapping and forecasting of floods.   
 
177. Under Activity 1.2, the project will enhance the WBIF EUFD hazard and risk modelling by a) developing 
hydrological modelling for all main basins (category I rivers), b) undertaking torrents hazard modelling, c) 
including HPPs and groundwater modelling in flood hazard, risk and vulnerability modelling and mapping 
for all relevant basins. These activities will rely on the transfer and scaling up of technologies and 
methodologies developed and applied under the Vrbas basin project. Furthermore, the project will 
introduce new technologies for modelling and development of climate risk-informed reservoir operation 
rules that minimizes downstream flood risk and damage, while maintaining dam safety within reasonable 
limits and optimizing water availability for power generation. This will be based on an integrated approach 
to basin flood risk management which includes adequate representation of HPP operations in the basin 
flood hazard and risk modelling and mapping, as well as in flood forecasting models, to enable real-time 
operational decisions during a developing flood. To this end, the project will incorporate HPP operations 
into flood hazard and risk modelling (to strengthen the role of HPPs in flood alleviation and maximize their 
capacity to utilize flood forecasts in their operations) in all relevant basins. The project will additionally 
develop sector-specific climate risk information tools and products for hydropower sectors with a particular 
focus on the Neretva and Trebisnjica sub-basins of the Adriatic Sea basin where there are large numbers 
of HPPs. 
 
178. This activity will also build on the bespoke GIS-based socio-economic flood risk and vulnerability model 
(which is based on EU flood Directive methodology for flood socio-economics assessment) developed for 
Vrbas basin which will be further enhanced with improved receptor and socio-economic datasets to be 
acquired/established by the project, integrate various spatial socio-economic data with the hazard maps, 
to produce risk maps, which will include economic losses and damages and loss of life estimates. In 
addition, the project will develop the technical methodology and tools for the systematic collection of socio-
economic datasets that are important to flood risk and vulnerability modelling and assessment 
 
179. Under Activity 1.3, the project will establish a fully-integrated impact-based flood forecasting and early 
warning system across the country, using state-of-the-art hydrometeorological modelling (hydrological and 
hydraulic models, DEM, etc.), forecasting (meteorological forecasting, use of ground weather radar, 
satellite imagery and aerial photography), EWS platform, telecommunications (GMS, internet, SMS, 
CCTV, TV and radio, walkie talkies, etc.) and information (GIS, web-based information portal and meta-
databases, etc.) technologies. It will also create new climate and weather products (e.g. climate advisories) 
for various users (HPP and agriculture. Participatory “Last Mile” communication solutions tailored to the 
needs of local communities, including CBEWSs and demonstration of cost-effective risk reduction and 
community resilience measures through the combination of structural and non-structural protection 
measures, which are relatively new for B&H. Under this activity, the project will also enhance the ICT 
systems that will support the national integrated FFEWS platform, for near real time forecasting and 
warning dissemination.  
 
180. Under Activity 2.2 the project will scale up successful EbA approaches piloted by the UNDP/SCCF Vrbas 
River project and embed the tools and technologies that were developed to support long-term design and 
implementation of EbA measures.   
 
181. Under Activity 3.1, the project will expand and further develop flood insurance scheme initiated under 
Vrbas project and explore and identify other risk financing products and tools. This represents technology

=== PAGE 65 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 61 
 
 
 
 
transfer which will embed risk-based natural disasters insurance and the relevant insurance models, tools 
and products in B&H.    
 
182. The project will develop a unified methodology and relevant technical assessment tools for appraisal-led 
design of structural and non-structural measures using climate risk information and cost-benefit appraisal 
methods and application of methods to the detailed design of prioritized structural and non-structural 
measures. 
 
183. Total GCF requested funds for technology transfer/development is approximately $3.4 Million USD. 
 
 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the 
GCF’s Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
184. This project has the potential to prevent loss of life, property and critical infrastructure assets for 799,445 people 
currently at risk of floods (25% of the total population of the country) and to 902,906 people projected to be at risk 
by 2050 representing approximately 26% of the entire population of B&H and 44% of the population of the 69 
municipalities covered by the targeted sub-basins. The project is targeting those most vulnerable to flood risk and 
the impact potential of the enhanced flood risk management and intervention measures is high and will safeguard 
vulnerable communities and their economic assets from these climate induced disasters. In addition, community 
resilience and livelihoods will be increased through the EbA strategies which will additionally enhance the 
environmental and ecological protective functions of the river basins. 
 
185. The project will increase resilience and enhance livelihoods of the most vulnerable segments of population, 
particularly women, children, and the elderly. Women represent 51.7% of the total affected population. The 
population under 15 years of age and of above 65 years of age represent 15.2% and 13.7% respectively of the 
affected population. Through the project interventions economic damages from climate-induced floods will be 
reduced. As shown in the detailed economic analysis (Annex 3A and Annex 3B), expected annual benefits as a 
result of the project activities are expected to reach $21 million once the project is fully implemented. The largest 
benefit (measured as avoided flood loss and damages) arises from the protection of household assets. In terms of 
geographic distribution, the benefits arise mostly in the Bosna and Neretva sub-basins. The project will also result 
in more resilient physical assets in 3 B&H river basins.  
 
186. The project’s adaptation benefits will also include a scaled transfer of climate resilient FRM technologies and 
mainstreaming of climate adaptation and the use of climate information in the institutional and regulatory systems 
in B&H that will result in improved incentives for climate resilience across sectors.  The project will implement 
floodplain zoning policy which will be based on the matching of permitted land use to category of flood risk with 
vulnerability of occupants/users of the land as a key consideration of permissible development (based on the 
principle of avoidance of high-risk areas).  This will have a direct impact in terms of reduced exposure to flood risk 
among the most vulnerable communities.    
 
187. The project design has been informed through consultation with various stakeholders and has sought to reflect the 
gender differentiated aspects of flood risks. Information on the needs of vulnerable groups (women, ethnic 
minorities, disabled, elderly) has been collected and will continue to be collected through ongoing and inclusive 
stakeholder engagement and the embedding of tools and methodologies for the collection of gender responsive 
socio-economic data for development of the flood socio-economic risk and vulnerability model to be developed 
under output 1.2. Through the implementation of a Gender Action Plan (GAP)the project will assist in fulfilling 
B&H’s commitment to gender equality and international obligations on gender responsive climate change and 
disaster risk measures. The GAP will draw on lessons learnt from the UNDP Vrbas project including the need for 
gender responsive planning and implementation. It will include gender analysis as part of risk and vulnerability and 
support capacity building of staff and implementing partners to collect sex and age disaggregated baseline data;

=== PAGE 66 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 62 
 
 
 
 
develop specific performance indicators to monitor, report or track progress, inform decision making; and 
strengthen accountability on commitments for gender equality. 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
188. The project demonstrates ambition in its goals and objectives in addressing climate change challenges facing 
B&H, by going beyond incremental changes and striving instead for significant and transformative impacts in terms 
of adaptation benefits, and sustainable development outcomes The project will change the paradigm of existing 
flood risk management in B&H in the face of climate change through enhanced institutional capacity at all levels, 
improved climate information and understanding of risk, mainstreaming non-structural ecosystem-based risk 
management approaches, engaging private sector and climate-proofing public and private investments in flood 
risk management. Without project interventions there will be a progressively increasing risk of catastrophic loss of 
life, property and economic assets and livelihoods throughout B&H. The alternative pathway reduces the risk to 
799,455 people through introduction of an integrated approach, which will embed new skills, methods, and 
technologies to assess the flood hazard, risk and vulnerability, to better understand the risk, and to develop a range 
of risk reduction and management strategies. 
 
189. The project is enhancing the availability of climate risk information on which all FRM will be based by scaling up 
hazard and risk modelling and assessment to include flood risk from torrential streams, and HPPs, thus extending 
the technical scale/scope of hazard, risk and vulnerability information. The project will enhance the capacity for 
flood early warning and implement a national sustainable impact based FFEWS resulting in improved warning 
times and reduced losses.  Technological innovations brought by the project include implementation of fully 
integrated impact based FFEWS based on state of the art observation, modeling, forecasting and communication 
platforms and technologies that will empower local communities to undertake local disaster risk reduction (DRR) 
and response measures, that complement the centralized EWS system, and can be replicated to other 
communities. The project will develop impact based FFEWS for main rivers which will be scalable to cover sub-
basins as necessary. Importantly, the flood forecasting will include all relevant flooding mechanisms and will also 
be scaled to provide specific sector flood forecasting products for hydropower and agriculture sectors. Through the 
development and implementation of protocols and SoPs on data generation, data management and 
communication for effective impact based FFEWS, the project will ensure the uptake and replication of technical 
and institutional FFEWS solutions across B&H. The project is therefore contributing to the geographic and 
technological scaling up of the FFEWS in B&H and will provide the technical and institutional basis for FFEWS and 
services to all at risk communities.  It also provides the basis for any future development of FFEWS to areas that 
may experience flooding in the future and for development of FFEWS products for other sectors in the future. In 
doing so, the project will contribute to the implementation of the new UN initiative “Early Warnings for All (EW4All)” 
announced by the UN Secretary-General in March 2022 aiming at facilitating partnerships for and promoting 
universal coverage of early warnings. 
  
190. The project will enhance the capacity to identify, plan and implement long-term flood risk management strategies 
at the basin and sub-basin scale by introducing combined structural and non-structural methods including EbA 
measures. Long-term flood risk investment planning will also be enhanced, and policy and legislation strengthened 
to enable long-term sustainability of interventions, by engaging the private sector to shoulder some of the 
increasing costs of required observation networks and risk information and early warning services. Also, climate 
risk information will enable a better understanding of the risks to, and impact of private sector activities on increased 
flood risk, and their potential role in flood alleviation, enabling private sector to incorporate FRM activities into their 
regular operations. The project is developing the capacity and systems whereby the current gap between the 
demand and supply of vital climate risk information is closed. Capacity building programs that will be established 
and implemented by the project will ensure the ongoing transfer of skills to create knowledge sharing and better 
climate services for the future. The project will help ensure sustainability by supporting all relevant government 
ministries in line with government policy, programme and strategic priorities. The establishment of methods and 
tools for developing and implementing flood risk management strategies, the introduction of risk assessment 
methods, standards, tools, guidance and regulatory documents make this project highly replicable within B&H. 
This investment in human capital will strengthen institutions that will have skilled human resources, information, 
tools and technologies to effectively pursue their mandate in climate risk management, thus ensuring sustainability 
and replicability of the intervention.

=== PAGE 67 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 63 
 
 
 
 
191. Through the project effective Nature-based FRM solutions will be embedded in B&H to address the complex 
interactions amongst multiple ecosystem degradation processes that are contributing to flood risk and affecting 
people’s vulnerabilities to climatic and other factors. In B&H, terrestrial ecosystems are under increasing pressure 
from changes in the use of land and natural resources, driven by socio-economic pressures. While climate change 
is impacting the intensity and frequency of flood risk as well as shifting natural eco-systems, such as distribution 
of forest cover, anthropogenic activities that increase deforestation, soil erosion and land degradation are 
combining to increase risk of floods due to the reduced ability of eco-systems to provide services important to 
protecting people, their property, and livelihoods. This, in turn, puts people under increased pressure to resort to 
unsustainable ecosystem use and management, further degrading ecosystems and their capacity to deliver 
services. While climate change affects the various terrestrial ecosystems in different ways, and each ecosystem is 
accompanied by its unique set of socio-economic and political issues, this vicious cycle of degradation is common 
to most. Adaptation to climate-induced flood risk in B&H, if tackled by hard structural measures alone, is likely to 
require increasingly larger investments in flood protection infrastructure, such as flood embankments, and dams 
and reservoirs to buffer against increased variability in rainfall and run-off. However, such traditional engineered 
solutions may not always be the best option. Nature-based FRM solutions, due to their potential value for risk 
reduction and adaptation, have been recognised as viable solutions (European Commission 2015)50. Natural ﬂood 
management (NFM) and natural water retention measures (NWRM) that alter, restore or use landscape features 
to manage ﬂood risk including (1) interception (retaining water in and on plants), (2) increased plant transpiration, 
(3) improved soil inﬁltration, (4) ponds and wetlands for increased floodplain storage, and (5) reconnecting the 
ﬂoodplain, have the potential to reduce extremes in the ﬂow discharge and thus help to reduce flood risk.  Nature-
based solution (NBS) encompassing EbA and non-structural FRM measures have been proven to be a viable 
substitute for, and complement to traditional hard infrastructure, and has provided additional eco-system services 
by enhancing the natural biophysical services of the rivers and river basins.  In B&H, torrential flooding which 
normally originates in steep upland catchments, cannot be addressed by traditional hard engineering measures, 
but rather needs to be managed by restoration of the vegetation cover and re-establishment of the natural eco-
system functions of the catchment.  Nature-based solutions are often less capital intensive and more easily 
reversible than engineered alternatives, thereby providing an additional “option” value. In addition to protection 
from climate change impacts, they also provide many other benefits to communities, for example through the 
maintenance and enhancement of ecosystem services crucial for livelihoods and human well-being, such as clean 
water, water regulation and habitat, recreational opportunities, and often provides employment opportunities. 
Appropriately designed NBS measures can also contribute to climate change mitigation, for example, by reducing 
emissions from ecosystem loss and degradation. To reduce flood risks, it is vital to build the resilience of the natural 
resource base, and to promote sound environmental and natural resource management practices and the 
sustainable use of ecosystems. Healthy and diverse ecosystems are more resilient to hazards. In particular, 
healthy catchment eco-systems, reduce soil erosion and runoff that causes flooding. For example, in Switzerland, 
is it estimated that forests save between USD 2–3.5 billion per year equivalent in disaster damage (including 
flooding) through restoration of key forest ecosystems51. Forests can be used as shelterbelts and windbreaks, 
and also play an important role in protecting against natural disasters including floods. Trees stabilize riverbanks 
and mitigate soil erosion. Wetlands serve to store water, provide storm protection, flood mitigation, land 
stabilization and erosion control. As part of the Vrbas project, several EBA and non-structural measures have been 
implemented throughout the basin. Over 15 EbA measures were implemented in the mountainous part of basin 
(See Section 7.11 of FS), as well as in middle and lower plains and they consist of the use of natural materials in 
the protection of riverbanks from erosion and degradation, the reconstruction of old meanders and abandoned 
river beds, restoration of the riverbed to its natural state and agroforestry measures. In the most upstream part of 
the basin, in the municipalities of Bugojno and Gornji Vakuf, a measure of rehabilitation of the old riverbed was 
implemented, which enabled water retention in the upstream part, thus ensuring reduced and controlled runoff in 
the downstream part of the basin. The added value of this measure is that the river island created by the 
reconstruction of the old riverbed is now significantly used for agricultural purposes as a highly fertile land. During 
the heavy rains in September 2019, several news portals in Banja Luka pointed out that the projects and 
interventions made through the Vrbas project gave results and reduced the flood risk compared to the floods from 
2014, in the largest city in the basin52  . Based on the results of the Vrbas project the B&H government has 
committed to embedding nature-based approaches and are seeking to  rebalance the priorities and relative value 
of “hard” infrastructure versus green solutions to manage flood risk. NBS solutions are embedded in the Flood Risk 
Management Plan for the Vrbas basin, for the first time in B&H. This move to adopt NBS is in line with many similar 
 
50 European Commission (2015) Towards an EU Research and Innovation policy agenda for Nature-Based Solutions & Re-Naturing Cities. 
Final report of the Horizon 2020 Expert Group on ‘Nature-Based Solutions and Re-Naturing Cities’. European Commission, Brussels 
51 https://nature4climate.org/ecosystem-services-and-green-infrastructure/ 
52 https://www.atvbl.com/vijesti/drustvo/minimalna-materijlana-steta-projekti-dali-rezultata-27-5-2019

=== PAGE 68 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 64 
 
 
 
 
tried and proven initiatives in Europe (e.g., “Making Space for Water” in England53 and similar54). During 
feasibility, 21 EbA and non-structural measures were prioritized for implementation based on CBA analysis of an 
original 69 such measures identified by WA’s (See paras 85 & 86 above). Government then selected the next 5 
for financing. Therefore, of the 26 measures, 5 EBA and 13 non-structural measures will be fully financed by 
government, while 8 non-structural measures will be co-funded by GCF and government. Hence there is a 79% 
Government to 21% GCF co-funding ratio of EBA and non-structural measures. This shows a very serious 
commitment of the Government to invest in nature-based solutions. In addition, to address the impact of climate 
change on forest ecosystems (See para 25 above and Section 10.2 of FS) the project is mainstreaming climate-
induced flood risk considerations into forestry policy (See pgs. 233-235 of FS), which is expected to establish 
policies which will protect the forest from the expected impacts of climate change and promote reforestation, 
afforestation, and sustainable forest use. The long-term impact will be enhanced forest eco-systems which will 
provide improved services to flood risk management and other biophysical functions. The project will therefore 
result in improvements in watershed ecosystems and restoration of ecological function through the use of 
innovative EbA strategies which will reverse the deleterious effects of catchment degradation and enhance 
livelihoods of rural communities.  This investment in EbA is an investment in social and economic assets of 
vulnerable communities. The GCF project will be investing in long-term sustainability of communities and their 
social and economic assets through the investment in EbA solutions, and the derived eco-system service attendant 
benefits of improved functions of catchments through effective flood risk management.   
 
192. 
The GCF project will leverage additional investments and create a multiplier effect through the mobilization 
of private sector investment, and co-financing from EIB, government, and other sources. The intervention will attract 
and unlock additional financial flows for climate action in the future through the establishment of risk financing and 
risk transfer mechanisms which will be developed. This will have a catalytic effect on the broader climate finance 
and investment landscape in BiH.  
 
193. 
The project is investing in the development of long-term climate risk financing. The project is developing fully 
articulated long-term municipal risk management plans for 10-12 highest risk municipalities and 1 canton, and 
sector resilience plans for highest risk sectors, which will set the direction for systematic risk informed sectoral flood 
risk management in the future. In addition, the project will develop long-term risk financing mechanisms and 
investment plans. Cost-benefit assessment methodologies and a socio-economic risk model will be embedded into 
the identification and design of climate proofed structural and non-structural measures and will form the basis of 
municipal investment planning. The project is also developing risk transfer mechanisms including disaster 
insurance. Risk financing and risk transfer mechanisms to be developed by the project, will ensure that long-term 
financial and economic resources are identified and available after GCF assistance ends and will ensure cost-
effective financing of flood risk reduction measures, and investments over time. This will result in sustainable 
financing of FRM in B&H. 
 
194. 
Forecast Based Financing mechanisms will be developed and implemented and will identify financial and other 
resources that will be needed during a disaster.  Forecast-based finance mechanisms have emerged as innovative 
approaches in flood risk management.  It will enable early action by utilizing reliable and timely weather forecasts 
and early warning systems. By using advanced forecasting technologies and models being developed by the 
project, these mechanisms will provide lead time to prepare and implement preventive measures before a flood 
event occurs and will allow for timely mobilization of resources, reducing the response time and increasing the 
effectiveness of interventions By acting in advance based on accurate forecasts, forecast-based finance 
mechanisms allow for targeted risk reduction measures. This includes activities such as pre-positioning emergency 
supplies, reinforcing infrastructure, conducting evacuation plans, and implementing community-based early 
warning systems. By focusing on risk reduction, these mechanisms help minimize the potential damage and losses 
caused by floods, ultimately enhancing resilience. Forecast-based finance mechanisms can lead to cost savings 
by avoiding or reducing the need for expensive emergency response and recovery efforts. By investing in 
preventive measures, such as early evacuation or protective measures for critical infrastructure, the costs 
associated with emergency relief, damage repair, and post-flood recovery can be significantly reduce. These 
mechanisms contribute to building and enhancing community resilience by promoting a proactive approach to flood 
risk management and by empowering communities with information, resources, and early action, forecast-based 
finance mechanisms strengthen their capacity to respond effectively to floods and reduce their vulnerability. This, 
in turn, helps communities recover faster and build resilience against future flood events. Forecast-based finance 
 
53 Johnson CL, Priest SJ (2008) Flood risk management in England. A changing landscape of risk responsibility. Int J Water Resour Dev 
24(4):513–525 
54 http://nwrm.eu/guide/files/assets/basic-html/index.html#1

=== PAGE 69 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 65 
 
 
 
 
mechanisms will also support evidence-based decision-making by providing accurate and reliable weather 
forecasts and early warnings. This enables authorities, policymakers, and communities to make informed decisions 
on resource allocation, preparedness measures, and response strategies. Having access to timely and reliable 
information enhances decision-making processes, enabling more efficient and effective flood risk management. 
Furthermore, it will encourage collaboration and partnerships among various stakeholders involved in flood risk 
management, including government agencies, meteorological services, humanitarian organizations, local 
communities, and financial institutions. The collaborative approach fosters knowledge sharing, coordination, and 
joint efforts, leading to better outcomes in terms of flood preparedness, response, and recovery. 
 
195. 
Forecast-based finance mechanisms offer a proactive and risk-informed approach to flood risk management. 
By leveraging weather forecasts and early warning systems, these mechanisms provide opportunities to take early 
action, reduce risks, enhance resilience, and optimize resource allocation, ultimately leading to more effective and 
efficient flood risk management strategies. This contributes directly to financial sustainability by reducing costs of 
responding to flooding, is highly scalable and replicable to all flood prone areas identified by hazard and risk maps.  
 
196. 
In summary, the project is implementing innovative approaches, technologies, and practices that have the 
potential to catalyze systemic change in FRM in B&H. It is introducing novel solutions combined with existing 
approaches in innovative ways to address climate-induced flood risk effectively. This includes implementing 
technological innovations such as impact-based flood forecasting using technologically advanced data products 
and models, development of innovative climate risk financing mechanisms that promote public and private sector 
participation, new approaches to policy and governance through the mainstreaming of climate-induced FRM into 
sectoral plans, strategies and tools and the combination of Nature Based Solutions with existing structural and non-
structural measures with enhanced environmental co-benefits. The project interventions will provide strong 
scalability and replicability impact as they will establish the methods, standards and approaches that will work 
across B&H and define these in guidance, legal and policy documents, and ensuring that the long-term institutional 
capacity for FRM is strengthened. There is at least a threefold replication potential for all project interventions and 
bearing in mind institutional and geographical similarities of all Western Balkans countries, there is also a regional 
replication potential.   
  
197. 
The project will shift the current paradigm by transforming the existing flood risk management practices in B&H 
from an ex-post facto i.e., reactionary post-disaster recovery approach to ex-ante i.e., risk informed preparedness 
approach based on adequate climate information and risk knowledge. 
 
198. The Theory of Change section of this proposal demonstrates how the current barriers can be removed through the 
project activities to achieve transformational change. 
 
 
Contribution to the enabling environment 
199. The project is creating three main categories of enabling conditions for climate resilient communities and their 
physical assets. First, innovative tools and methods will be introduced for hazard, risk and vulnerability 
assessment, modelling and mapping to enhance WBIF modelling and mapping to produce definitive hazard maps 
will be provided for key flood hazard and risk information that will enable climate resilient strategies, policies and 
practices in all sectors in B&H. Development of sector specific operational and flood forecasting modelling tools 
and products will enable sector development along climate resilient development pathways, for the HPP and 
agriculture sectors. 
 
200. The establishment of a fully-integrated impact-based flood forecasting and early warning system across the country 
(Activity 1.3), is also contributing to the enabling environment, through the creation of new climate and weather 
products (e.g. climate advisories) for various users (HPP and agriculture and the establishment of participatory 
“Last Mile” communication solutions tailored to the needs of local communities, including CBEWSs and 
demonstration of cost-effective risk reduction and community resilience measures through the combination of 
structural and non-structural protection measures are relatively new for B&H.  
 
201. Secondly, the project will combine best available science and local knowledge for vulnerability assessment, hazard 
and risk mapping, and will introduce appraisal-led flood risk management and investment planning processes at 
river basin and community levels by introducing cost-benefit analysis methods and tools to embed climate-risk 
informed, appraisal-led methods of strategic planning for Flood Risk Management and climate change adaptation

=== PAGE 70 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 66 
 
 
 
 
and investment planning thus enabling risk informed budgeting and resource allocation. Furthermore, technologies 
will be utilized to create efficiency in this process. The project will enable the application of EBA and non-structural 
solutions by embedding the new methodologies and national technical guidance documents to ensure long-term 
incorporation of such methods alongside more traditional structural measures.  
 
202. Thirdly, the project will create the conditions to unlock both public and private sector finance for scalable 
investments into flood risk reduction. Municipal investment plans based on cost-benefit analysis and appraisal-led 
identification of climate-resilient flood risk management investment requirements will identify both public and 
private finance mechanisms. Such investment planning will enable evidence-based advocacy for public sector 
investment into climate-resilient FRM.  The project will develop a strategy and tools for private sector engagement 
in long-term climate-proof risk management and provide technical assistance to financial institutions to mainstream 
climate change risks into their business models. The project will develop public-private partnerships for long-term 
implementation of risk financing mechanisms for entity-level flood risk financing and resilience strategy. The project 
is developing such risk financing and transfer mechanisms based on detailed socio-economic risk, damages and 
losses assessment.   
 
203. Importantly, the project will improve regulatory environment and tools for the promotion of flood insurance 
alongside seeking solutions for other risk financing and transfer products and tools. This will  include assessment 
of feasibility for micro-insurance for agricultural producers, entrepreneurs and small and medium-sized enterprises 
in different industries; feasibility for a regional disaster risk insurance program to increase the degree of 
diversification of risk; exploration opportunities for use of catastrophe bonds to transfer disaster risk to the capital 
market; sector-specific natural disaster (including floods) insurance product packages for insurance in each of the 
defined sectors, based on studies to estimate cost-benefit. 
 
Contribution to Regulatory Framework and policies 
204. The project will revise and implement several protocols, SOPs, and Codes of Conduct for each of the institutions 
responsible for FRM and FFEWS. These will include SoPs for “last-mile” warning and dissemination and 
communication system, Protocols and SOPs on data generation, data management for FRM, data sharing 
protocols and platform for climate data, across all government institutions in both entities including spatial Data 
Infrastructure to be developed/enhanced to ensure climate data flow/exchange.  
  
205. The project will enhance the existing legislative and regulatory FRM framework by mainstreaming the climate-
induced flood risk management into sectoral planning for agriculture, forestry, environment, hydropower, critical 
infrastructure and spatial planning. A draft floodplain development policy based on detailed climate-risk informed 
flood hazard, risk and vulnerability maps, will be scaled up to spatial planning and development control for all other 
basins. This policy will underpin the floodplain planning and development control to achieve basin-wide climate 
resilience to increasing flood risks and will result in a paradigm shift from uncontrolled floodplain development to 
climate-risk informed controlled floodplain usage. Hence the project will develop the country-wide floodplain zoning 
policy and legislation, based on hazard, risk and vulnerability mapping. 
 
206. The project will develop strategies for the management of critical infrastructure in the floodplain in order to improve 
the resilience of critical infrastructure, based on a shared, consistent, proportionate and risk-based approach to 
reducing vulnerability over time, and embedding flood resilience measures into the planning, design, construction, 
and long-term management of critical infrastructure. The project will enhance/updated climate risk informed 
methodologies, standards for infrastructure design, construction material, use and maintenance of all categories 
of critical infrastructure. 
 
Potential for Knowledge Sharing and learning 
207. The project has particularly strong emphasis on knowledge generation, learning and information 
sharing/dissemination. First, the project will enhance and introduce new hazard and risk assessment modelling 
and mapping tools and generate definitive flood hazard, risk, and vulnerability maps for all basins in B&H. The 
project will train WA and HMI staff in the use and maintenance of these new tools and technologies.  Furthermore, 
the project will develop damage and loss accounting methods, tools, and technologies. 
 
208. The project is generating climate risk information which will be used to increase knowledge and provide information 
for all stakeholders including decision makers in progressing with climate resilient development. To enable wide 
reaching use and application of climate risk information the project is developing data sharing protocols to enable

=== PAGE 71 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 67 
 
 
 
 
data/information exchange between water and other sectors relevant for integrated water management and climate 
change (agriculture, forestry, environment, spatial planning and hydro-energy sectors). 
 
209. To enable access and sharing of climate risk information, a centralized information system and knowledge sharing 
platform will be developed, based on the project SDI and GeoPortal established by the Vrbas project, which 
comprises GIS database for all spatial data related to the basin flood risk management. The GeoPortal is a GIS-
based tool which integrates various spatial socio-economic data with the flood hazard and flood risk maps, 
vulnerability maps including loss/damage models, real time hydro meteorological data, torrents sensitivity model, 
cadaster of torrents etc. The database was designed to be expandable to include other basins. The flood hazard 
information system to be developed under the project will consist of an integrated e-Library, databases (including 
the GIS database previously noted), information systems and knowledge portal. The web knowledge portal will 
help increase awareness, provide interactive hazard maps, with integration with social media and possible mobile 
application to increase community engagement and allow two-way flow of information. The GeoPortal will serve 
the municipalities for local level flood risk management to interact with communities through the PGIS tool within 
the platform and will be placed in the ownership of the entity and municipal civil protection units who will have 
responsibility for maintenance and update of the system in the future. In addition, UNDP has developed a Disaster 
Risk Analysis System which is an online data sharing platform for all disaster data. The project will contribute to 
the development of the platform and the embedding of flood hazard and risk information as well as expansion of 
the platform functionality to provide the specific functionality that will be required or using the flood hazard and risk 
information.  
 
210. The flood risk management platform will be established as a country-wide mechanism for cross-entity, multi-
sectoral and inter-disciplinary coordination and policy guidance on flood risk management and risk reduction with 
public, private, and civil society participation involving all concerned entities within B&H.  The data sharing platform 
will coordinate all stakeholder engagement at the entity and local level and will pursue an all-of-society engagement 
in FRM. It would also have mechanisms for effective dialogue with Local Platforms in place in order to influence, 
encourage and coordinate local action. In parallel, the country-wide Platform will seek to understand local priorities 
and issues.  
 
211. Under Activity 2.4, the project will implement country-wide training programmes in the technical and practical areas 
of flood risk management for practitioners, decision-makers, communities, emergency responders based on 
previous institutional capacity needs and gap assessment of state, entity. The project will embed training in FRM 
and the use of climate risk information in the relevant entity training institutions to improve the technical capacity 
and knowledge base for hazard and flood risk management, based on a Training of Trainers (ToT) through the 
development and establishment of training curricula, and rosters of trainers and the development of mechanisms 
for delivering long-term capacity development such as development of key partnerships with universities and other 
academic research institutions that can be forged to ensure long-term FRM training.  
 
212. The project will implement a knowledge management (KM) framework (See Chapter 11 of the FS for detailed 
description of the KM framework).  It will have the following key aims: 
• 
To ensure access to data and information generated by the project as well as long-term access to data on 
which stakeholders’ essential institutional functions rely and/or data and information that can be used for 
evidence for policy and practice advice (connecting people to information and knowledge)  
• 
Connect key stakeholder groups, practitioners, and experts to ensure that key learning and experience is 
shared within and across sectors (connecting people to people)  
• 
Ensure staff in the stakeholder institutions know about effective and relevant KM techniques so that knowledge 
is shared, captured, and retained by the institutions and shared within and across the sector (institutional KM 
improvement)  
 
213. By developing and promoting KM as a tool for continuous and sustainable improvement and ensuring that KM 
tools generated by the project will be systematically used and maintained within the stakeholder institutions 
(Developing and embedding KM tools and practices). 
 
214. Knowledge Brokerage: The Technical Advisory Working Group (to be comprised of representatives from 
government, private sector, academia and civil society (hydro-meteorological institutes, statistics institutes, 
agricultural institutes, local governments together with associations of cities and municipalities of Republika Srpska 
and Federation of B&H Environmental Protection Funds, the civil society and other local and international NGOs) 
will additionally act as a convener and facilitator linking between government, academia, and private sector to 
create conducive environments to enable the take up of scientific expertise and evidence to be developed by the

=== PAGE 72 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 68 
 
 
 
 
project. Research institutes, academic networks, learned societies, think tanks and charities will be invited, when 
necessary, as secondary members of, or consultees to the working group during the development of evidence-
based policies. Thus, the TAWG will fulfil multiple complimentary functions, such as fostering networks and 
synthesizing evidence, and working at different levels of influence. It will provide the platforms and channels for 
promoting the project results and evidence, through targeted workshops, and information sharing (through many 
of the knowledge management structures discussed above). In addition, the project will seek to engage with other 
organizations and people who can potentially act as knowledge brokers within the TAG 
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
215. The project will deliver sustainable development co-benefits including enhanced ecosystem services, gender 
responsive livelihood enhancement and job creation, and improved resilience of communities’ physical assets. The 
main socio-economic co-benefits from the project investment are derived from the avoided socio-economic 
losses from floods. Under climate change, economic losses from single extreme hazard events are expected to 
reach US$ 750 Million55 Expected Annual Damages (EAD) for households, businesses, agriculture, and public 
buildings, which could significantly impact and reverse socio-economic development gains of B&H. Avoided losses 
to sectors such as agriculture and hydropower could be significant. The project interventions that provide sector-
specific risk information and risk management strategies will be important for the long-term development of the 
hydropower sector; such information as water flow forecasts will be critical for planning, risk information will assist 
with optimizing operations and avoid unplanned and ill-timed releases of water during flood events that have 
deleterious impacts downstream. Climate risk informed planning of the hydropower sector is important nationally 
as it will secure hydropower development and help continue a shift to clean energy, leading to reduction of 
greenhouse gases emission. Climate risk information will also safeguard assets such as transportation (roads and 
bridges) which are critical to the economic development and functioning of communities. By reducing and avoiding 
flood-related losses, the project will help the Government of B&H to reduce and optimize budget spending on 
recovery, improve the use of public funds for disaster preparedness and recovery, and thus releasing public funds 
for socially significant projects and infrastructure. Economic co-benefits will also be realized in the agriculture sector 
which comprises 7.8% of GDP, but on which 20% of population relies and which is at high risk from flood hazards. 
Prevention of agricultural losses, coupled with enhanced agricultural livelihoods through agro-forestry 
opportunities, will result in overall enhanced productivity of the agricultural sector.  
 
216. This project will directly benefit the most vulnerable parts of the population and will have significant benefits to 
gender equality. The project will engage local gender experts to ensure that gender considerations are a key part 
of any consultation or activity planning process. Flooding and disasters in general, impact women 
disproportionately. In B&H there are significant gender inequalities, fueled by traditional gender roles.  Men are 
more than twice as likely as women to be employed, self-employed or engaged in contract work.  For effective 
flood risk management, the project will ensure that women are primary stakeholders and will therefore need to be 
involved in decisions on the types of solutions that are implemented.  The project will therefore safeguard local 
communities and their assets from climate disasters with particular attention to women, and other vulnerable 
groups.  
 
217. Environmental co-benefits mainly relate to EbA strategies and nature-based solutions such as riparian plantings 
and agro-forestry which will provide water retention functions; regulation of hydrological flows (buffer runoff, soil 
infiltration, groundwater recharge, maintenance of base flows); natural hazard mitigation (e.g. flood prevention, 
peak flow reduction, soil erosion and landslide control); increased streambed stabilization resulting in decreased 
erosion, habitat preservation, and reforestation. The project will increase the resilience of vulnerable people, 
properties, infrastructure, and economic sectors. Further, the project will enhance the resilience of forest 
ecosystems, including protected areas, as well as protect streams, reservoirs and lakes from siltation and thus, 
aquatic fauna from increased turbidity. The project is addressing climate-induced flood risks by introducing FRM 
and CCA measures. In general, the project is providing key environmental protection benefits through the 
introduction of disaster risk reduction, climate change adaptation and protection of people, property, and the 
environment from major hazards. In the long-run the project will bring about significant environmental benefits by 
 
55 Socio-economic impact of floods under current and climate change conditions in B&H was done as part of Feasibility Study (See Section 
2.6 Annex 2)

=== PAGE 73 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 69 
 
 
 
 
increasing the country’s resilience to climate-induced flood disasters and thus, enabling its population to better 
protect national assets, including environmental assets (land, forest and land resources). 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
218. B&H is a middle-income country with an estimated 3.5 million inhabitants. The 1992-1995 war has had a 
devastating impact on its human, social and economic resources, leading to enormous challenges of the post-war 
reconstruction and economic and social recovery. This challenge has been further compounded by the transition 
towards market economy requiring structural reforms and improved governance. B&H has a transitional economy 
with limited market reforms. The economy relies heavily on the export of metals, energy, textiles, and furniture as 
well as on remittances and foreign aid. Poor coordination among various government levels hampers economic 
policy coordination and reform, while excessive bureaucracy and a segmented market discourage foreign 
investment. The economy is among the least competitive in the region. The national currency (BKM) introduced in 
1998 - is pegged to the euro through a currency board arrangement, which has maintained confidence in the 
currency and has facilitated reliable trade links with European partners. In 2016, B&H began a three-year IMF loan 
program, but it has struggled to meet the economic reform benchmarks required to receive all funding instalments. 
Interethnic warfare in Bosnia and Herzegovina caused production to plummet by 80% from 1992 to 1995 and 
unemployment to soar, but the economy made progress until 2008, when the global economic crisis caused a 
downturn. Since 2013, B&H has posted positive economic growth, though severe flooding in 2014 significantly 
hampered the recovery.   
 
219. Due to the war time devastation and a slow transition of economy, a large part of B&H’s population still lives in 
poverty (population living below the poverty line is 16.9% (2015 est.)). Between 2000 and 2019, B&H’s HDI value 
increased from 0.672 to 0.780, an increase of 14.9 percent.  However, when discounted for inequality, the B&H 
HDI falls to 0.667, a loss of 14.5 percent due to inequality in the distribution of the HDI dimension indices. The 
Human inequality coefficient for B&H is equal to 15.3 percent. B&H has a Gender Inequality Index value of 0.149, 
ranking it 38 out of 162 countries in 2019. The slow rate of the post-war economic recovery has been compounded 
by the negative impacts of climate change on key sectors such as agriculture, energy (hydropower), the 
environment, in particular, due to the increased frequency and magnitude of flood disasters, which have tripled in 
the last decade.  In 2010 the second largest flood on record caused damages of US$ 200 million or approximately 
1% of GDP. In May 2014, B&H experienced its worst flooding in 150 years which resulted in 26 deaths and US$2.7 
Billion worth of damages (15% of GDP). 
   
220. The most damaging floods have had devastating impacts on the most vulnerable groups including the rural poor, 
war returnees and displaced persons. Based on indicative information from local authorities, a significant proportion 
of the flood victims belong to one of these vulnerable groups.  For example, in several municipalities in the Vrbas 
basin up to 100% of affected households have been identified as war returnees or displaced persons who are least 
equipped to cope with and recover from floods. This has led to a deepening of poverty in flood affected areas. 
Climate change and climate-induced floods have a significant impact on the most important economic sectors such 
as agriculture, water management, hydropower, and limits country’s already low adaptive capacity. Please refer to 
Annex 7 (stakeholder consultations) for the evidence of consultations with beneficiary communities on their 
vulnerability and needs. 
 
221. Annex G of the FS provides a detailed assessment of the institutional capacity in all key aspects of flood risk 
management. B&H institutions and professionals do not have adequate experience in identifying hazard and 
assessing vulnerability and risk from natural disasters in line with international standards. Complex and fragmented 
institutional structure, and a lack of coordination and cooperation hinders successful implementation of those 
actions.  The lack of horizontal (between entities and among sectors within the same entity) and vertical (among 
state, entity, cantonal and municipal levels) communication within the water management sector further limits 
effective cross-sectoral climate risk management. Institutional capacity gaps in B&H include: The need to 
strengthen the hydrometric monitoring on which the strategic assessment and forecasting of flood risk relies, 
develop, and disseminate definitive flood risk maps, and climate risk data products and develop the institutional 
technical and financial and human resources to develop and implement a range of modern flood risk management 
strategies including EbA, non-structural and structural measures.  The project is addressing these institutional gaps 
by i) implementing FFEWS according to revised and agreed institutional arrangements, roles, and responsibilities 
for FFEWS (See Section 6.5 of FS); ii) developing the protocols for effective FFEWS and FRM to strengthen 
coordination and eliminate institutional fragmentation; iii) Implementing a number of state-of the art technologies, 
equipment and tools, developing a capacity building plan and framework and undertaking training.

=== PAGE 74 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
 
 
 
 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
222. 
The proposal development is initiated at the request of the Government of B&H and builds upon a very strong 
national ownership. B&H became a party to the UNFCCC on 6 December 2000, and since then has worked to 
establish an appropriate political, institutional, and legal framework to meet its obligations under the Convention. 
B&H adopted the ‘Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs)’ under the Paris Agreement in October 
2015 for the period until 2030. The Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) of B&H was prepared in November 
2020. B&H NDC includes a section on climate change adaptation and the updated section on contribution to climate 
change mitigation. The NDC identifies the sectors that are most vulnerable to climate change including: agriculture, 
water resources, forestry, energy, tourism, biodiversity and sensitive ecosystems, and human health with the two 
most vulnerable sectors being are agriculture and water resources management. The NDC highlights the 
importance of detailed planning of short, medium and long-term adaptation measures, development of climate risk 
financing mechanisms, and strengthening the responsible institutions in monitoring, analysis and modelling of 
climate risk.  B&H’s first Climate Change Adaptation and Low Emission Development Strategy (CCALEDS), 
adopted by the Council of Ministers of B&H on 8th October 2013 is a key policy document informing the national 
adaptation priorities and details measures for adaptation to climate change and capacity building needs, with the 
aim of providing a strategic and programme basis for effective international support. The Strategy includes four 
outcomes covering climate change risks, vulnerabilities and opportunities for evidence-based policy development, 
effective institutional and regulatory framework, mainstreaming CCA approaches into decision making, and 
effective resourcing with timely and effective implementation.  Increasing flood risk is identified in the Strategy 
among the key climate change impacts, the Strategy highlights an increasing vulnerability of population and 
ecosystems as well as agricultural sector and HPPs to climate-induced floods. The CCALEDS was updated in 2020 
and includes adaptation priorities for 2020 to 203056. The Strategy has the following high level outcomes:  Outcome 
1: Climate change risks, vulnerabilities and opportunities are reliably identified, quantified and effectively 
communicated, supporting evidence-based policy development; Outcome 2: An effective institutional and 
regulatory framework supporting adaptation, coupled with delivery capacity, is addressing climate change risks and 
opportunities across sectors; Outcome 3: Adaptation approaches are mainstreamed into decision-making, 
implemented and their objectives and planned delivery are understood by an informed society; Outcome 4: A well-
resourced Adaptation Strategy being implemented on time, effectively, and delivering the expected outcomes. The 
proposed project directly contributes to the stated outcomes of the CCALEDS 2020-2030 strategy.  In particular, 
Output 1 of the project is developing the risk knowledge base through monitoring modelling, mapping and 
forecasting flood risk.  It is also developing the data sharing platforms and coordination mechanisms for 
dissemination and use of climate risk information while under Output 2 the project is mainstreaming climate risk 
information into sectoral policies, thus contributing to evidence-based policy development. GCF Output 2 is 
strengthening the institutional and regulatory framework and building capacities for climate risk informed FRM, 
adaptation and resilience building. In addition, the project is supporting the development of the risk financing and 
risk transfer mechanisms which will ensure a well-resources investment framework for adaptation to flood risk The 
proposed project activities aligns with CCA-LEDS 2020-2030 adaptation priority outputs 1.1, 1.3, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 
3.2, 3.12, 3.13, 3.16. 
 
223. 
The European Floods Directive on the assessment and management of flood risks (2007/60/EC) (EUFD) was 
adopted to address flood risk which was not included in the European Water Framework Directive (2000/60 / EC) 
(WFD), and an important issue within integrated water resources management. The directive entered into force 
with the main aim of reducing the risk of floods and taking into account the impact of future climate change on flood 
risk, in order to reduce the harmful effects on human health, economic activities, as well as the environment and 
cultural heritage. The EUFD provides a framework for flood risk assessment and management and reaffirms the 
public's right to access information and to participate in the planning process.  The EUFD framework is comprised 
of 3 stages – Stage 1 - Carry out a preliminary flood risk assessment (PFRA); Stage 2 - Prepare flood hazard maps 
and flood risk maps and Stage 3 - Establish flood risk management plans (FRMP). The proposed project activities 
under “Output 1: Climate-informed impact-based FFEWS and an increased generation and use of climate data to 
reduce vulnerability to flood related disasters” are fully aligned with Stages 1& 2 of EUFD. Namely, project activities 
under Activity 1.2 aim to review and enhance development of hydrologic and hydraulic modeling for the 
development of continuous full scale country flood hazard maps which will be used to develop flood risk maps, 
therefore increasing its alignment with EUFD. Under Activity 1.3 the project aims to upgrade existing FFEWS to 
include all remaining major basins, therefore improving flood risk management for whole country. All activities under 
“Output 2: Non-structural flood risk reduction measures and nature-based solutions mainstreamed in sectoral 
policies and plans and effectively contribute to protection of people and livelihoods from climate-induced flood risk” 
 
56 The 2020-2030 Climate Change Adaptation and Low Emission Development Strategy for Bosnia and Herzegovina, December 2020.

=== PAGE 75 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 71 
 
 
 
 
have complementary elements to EUFD which includes implementation of non-structural measures recognized in 
PFRM as well as develop long-term institutional capacity development plans for climate resilient FRM. 
 
224. 
B&H is working on the project ‘Advance the National Adaptation Plan (NAP) process for medium-term 
investment planning in climate sensitive sectors in Bosnia-Herzegovina’. The NAP builds on the country’s 
CCALEDS of 2013 and advances adaptation planning in B&H with a focus on sectoral approaches, upgrading the 
knowledge base for adaptation, prioritizing adaptation interventions for the medium term, building institutional 
capacities for integrating climate change adaptation, and demonstrating innovative ways of financing adaptation at 
entity, cantonal and local government levels. 
 
225. As a response to devastating 2014 floods, B&H Council of Ministers in November 2014 adopted an Action Plan for 
Flood Protection and River Management (2014-2021). The project is a direct response to the priorities that have 
emerged from the B&H National Communications, CCALEDS and Action Plan for Flood Protection and River 
Management, which indicate that problems of floods has been exacerbating in the last years and is expected to 
become progressively more serious due to climate change.  
 
226. Strong country ownership is also demonstrated by significant government co-financing commitments. Co-financing 
support for the project will be provided by the Republika Srpska government through an EIB loan of US$21.5 Million 
for structural measures and additionally through US$36.0 Million of the public funds to be provided by both 
Governments of FB&H and RS for co-financing of EbA measures, the O&M of structural measures, hydrometric 
equipment, and modelling and FFEWS systems. 
   
227. To initiate the development of this project, a UNDP-GEF technical mission was undertaken in March 2018. Since 
then regular consultations with the key national and regional authorities and with B&H GCF NDA have been 
conducted. The NDA, as well as other relevant institutions in charge of environment and water/flood management 
expressed an interest in developing a new project proposal with UNDP on flood risk management based on the 
outcomes of the existing Vrbas River project. B&H is about to initiate development of its first GCF country 
programme. However, the B&H GCF NDA has already confirmed that the proposed project is a priority for the GCF 
programming in B&H through its letter to GCF submitted in May 2019. This project has been given priority in near-
term programming.  
 
228. Further consultations were conducted with all key stakeholders in July and September 2018 when the Idea Note 
was presented and finalized at joint workshops.  The Project idea was also presented in detail to the Project Boards 
of Vrbas and NAP projects consisting of GCF NDA and representatives of the ministries in charge of water 
management and environment. These discussions informed the development of the Concept Note, which involved 
all relevant institutions in B&H: the GCF NDA, ministries in charge of water management, water agencies and 
hydro-meteorological institutes. Validation meeting for the Concept Note engaging all relevant stakeholders was 
held on 5 February 2019, all stakeholders expressed their support to the proposal.  In addition, separate meetings 
were held with HPP representatives who showed a great interest and willingness to be part of the project.  
Validation meeting for the Full Proposal engaging all relevant stakeholders was held on 16 October 2019, all 
stakeholders expressed their support to the proposal. In addition, separate meetings were held with HPP 
representatives, entity ministries of agriculture and forestry and municipalities, who showed a great interest and 
willingness to be part of the project (See Annex 7). 
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
229. The project addresses the fundamental barriers to achieving resilience to climate-induced floods through the 
provision of technical capacities, policies and legislative enhancements, and by investing in structural and non-
structural risk reduction measures, including EbA approaches. The combination of interventions related to 
ecosystem-based approaches and structural measures, as proposed by this project, has been shown to lead to 
significantly larger improvements in resilience to communities, compared to an approach focusing on one of those 
strategies. By addressing the capacity to undertake risk assessment and monitoring and to generate missing 
climate risk information, the project will lay the foundation for efficient and risk-informed flood risk management in 
the future. In addition, by addressing the legislative and policy gaps, the project is ensuring long-term sustainability 
of project interventions. Furthermore, the adoption of this holistic and integrated approach that addresses all the 
root causes, will have long-term efficiency and effectiveness benefits, compared to the ad hoc, ex-post, non-
climate-responsive approach to flood risk management that is currently undertaken. Climate induced extreme 
events are estimated to result in $21.1 Million USD Expected Annual Damages (EAD) for households, businesses,

=== PAGE 76 ===
D 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 72 
 
 
 
 
agriculture and public buildings annually or $ 422.7 Million USD Expected Annual Damages (EAD) for 20 years of 
project, while the cost of the project is $72.7 Million USD.  
 
230. Of the project’s total proposed budget of $72.69 million, GCF funding represents 19.8% of the estimated project 
cost and co-financing 80.2% (please see section B.5 for details on financing structure), 42% or $30.74 Million is 
proposed to be provided by the Government of B&H and 29% of the necessary budget resources is to be provided 
by the EIB in the form of senior loans. Government of B&H, in spite of its economic and budget constraints 
mentioned above, bringing in substantial resources to the project demonstrates its commitment to the project and 
more strongly its moral responsibility to provide flood forecasting and early warning system (FFEWS) as an 
essential service to the population. 
 
231. The most damaging floods in B&H (2010 – 1% of GDP and 2015 – 15% have had devastating impacts on the most 
vulnerable groups including the rural poor, war returnees and displaced persons. The proposed project has the 
potential to prevent loss of life, property and critical infrastructure assets for 902,906 people representing 
approximately 26% of the entire population of B&H and 44% of the population of the 69 municipalities covered by 
the targeted sub-basins. This project will increase resilience and enhance livelihoods of the most vulnerable 
segments of population, particularly women (51.7%), children (15.2%) and the elderly (13.7% of the affected 
population). At a total project cost of $72.69 million, this project aims to provide climate resilient flood risk protection 
and early warning system support at a cost of $80.5 per direct beneficiary, which is comparable to other projects 
of similar nature.  
 
232. Based on detailed economic analysis (Annex 3), the project has an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 
19.3%57. The economic analysis of the project was carried out in accordance with the Guidelines for the Economic 
Analysis of Projects of United Nations Development Program.58 The economic efficiency of the investment was 
determined by computing the economic net present value (NPV) with an assumed 10% discount rate, and the 
economic internal rate of return (EIRR). The economic analysis was conducted at both the national level, and then 
for each of the sub-basin included in the proposed investment project. The analysis shows that the proposed 
investment project is economically efficient as measured by NPV and IRR. The analysis also shows the proposed 
interventions are economically efficient in each of the sub-basins targeted by the project, with the exception of 
the Vrbas sub-basin which shows an EIRR slightly lower than 10%.  Three different types of sensitivity 
analysis were conducted and demonstrated that the economic efficiency of the project as a whole is robust. There 
is thus a great level of confidence that the proposed investment project is economically efficient in each sub-basin 
of the target area, and as a whole. 
 
233. GCF investment will catalyze US$ 57.5 million of co-financing from public and private sector. The project partners 
and beneficiaries will also secure O&M costs against all project supported infrastructure and hydrometric 
equipment. The public-good nature of this project outputs doesn’t entail significant revenue generation or cost 
recovery from the project although the project will support engagement of the public sector for limited cost-recovery 
to cover the operation and maintenance of monitoring and early warning systems. Where income generation 
opportunities might occur indirectly because of project outcomes, these would apply directly to the beneficiaries 
(for instance, improved agricultural productivity), primarily as household income.  
 
234. 
Overall, the proposed solutions are based on successful best practices, community ownership, and synergies 
across the three outputs and inter-related activities and build upon ongoing efforts to ensure their efficiency and 
cost-effectiveness. The proposed activities and interventions will reach 902,906 people or 26% of the population 
at risk from flooding and will indirectly benefit 100% of the population through better economic resilience and stable 
GDP in the face of flood events. 
 
 
57 The full Economic Analysis is provided in Annex 3a and b.   
58 UNDP. 2015. Guidance on the conduct and reporting of the Economic and Financial Analysis of Climate Change 
Adaptation and Mitigation Projects and Programmes. UNDP.

=== PAGE 77 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 73 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
 
E.1. Project/Programme Focus 
☐ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
 
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/programme will contribute (Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Scale 
FRM is currently done in a largely non-
integrated manner by the relevant 
institutions in B&H, FRM covers mainly main 
river fluvial flooding and does not take 
account of torrential floods which is 
prevalent on small flashy upland 
catchments, nor groundwater flooding, nor 
HPP operation flood risk. FRM is currently 
limited in approach and is mainly focused on 
response, and limited implementation of 
costly, non-climate risk-informed structural 
measures.  
Spatial coverage of the hydrometeorological 
monitoring network is incomplete and needs 
technological upgrades.  Availability and 
access to  flood risk information is limited.  
The flood forecasting and early warning 
system is  incomplete,  fragmented and non-
Low 
A nation-wide integrated risk-
informed and climate-responsive 
approach to flood risk 
management will be established. 
The FRM capacities and 
coverage of the FFEWS 
established by the Vrbas project 
and other baseline projects will 
be scaled-up to national scale. 
The FFEWS will be extended to 
cover torrential floods and HPPs 
flood risk and will be impact-
based. 
FRM will be undertaken in an 
integrated manner, including the 
national integrated flood 
forecasting and EWS with 
effective last-mile communication 
in place.  All FRM stakeholders 
The following project activities will contribute to the paradigm shift 
through scaling-up FRM solutions:  
 
Activity 1.1. Upgrade and expand the coverage of the 
hydrometric network for enhanced monitoring of climate 
variables in Category I catchments and torrential streams 
contributes to the geographic and technological scaling up of the 
FFEWS in B&H 
 
Activity 1.2 . Enhance climate-induced flood hazard, risk and 
vulnerability information for strategic risk management and 
sound decision making for climate induced flood management  
-  Under this activity, the EUFD maps will be enhanced to include 
flood risk from torrential streams, and HPPs, thus extending the 
technical scale/scope of hazard, risk and vulnerability information. 
 
Activity 1.3 Develop an integrated impact-based centralized and 
community-based flood forecasting and early warning system.- 
The project will develop impact based FFEWS for main rivers which

=== PAGE 78 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 74 
 
 
 
 
 
impact-based, covering only Vrbas and Una-
Sana basins.  
Baseline projects (see para 39 above) were 
limited in scope and/or geographical extent 
and budget, which in-turn, limited their 
transformational potential. 
 
will have access to flood risk 
information for decision making 
and sectoral planning. Flood risk 
will be mainstreamed into key 
sectoral plans. Combination of 
structural, non-structural and 
EbA approaches to FRM with 
sufficient investment for 
implementing necessary 
measures.  
will be scalable to cover sub-basins as necessary. Importantly, the 
flood forecasting will include all relevant flooding mechanisms and 
will also be scaled to provide specific sector flood forecasting 
products for Hydropower and agriculture sectors.   
 
Activity 2.1 Mainstream climate induced flood risk reduction into 
sectoral 
planning 
(agriculture, 
hydropower, 
critical 
infrastructure) and spatial planning - The project is mainstreaming 
climate risk reduction into key sectors, which can be scaled up to 
cover more sectors in the future.   
  
Activity 3.1 Develop investment framework for climate induced 
flood risk reduction and management and will lay the ground and 
identify financing framework for further replication and scaling up of 
climate-informed FRM at the national level.   
 
Replicability 
Currently there is limited capacity to 
replicate successful FRM project-based 
initiatives (such as Vrbas) due to lack of 
sustainable financing for FRM, despite the 
high replicability value of Vrbas project, 
which established a Vrbas basin-level 
integrated FRM framework.   
Low 
Strengthened institutional and 
technical capacities, financing 
frameworks, and enabling 
environment for climate informed 
FRM will enable replication of 
results throughout B&H. The  
project will replicate successful 
technologies and practices 
piloted by the earlier project and 
will further extend these by 
introducing new technologies 
and innovations such as Impact-
based forecasting (IBF), 
forecast-based financing (FbF), 
blended risk financing and risk 
transfer mechanisms. The 
project will establish new 
partnerships with the private 
sector to leverage and scale up 
climate informed FRM 
investments, and  will embed 
methods for, and implement 
Activity 1.3 Develop an integrated impact-based centralized and 
community-based flood forecasting and early warning system. - 
Under this activity CBEWS will be developed for 60 high-risk 
communities which can be replicated to other communities.   
 
Activity 1.4: Develop and implement protocols and SoPs on data 
generation, data management and communication for effective 
impact based FFEWS and flood risk management contributes to 
the uptake and replication of technical and institutional FFEWS 
solutions across B&H. 
 
Activity 2.2 Implement and mainstream new ecosystem-based 
flood risk reduction and climate change adaptation methods. – 
The project is implementing 21 prioritised non-structural and EBA 
measures with significant potential for replicating in other basins 
using the standardised designs being developed under Activity 2.3. 
Codify and mainstream EbA solutions into policies and 
regulations and promote non-structural measures among 
decision-makers and communities.   
 
Activity 3.3 Implement climate-proof structural flood risk 
reduction and anti-erosion interventions in Vrbas, Una-Sana,

=== PAGE 79 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 75 
 
 
 
 
 
climate resilient structural 
measures as well as eco-system 
based non-structural measures.  
The project will develop/update, 
codify and embed new SOPs, 
institutional guidelines and 
methodologies for the adoption 
and replication of new methods 
and technologies. These 
initiatives will ensure continued 
practice of embedded integrated 
FRM and enable the project to 
be highly replicable within B&H 
and across the region.   
Bosna and Drina River basins – GCF funds are being used to 
climate proof the designs of structural measures which will be 
financed by the Government through the EiB loan. The methods for 
using climate risk information in the design of flood structural 
measures will be developed under Activity 2.1 and will provide the 
basis for replication in the future. Replication will be possible as a 
result of Activities 3.1 and 3.2, which build financing and 
investment framework/plans for the FRM at the national, cantonal 
and municipal level.    
 
Sustainability 
Flood risk management in B&H has been 
undertaken mainly through donor-funded 
projects implemented by or in partnership 
with relevant ministries.  In some cases, the 
sustainability of these initiatives has been 
limited due to the limited technical and 
geographic scope of such projects and lack 
of sustainable government financing to 
continue the initiatives beyond the life of the 
projects.  Long-term O&M financing for 
equipment, technologies and FRM structural 
and non-structural measures is lacking.  
Long-term financing for the regular update, 
generation, sharing of climate risk 
information and for development of regular 
update of technical standards and guidelines 
is lacking.  Long-term continuous capacity 
development and continued professional 
development in the field of FRM is missing.  
Low 
 
Long-term technical, financial 
and institutional capacities for 
FRM are strengthened and 
mechanisms in place for long-
term O&M of equipment and 
technologies, continued capacity 
development. O&M plans and 
Capacity development plans 
established and updated 
regularly.  Method, tools and 
technology embedded into the 
relevant institutions, for the long-
term generation, updating and 
availability of climate risk 
information.  Platforms for 
sharing climate risk information 
and collaboration on FRM 
established and functional and 
include all-of-government and all-
sectors stakeholders.  
Activity 1.1 Upgrade and expand the coverage of the 
hydrometric network for enhanced monitoring of climate 
variables - Under Sub-activity 1.1.3 the project will set-up 
sustainable operation and maintenance O&M for the network and 
under Sub-Activity 1.1.4 will develop long-term financing 
mechanisms for the maintenance of the hydrometric network.  This 
will ensure the sustainability of the rehabilitated hydrometric 
monitoring network on which all FRM activities will rely in the future.   
 
Activity 1.2. Enhance climate-induced flood hazard, risk and 
vulnerability information for strategic risk management and 
sound decision making for climate induced flood management 
- This activity will ensure the definitive climate risk information which 
will ensure that climate risk activities and decision making will result 
in sustainable solutions.  It will also embed the method, tools and 
technology into the relevant institutions, to ensure long-term 
generation, updating and availability of climate risk information.  
Activity 1.4 Develop and implement protocols and SoPs on 
data generation, data management and communication for 
effective impact based FFEWS and flood risk management, will 
provide the basis for institutional collaboration, and data sharing on 
FRM in the future.

=== PAGE 80 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 76 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub-Activity 1.3.4: Develop and implement a capacity 
development plan for embedding flood hazard and risk 
modelling approaches and FFEWS into appropriate institutions 
in B&H, which in particular will Conduct FFEWS training on the new 
system for all institutions involved in FFEWS as identified by 
institutional mapping and institutional arrangement plan for FFEWS 
and Activity 2.4 Review and strengthen institutional capacity 
and develop long-term institutional capacity development 
plans for climate resilient FRM will develop the institutional 
capacity development plan for long term FRM in B&H and will 
conduct training on proposed FRM policy and sectoral FRM.  The 
long-term CDP will ensure sustainability and continuous upgrading 
of capacities for FRM.   
 
Activity 2.1 Mainstream climate induced flood risk reduction 
into sectoral planning (agriculture, hydropower, critical 
infrastructure) and spatial planning - mainstreaming climate 
risk reduction into key sectors will strengthen the policy 
framework for FRM and result in sustainable FRM in the future. 
 
Activity 2.2 Implement and mainstream new ecosystem-based 
flood risk reduction and climate change adaptation methods 
and 2.3. Codify and mainstream EbA solutions into policies 
and regulations and promote non-structural measures will build 
the natural capital of B&H and provide improved eco-system 
services which will be more sustainable than traditional hard 
structural measures which inevitably have a limited lifespan.   
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
 
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final59 
 
59 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the target value at the end 
of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.

=== PAGE 81 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 77 
 
 
 
 
 
Choose an item. 
Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
Periodic condition inspection 
and performance evaluation 
reports of Water Agencies and 
Hydrometeorological Institutes 
of structural, non-structural 
and EBA measures and of the 
FFEWS. Independent 
evaluation of the operations 
and performance of the impact 
based FFEWS; independent 
evaluation reports; project 
reports 
 
0 
Direct: 399,723 
(203,858 women, 
195,864 men) 
 
Indirect: 998,622 
people (0.505 
million women; 
0.485 million men)   
 
Direct: 799,445 
people (407, 717 
women, 391,728 
men) 
 
Indirect: 1,977,244 
people (1.01 
million women; 
0.969 million men)   
Methodology for estimating 
adaptation beneficiaries is 
summarised in Annex 22. 
Based on PFRA hazard maps 
combined with physical and socio-
economic data for all receptors, 
socio-economic risk modelling has 
been undertaken to estimate the 
beneficiaries of the project under 
baseline and climate change 
(2050) scenarios for each of the 
five most vulnerable sub-basins in 
B&H (Una-Sana, Vrbas, Bosna, in 
the Sava basin, and Neretva and 
Trebišnjica in the Adriatic Sea 
basin)60. The modeling shows that 
799,445 people and 272,811 
households are currently at risk 
from floods. Under climate change, 
by 2050 the number of affected 
people and households will 
increase to 902,906 people and 
306,907 households. A 
conservative estimate of 799,445 
beneficiaries (i.e. present day 
population at risk) is used as this is 
the number that will benefit by the 
end of the 6- year GCF project. 
The maximum indirect 
beneficiaries is estimated as the 
rest of the population, given that 
people in low risk areas will also 
have access to the early warnings 
via the same media and can act 
accordingly when in at risk areas.  
The rest of the population also will 
benefit from reduced flood 
economic damages and losses, as 
this has an indirect impact on GDP 
when there is a need to 
rebuild/rehabilitate infrastructure 
after every flood etc. Therefore, 
 
60 See Section 2.3 and Annex E of the FS.

=== PAGE 82 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 78 
 
 
 
 
 
population at large will benefit from 
the reduced disruption of 
businesses, logistics and 
infrastructure, reduced budget 
spendings on recovery and 
compensations. However, a 
conservative estimate of 80% of 
the rest of the population is used 
as the number of indirect 
beneficiaries. 
It is assumed that the occurrence 
of major extreme weather or 
seismic events do not deviate 
project trajectory and that  
Relevant government agencies 
cooperate on the implementation 
of all project interventions.  
 
ARA1 Most 
vulnerable people 
and communities 
 
Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
Independent evaluation of the 
operations and performance of 
the structural, non-structural 
and EBA measures in 
protection the most vulnerable 
communities. Periodic 
condition inspection and 
performance evaluation 
reports of Water Agencies and 
Hydrometeorological Institutes 
of structural, non-structural 
and EBA measures 
Independent Impact Evaluation 
surveys and reports which will 
assess change in vulnerability 
of communities at project mid-
term and end-term compared 
to baseline.  
 
0 
Direct: 11,25861 
people (5,513 
men; 5,745 
women)  
protected from 
extreme floods 
through structural 
and EbA 
measures in 5 
basins (Vrbas, 
Una-Sana, Bosna, 
Neretva and 
Trebisnjica river 
basins) 
 
Indirect: 370,670 
(189,041 women, 
181,628 men) 
people living in the 
municipalities 
Direct: 22,516 
people (11,026 
men; 11,490 
women)  
protected from 
extreme floods 
through structural 
and EbA 
measures in 5 
basins (Vrbas, 
Una-Sana, Bosna, 
Neretva and 
Trebisnjica river 
basins) 
 
Indirect: 741,339 
(378,083 women, 
363,256 men) 
people living in the 
municipalities 
Methodology for estimating 
adaptation direct beneficiaries is 
summarised in Annex 22. 
Modelling and consultation with 
Water Agencies was undertaken to 
identify the most vulnerable 
communities where structural, non-
structural measures and EBA 
measures could provide protection 
and save lives, in addition to the 
early warning system. Number of 
beneficiaries is defined through the 
modeling and preliminary design of 
the proposed flood protection 
measures. Direct beneficiaries are 
those who will be directly protected 
by flood protection interventions. 
Indirect beneficiaries are remaining 
present day population at risk in 
the municipalities where the 
interventions will be implemented 
and who will benefit through 
reduced loss and disruption to 
 
61 Please see sections 18.9 and 18.10 of the FS which provide detailed descriptions of the methodologies used to calculate the benefits of the 21 non-structural and 10 structural measures that will 
be implemented under the project.

=== PAGE 83 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 79 
 
 
 
 
 
where structural 
and EBA 
protection 
measures will be 
implemented  
 
 
 
where structural 
and EBA 
protection 
measures will be 
implemented  
 
 
 
 
critical infrastructure assets and 
reduced disruption of 
logistics/businesses by the end of 
the 6-year project. 
Assumptions: 
The occurrence of major extreme 
weather or seismic events do not 
deviate projected trajectory 
Relevant government agencies 
cooperate on the implementation 
of the FFEWS, data management 
and EbA measures 
 
 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
 
Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
Project reports  
Independent evaluation of the 
operations and performance of 
the impact based FFEWS 
 
0 
Direct:  388,465 
(198,117 women, 
190,348 men) with 
access to early 
warnings; 
 
Indirect: 997,628 
people (0.51 
Million women; 
0.49 Million men)   
 
Direct: 776,929 
(396,234 women, 
380,695 men)) 
with access to 
early warnings 
 
Indirect: 1,995,257 
people (1.02 
Million women; 
0.978 Million men)   
Methodology for estimating 
adaptation beneficiaries is 
summarised in Annex 22. 
The total direct beneficiaries are 
people at risk of flooding whose 
health, wellbeing, food and water 
security will be improved as a 
result of enhanced access to 
timely early warning and climate 
information.  It is calculated as the 
present-day population at risk 
minus beneficiaries of the 
structural, non-structural and EbA 
measures to avoid double counting 
of beneficiaries.     
Indirect beneficiaries are estimated 
as the rest of the population of 
BiH, given that people in low risk 
areas will also have access to the 
early warnings and climate 
information via the same media 
and can act accordingly when in at

=== PAGE 84 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 80 
 
 
 
 
 
risk areas. They will therefore also 
have indirect health, wellbeing, 
livelihoods, food and water security 
benefits.  In order to avoid double 
counting of direct and indirect 
beneficiaries, people who will 
benefit from both structural/EBA 
flood protection measures 
(included under ARA 1) and also 
from the FFEWS were excluded 
from the estimation of direct 
beneficiaries under ARA 2.  In 
addition, a conservative estimate 
of 80% of the rest of the population 
is used as the number of indirect 
beneficiaries. 
 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
 
Supplementary 2.4: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) covered 
by new or improved 
early warning systems 
 
Project reports  
Independent evaluation of the 
operations and performance of 
the impact based FFEWS 
 
Currently 156,973 at 
risk people (80,056 
women and 76,917 
males) in Una-Sana 
basin and 213,740 
(109,007 women 
and 104, 733 males) 
in Vrbas basin (41% 
of total at risk 
population) covered 
by FFEWS. 
 
Direct:  388,465 
(198,117 women, 
190,348 men) with 
access to early 
warnings; 
 
 
Direct: 776,929 
(396,234 women, 
380,695 men)) 
with access to 
early warnings 
 
 
Methodology for estimating 
adaptation beneficiaries is 
summarised in Annex 22. 
The number of beneficiaries by the 
end of the 6-year project is 
calculated as the present-day 
population at risk minus 
beneficiaries of the structural, non-
structural and EbA measures to 
avoid double counting of 
beneficiaries.     
The occurrence of major extreme 
weather or seismic events do not 
deviate projected trajectory 
Relevant government agencies 
cooperate on the implementation 
of the FFEWS, data management 
and EbA measures

=== PAGE 85 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 81 
 
 
 
 
 
ARA3 Intrastructure 
and built environment 
 
Core 3: Value of 
physical assets made 
more resilient to the 
effects of climate 
change and/or more 
able to reduce GHG 
emissions 
Independent evaluation of the 
standard of protection provided 
by the project-implemented 
measures.   
 
 
0 
 
$250.9 Million 
USD value of 
household assets 
and $54.5 Million 
USD value of 
business assets 
made more 
resilient to the 
effects of climate 
change in 6 target 
basins by 
structural, non-
structural and EbA 
measures; 
Una/Sana,  
Vrbas, Bosna, 
Sava/Ukrina, 
Drina,  
Neretva/treb  
$501.8 Million 
USD value of 
household assets 
and $109 Million 
USD value of 
business assets 
made more 
resilient to the 
effects of climate 
change in 6 target 
basins by 
structural, non-
structural and EbA 
measures; 
Una/Sana, Vrbas, 
Bosna, 
Sava/Ukrina, 
Drina,  
Neretva/treb 
Structural and non-structural 
measures meet their design 
standards in reducing the risks to 
population and reduction in 
agricultural and other economic 
losses. 
 
The occurrence of major extreme 
weather or seismic events do not 
deviate projected trajectory 
ARA3 Intrastructure 
and built environment 
 
Supplementary 3.1: 
Change in expected 
losses of economic 
assets due to the impact 
of extreme climate-
related disasters in te 
geographic area of the 
GCF intervention 
Project reports  
Municipality post-flood 
assessment reports data 
0 
(Economic loss 
exposure equivalent 
to 15% of GDP).  
 
$41.8 Million USD  
reduction in 
expected 
economic losses 
to households and 
9.5 million in 
business assets in 
6 target basins by 
structural, non-
structural and EbA 
measures; 
Una/Sana,  
Vrbas, Bosna, 
Sava/Ukrina, 
Drina,  
Neretva/treb  
$83.5 Million USD  
reduction in 
expected 
economic losses 
to households and 
19 million in 
business assets in 
6 target basins by 
structural, non-
structural and EbA 
measures: 
Una/Sana, Vrbas, 
Bosna, 
Sava/Ukrina, 
Drina,  
Neretva/treb  
Structural and non-structural 
measures meet their design 
standards in reducing the risks to 
population and reduction in 
agricultural and other economic 
loses. 
The occurrence of major extreme 
weather or seismic events do not 
deviate projected trajectory

=== PAGE 86 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 82 
 
 
 
 
 
ARA3 Intrastructure 
and built environment 
 
Supplementary 2.6: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) living in 
buildings that have 
increased resilience 
against climate hazards 
Independent evaluation of the 
standard of protection provided 
by the project-implemented 
measures.   
 
0 
 
Direct: 11,25862 
people (5,513 
men; 5,745 
women), whose 
houses are 
protected from 
extreme floods 
through structural 
and EbA 
measures in 5 
basins (Vrbas, 
Una-Sana, Bosna, 
Neretva and 
Trebisnjica river 
basins) 
 
Direct: 22,516 
people (11,026 
men; 11,490 
women) whose 
houses are 
protected from 
extreme floods 
through structural 
and EbA 
measures in 5 
basins (Vrbas, 
Una-Sana, Bosna, 
Neretva and 
Trebisnjica river 
basins) 
Structural and non-structural 
measures meet their design 
standards in reducing the risks to 
population and reduction in 
agricultural and other economic 
losses. 
The occurrence of major extreme 
weather or seismic events do not 
deviate projected trajectory 
ARA4 Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services 
 
Core 4: Hectares of 
natural resources 
brought under improved 
low-emission and/or 
climate-resilient 
management practice 
WA’s and HMI’s periodic and 
post-event survey reports and 
performance evaluation 
reports on hectares of land 
protected by structural, EBA 
and non-structural measures. 
0 
 
Institutional and 
technical capacities 
for the design and 
imple-mentation of 
non-structural and 
EbA FRM measures 
are absent or very 
limited. 
 
No EBA FRM 
measures in place 
 
Non-structural flood 
protection measures 
2,540 ha of land 
protected from 
extreme floods 
through  non-
structural and EbA 
measures in 4 
basins (Neretva, 
Una-Sana, Bosna, 
Vrbas) with GCF 
funds;  
 
5,081 Ha of land 
Protected from 
extreme floods 
through  non-
structural and  
EbA measures in 4 
basins (Neretva, 
Una-Sana, Bosna, 
Vrbas)  
 
WA’s, Municipalities, and 
community members are willing 
and able to implement climate-
resilient non-structural and EbA 
design and development practices. 
 
62 Please see sections 18.9 and 18.10 of the FS which provide detailed descriptions of the methodologies used to calculate the benefits of the 21 non-structural and 10 structural measures that will 
be implemented under the project.

=== PAGE 87 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 83 
 
 
 
 
 
implemented in 
Vrbas basin only 
ARA4 Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services 
 
Supplementary 4.1: 
Hectares of terrestrial 
forest, terrestrial non-
forest, freshwater and 
coastal marine areas 
brought under resoration 
and/or improved 
ecosystems 
 
WA’s and HMI’s periodic and 
post-event survey reports and 
performance evaluation 
reports on hectares of land 
protected by structural, EBA 
and non-structural measures 
0 
 
Institutional and 
technical capacities 
for the design and 
implementation of 
non-structural and 
EbA FRM measures 
are absent or very 
limited. 
 
No EBA FRM 
measures in place 
 
Non-structural flood 
protection measures 
implemented in 
Vrbas basin only 
100 ha afforested 
to meet anti-flood 
and anti-erosion 
requirements. 
 
40 ha of re-
grassing as part of 
EBA measures 
200 ha afforested 
to meet anti-flood 
and anti-erosion 
requirements. 
 
80ha of re-
grassing as part of 
EBA measures 
WA’s, Municipalities, and 
community members are willing 
and able to implement climate-
resilient non-structural and EbA 
design and development practices. 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
 
 
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for current 
state (baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
Core Indicator 5: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to strengthening 
institutional and 
Lack of protocols, updated 
methodologies, standards, and 
tools. 15% of protocols in 
place;  
low 
Rating: High 
80% of protocols, 
methodologies, standards for 
FRM in place;  
Implemented protocols – 
Activity 1.4 
Updated methodologies, 
standards, and tools for FRM – 
Activities, 1.2, 1.3  
National level (one 
country)

=== PAGE 88 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 84 
 
 
 
 
 
regulatory frameworks 
for low emission climate-
resilient development 
pathways in a country-
driven manner 
Lack of climate risks 
mainstreamed into sectoral 
policy. CC-induced FRM not 
mainstreamed into policies. 
Technical regulations and 
guidance on ecosystem based 
FRM are largely lacking.   
 
 
Policies, regulations, technical 
guidance exist and enforced. 6 
policies and technical 
guidelines developed and 
implemented and enforced in 6 
target basins, flood risk 
reduction mainstreamed into 
Hydropower, Agriculture, and 
Forestry sectoral policies; 
floodplain zoning policy and 
development control.  
 
Critical infrastructure technical 
guidelines. 
 
EbA technical guidelines 
Climate-induced flood risk 
mainstreamed into sectoral 
policies (Hydropower, 
Agriculture, and Forestry 
sectoral policies; floodplain 
zoning policy and development 
control) – Activity 2.1 
Technical guidelines for 
climate proofed critical 
infrastructure design – Sub-
Activity 2.1.3 
Technical guidelines EbA 
technical guidelines developed 
– Activity 2.3 
Core Indicator 6: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to technology 
deployment, 
dissemination, 
development or transfer 
and innovation 
Incomplete hydrometric 
network with only 20% of the 
network using modern 
automatic observation 
equipment.  
Limited climate-induced flood 
hazard and risk modelling and 
mapping using modern 
methodologies, models and 
technologies (EUFD modelling, 
and mapping completed for 
Vrabs basin only).   
Modern FFEWS systems using 
updated data products and  
technologies to provide climate 
risk information in operational  
decision making on flood risk 
response available for Vrbas 
and Una_Sana basins (2 of 6 
basins) only. 
low 
Rating: High 
Rehabilitated and complete 
hydrometric observation 
network using updated 
automatic observation stations 
and latest technologies in 
place in all basins. 
Enhanced EUFD hazard and 
risk models and maps 
available for 6 basins and used 
in decision making in those 6 
basins. 
Impact-based FFEWS 
operational for all 6 basins and 
provides climate risk forecasts 
and warnings to population. 
At least 2 sectors specific 
FFEWS products are used in 
decision-making (Sector-
specific climate information 
Rehabilitated and complete 
hydrometric observation 
network  - Activity 1.1 
 
 
 
 
Enhanced EUFD hazard and 
risk models and maps  - 
Activity 1.2 
 
 
 
Impact-based FFEWS 
operational for all 6 basins - 
Activity 1.3 
National level (one 
country)

=== PAGE 89 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 85 
 
 
 
 
 
No sector-specific climate risk 
information or products 
available  
An FRM data sharing portal is 
developed for Vrbas basin 
(Vrbas Geo-Portal) 
product/services for HPP and 
agric); 
Operational cross-sectoral 
platform for sharing and use of 
CC FRM data with relevant 
data sharing protocols 
 
 
At least 2 sectors specific 
FFEWS products (HPP and 
agric) -  Sub-Activity 1.3.3 
 
 
 
Cross-sectoral platform 
established and operational – 
Sub-activity 1.4.3 
 
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards 
Limited knowledge and 
capacities on hazard, 
vulnerability and risk 
assessment and modelling. 
15% of practitioner with 
relevant capacities 
 
Limited knowledge and 
capacities in forecasting and 
EW.  Communities lack timely 
flood forecast and early 
warning. 
 
Lack of experience, 
knowledge, practice methods 
and good practice guidelines 
on EbA .   
 
Limited knowledge and 
capacities on flood risk 
management  
low 
Rating: Medium 
75% of hazard, vulnerability 
and risk modelling practitioners 
with relevant capacities; 
Capacity development plan for 
embedding flood hazard and 
risk modelling approaches and 
FFEWS into appropriate 
institutions in B&H 
Best-practice guidelines, 
technical specification, 
standards and protocols, and 
knowledge portals established 
for the application of EbA and 
non-structural measures. 
At least 50% increase over 
baseline in institutional 
capacity within WA’. HMIs, 
municipalities (in 6 basins);  
 
FRM training embedded in 
existing government training 
Strengthened hazard and risk 
monitoring, modelling,– 
Activities 1.1, 1.2,  
Capacity development plan for 
embedding FFEWS into 
relevant institutions in B&H - 
Activity 1.3  
Best-practice guidelines, 
technical specification, 
standards and protocols for the 
application of EbA and non-
structural measures; 
knowledge portal and common 
resource center to collect, 
collate and share knowledge 
and fill these gaps to advance 
uptake of nature-based 
solutions; Knowledge portal for 
collaboration between 
specialists to allow to co-
working and knowledge 
sharing - Activity 2.3 
FRM training embedded in 
existing government training 
National level (one 
country)

=== PAGE 90 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
programmes for long-term 
FRM training in B&H 
 
 
programmes for long-term 
FRM training in B&H in the 
following topics: Flood hazard 
and risk assessment, 
hydrometry, forecasting and 
modelling, EWSs; Vulnerability 
and Risk Assessment; River 
basin flood risk management 
planning and the use of 
climate information - Activity 
2.4 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) 
Project/programme 
results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
 
Project/programme 
specific Indicator 
 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
Output 1. Fully 
integrated impact-based 
flood forecasting and 
EWS facilitates timely 
preparation and 
response 
 
1.1 Number of new hydro-
meteorological monitoring 
equipment purchased, 
installed and operational 
 
 
Project reports, evaluation 
reports, site observations  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hydrometric 
monitoring network 
inadequate. 
Existing stations by 
basin: 
Una/Sana -  
17 Meteo, 28 hydro.  
Vrbas-  
25 (meteo), 18 
(hydro);  
Bosna – 35 (meteo), 
65 (hydro);  
 
Hydro-
meteorological 
observation 
network expanded 
with 9-
Groundwater 
monitoring 
stations; 24- 
rehabilitated 
piezometers; 18-
new  piezometer 
100 and 200 m 
deep.  
10- boreholes with 
average depth up 
to 50 m; 30- 
boreholes with 
average depth up 
 
Hydro-
meteorological 
observation 
network expanded 
with 9-
Groundwater 
monitoring 
stations; 24- 
rehabilitated 
piezometers; 18-
new  piezometer 
100 and 200 m 
deep.  
10- boreholes with 
average depth up 
to 50 m; 30- 
boreholes with 
average depth up 
 
Assumptions: Government 
commitments to secure 
adequate O&M of monitoring 
equipment, relevant software 
and databases are fulfilled on a 
continuous basis both during 
the project implementation and 
afterwards 
 
Capacities built across relevant 
institutions through the project 
are maintained and periodically 
updated

=== PAGE 91 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 87 
 
 
 
 
 
Sava/Ukrina-  
1 (meteo), 1 (hydro);  
Drina – 15 (meteo), 
28 (hydro);  
Neretva/treb – 3 
(meteo), 38 (hydro);  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to 30 m; 26-
Meteorological 
stations; 23-
Hydrological 
stations 
GCF-funded 
Stations by basin:  
Una/Sana -  
6 Meteo; 12 hydro;  
Vrbas-  
5 (meteo), 12 
(hydro);  
Bosna – 7 (meteo), 
11 (hydro);  
Sava/Ukrina-  
1 (meteo), 21 
(hydro);  
Drina – 1 (meteo), 
11 (hydro);  
Neretva/treb – 6 
(meteo), 47 
(hydro);  
to 30 m; 26-
Meteorological 
stations; 23-
Hydrological 
stations 
GCF-funded 
Stations by basin:  
Una/Sana -  
6 Meteo; 12 hydro; 
Vrbas-  
5 (meteo), 12 
(hydro);  
Bosna – 7 (meteo), 
11 (hydro);  
 Sava/Ukrina-  
1 (meteo), 21 
(hydro);  
Drina – 1 (meteo), 
11 (hydro);  
Neretva/treb – 6 
(meteo), 47 
(hydro); 
Relevant government 
institutions cooperate on the 
implementation of the FFEWS 
and data management.  
 
Risks/Externalities: Failure of 
institutions to agree protocols for 
FFEWS and/or failure to engage 
local communities in CBEWS 
resulting in non-integrated 
national FFEWS and incomplete 
last mile coverage

=== PAGE 92 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 88 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.2. Number of river basins 
for which enhanced flood 
hazard and risk maps and 
FFEWS are available and 
in use by institutional 
beneficiaries (Water 
Agencies, 
Hydrometeorological 
Institutes, and sectors: 
agriculture, hydropower, 
critical infrastructure and 
spatial planning) 
 
 
 
Project reports, evaluation 
reports, monitoring and risk 
assessment products 
Knowledge system:  e-library, 
created databases, information 
systems, knowledge portal 
Project surveys 
Performance assessment 
reports for FFEWS. 
 
 
0 
Lack of key data sets 
for development of 
hazard and risk 
models; flood risk 
maps and 
vulnerability 
assessment available 
only for Vrbas Basin; 
FFEWS platforms 
available for only two 
river basins (Vrbas 
and Una-Sana) 
 
 
 
 
All 6 river basins 
(3,859,800 ha)  
with enhanced 
flood hazard and 
risk maps 
 
All 6 river basins 
with impact based 
FFEWS 
50% of surveyed 
institutional users 
water agencies, 
HMI, and sectoral 
institutions    use 
FRM hazard and 
risk information in 
sectoral planning, 
practice and 
decision-support 
functions;  
 
All relevant 
institutions have 
access to timely 
impact based 
FFEWS warnings.  
   
Institutions 
responsible for 
warning and 
response have 
50% improvement 
in warning lead 
times and 
accuracy.  
 
 
All 6 river basins 
(3,859,800 ha)  
with enhanced 
flood hazard and 
risk maps 
 
All 6 river basins 
with impact based 
FFEWS 
90% of surveyed 
institutional users  
water agencies, 
HMI,  and sectoral 
institutions use 
FRM hazard and 
risk information in 
of sectoral 
planning, practice 
and decision-
support functions;  
 
All relevant 
institutions have 
access to timely 
impact based 
FFEWS warnings. 
  
Institutions 
responsible for 
warning and 
response have 
50% improvement 
in warning lead 
times and 
accuracy. 
 
 
 
 
 
Baseline data sources: WA and 
HMI Strategic plans 
Sectoral institution covering the 
following sectors at all levels of 
governance: Agriculture, 
hydropower, forestry, critical 
infrastructure and spatial 
planning. 
 
Ministry of Foreign Trade and 
Economic Relations of Bosnia 
and 
Herzegovina 
(MoFTER, 
GCF focal point), The Ministry 
for 
Spatial 
Planning, 
Civil 
Engineering 
and 
Ecology 
(MSPCEE, UNFCCC), Ministry 
of 
Agriculture, 
Water 
Management, and Forestry of 
Federation of B&H, Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry, and Water 
Resources of Republika Srpska, 
State,  Entity and Canton Red 
Cross ,  Association of Cities 
and 
Municipalities 
, 
Entity, 
Canton and municipal Civil 
Protection, 
Hydropower 
Companies.

=== PAGE 93 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 89 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.3  Status of 
implementation of protocols 
and SoPs on data 
generation, data 
management and 
communication for effective 
FFEWS and flood risk 
management introduced by 
the project 
 
Project reports, evaluation 
reports, monitoring and risk 
assessment products 
 
 
Data sharing platform 
protocol developed for 
Vrbas and Una-Sana. 
 
WA’s, HMIs and 
relevant institutions 
in 50% of basins 
with access to and 
using data sharing 
protocols, 
including: 
 
a) SoPs for “last-
mile” warning and 
dissemination and 
communication 
system, b) 
Protocols and 
SOPs on data 
generation, data 
management for 
FRM, c) data 
sharing protocols 
and platform for 
climate data,  
across all 
government 
institutions in both 
entities including 
spatial Data 
Infrastructure to be 
developed/enhanc
ed to ensure 
climate data 
flow/exchange 
 
WA’s, HMIs and 
relevant institutions 
in 100% of basins 
with access to and 
using data sharing 
protocols , 
including: 
 
a) SoPs for “last-
mile” warning and 
dissemination and 
communication 
system, b) 
Protocols and 
SOPs on data 
generation, data 
management for 
FRM, c) data 
sharing protocols 
and platform for 
climate data, 
across all 
government 
institutions in  both 
entities including 
spatial Data 
Infrastructure to be 
developed/enhanc
ed to ensure 
climate data 
flow/exchange   
Output 2.   
Non-structural flood risk 
reduction measures 
and nature-based 
solutions mainstreamed 
 
2.1. Number and level* of 
enforcement of sectoral 
policies, regulations and 
technical guidelines with 
climate induced flood risk 
reduction, including EbA, 
 
Project reports – policy reviews, 
evaluation reports, independent 
evaluation report. 
 
Level 1  
 
CC-induced FRM not 
mainstreamed into 
policies. Technical 
regulations and 
Level 2  
 
4 policies, and 
technical 
guidelines 
developed and 
Level 3 
 
6 policies and 
technical 
guidelines 
developed and 
Government has political will to 
implement relevant regulatory 
reform to embed CC-induced 
FRM in relevant  institutions and 
are willing to conduct regulatory 
and institutional reform

=== PAGE 94 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 90 
 
 
 
 
 
in sectoral policies and 
plans and effectively 
contribute to protection 
of people and 
livelihoods from 
climate-induced flood 
risks.  
 
mainstreamed as a result of 
the project   
 
 
 
 
B&H CCA M&E system under 
the NAP.   
 
Sector-specific compliance 
reports for Energy, Forestry and 
Agriculture. 
 
 
guidance on 
ecosystem based 
FRM are largely 
lacking. Floodplain 
zoning policy 
developed for Vrbas 
river basin. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implemented in 3 
target basins; 
 
flood risk reduction 
mainstreamed into 
Hydropower, 
Agriculture and 
Forestry sectoral 
policies;  
 
floodplain zoning 
policy and 
development 
control;  
 
 
implemented and 
partially enforced 
in 6 target basins  
 
flood risk reduction 
mainstreamed into 
Hydropower, 
Agriculture and 
Forestry sectoral 
policies;  
 
floodplain zoning 
policy and 
development 
control.  
 
Critical 
infrastructure 
technical 
guidelines  
 
EbA technical 
guidelines 
 
Capacities created as a result of 
project are maintained and 
periodically upgraded;  
 
Women involvement is 
encouraged  
 
Various Sectoral Ministries; 
willingness to engage in the 
programme and transfer 
received know-how to 
stakeholders;  
 
Government engages in each 
step of the development of the 
sectoral policies, endorses it 
officially and takes a 
commitment to implement it 
through allocation of relevant 
funds for implementation of 
priority measures and/or 
resource mobilization

=== PAGE 95 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 91 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.2.  % increase in the level 
of institutional capacity for 
implementation of FRM and 
FFEWS among key 
government agencies over 
baseline 
 
Institutional capacity 
assessment scorecard for all 
institutions (entity ministries, two 
Water Agencies, and two HMIs) 
Project reviews, independent 
evaluation report. 
 
Lack of coherent 
institutional capacity 
development 
framework that 
embeds FRM and 
FFEWS capacities 
into relevant 
institutions 
 
Baseline level of 
institutional capacities 
to be established 
during Year 1 of the 
project 
 
 
At least 25% 
increase over 
baseline in 
institutional 
capacity (technical 
capacity: 
knowledge, skills, 
systems, 
technologies), 
within WA’. HMIs, 
municipalities (in 3 
basins);  
 
 
At least 50% 
increase over 
baseline in 
institutional 
capacity (technical 
capacity: 
knowledge, skills, 
systems, 
technologies) 
within WA’. HMIs, 
municipalities (in 6 
basins);  
 
FRM training 
embedded in 
existing 
government 
training 
programmes for 
long-term FRM 
training in B&H 
 
*Level 0 - Policies do not exist; 
Level 1 – Some fragmented 
policies designed but the policy 
framework is incomplete;  
Level 2 -  policy and regulatory 
framework designed but not 
enforced 
Level 3 -  policies, regulations, 
technical guidance exist and 
partly enforced; 
Level 4 – policies, regulations, 
technical guidance enforced 
 
Detailed institutional capacity 
assessment will be undertaken 
based on scorecards which will 
provide a baseline at the start of 
the project and short-medium 
and long-term targets. The 
Detailed Capacity Development 
plan will be developed and 
priority short- and medium-term 
capacity development will be 
undertaken by the project. 
Capacity development delivered 
by the project will be measured 
against the baseline capacity 
assessed at the start.  Activity 
2.4 is embedding Long-term 
FRM training and CD into 
relevant government training 
institutions and programmes. 
(FS pgs. 249-252.  Please also 
see Chapters 3-7 of FS for a 
detailed description of all 
aspects of existing FRM

=== PAGE 96 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 92 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63 Please see sections 18.9 and 18.10 of the FS which provide detailed descriptions of the methodologies used to calculate the benefits of the 21 non-structural and 10 structural measures that will 
be implemented under the project.   
institutional capacity and 
practice in BiH). 
 
2.3 Number of people 
protected through 
ecosystem-based flood risk 
reduction measures  
 
 
Site visit report; Project reports, 
evaluation reports, independent 
evaluation report, Mid-term and 
terminal evaluation reports; IE 
surveys and reports; site-
specific ESPs 
 
 
 
0 
 
Institutional and 
technical capacities 
for the design and 
implementation of 
non-structural and 
EbA FRM measures 
are absent or very 
limited; No EBA FRM 
measures in place;  
Non-structural flood 
protection measures 
implemented in Vrbas 
basin only. 
 
6,79963 people 
(3,293 men; 3,506 
women)  
protected from 
extreme floods 
through EbA 
measures in 5 
basins (Vrbas, 
Una-Sana, Bosna, 
Neretva and 
Trebisnjica river 
basins) through  
 
 
13,598 people 
(6,586 men; 7,012 
women)  
protected from 
extreme floods 
through EbA 
measures in 5 
basins (Vrbas, 
Una-Sana, Bosna, 
Neretva and 
Trebisnjica river 
basins) through  
 
Risks/Externalities:  Under-
performance of the implemented 
EbA and non-structural 
measures under extreme events 
beyond design standards 
 
Method for calculating 
beneficiaries of the structural 
and EBA measures to be 
implemented in the 5 basins is 
provided in Section 18.9 and 
18.10 of the FS.  Please see all 
of Annex E for full socio-
economic CBA methodology.

=== PAGE 97 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 93 
 
 
 
 
 
Structural measures 
design are not climate 
risk informed.    
Output 3. Climate-proof 
flood protection 
measures scaled-up 
through new and 
improved national and 
local investment 
frameworks to increase 
resilience of the most 
vulnerable groups to 
climate induced 
flooding. 
 
3.1. Number of country-
wide investment 
frameworks, new private 
sector partnerships and/or 
risk transfer mechanisms 
for climate induced flood 
risk reduction and 
management;  
 
 
 
Project reports, evaluation 
reports, independent evaluation 
report 
Insurance product 
developed for Vrbas 
basin but not 
implemented 
 
No other private 
sector investment 
frameworks in place 
4 
strategies/mechani
sms developed 
 
(including 2 Private 
sector engagement 
strategies and 1 
flood risk financing 
mechanism 
developed and FbF 
mechanism 
developed);  
 
 
7  
(including 2 
Investment 
frameworks for 
climate induced 
floods risk 
reduction and 
management;  
3 flood risk 
financing 
mechanism in 
place;   
2 MoUs with 
private/productive 
sector actors) 
WA’s, Municipalities, and 
community members are willing 
and able to implement, 
municipal investment plans, 
response plans, climate-resilient 
structural design and 
development practices. 
 
WA’s have the financial, 
technical and resourcing 
capacity to maintain structures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2. Number of Multi-year 
climate resilient municipal 
investment plans and 
gender responsive 
community preparedness 
plans developed with 
project support in 
Municipalities and  cantons 
following investment and 
preparedness plans 
completed by project.   
 
 
Project reports, evaluation 
reports, independent evaluation 
report  
 
0  
 
No multi-year climate 
resilience municipal 
investment plans and 
gender responsive 
community 
preparedness plan in 
place 
 
At least 6  Multi-
year climate 
resilient municipal 
investment plans 
and gender 
responsive 
community 
preparedness 
plans (include 
EAPs for FbF) 
developed in 5-6 
municipalities and 
1 canton in Vrbas, 
Una Sana and 
Bosna, Drina, 
Neretva and  
Trebisnjica river 
basins   
 
 
At least 12  Multi-
year climate 
resilient municipal 
investment plans 
and gender 
responsive 
community 
preparedness 
plans ((include 
EAPs for FbF)) 
developed in 10-12 
municipalities and 
1 canton in Vrbas, 
Una Sana and 
Bosna, Drina, 
Neretva and  
Trebisnjica river 
basins

=== PAGE 98 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 94 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3. Number and 
effectiveness (nu. of 
people/ha of land 
protected) of climate-proof 
structural flood risk 
reduction and anti-erosion 
interventions implemented 
in Vrbas, Una-Sana and 
Bosna, Drina, Neretva and 
Trebisnjica river basins with 
the project support 
 
Project reports, evaluation 
reports, independent evaluation 
report 
 
0 
5 climate-proof 
structural flood risk 
reduction and anti-
erosion 
interventions 
implemented in 
Vrbas, Una-Sana 
and Bosna, 
Neretva and 
Trebisnjica river 
basins (approx.. 
16,000 meters total 
length) 
4,459 people 
(2,220 men; 2,239 
women); and 1,154 
ha of agricultural 
land protected from 
flooding 
10 climate-proof 
structural flood risk 
reduction and anti-
erosion 
interventions 
implemented in 
Vrbas, Una-Sana 
and Bosna, 
Neretva and 
Trebisnjica river 
basins ( approx.. 
32,131 meters total 
length) 
8,918 people 
(4,440 men; 4,478 
women); and 
2,138.7 ha  of 
agricultural land 
protected from 
flooding  
 
See Annex A (table 14-3) of the 
FS for design drawings and 
details of the 10 structural 
measures, and Annex E 
(section 18.10) for the socio-
economic assessment and 
options appraisal of the 
structural measures. 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators 
Co-benefit 1:  
(Social/Health) 
Improved health  and 
reduced health risks 
due to the reduction in 
the number of floods-
related injuries and 
exposure to water borne 
diseases.   
Number of people with 
reduced risk of water-borne 
diseases as a  result of the 
project flood risk reduction 
intervention 
Project reports, evaluation 
reports, independent project 
impact evaluation report 
0 
 
59% of the population 
of B&H currently not 
connected to 
sewerage systems 
and 25% are without 
access to drinking 
water, these people 
are at higher risk of 
suffering from illness 
due to water borne 
disease that arise due 
to flooding.   
235,836 people 
(120,277  women;  
115,560 men)   
 471,673 people 
( 240,553  women;  
231,120  men)  
Estimation method: Present day 
population at risk = 799,445;  
% of population not connected 
to sewerage = 59%  
Therefore, number of 
beneficiaries = 471,673 people 
The occurrence of major 
extreme weather or seismic 
events do not deviate historic 
trajectory 
Relevant government agencies 
cooperate on the 
implementation of the FFEWS, 
data management and EbA 
measures

=== PAGE 99 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 95 
 
 
 
 
 
Structural and non-structural 
measures meet their design 
standards in reducing the risks 
to population. 
  
Co-benefit 3: (Gender) 
Female practitioners 
trained in all aspects of 
FRM; gender-
responsive risk 
assessments and FRM 
framework established 
% of trained practitioners 
are female; Gender-
responsiveness of CDP; 
gender-responsiveness of 
data collection and 
modellng. 
Project reports, evaluation 
reports, independent project 
impact evaluation report 
Limited training in 
FRM through all 
institutions. No long-
term capacity 
development plans in 
place; gender-
responsive 
systematized system 
of collection of 
vulnerability and 
modelling vulnerability 
to floods is fully 
developed for Vrbas 
basin only 
Minimum of 40% 
trained 
practitioners are 
female; Capacity 
development plan 
is gender-
responsive;  
gender-responsive 
systematized 
system of 
collection of 
vulnerability and 
modelling 
vulnerability to 
floods is fully 
developed for all 
basins. 
Minimum of 40% 
trained 
practitioners are 
female; Capacity 
development plan 
is gender 
responsive;  
gender-responsive 
systematized 
system of 
collection of 
vulnerability and 
modelling 
vulnerability to 
floods is fully 
developed for all 
basins. 
GAAP effectively implemented; 
 
Government counterparts are 
committed to gender responsive 
FRM 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
 
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables  
Activity 1.1:   Upgrade and expand the coverage 
of the hydrometric network for enhanced 
monitoring of climate variables in Category I 
catchments and torrential streams 
The Project will expand the hydrometeorological 
monitoring network to cover a greater range of 
hydrometric variables that climate change is 
bringing. Previous upgrades to the 
hydrometeorological observation network have 
not been realized at the appropriate spatial and 
temporal scale to enable effective flood 
monitoring, management, forecasting and early 
warning. In addition to pluvial and fluvial 
flooding in the biggest catchments (category I 
catchment), climate change is increasing the 
risks from torrential streams, which are currently 
1.1.1. Develop optimized hydrometric network 
specification, develop ICT strategy and plan for 
hydrometric  
1.1.2. Procure and install equipment to increase 
density of the hydro-meteorological observation 
network and expand monitoring to include 
greater range of hydrometric variables that 
climate change is bringing  
1.1.3. Sett-up sustainable O&M for the network 
1.1.4. Develop long-term financing mechanisms 
for the maintenance of the hydrometric network 
Hydro-meteorological observation network 
expanded with 9-Groundwater monitoring 
stations; 24- rehabilitated piezometers; 18-new  
piezometer 100 and 200 m deep.  
10- boreholes with average depth up to 50 m; 
30- boreholes with average depth up to 30 m; 
26-Meteorological stations; 23-Hydrological 
stations

=== PAGE 100 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 96 
 
 
 
 
 
not monitored or studied but cause great 
damage 
2 strategic plans, methodologies, guidelines and 
manuals for the operation and maintenance of 
the optimized hydrometric network. 
 
1 prototype mechanism for private sector cost 
recovery 
 
2 Public Sector O&M financing strategies action 
plans, budgetary allocation mechanisms and 
tools 
Activity 1.2:  Enhance climate-induced flood 
hazard, risk and vulnerability information for 
strategic risk management and sound decision 
making for climate induced flood management 
The Project will enhance the WBIF EUFD 
hazard and risk modelling by a) developing 
hydrological modelling for all main basins 
(category I rivers), b) undertaking torrents 
hazard modelling, c) including HPPs and 
groundwater modelling in flood hazard, risk and 
vulnerability modelling and mapping for all 
relevant basins. 
1.2.1: Develop hydrological modelling for all 
main basins (category I rivers) to complement 
WBIF project’s EUFD hazard and risk models. 
1.2.2:  Develop full basin hydraulic models  
1.2.3: Produce country-wide maps of torrents 
hazard, risk and vulnerability  
1.2.4: HPP modelling for development of 
enhanced operating rules for HPPs. Incorporate 
HPP operations into flood hazard and risk 
modelling. Upgrade models in Adriatic Sea 
basin to include groundwater modelling 
:    
• 
Topographic surveys in target basins 
• 
Relevant topographic data sets 
procured 
• 
Technical methodology and survey 
completed for the systematic 
collection of gender-sensitive socio-
economic data to support natural 
disaster risk and vulnerability 
assessment. 
• 
Enhanced WBIF EUFD hydrological 
models for 6 river basins. 
• 
Enhanced WBIF EUFD hydraulic 
flood hazard models for 6 river 
basins(Category I) 
• 
HPPs and groundwater flood models 
incorporated into  modelling in flood 
hazard models,  
• 
Reservoir operation models for all 
target basins 
• 
Updated Neretva and Trebišnjica 
basin model and optimised operating 
rules for HPP 
• 
Torrents hazard models for 6 basins 
• 
GIS-based socio-economic risk and 
vulnerability model 
• 
Country-wide flood hazard, risk and 
vulnerability maps for 6 basins. 
• 
Guidance, methodologies and 
specifications for dam breach 
modelling and mapping;

=== PAGE 101 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 97 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
Strategy and programme of updating 
dam breach modelling and mapping 
for all medium and high hazard dams 
in B&H;   
• 
Guidance, methodologies and 
specifications for the inclusion of HPP 
operations in flood hazard modelling 
and mapping;  
• 
Practitioners/experts/modelers trained 
in Flood hazard and risk modelling  
• 
 
Activity 1.3:  Develop an integrated impact-
based centralized and community-based flood 
forecasting and early warning system (FFEWS) 
Under the Project the Vrbas prototype will be 
scaled up to cover the two hydro-energy 
intensive basins of Neretva and Trebisnjica, and 
the Una-Sana basin forecasting model will be 
updated.  The project will  Implement CBEWS 
for 60 high priority communities and  develop 
sector specific FFEWS products and develop 
and implement a capacity development plan for 
embedding flood hazard and risk modelling 
approaches and FFEWS into appropriate 
institutions in B&H 
1.3.1: Develop and implement National impact-
based 
FFEWS 
system 
(integrated 
and 
Community-based).   
1.3.2: Implement CBEWS for high priority 
communities  
1.3.3: Review, identify and develop sector 
specific FFEWS products for agriculture and 
hydropower/energy sectors 
1.3.4: Identify and implement a capacity 
development plan for embedding flood hazard 
and risk modelling approaches and FFEWS into 
appropriate institutions in B&H 
• 
Assessment Report on legal, 
institutional, organisational, financial 
and technical environment, issues 
and gaps at HMSs. 
• 
A logical and physical database 
model for new and historic 
meteorological and hydrological data 
collections. 
• 
The tools and services for online and 
offline data and metadata acquisition, 
quality and quantity control, database 
feed, post-processing and reporting 
are fully functional.  
• 
6 FFEWS models and 1 FEWS 
platform integrating all basin FFEWS 
models;  
• 
Equipment procured for CBEWS (60 
water level sensors; 120 staff gauges;  
2 GSM/GPRS modem device; 40 
generators; 40 sirens; 400 portable 
radio stations; 100 mobile radio 
stations; 120 boards.  
• 
Community Based Early Warning 
Systems for 60 high priority 
communities;  
• 
Sector-specific FFEWS products for 
HPP and agriculture;  
• 
Capacity development plan for flood 
hazard and risk modelling and 
FFEWS developed and 
institutionalized in B&H 
• 
Training in partnership with WMO 
regional training centers,  delivered to 
all HMI, WA an other staff and 
practitioners on FFEWS

=== PAGE 102 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 98 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 1.4: Develop and implement protocols 
and SoPs on data generation, data 
management and communication for effective 
impact based FFEWS and flood risk 
management 
The project will revise and implement a number 
of protocols,  and SOPs, and Codes of Conduct 
for each of the institutions responsible for FRM 
and FFEWS. These will include SoPs for “last-
mile” warning and dissemination and 
communication system, Protocols and SOPs on 
data generation, data management for FRM, 
data sharing protocols and platform for climate 
data, across all government institutions in both 
entities including spatial Data Infrastructure to 
be developed/enhanced to ensure climate data 
flow/exchange. 
1.4.1: Update and implement SoPs for last-mile 
warning and dissemination and communication 
system.  
1.4.2: Develop national protocols and SOPs on 
data generation, data management for FRM. 
1.4.3: Develop data sharing protocols and 
platform for climate data, across all government 
institutions in both entities 
• 
SoPs for “last-mile” warning and 
dissemination and communication 
system; 
• 
Protocols and SOPs on data;  
• 
FRM, at least 12 data sharing 
protocols between water 
management and other relevant 
sectors (agriculture, forestry, 
environment, spatial planning and 
hydro-energy);  
• 
Cross-sectoral platform for climate 
data, across all government 
institutions  
Activity 2.1: Mainstream climate induced flood 
risk reduction into sectoral planning (agriculture, 
hydropower, critical infrastructure) and spatial 
planning 
The project will enhance the existing legislative 
and regulatory FRM framework by 
mainstreaming the climate-induced flood risk 
management into sectoral planning for 
agriculture, forestry, environment, hydropower, 
critical infrastructure, and spatial planning 
2.1.1: Mainstream climate induced flood risk 
reduction into sectoral strategies, plans and 
technical guidelines for agriculture, hydropower, 
critical infrastructure, forestry and environment 
2.1.2: Develop national floodplain zoning policy 
and legislation, based on national hazard, risk 
and vulnerability mapping, flood resilient building 
codes and embed climate change considerations 
in the design and construction standards of 
critical infrastructure 
2.1.3: 
Update 
climate 
risk-informed 
methodologies and standards for infrastructure 
design, 
construction 
material, 
use 
and 
maintenance of critical infrastructure in B&H 
2.1.4: deliver training and technical advice on 
climate resilient infrastructure design, 
construction and O&M approaches 
5 Sectoral strategies, plans and technical 
guidelines (for agriculture, hydropower, critical 
infrastructure, forestry and environment);  
 
National floodplain zoning policy and legislation 
implemented in all basins;  
 
Updated climate risk-informed methodologies, 
standards for infrastructure design, construction 
material, use and maintenance of critical 
infrastructure in B&H 
 
Capacity development plan for climate resilient 
infrastructure design, construction and O&M 
approaches 
Activity 2.2: Implement and mainstream new 
ecosystem-based flood risk reduction and 
climate change adaptation methods 
The project will implement catchment 
management measures including 8 non-
structural measures  
2.2.1:  Implement catchment management 
measures for reduced erosion  
2.2.2: Implement 21 selected non-structural 
flood risk reduction measures 
Catchment management for reduced erosion;  
8 Non-structural measures implemented;  
 
Activity 2.3: Codify and mainstream EbA 
solutions into policies and regulations and 
promote non-structural measures among 
decision makers and communities 
The project will document best practice non-
structural approaches that can be adapted to 
the B&H context and collect lessons learned 
and facilitate dissemination of successful 
approaches in the country. The successful 
practices will be codified in a form of guidelines 
2.3.1: Develop best-practice guidelines for EbA 
and non-structural measures 
• 
EbA and non-structural measures 
incorporated into relevant entity FRM 
policies and regulations. 
• 
Best-practice guidelines, manuals 
technical specification, standards and 
protocols that provide clear guidance

=== PAGE 103 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 99 
 
 
 
 
 
and tools. This activity will document and 
mainstream non-structural measures into FRM 
policies and practices. 
2.3.2: Develop technical specification, manuals, 
standards and protocols for design and 
implementation of non-structural measures  
2.3.3: Review and implement training required 
for new non-structural measures 
on the design, implementation, and 
maintenance of EbA solutions and 
non-structural measures for flood risk 
management. 
• 
Methodology for system evaluation;  
• 
Methodology and guidance for 
undertaking risk assessment and 
appraisal of EbA measures;  
• 
Knowledge portal and common 
resource center to collect, collate and 
share knowledge and for 
interdepartmental collaboration, 
coordination and joint decision-
making to ensure the integration of 
EbA solutions and non-structural 
measures across different policy 
domains, such as water 
management, land-use planning, and 
environmental conservation.;  
• 
Capacity development:  Training in 
the application of methods for the 
identification, prioritization, design 
and implementation of basin 
appropriate EbA solutions;  
 
• 
Training for 200 FRM practitioners at 
all levels and all relevant types of 
stakeholders (entity, municipal, 
community) 
 
• 
Awareness raising: Workshops, and 
knowledge-sharing platforms to build 
awareness, technical skills, and 
understanding of the benefits and 
implementation considerations of 
nature-based approaches and non-
structural measures 
Activity 2.4: Review and strengthen institutional 
capacity and develop long-term institutional 
capacity development plans for climate resilient 
FRM 
The activity will implement country-wide training 
programmes in the technical and practical areas 
of flood risk management for practitioners, 
decision-makers, communities, emergency 
responders.  
2.4.1: 
Embed 
FRM 
training 
in 
existing 
government training programmes for long-term 
FRM training in B&H. 
2.4.2: 
Develop 
a 
costed 
and 
prioritized 
Institutional capacity development plan to 
address 
technical, 
functional 
and 
human 
capacity gaps identified through the completed 
institutional capacity assessment  
FRM training embedded in existing government 
training programmes for long-term FRM CD in 
B&H in the following topics:  
 
• 
Flood hazard and risk assessment, 
hydrometry, forecasting and 
modelling, EWSs;  
• 
Vulnerability and Risk Assessment;

=== PAGE 104 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 100 
 
 
 
 
 
2.4.3: Implement  community-based training 
and awareness raising initiatives at community 
level 
• 
River basin flood risk management 
planning and the use of climate 
information  
 
Key deliverables: 
• 
Training curricula, and rosters of 
trainers developed and mechanisms 
for delivering long-term capacity 
development (e.g. development of 
key partnerships with universities and 
institutions) for FRM training. 
• 
Costed and prioritised institutional 
capacity development plan to address 
technical, functional and human 
capacity gaps in FRM. 
• 
Community-based training and 
awareness raising initiatives 
implemented at community level  
• 
Emergency response training of first 
responders 
• 
Guidelines on community DRR/DRM 
• 
Local NGOs, CBOs or non-CBO 
community members trained in 
Community-based Risk Assessment 
approaches, Community-based Early 
Warning Systems and gender-
responsive Community-based Flood 
Risk Management;  
• 
training of trainers’ programme and a 
syllabus for topics such as first 
response, search and rescue and 
warning dissemination, and example 
standard specifications for external 
training providers  
• 
Educational material and a 5year 
training programme on flood and 
disaster risk and emergency 
response for use in school outreach 
programmes, university courses, 
communities etc. (training material, 
course notes, plays etc.)   
• 
Annual community forums on FRM 
and CBEWSs with participation of 
target communities and 
representatives of vulnerable groups

=== PAGE 105 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 101 
 
 
 
 
 
to exchange information, lessons 
learned, successes and impediments;  
• 
Community-government and public-
private dialogues around local risks 
and risk reduction strategies and their 
financing.  
• 
Develop and deliver awareness 
raising messages using social media, 
art and creativity to communicate 
FRM and FFEWS concepts to 
broader society and to disseminate 
project lessons and successes;  
• 
Media partnerships: TV and radio talk 
shows around FRM and FFEWS; 
media coverage of project activities;  
• 
Production of footages, Public Social 
Announcements (PSAs) of short 
documentaries around FRM and  
project achievement  
• 
Training for media on FRM and 
FFEWS and annual essay/media 
article awards competitions.  
 
Activity 3.1: Develop investment framework for 
climate induced flood risk reduction and 
management 
The project will develop a strategy and tools for 
private sector engagement in long-term climate 
change-induced flood risk management.  The 
project will develop the most appropriate 
mechanisms for risk transfer, risk financing and 
supporting cost recovery mechanisms from a 
variety of sources. The Activity will also include 
the development of policy and legislation for 
private sector engagement in climate risk 
financing and for risk transfer mechanisms such 
as flood insurance. 
3.1.1: Develop investment framework for climate 
induced floods risk reduction and management 
including 
provisions 
for 
public 
and 
private/productive sector engagement in climate 
risk financing ;  
3.1.2: Develop risk financing and transfer 
mechanisms based on detailed socio-economic 
risk, damages and losses assessment;  
3.1.3: Design natural disasters’ insurance 
scheme and explore, and identify, other risk 
financing and transfer mechanisms products and 
tools.  
3.1.4: Develop tool for appraisal-led design for 
structural and non-structural FRM measures, 
FRM investment planning, climate risk financing 
mechanisms and for appraisal-led FRM options 
design and decision-making, based on CBA 
approaches 
5 strategies and plans for long-term ongoing 
investment frameworks that would be required 
to address flood risk to each sector;  
Sector-specific information dissemination 
portals as part of the information platform to be 
developed under 1.4.3;  
2 risk financing and risk transfer strategy for 
private sector engagement in risk financing and 
risk transfer mechanisms for entity-level flood 
risk financing and resilience strategy;  
 
3 natural disasters products developed;  
3 Feasibility studies on micro-insurance, 
regional disaster risk insurance program and 
catastrophe bonds; 
4 sector specific awareness campaigns;

=== PAGE 106 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 102 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 tools for appraisal-led design for structural 
and non-structural FRM measures based on 
cost benefit analysis (CBA) approaches.  
 
Activity 3.2:  Formulate  multi-year climate 
resilient municipal investment plans and gender 
responsive community preparedness plans in 
selected municipalities (10-12) and in one 
canton in Vrbas, Una-Sana and Bosna, Drina, 
Neretva and Trebišnjica basins 
The project will develop municipal investment 
plans for climate-resilient investment planning 
for flood risk management in 10-12 
municipalities and 1 canton in the Vrbas, Una-
Sana and Bosna basins.  
3.2.1:  Develop municipal investment plans for 
climate resilient FRM planning for 10-12 highest 
risk communities and 1 canton   
3.2.2:  Develop preparedness plans for 10-12 
highest risk communities and 1 canton based on 
Vrbas methodology   
 
2 financing models for investment maintenance 
costs;  
Standardized 
CBA 
tools 
embedded 
in 
municipality for developing annual infrastructure 
investment plans.    
10-12 municipal FRM investment plans based on 
risk-informed 
project 
designs, 
including 
maintenance, and costs-benefit analysis based 
on CBA methods and models.  
 
Multi-year climate resilient municipal investment 
plan 
and 
gender 
responsive 
community 
preparedness plan implemented in the highest 
risk municipalities (10-12) in Vrbas, Una-Sana 
and Bosna basins;  
 
Community preparedness plans for the 10-12 
communities in line with the procedure, 
methodology and content of CEFP in B&H as 
defined by Law of Protection and Rescue in RS 
and FB&H 
Activity 3.3: Implement climate-proof structural 
flood risk reduction and anti-erosion 
interventions in Vrbas, Una-Sana, Bosna and 
Drina river basins (co-financed) 
This activity will focus on implementation of 
priority structural flood risk reduction 
interventions for areas at highest risk. The 
structural measures will be financed through 
loan resources and Water Agencies. 
3.3.1: Finalize detailed design of climate resilient 
flood protection structural measures identified 
using 
CBA 
methods 
and 
appraisal-led 
optioneering to identify and prioritize critical flood 
protection structures. 
3.3.2: Implement new flood defenses and the 
rehabilitation and upgrade of existing flood 
defenses with climate proofing 
 
Detailed design of 10 structural measures; 
 
10 structural measures implemented.

=== PAGE 107 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 103

=== PAGE 108 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 104 
 
 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
235. 
Risk factors associated with the project implementation include institutional, policy, financial, technical and 
operational aspects of establishing an integrated climate resilient flood risk management and introducing an impact-
based MHEWS both national-wide and at community level; and social and environmental due to the implementation 
of climate-resilient nature-based solutions and construction of protective infrastructures against flood risks. The 
latter risks may affect the sedimentation movement during construction of flood defence infrastructures. Other risks 
may affect the lack of commitment from communities where restoration activities, alternative livelihoods and EWS 
are planned. The proposed project includes several mitigation measures to address these risks.  
 
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Political situation becomes unstable due to local upheavals or regional conflicts  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will develop and implement emergency management/contingency plan in line with UNDP CO’s crisis 
management requirements. This may reduce the level of impact of the risk to medium to low level 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
Extreme hazardous event resulting in damage or destruction to hydrometeorological and/or flood defense 
infrastructure, damage to beneficiary communities,  and disruption to  project implementation, requiring 
reprogramming of government FRM budgets or implementation delays.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will develop and implement emergency management/contingency plan in line with UNDP CO’s crisis 
management requirements. During the planning, design and construction of relevant infrastructure, disaster risks will 
be taken into consideration for all stages, and relevant risk mitigation/reduction measures will be put in place.  
Importantly, the project is designing and implementing climate proofing of infrastructure which should ensure that 
designs are robust against flood damage and destruction up to the design Standard of Protection. These risk 
reduction measures will reduce the level of impact and probability that the infrastructure will be destroyed, to 
minimum level.   
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Climate adaptation, FRM and DRR do not remain a government priority and therefore political, financial and technical 
support to the project is reduced  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will leverage (and strengthen if necessary) already established strong partnerships with high-level 
government representatives and will carry out lobbying and advocacy campaigns in support of CC adaptation, FRM 
and DRR. This will reduce the impact of the risk to the minimum level. 
Selected Risk Factor 4

=== PAGE 109 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 105 
 
 
 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Absorption and operational capacities of project beneficiaries (WAs and HMIs, municipalities etc.) are inadequate to 
properly run and maintain FRM technologies and systems implemented by the project, after completion 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will pay close attention to the capacity building of all relevant agencies through carrying out training of 
trainers, on-the-job and field trainings of the staff of relevant agencies, introducing/strengthening internship 
mechanisms, developing technical guidelines, methodologies and sustainable operations and maintenance plans and 
embedding ongoing training capacity within relevant institutions. These actions, altogether will reduce the probability 
and impact of the risk to minimum level. 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
 
Category 
Category 
Category 
Governance 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Government and private sector unable to meet co-financing and/or O&M commitments to the project (e.g. due to 
unforeseen budget cuts).   
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will assist the government authorities to develop and implement sustainable long-term investment 
planning and will develop risk financing mechanisms which will secure financing for activities in the long-term.    
Selected Risk Factor 6 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Local communities are not interested to be engaged in CBEWS and community based EbA processes 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The project will conduct extensive awareness campaign at municipal and community level on the climate-induced 
flood  hazards, vulnerabilities and risks and benefits for reducing these risks. It will also make significant efforts to 
mobilize and empower local communities in CBEWS and CB-EbA. This will reduce the impact and probability of the 
risk to the minimum. 
Selected Risk Factor 7 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Other 
Medium 
SelectHigh 
Description 
COVID 19 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The world is currently suffering from the COVID19 pandemic, and B&H is no exception.  As a highly transmissible 
infectious virus, COVID 19 represents a risk whenever mass gatherings, close working conditions or physical contact 
occurs involving people infected with the virus. 
‘COVID safe’ practices are to be adopted by the project.  Compliance with directives of WHO and Ministry of Health 
must occur and all efforts to reduce the risk of spread will be taken.  The project itself does not represent a significant

=== PAGE 110 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 106 
 
 
 
 
risk, but given the high transmissibility of COVID, any activity that brings people together needs to be treated as risky 
and appropriate precautions taken. 
Selected Risk Factor 8 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Governance 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
The complex institutional structure and division of authorities and responsibilities between the state government, the 
two entities in B&H, the line ministries of both entities, and the municipal authorities and the different management 
arrangements for FRM according to the category of river and type, might present implementation and coordination 
challenges to the targeted project activities. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Close collaboration with relevant stakeholders from the outset and by determining collaborative strategies and focal 
points in each of the key institutions for the Project Board. The project implementation team and UNDP will use the 
relevant experience from the previous projects and will rely on the Stakeholder Engagement Plan to make sure that 
the institutional barriers are tackled timely and efficiently. The project activities (1.3,1.4,2.4) will improve institutional 
capacities, information and coordination for FRM thus reducing institutional vulnerability and reducing the risk.  
Selected Risk Factor 9 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Sanctions 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Project engage with entities or individuals listed on UN sanctions 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
This project is implemented by UNDP under the Direct Implementation Modality (DIM) and will be guided by UNDP’s 
policy framework. UNDP, by virtue of being an organ of the United Nations and therefore being part of the same 
entity, is also beholden to the principles on countering the financing of terrorism. UNDP systematically screens all 
entities being considered to be contracted by or partner with UNDP against the Consolidated UN Security Council 
Sanctions List (https://www.un.org/securitycouncil/content/un-sc-consolidated-list). UNDP Country Office in B&H will 
be responsible for screening all entities or individuals against the Consolidated UN Security Council Sanctions List 
before engaging with them for the project. 
Selected Risk Factor 10 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
ML/FT 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Money laundering and terrorist financing risks 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
This project is implemented by UNDP under the Direct Implementation Modality (DIM) and will be guided by UNDP’s 
policy framework. UNDP, by virtue of being an organ of the United Nations and therefore being part of the same entity, 
is also beholden to the principles on countering the financing of terrorism. UNDP systematically screens all entities 
being considered to be contracted by or partner with UNDP against the Consolidated UN Security Council Sanctions 
List. 
Please 
refer 
to 
the 
UN 
Security 
Council 
Consolidated 
Sanctions 
List 
available 
at 
https://www.un.org/securitycouncil/content/un-sc-consolidated-list for the latest information on sanctions. 
 
 
Selected Risk Factor 11

=== PAGE 111 ===
E 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 107 
 
 
 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Prohibited practices 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Prohibited Practices Risks 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
UNDP applies a zero tolerance policy in relation to fraud and corruption. The guiding principles of UNDP's commitment 
to prevent, identify and address all acts of fraud and corruption have been laid out in the UNDP Policy against Fraud 
and Corrupt Practices (the "FCP Policy"), which applies to all activities and operations of UNDP, including projects and 
programmes. The fundamental principles of UNDP's FCP Policy serve as the basis for and are integrated in UNDP's 
policy frameworks in relation to procurement, financial management, internal control and accountability and staff rules 
and regulations.  
Under the terms of the FCP Policy and related policies, UNDP has a commitment, when developing a new 
programme or project, to ensure that risks related to fraud and corrupt practices are fully identified and considered in 
the programme/project design and processes and that adequate and effective measures to mitigate such risks are 
put in place. In this light, the processes and requirements for UNDP's partnership capacity assessment (PCAT) 
require UNDP to carry out a thorough due diligence of the risks in relation to the programme/project it intends to 
engage in, as well as in relation to the potential partners who will be involved in the implementation of such 
programmes/projects. Such capacity assessments include, among other things, a screening of all entities being 
considered to be contracted by or partner with UNDP against the Consolidated UN Security Council Sanctions List (to 
which UNDP, by virtue of being an organ of the United Nations and therefore being part of the same entity, is also 
beholden), an assessment of any history of fraud, corruption or other fraudulent practices and/or potential conflicts of 
interest. Based on this capacity assessment, UNDP then builds an internal control component into the design of the 
project and ensures that the financial management of the programme/project contains adequate safeguards to 
prevent, monitor and address any risks and acts of fraud, corruption or AML/CFT that may be identified.

=== PAGE 112 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 108 
 
 
 
 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
236. The project was screened against UNDP’s Social and Environmental Standards using the UNDP Social and 
Environmental Screening Procedure (SESP), to identify any potential social and environmental risks that could 
arise from project activities. An Environmental and Social Assessment Report (ESAR) was prepared to assess the 
potential risks in more detail (see Annex 6).The ESAR has been prepared using publicly available information, 
project reference documents, consultation with stakeholders such as government, NGOs and project development 
team members, and field-visits by a safeguard specialist to representative sites.   
237. The risk profile of the project has been determined to be moderate (Category B).  The risks are considered 
acceptable and manageable through the application of mitigation measures.  The ESAR includes and 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), which provides an outline of the types of mitigation 
measures that are likely to be required when implementing the project.   
238. Through delivery of the project’s inter-related outputs, communities in B&H will be better equipped to adapt to 
climate impacts, particularly flooding.  The project will deliver sustainable development co-benefits including 
enhanced ecosystem services, gender responsive livelihood enhancement and job creation, and improved 
resilience of communities’ physical assets. 
 
Environment 
239. Physical impacts will be primarily associated with with construction activities for the river works, and access to land 
for both river works and forestry activities, particularly the implementation of the priority risk reduction interventions 
at the sites proposed under Activity 3.3. Construction impacts will be temporary in nature, such as localised 
erosion/sedimentation, noise and dust from construction equipment, and possible changes to people’s ability to 
move within the locale during construction.  Permanant infrastructure will be designed to minimise long-term 
impacts. The implementation of the ESMP will ensure that these impacts are satisfactorily managed 
240. The majority of the construction works involve building river infrastructure.  It is anticipated that most materials, 
particularly rock, will come from existing quarries near the sites.  Other material requirements will be minimal.  The 
proposed river works will not impact on critical ecosystems and/or habitats.  The rivers have been significantly 
impacted by both anthropogenic activities and climate induced events in the past.  Some riparian vegetation will 
be lost at some of the sites.  
241. The project is addressing climate-induced flood risks by introducing FRM and CCA measures.  In general, the 
project is providing key environmental protection benefits through the introduction of disaster risk reduction, climate 
change adaptation and protection of people, property and the environment from major hazards. In the long-run the 
project will bring about significant environmental benefits by increasing the country’s resilience to climate-induced 
flood disasters and thus, enabling its population to better protect national assets, including environmental assets 
(land, forest and land resources). 
242. Environmental co-benefits mainly relate to EbA strategies such as riparian plantings and agro-forestry which will 
provide water retention and functions; regulation of hydrological flows (buffer runoff, soil infiltration, groundwater 
recharge, maintenance of base flows); natural hazard mitigation (e.g. flood prevention, peak flow reduction, soil 
erosion and landslide control); increased streambed stabilization resulting in decreased erosion, habitat 
preservation, and reforestation. Environmental impacts associated with the project are considered acceptable due 
to the nature of the interventions and the ability to manage impacts through implementation of mitigation measures, 
while social benefits are significant and can provide long-term improvements to the lives of communities in the 
target areas (see Section D). 
 
Social 
243. The project is expected to directly benefit approximately 26% of the population.  Project interventions will be 
undertaken in areas of B&H where communities are particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. The 
project is targeting those most vulnerable to flood risk and the impact potential of the enhanced flood risk 
management and intervention measures is high and will safeguard vulnerable communities and their economic 
assets from these climate induced disasters.  Government land will be used for structural interventions, so the 
project does not require any land acquisition and/or resettlement.       
244. The project will also improve the capacity of government and communities to plan, design and manage rural 
infrastructure that is climate resilient. By enhancement of the existing legislative and regulatory FRM framework in 
order to mainstream the climate-induced flood risk management into sectoral planning for agriculture, hydropower, 
critical infrastructure and spatial planning, the project will directly protect and save lives, increase food production 
safety, and flood risk informed local development and land use.

=== PAGE 113 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 109 
 
 
 
 
245. The approach applied within the project will underpin the floodplain planning and development control to achieve 
basin-wide climate resilience to increasing flood risks and will result in a paradigm shift from uncontrolled floodplain 
development to climate-risk informed and controlled floodplain usage. 
246. It is anticipated that based on the communities’ needs, the projects will be fully accepted.  None the less, the project 
has developed a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) to deal with any complaints and issues that may arise 
because of the project.  The GRM has been designed to ensure that an individual and/or group are not financially 
impacted by the process of making a complaint and/or grievance.  The GRM complies with Bosnian and UNDP 
Safeguard procedures.  Furthermore, the GRM allows individuals and/or groups to also file a complaint with the 
Office of Anticorruption and Integrity within the UNDP or utilise the GCF Independent Redress Mechanism should 
they have any concerns as to corruption, unethical behaviour or where they believe their complaint or grievance 
has not been adequately addressed. 
 
Gender and social inclusion 
Gender 
247. The project will directly benefit the most vulnerable parts of the population, particularly women who are 
disproportionately affected by flooding and disasters in general. In B&H there are significant gender inequalities, 
fuelled by traditional gender roles.  The project has been designed with attention paid to gender and social 
inclusion. UNDP64 has identified that the most vulnerable women in the country are: the women living below the 
poverty line, single mothers, Roma women, internally displaced women, minority returnees and LGBTI women. 
The gender analysis undertaken at the project design phase, acts as an entry point for gender mainstreaming 
throughout implementation, and builds on stakeholder consultation, existing analytical documentation and data 
from projects currently being implemented, and national statistics where available.  
248. The project will ensure that women are primary stakeholders and will therefore need to be involved in decisions on 
the types of solutions that are implemented.  The project will safeguard local communities and their assets from 
climate disasters with particular attention to women, and other vulnerable groups.  The Gender Assessment and 
Action Plan prepared for the project outlines positive actions that will be taken by the project. 
249. The project will ensure that women are empowered to benefit from the structural interventions that will mitigate 
flood events and will be included in consultations during design to ensure that the structures will not impact 
negatively on gender equality.  With regard to EBA approaches, the project will implement agro-forestry, which will 
enable and empower women to diversify agricultural activities, thus building women’s resilience to cope with 
climate change impacts.   
250. Along with a multi-year climate resilient municipal investment plan, the project will formulate and implement gender 
sensitive community preparedness plans in selected municipalities (10-12) in Vrbas, Una-Sana and Bosna basins. 
The preparedness plans will be based on needs assessment of both genders and will comprise of gender sensitive 
actions including access to knowledge (trainings), information and resources that will increase capability of both 
genders for timely and effective actions to avoid the loss of lives and to reduce the damages of flooding during the 
event. 
251. 
UNDP will request that contractors, suppliers, and partners adhere to zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and 
harassment (SEAH) and commit to taking adequate action if faced with SEAH allegations, in the absence of which, 
contractual arrangements can be terminated. UNDP has a standalone Code of Ethics which applies to all staff and 
contractors and defines the ethical standards applicable to all, citing the specific policy references. UNDP is 
committed to creating and maintaining a working environment that respects the inherent dignity of all persons, 
affording them the opportunity to reach their fullest potential and empowering them to deliver the best possible 
results for UNDP and the people we serve. To that effect, UNDP has further implemented policies for protection 
against Harassment, Sexual Harassment, Discrimination and abuse of Authority, as well as special measures for 
protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse.  These policies are further backed by a Policy for Protection 
against Retaliation against individuals holding UNDP assignments/contracts (i.e., staff members, interns, UN 
Volunteers and contractors) who have, in good faith, properly reported allegations of misconduct, or who have 
cooperated with a duly authorized audit or investigation. 
Other vulnerable groups 
 
64 https://www.undp.org/bosnia-herzegovina/publications/intersectional-analysisdifferential-impact-covid-19-crisis-and-inflation-
womenbosnia-and-herzegovina

=== PAGE 114 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 110 
 
 
 
 
252. 
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, several groups are particularly vulnerable to flood risk. These groups may face 
higher levels of exposure and have limited capacities to cope with and recover from the impacts of flooding. The 
main vulnerable groups are: 
• 
Socioeconomically Disadvantaged Communities: Socioeconomically disadvantaged communities, including 
low-income households, marginalized groups, and those living in informal settlements or substandard housing, 
are often more vulnerable to flood risk. Limited resources, lack of infrastructure, and inadequate access to 
services make it challenging for these communities to effectively prepare for, respond to, and recover from 
floods 
• 
Rural and Agricultural Communities: Rural communities, particularly those engaged in agriculture and 
subsistence farming, are highly susceptible to flood risk. Floods can lead to crop losses, damage to livestock, 
destruction of infrastructure (e.g., irrigation systems), and disruption of livelihoods. The dependence on 
agricultural activities and limited access to alternative income sources amplify their vulnerability. 
• 
Elderly Population: The elderly population faces heightened vulnerability to flood risk due to physical limitations, 
limited mobility, and underlying health conditions. These factors can hinder their ability to evacuate, seek 
shelter, or access necessary assistance during and after flooding events. Additionally, the elderly population 
may face challenges in recovering and rebuilding their lives after a flood 
• 
Children and Youth: Children and youth are a vulnerable group during floods due to their dependency on 
caregivers, increased health risks, and potential disruptions to education and social support networks. 
Displacement, loss of shelter, separation from family members, and exposure to hazardous conditions can 
have long-lasting impacts on their well-being, development, and future opportunities 
• 
Ethnic and Minority Groups: Ethnic and minority groups, such as Roma communities, particularly those living 
in remote or marginalized areas, may face disproportionate vulnerability to flood risk. Limited access to 
resources, infrastructure, and decision-making processes can hinder their capacity to prepare for and respond 
to floods. Cultural and language barriers may also impede effective communication and coordination during 
emergencies. 
• 
People with Disabilities: Individuals with disabilities may face additional challenges during floods, such as 
limited mobility, sensory impairments, or reliance on assistive devices. Barriers in physical infrastructure, lack 
of inclusive emergency plans, and limited access to information and support services can exacerbate their 
vulnerability and reduce their ability to safely evacuate or access necessary assistance. 
Understanding the specific vulnerabilities of gender and other socially and economically excluded groups is crucial for 
developing inclusive and targeted flood risk management strategies. It is also important to address the intersecting 
vulnerabilities and promote social equity in building resilience to flood risk in B&H. During project development, a 
number of these vulnerabilities were included in the socio-economic assessment of flood risk modelling and 
assessment based on socio-economic and census data. During implementation and as part of the ESIA and ESMP, 
measures will be tailored to ensure their participation, access to early warning systems, evacuation plans, and post-
flood recovery support.  
 
Conclusion 
253. Environmental impacts associated with the project are considered acceptable due to the nature of the interventions 
and the ability to manage impacts through implementation of mitigation measures, while social benefits are 
significant and can provide long-term improvements to the lives of communities in the target areas.   
 
254. Budgeting for environmental interventions and the application of mitigation measures to enhance positive impacts 
for the project is an investment in the future as it will reduce the environmental and social liability at local, state and 
national levels.  The end result of this expenditure will be that there will be reduced river sedimentation and erosion; 
stronger and improved resilience to the impacts of climate change, healthier ecosystems, more knowledgeable 
communities and overall improvement in the quality of life of the population as an investment in the future of the 
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which if implemented as per the project proposal, will be repaid may times over 
through reduced long-term operation and maintenance costs of implementing the project. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
255. The project will address specific gender-based vulnerabilities as a key requirement of enhanced of climate change 
adaptation strategies and actions.  As a result of the project implementation more lives, property and productive 
assets will be secured from the impacts of climate induced disasters.  While all B&H population will benefit from

=== PAGE 115 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 111 
 
 
 
 
the project, the gender gap will decrease as women’s benefits will be relatively bigger given greater dependence 
of their livelihoods on natural resources. During the proposal development individual gender-specific impacts and 
needs have been examined through the lenses of vulnerability, capacities and voices and this will continue 
throughout project implementation as detailed in the Gender Action Plan (Annex 8). This approach will ensure 
support to most vulnerable social groups among which women in B&H are specifically recognized. By enabling 
equal participation of men and women, the project will ensure that climate change adaptation is more effective and 
sustainable. 
 
256. Assessment of the human rights within the B&H legal framework in latest decades reveals that significant progress 
has been made in the application of the principle of the gender equality, which is a result of activities taken by 
gender institutional mechanisms but also due to civil society activism. However, the Gender Assessment and 
Gender Action Plan (Annex 8) outline several social phenomena that are increasing gender-based vulnerability 
especially in conditions of climate induced disastrous floods in B&H. 
257. The vulnerability of women in B&H is caused by social and economic reasons which are deeply rooted in traditional 
norms of the society. Representation of women in legislative and executive authorities as well as in managerial 
positions, at all levels, remains unsatisfactory.  Hence there is reduced participation of women in decision making 
including economic, environmental and social issues. Due to gender stereotypes women with secondary and 
university education are also more likely to be unemployed than men with the same education. Out of total number 
of employees only 37% are women. One working hour of women in B&H is 10% less paid than men.  Also, great 
prevalence of traditional socio-cultural gender norms supports male ownership.  Men account for over 70 percent 
of landownership and own 74 percent of dwellings. Women have lower financial inclusion by almost 10% compared 
to man. Social gender stereotypes that restrict women’s involvement outside of household and family are even 
more deeply rooted in rural areas. 
 
258. The existing gender inequality factors (e.g. limited engagement of women in planning and decision making) and 
traditional distribution of gender roles in families and communities call for tailoring and targeting of the project 
solutions to outreach beneficiaries of both genders equally. In order to address these vulnerabilities and more 
effectively involve women in FRM processes the project has dedicated special attention to gender issues under 
activities: 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 2.4, 3.1, 3.2. The project will assess gender-specific vulnerabilities  to flood risks through 
gender responsive socio-economic data collection, ensure equal participation and decision making as well as 
information access and warning dissemination services. Further, the project will ensure women are involved in the 
processes of capacity building for climate induced hazard risk assessment within the FRM at all levels, but also in 
the development of public/private collaboration on building resilience by climate risk finance mechanisms. 
 
259. At Project inception, additional gender analysis will be undertaken to ensure that the baseline data set is sex- and 
age-disaggregated and adequate for assessment of the gender impacts of the Project. Progress reports will provide 
periodic updates on the effect of the Project on women, and regular UNDP review missions and the midterm review 
mission will review and monitor the gender impacts. The Gender Action Plan includes a number of 
recommendations aimed at ensuring that the project: 
• 
narrows gender inequality.  
• 
addresses the needs and constraints of women, girls, men, and boys.  
• 
avoid any risks of adverse gender impacts;  
• 
ensure women’s participation, promotes their leadership qualities; and  
• 
ensure women are included as planners, co–implementers and agents of change.  
 
As part of the implementation of the Gender Action Plan the project will:  
(i) Carry out gender responsive vulnerability assessment informed by gender analysis:  When carrying out group 
discussions and in-depth interviews with key stakeholders, the project will ensure an equal representation of 
women, elderly people, disabled or family members of disabled, IDPs, community leaders and government 
officials.  
(ii) Ensure collection of sex- and age-disaggregated data for project indicators: Gender responsive and sex-
disaggregated reporting will be further introduced beyond the project level at the national level through the 
multi-hazard disaster risk information and knowledge system to be designed by the project.   
(iii) Enhance gender considerations in disaster preparedness activities based on gender analysis: Men and 
women of different age groups, as well as those from vulnerable communities will be involved in planning and 
implementation. Community consultancy groups with at least 30 percent representation of less represented 
sex will be established. The project will ensure that information on hazards, their character, probability of 
occurrence, threats to life, possible impact on livelihood, houses, crops and livestock and on protecting

=== PAGE 116 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 112 
 
 
 
 
measures is reaching both women and men through appropriately tailored channels. Gender Mechanisms 
representative will be engaged in disaster preparedness activities. 
(iv) Warrant universal access to disaster warnings: The project will tailor warning to the gender-differentiated 
needs and capabilities of specific population groups, such as children, senior citizens, IDPs, the sick and 
persons with disabilities.   
(v) Mainstream gender considerations and engagement of women in resilience building activities targeting 30 
percent representation of less represented sex in capacity building and training activities supported by the 
project. The project will ensure that women have equal access to information and livelihood generating 
activities facilitated by the project. The project will strengthen social capital through creating community 
groups for planning for, safeguarding from and mitigating adverse effects of natural disasters with at least 30 
percent less represented sex participation. 
(vi) Conduct gender mainstreaming trainings and build capacity of national stakeholders targeted by project and 
responsible for various disaster risk reduction functions  
(vii) Engage women in decision-making: the project will ensure at least 30 percent representation and active 
participation of less represented sex in project stakeholder consultations, local and national decision-making 
bodies established and/or facilitated by the project. The project will secure participation of the Gender 
Institutional Mechanism representatives in the consultations and decision-making.  
(viii) 
Project staff: The project will ensure that men and women are adequately represented in the project 
implementation team, staff members will be trained on gender mainstreaming and on social vulnerability 
approach. The Project team leaders will ensure that all specialists are briefed on their responsibilities in 
relation to the Gender Action Plan upon mobilization. 
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
260. The financial management and procurement of this project will follow UNDP financial rules and regulations 
available 
here: 
https://info.undp.org/global/documents/frm/Financial-Rules-and-Regulations_E.pdf. 
Further 
guidance is outlined in the financial resources management section of the UNDP Programme and Operations 
Policies and Procedures available at https://info.undp.org/global/popp/frm/Pages/introduction.aspx. 
 
261. UNDP has comprehensive procurement policies in place as outlined in the ‘Contracts and Procurement’ section of 
UNDP’s Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP).  The policies outline formal procurement 
standards and guidelines across each phase of the procurement process, and they apply to all procurements in 
UNDP.  See here:  https://info.undp.org/global/popp/cap/Pages/Introduction.aspx. Procurement of services and 
goods will be done in a cost effective and reliable way and by applying following principles: Best Value for Money, 
which consists of the selection of the offer that best meets the end-users’ needs and that presents the best return 
on investment; Fairness, Integrity and Transparency, which ensures that competitive processes are fair, open, 
and rules-based. All potential vendors will be treated equally, and the process will feature clear evaluation criteria, 
unambiguous solicitation instructions, realistic requirements, and rules and procedures that are easy to 
understand; Effective International Competition, understood as giving all potential vendors timely and adequate 
information on UNDP requirements, as well as equal opportunity to participate in procurement actions; and In the 
best interest of UNDP, which means that any business transactions must conform to the mandates and principles 
of UNDP and the United Nations. As outlined in the Procurement Plan, procurement of goods and services will be 
carried out by UNDP and the UNDP procurement procedures will be applied (POPP). Additional details on the 
UNDP procurement threthholds and methods are provided in the Annex 10. Procurement Plan 
 
262. The project will be implemented following the Direct Implementation Modality (DIM) following DIM guidelines. 
 
263. The project will be audited following the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted above and applicable audit 
guidelines and policies. According to the current audit policies, UNDP will be appointing the auditors. In UNDP 
scheduled audits are performed annually, during the programme cycle as per UNDP assurance/audit plans, on the 
basis of the implementing partner's risk rating and UNDP’s guidelines. The project financial statements will comply 
with international accounting standards. A scheduled audit is used to determine whether the funds transferred to 
the implementing partner were used for the appropriate purpose and in accordance with the work plan. A scheduled 
audit can consist of a financial audit or an internal control audit.  
 
264. Financial Sustainability. The government’s co-finance covers O&M costs during the 6 years of the project’s 
implementation duration, and the government and HPP partner are committed to cover O&M costs of equipment

=== PAGE 117 ===
F 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 113 
 
 
 
 
and flood defences installed during the project over the 20 years of investment lifetime, thus ensuring continued 
operation and financial sustainability of the project’s proposed investments. Details of the financial analysis are 
presented in Annex XII (b). In addition, the project is developing risk-based investment planning frameworks at the 
municipal and contonal levels, climate risk financing and risk transfer mechanisms.  These interventions will help 
to identify and plan the financing that is needed to address climate risks to communities, develop and implement 
long-term public and private sector climate finacing, as well as instruments for transferring risk and building 
financial resilience of households and key sector players. All of these interventions will contribute to the financial 
sustainability of the project.   
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information. 
 
☒ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
be disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☐ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
• 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with 
an explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
• 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website.  
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 118 ===
H 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 114 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  
☒ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP/Annex 6b) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☒  Others: SESP(Annex 6a)  
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance)  
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule         
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☒ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
 
 
☒ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☐ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a pilot 
project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☒ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22 
Beneficiary Estimation Methodology 
☒ 
 
UNDP Responses to GCF comments on FP

=== PAGE 119 ===
BOSNA I HERCEGOVINA
MINISTARSTVO VANJSKE TRGOVINE
I EKONOMSKIH ODNOSA
BOCHA XEPIIEIOBHA
MHCTAPCTBO CITO.JLHE
TPIOBHE EKOHOMCKX OJIHOCA
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
MINISTRY OF FOREIGN TRADE AND
ECONOMIC RELATIONS
Number: Ol-0-2024/23
Sarajevo, 14 June 2023
NO OBJECTION LETTER
To: The Green Climate Fund ("GCF")
Re: Funding proposal for the GCF by UNDP regarding "Scaling-up Climate Resilient Flood Risk
Management in Bosnia and Herzegovina" project
Dear Madam, Sir,
We refer to the project titled "Scaling-up Climate Resilient Flood Risk Management in Bosnia and
Herzegovina" in Bosnia and Herzegovina as included in the funding proposal submitted by UNDP to
us on 26 April 2023.
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and
Economic Relations of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the NDA/Focal Point of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content ofwhich we acknowledge to have reviewed, we
hereby communicate our no-objection to the project as included in the funding proposal.
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that:
(a) The governments in Bosnia and Herzegovina have no-objection to the project as included in
the funding proposal;
(b) The project as included in the funding proposal is in conformity with the national priorities,
strategies and plans in Bosnia and Herzegovina;
(c) In accordance with the GCF's environmental and social safeguards, the project as included in
the funding proposal is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection to the project as included in
_!.he»f
• • • ing~~
oposal has been duly followed.
> .,A
7 CO>rt • q
w."/'Nämestasa.Kotre
."3ifé;Mihìster'gfForeign Trade and9Economic Relations of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the GCF National
•
Des)gnat@dAuthorty/Focal Pomt of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
¿--:. .2-.·
Mycana 9, 71 000 Capajeso, men: +387 33 220 093 pakc: +387 33 220 091
Musala 9, 71 000 Sarajevo, tel:+ 387 33 220 093 Jaks: +387 33 220 091
www.mvteo.gov.ba
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authority(ies) or focal point(s)

=== PAGE 120 ===
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
Scaling up climate resilient flood risk management in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Existence of subproject(s) 
to be identified after GCF 
Board approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or private) 
Public 
Accredited entity 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category B 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or 
location(s) of programme 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Flood risk reduction activities will be implemented in: 
Neretva river basin, Čapljina municipality;  
Bosna river basin, municipalities Gračanica, Maglaj, Doboj, 
Modriča, Lukavac; 
Sana river Basin, Prijedor municipality;  
Jošavka river basin, Čelinac municipality; 
Vrbas river basin, City of Banja Luka; Gradiška municipality; 
and 
Drina river basin, City of Bijeljina. 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, September 8, 2023 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English, Bosnian, Croatian, and Serbian 
Explanation on language 
The official languages of Bosnia and Herzegovina are Bosnian, 
Croatian, and Serbian. Bosnian and Croatian is the same 
language, which is called Croatian in the areas with Croat 
majority and Bosnian within Bosniak majority. The Bosnian 
and Croatian language uses Latin alphabet. Serbian language 
uses the Cyrillic alphabet. ESMF has been published in all 
official national languages  as well as in the English language. 
Link to disclosure 
English:  
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023-
09/scaling_up_climate_resilient_flood_risk_management_bih_
esar_and_esmf.pdf 
Bosnian: 
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023-
09/izvjestaj_o_procjeni_utjecaja_na_okolis_i_drustvo_bos.pdf 
Croatian:  
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023-
09/izvjestaj_o_procjeni_utjecaja_na_okolis_i_drustvo_cro.pdf 
Serbian:  
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023-
09/proshirene_upravlana_rizikom_od_poplava_otpornog_na_
klimu_u_bosni_i_khercegovini.pdf 
Other link(s) 
UNFCCC site in Bosnia and Herzegovina:

=== PAGE 121 ===
English: 
http://www.unfccc.ba/en/site/upload/PDF_dokumenti/Scali
ng_up_climate_resilient_flood_risk_management_BIH-eng.pdf 
 
Bosnian: 
http://www.unfccc.ba/site/upload/PDF_dokumenti/Scaling_
up_climate_resilient_flood_risk_management_BIH_FP_complet
e.pdf 
 
Croatian: 
http://www.unfccc.ba/site/upload/PDF_dokumenti/Scaling_
up_climate_resilient_flood_risk_management-CRO.pdf  
 
Serbian: 
http://www.unfccc.ba/site/upload/PDF_dokumenti/Scaling_
up_climate_resilient_flood_risk_management_BIH-cir.pdf  
 
Water Agency “Public institution Vode Srpske”: 
http://www.voders.org/dokumentacija/izvjestaj_o_procjeni_
utjecaja.pdf  
Проширење управљања ризиком од поплава 
08092023.pdf (voders.org) 
Republic Hydrometeo institute:  
https://rhmzrs.com/project/prosirenje-upravljanja-rizikom-
od-poplava-otpornog-na-klimu-u-bosni-i-hercegovini/  
Remarks 
An ESIA consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Assessment Report and Environmental and Social 
Management Framework”. 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Friday, September 8, 2023 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English, Bosnian, Croatian, and Serbian 
Explanation on language 
The official languages of Bosnia and Herzegovina are Bosnian, 
Croatian, and Serbian. Bosnian and Croatian is the same 
language, which is called Croatian in the areas with Croat 
majority and Bosnian with Bosniak majority. The Bosnian and 
Croatian language uses Latin alphabet. Serbian language uses 
the Cyrillic alphabet. ESMF has been published in all official 
national languages  as well as in the English language.  
Link to disclosure 
English:  
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023-
09/scaling_up_climate_resilient_flood_risk_management_bih_
esar_and_esmf.pdf  
 
Bosnian: 
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023-
09/izvjestaj_o_procjeni_utjecaja_na_okolis_i_drustvo_bos.pdf 
 
Croatian: 
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023-
09/izvjestaj_o_procjeni_utjecaja_na_okolis_i_drustvo_cro.pdf  
 
Serbian:

=== PAGE 122 ===
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023-
09/proshirene_upravlana_rizikom_od_poplava_otpornog_na_
klimu_u_bosni_i_khercegovini.pdf  
Other link(s) 
UNFCCC site in Bosnia and Herzegovina:  
English: 
http://www.unfccc.ba/en/site/upload/PDF_dokumenti/Scali
ng_up_climate_resilient_flood_risk_management_BIH-eng.pdf 
 
Bosnian: 
http://www.unfccc.ba/site/upload/PDF_dokumenti/Scaling_
up_climate_resilient_flood_risk_management_BIH_FP_complet
e.pdf 
 
Croatian: 
http://www.unfccc.ba/site/upload/PDF_dokumenti/Scaling_
up_climate_resilient_flood_risk_management-CRO.pdf  
 
Serbian: 
http://www.unfccc.ba/site/upload/PDF_dokumenti/Scaling_
up_climate_resilient_flood_risk_management_BIH-cir.pdf  
 
Water Agency “Public institution Vode Srpske”: 
http://www.voders.org/dokumentacija/izvjestaj_o_procjeni_
utjecaja.pdf  
Проширење управљања ризиком од поплава 
08092023.pdf (voders.org) 
Republic Hydrometeo institute:  
https://rhmzrs.com/project/prosirenje-upravljanja-rizikom-
od-poplava-otpornog-na-klimu-u-bosni-i-hercegovini/  
Remarks 
An ESMP consistent with the requirements for a Category B 
project is contained in the “Environmental and Social 
Assessment Report and Environmental and Social 
Management Framework”. 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Social and Environmental Safeguards Procedure (SESP) 
Tuesday, September 12, 2023 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English, Bosnian, Croatian, Serbian 
Explanation on language 
The official languages of Bosnia and Herzegovina are Bosnian, 
Croatian, and Serbian. Bosnian and Croatian is the same 
language, which is called Croatian in the areas with Croat 
majority and Bosnian with Bosniak majority. The Bosnian and

=== PAGE 123 ===
Croatian language uses Latin alphabet. Serbian language uses 
the Cyrillic alphabet. 
We have, however added documents indicating a language, not 
a letter. 
SESP has been published in all official national languages as 
well as in the English language. 
Link to disclosure 
English:   
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023-
09/social_and_environmental_screening_template.pdf  
 
Bosnian: 
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023-
09/obrazac_za_socijalni_i_ekoloski_pregled_bos.pdf 
 
Croatian:  
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023-
09/obrazac_za_socijalni_i_ekoloski_pregled_cro.pdf 
 
Serbian: 
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2023-
09/obrazac_za_socijalni_i_ekoloshki_pregled.pdf  
Other link(s) 
UNFCCC site in Bosnia and Herzegovina: 
English: 
http://www.unfccc.ba/en/site/upload/PDF_dokumenti/FP-
UNDP-20220421-6360-
Annex%206_a_%20SESP_20230522_clean.pdf 
 
Bosnian: 
http://www.unfccc.ba/site/upload/PDF_dokumenti/FP-
UNDP-20220421-6360-
Annex%206_a_%20SESP_20230522_clean_LAT.pdf  
 
Croatian: 
http://www.unfccc.ba/site/upload/PDF_dokumenti/FP-
UNDP-20220421-6360-
Annex%206_a_%20SESP_20230522_clean_CRO.pdf  
 
Serbian: 
http://www.unfccc.ba/site/upload/PDF_dokumenti/FP-
UNDP-20220421-6360-
Annex%206_a_%20SESP_20230522_clean_CIR.pdf  
 
Remarks 
The SESP is a UNDP document that is used for identifying social 
and environmental risks and mitigation measures. It does not 
replace or conflict with GCF ESS requirements and policies. 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Tuesday, September 12, 2023 
Place 
Physical copies of the ESMF are available to the public at 
regional sub-offices of the Public Institution “Vode Srpske” in 
Bosna, Sana, Vrbas, Drina and Trebisnjica river basins at their 
local offices as follows: 
 
- 
Bijeljina: Miloša Obilića 51, 76300 Bijeljina 
- 
Doboj: Vojvode Mišića 22, 74000 Doboj,  
- 
Prijedor: Aleja Kozarskog odreda 4, 79101 Prijedor

=== PAGE 124 ===
- 
Banja Luka: Milana Radmana 10, 78000 Banja Luka 
- 
Trebinje: Srpska 2, 89101 Trebinje 
- 
Zvornik:  Svetog Save bb, 75400 Zvornik 
 
In the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, physical copies 
of the ESMF are available  
-in the Water Agency for Sava River Basin (Hamdije 
Čemerlića 39a, Sarajevo 71000 ) and  
-Water Agency for Adriatic River Basin (Dr. Ante 
Starčevića bb. 88000 Mostar).  
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
N/A 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  
Monday, October 23, 2023 
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above.

=== PAGE 125 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 125 
 
 
 
Secretariat’s assessment of FP216 
Proposal name: 
Scaling up climate resilient flood risk management in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina 
Accredited entity: 
United Nations Development Programme 
Country/(ies): 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Project/programme size:  
Medium 
I. 
Overall assessment of the Secretariat 
1. 
The funding proposal is presented to the Board for consideration with the following 
remarks: 
Strengths 
Points of caution 
The direct benefits will be extended to 799,445 
people, accounting for 25 per cent of the total 
population, with a focus on the most vulnerable 
population. 
Political instability could pose a risk that 
requires careful management.  
Scaling up successful innovative flood risk 
management (FRM) technologies and 
implementing a nationwide, impact-based Flood 
Forecasting and Early Warning System (FFEWS), 
which will lead to improved warning times and 
reduced losses. 
The project’s strong inclination towards 
scaling up and replicating proposed 
innovations and knowledge products beyond 
the project areas will require great attention 
to the technical soundness and flexibility of, 
in particular, innovative FRM technologies 
and FFEWS to incorporate the needs and 
vulnerability aspects of communities and 
institutions outside the scope of the project.  
 
Engaging the private sector in climate information 
services and FRM activities and facilitating the 
increased use of climate risk information in its 
operations.  
 
GCF investment of USD 14.4 million will leverage 
an additional USD 58.29 million in co-financing 
from both public and private sectors. The 
government of Bosnia and Herzegovina will 
contribute USD 30.74 million in co-financing.  
 
2. 
The Board may wish to consider approving this funding proposal in accordance with the 
terms and conditions listed in the respective term sheet and addendum XXI, titled “List of 
proposed conditions and recommendations”. 
II. 
Summary of the Secretariat’s assessment

=== PAGE 126 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 126 
 
 
2.1 
Project background  
3. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, identified as a middle-income country, has an estimated 
population of 3.531 million and spans an area of 51,209.2 km². During the 1992–1995 conflict, 
the country underwent severe destruction. In subsequent years, it has been navigating a 
complicated landscape of post-war rebuilding, along with economic and social revitalization. 
The conflict significantly compromised the country’s flood risk management capabilities, 
inflicting direct harm on flood control infrastructure and hydrological monitoring stations, 
while also creating hazardous minefields around these facilities. Adding to these difficulties is 
the country’s gradual economic transition towards a market-based system, demanding 
enhanced governance and structural changes.   
4. 
Around a quarter of the population of Bosnia and Herzegovina faces a high risk of 
flooding exacerbated by climate change, which has led to increased rainfall intensity and 
unpredictability, resulting in more frequent and severe flooding events that impact lives, 
property and essential infrastructure. Key economic sectors such as agriculture, water 
management and hydropower are especially vulnerable. Between 2006 and 2012, flooding 
accounted for 62 per cent of all natural disaster-related damages across the countries. This was 
followed by a significant flood event in 2010 that led to damages worth USD 200 million, or 
approximately 1 per cent of gross domestic product. An even more catastrophic flooding event 
occurred in May 2014, the worst in 150 years, affecting a quarter of the nation’s land and 
causing a staggering USD 2.7 billion in damages, equivalent to 15 per cent of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina’s gross domestic product. These floods have disproportionately affected 
vulnerable segments of the population, including the rural poor, war returnees and displaced 
persons, who often live in flood-prone areas.  
5. 
The objective of the project is to seek to reduce the growing vulnerabilities of 
communities and livelihoods in Bosnia and Herzegovina to heightened risks of climate-triggered 
floods. The project is designed to establish an integrated and innovative, gender-responsive, 
climate-resilient approach to FRM. It aims to fortify the institutional, technical and financial 
frameworks for the sustained implementation of comprehensive FRM strategies, which include 
a blend of structural interventions, non-structural measures as well as ecosystem-based 
approaches. Additionally, the project will focus on improving the utilization of climate 
information, flood forecasting, early warning and emergency response systems to heighten the 
resilience and adaptive capacities of communities at risk. This initiative is aligned with the 
United Nations multi-partner initiative Early Warnings for All (EW4All) programme, launched 
in March 2022, and aims to contribute to the execution of the EWS4All Executive Action Plan, 
developed in March 2023. The project outlines two outcomes and three outputs:  
(a) 
Outcome 1: Climate-informed gender-responsive impact-based FFEWS and increased 
generation and use of climate data reduce vulnerability to flood-related disasters; 
(i) 
Output 1: Fully integrated impact-based FFEWS facilitates timely preparation 
and response;  
(b) 
Outcome 2: Vulnerable communities in Bosnia and Herzegovina including women, 
children, persons with disabilities and older persons are better protected from and less 
exposed to climate-induced flood risks through a combination of structural and non-
structural flood risk reduction solutions; 
(i) 
Output 2: Non-structural flood risk reduction measures and nature-based 
solutions mainstreamed in sectoral policies and plans and effectively contribute 
to the protection of people and livelihoods from climate-induced flood risk; and 
(ii) 
Output 3:  Climate-proof flood protection measures are scaled-up through new 
and improved national and local investment frameworks increasing the 
resilience of the most vulnerable groups to climate-induced flooding.

=== PAGE 127 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 127 
 
 
6. 
Aimed at impacting a significant segment of the population, the proposed project targets 
799,445 direct beneficiaries by the end of the project, representing 25 per cent of the total 
population. It will prevent loss of life, property, critical infrastructure and economic assets, and 
will build resilience to flooding in the most vulnerable communities.  
7. 
The total project financing amounts to USD 72.69 million, with a request for GCF grants 
of USD 14.4 million. The remaining sum of USD 58.23 million will come from a diverse range of 
co-financing partners, which include the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina and UNDP.  
2.2 
Component-by-component analysis 
8. 
The project objective will be achieved through three complementary outputs that 
comprise its three components.  
Component 1: Climate-informed impact-based FFEWS and an increased generation and use of 
climate data to reduce vulnerability to flood-related disasters (total cost: USD 14.65 million; GCF 
cost: USD 5.095 million) 
9. 
The project aims to enhance the hydrometeorological monitoring network by covering a 
broader array of hydrometric variables impacted by climate change. Special focus will be on 
placed areas with the highest risk, such as Category I rivers and torrents. Technical support will 
be offered to integrate hydro power plants' hydrometric networks into the national grid. A 
sustainable operation and maintenance (O&M) system will also be set up, financed by both the 
public and private sectors.  
10. 
This component will refine existing hazard and risk models to include a more 
comprehensive approach. Activities will include extending models to cover whole basins, 
including category II tributaries, and improving hydrological modelling. The goal is to create an 
effective reservoir operation strategy that balances flood risk, dam safety and power generation. 
The project will incorporate hydro power plant operations into flood hazard and risk modelling 
in key basins and will produce specialized climate risk information for the hydropower sector, 
especially focusing on the Neretva and Trebisnjica River Sub-basins.  
11. 
Building on existing FFEWS, this project will advance information and communications 
technology systems to support real-time forecasting and warning. The new FFEWS will cover 
hydro-energy intensive river basins such as Neretva and Trebisnjica, and update existing 
models for the Una-Sana River Basin. Further enhancements will include advanced 
meteorological forecasting capabilities based on numerical weather prediction models. 
12. 
To ensure the sustainability of these initiatives, the project will deliver extensive 
training and capacity-building programmes. It will streamline communication between different 
agencies to avoid duplication and inefficiencies and establish standard operating procedures 
(SOPs), communication protocols and codes of conduct, including “Last-mile” communication 
protocols, protocols and SOPs defining the forecast thresholds for forecast-based financing. The 
project will also develop operational maintenance of the hydrometric network. It will assess and 
further develop specific data-sharing/communication protocols for impact-based FFEWS and 
climate-resilient FRM in coordination with the national adaptation plan project and will 
implement these protocols across relevant institutions. 
Component 2: Non-structural flood risk reduction measures and nature-based solutions 
mainstreamed within sectoral policies and plans and effectively contribute to protection of people 
and livelihoods from climate-induced flood risk (total cost: USD 27.67 million; GCF cost: USD 6.74 
million) 
13. 
The second component of the project is focused on elevating key FRM policies. This will 
be accomplished by enhancing existing legal and regulatory frameworks to incorporate climate-
responsive FRM across various sectors, such as agriculture, forestry, hydropower and spatial

=== PAGE 128 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 128 
 
 
planning. At the state level, a holistic, cross-entity strategy will be adopted, particularly for 
shared basins. This integrated approach necessitates the participation of key stakeholders, 
improved coordination, and the ratification of relevant regional and multilateral environmental 
agreements. The project will also revise existing regulations to accommodate the challenges 
posed by climate-induced floods. Through these activities, local governments will be enabled to 
formulate evidence-based, climate-resilient policies and strategies, grounded in comprehensive 
impact assessments and cost–benefit analyses. 
14. 
This project component will incorporate community-based ecosystem-based adaptation 
(EbA) solutions aimed at mitigating the impacts of severe flooding, particularly in the Vrbas 
River Basin. The project will expand upon the successful EbA methods previously piloted by the 
UNDP/Special Climate Change Fund Vrbas River initiative. The Vrbas River Basin, unique in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina for its existing torrential flood hazard maps and evaluated cost-
effective EbA strategies, will be prioritized for the implementation of high-impact ecological 
measures. Additionally, one key issue contributing to sediment build-up is the existing network 
of forest roads, initially carved out during wartime for illegal logging. Though current legislation 
largely prevents the expansion of such roads for timber extraction, their initial construction has 
led to significant material run-off, affecting river networks usually the mainstream of the River 
Vrbas. 
15. 
The project aims to establish a comprehensive framework in Bosnia and Herzegovina 
for applying climate-resilient EbA approaches to flood-risk management. It will adapt well-
tested flood management strategies from other countries and compile best practices. These 
insights will be consolidated into countrywide guidelines, technical specifications, standards 
and protocols, and will be incorporated into national policies. The project will also strengthen 
institutional capacities in identifying and implementing these EbA approaches to flood risk 
management measures.  
16. 
The project will support the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina in transitioning 
from ad-hoc project-based awareness and education to a more systematic and sustainable 
approach to flood and disaster risk education. A long-term awareness-raising campaign will be 
developed and executed. This will include nationwide training programmes focused on flood 
risk management, targeting practitioners, decision makers, local communities and emergency 
responders. The project will also formulate a sustainable capacity development plan, enhancing 
training in FRM and climate risk information within existing educational institutions. This 
strategy will include a Train-the-Trainers programme, foster key partnerships with academic 
institutions, and establish mechanisms for long-term capacity-building, building on the 
groundwork laid by the initial Vrbas project.  
Component 3: Climate-proof flood protection measures scaled-up through new and improved 
national and local investment frameworks increasing resilience of the most vulnerable groups to 
climate-induced flooding (total cost: USD 26.52 million; GCF cost: USD 1.88 million) 
17. 
Component 3 aims to bolster the resilience of community livelihoods by amplifying 
flood protection measures that are resilient to climate change. This will be realized by 
formulating an Investment Framework designed specifically to reduce and manage climate-
induced flood risks, which will involve both public sector and private sector participation in 
climate risk financing and risk transfer mechanisms. The planned activities will establish these 
financing and risk transfer mechanisms after conducting thorough assessments of 
socioeconomic risks, damages and losses. These initiatives will be largely co-financed by the 
national insurance sector. 
18. 
Building on the climate risk-sensitive budgeting mechanisms developed at the municipal 
level under the national adaptation plan project, this component will explore avenues for 
integrating such budgeting practices into Bosnia and Herzegovina's existing public financial 
management framework. This will leverage current strengths while addressing any bottlenecks

=== PAGE 129 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 129 
 
 
in the budgeting process that obstruct climate risk-sensitive budgeting for flood risk 
management. Key tools for this effort will include damage and loss modelling to quantify the 
existing cost of disasters, thereby informing resource allocation within the FRM framework. The 
component will also introduce value-for-money analysis, utilizing cost–benefit data to 
underscore the advantages (and higher value-for-money) of greater spending on FRM, 
preparedness and mitigation. 
19. 
This component will orchestrate a comprehensive engagement programme involving 
state institutions, insurance and reinsurance firms, and financial and capital market entities. 
The goal is to forge pivotal public–private partnerships aimed at augmenting and scaling up 
investments in climate-resilient initiatives. Legislative and governance interventions will be 
executed to reinforce financial institutions, enabling them to offer climate-responsive financing 
options and products within existing markets, thereby ensuring the long-term viability of the 
investments with the potential for future scaling. Additionally, financial institutions, including 
microfinance entities, will receive specialized training and technical guidance for the 
development of lending products. This will allow them to integrate climate risk data into their 
lending processes, thereby optimizing performance and reducing risks. Furthermore, loans with 
favourable terms will be provided to climate-responsive enterprises in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
improving upon current market conditions in aspects such as interest rates, loan periods and 
credit criteria.  
Project management (total cost: USD 3.85 million; GCF cost: USD 0.68 million) 
20. 
The portion of the project management cost covered by GCF constitutes less than 5 per 
cent of the total GCF funding requested and is in compliance with GCF’s policy on fees.   
III. 
Assessment of performance against investment criteria  
3.1 
Impact potential                                                                               Scale: High 
21. 
The initiative aims to mitigate flood risks for about 799,445 people, or 25 per cent of the 
nation's total population, who are currently vulnerable to climate change. By 2050, it is 
estimated that this will extend to 902,906 people or roughly 26 per cent of the entire 
population. This project is particularly aimed at safeguarding the most flood-vulnerable 
populations in 69 specified municipalities, making up 44 per cent of their inhabitants. The 
implementation of enhanced flood risk management is expected to have a high impact, 
preserving not only lives but also economic assets and infrastructure. Furthermore, EbA 
strategies will bolster both community resilience and ecological safeguards within targeted 
river basins. 
22. 
The project is geared towards fortifying resilience and improving the livelihoods of at-
risk demographics, specifically women, children, and senior citizens. Women make up 51.7 per 
cent of the affected population, whereas those under 15 and over 65 account for 15.2 per cent 
and 13.7 per cent, respectively. Economic analyses suggest that the initiative will yield an 
estimated annual benefit of USD 21 million upon full implementation, with the most significant 
gains seen in the protection of household assets. Geographically, the Bosna and Neretva River 
Sub-basins stand to benefit the most. The resilience of physical infrastructure across three key 
river basins in Bosnia and Herzegovina will also be heightened.  
23. 
In addition to local benefits, the project also aims for broader climate resilience through 
the adoption of FRM technologies and the integration of climate information into institutional 
frameworks in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The introduction of floodplain zoning policies, attuned 
to the specific vulnerabilities of local communities, aims to reduce their flood risk exposure 
significantly.

=== PAGE 130 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 130 
 
 
24. 
Stakeholder consultations have informed the project's design, with particular attention 
paid to the unique vulnerabilities of women, ethnic minorities, the persons with disabilities and 
older persons. The collection of gender-sensitive socioeconomic data will be an ongoing 
process. A Gender Action Plan (GAP) will further anchor the project in fulfilling Bosnia and 
Herzegovina's commitments to gender equality and international protocols on gender-
responsive climate adaptation and disaster risk measures. The GAP will leverage insights from 
prior initiatives, like the UNDP Vrbas project, and will include metrics and tools for monitoring 
progress in gender equality.  
3.2 
Paradigm shift potential 
                                  Scale: Medium to High 
25. 
The project  aims to revolutionize existing flood risk management procedures in Bosnia 
and Herzegovina by enhancing institutional effectiveness at various levels, disseminating 
reliable climate information and early warnings, deepening the understanding of disaster risk, 
and integrating non-structural, ecosystem-based risk management methods. The project also 
plans to collaborate with the private sector and bolster the resilience of both public and private 
investments to climate change, aiming to make flood risk management more integral to 
development planning. Furthermore, the project will cultivate new skill sets by employing 
integrated techniques and technologies to evaluate flood-related risks and formulate innovative 
risk management and mitigation strategies.  
26. 
The project aspires to make robust climate information and early warning services 
widely accessible. It intends to broaden climate risk information for FRM to extend the reach of 
existing hazard and risk modelling to include flash floods and hydroelectric power plants, 
thereby enriching the spectrum of hazard, risk and vulnerability information. The innovative 
introduction of forecast-based financing mechanisms will facilitate early, proactive measures, 
thereby enhancing the efficiency of response efforts and potentially reducing loss and damage.  
27. 
This will mark the first instance of a comprehensive, large-scale FFEWS being 
implemented in the nation. Innovative measures of observational tools, forecasting systems and 
digital technologies like Internet of Things and data analytics will be used to empower local 
communities to undertake their own disaster risk reduction measures. This complements the 
national EWS and offers potential for duplication in other locales. The project also seeks to 
partner with the private sector to create specialized climate services for sectors like 
hydropower and agriculture, thereby enhancing business continuity planning and private sector 
engagement.  
28. 
The plan underscores the importance of knowledge dissemination and collective 
learning. A nationwide flood risk management platform is envisioned to facilitate 
interdisciplinary coordination and offer policy guidance on flood risk management, drawing 
participation from public, private and civil sectors. Activity 2.4 is designed to offer extensive 
training programmes on flood risk management for various stakeholders, including decision 
makers and emergency responders. It also aims to bolster research and development in flood 
risk management via academic collaborations.  
29. 
The proposal is fully aligned with the United Nations Secretary-General’s EW4All 
initiatives, encapsulating all its four pillars: disaster risk knowledge and management; 
detection, observation, monitoring, analysis and forecasting; warning dissemination and 
communication; and preparedness and response capabilities.   
3.3 
Sustainable development potential                                            Scale: High 
30. 
The project is poised to deliver multiple co-benefits including enhanced ecosystem 
services, gender-responsive livelihood enhancement and job creation, and improved resilience

=== PAGE 131 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 131 
 
 
of communities’ physical assets. One of the notable economic advantages stems from averting 
the socioeconomic toll of flood disasters, which under climate change scenarios could reach up 
to USD 750 million in expected annual damages. This would notably hamper Bosnia and 
Herzegovina's socioeconomic progress. Avoiding such losses in sectors like agriculture and 
hydropower would be particularly significant.  
31. 
The project’s interventions offer detailed, sector-specific climate risk information, which 
is critical for strategic planning and operational optimization in sectors like hydropower. This 
targeted approach not only ensures the sustainable development of the hydropower sector but 
also facilitates a shift toward clean energy, contributing to greenhouse gas reduction. Similarly, 
safeguarding crucial infrastructure like roads and bridges will bolster economic development 
and community functionality. This, in turn, allows the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina 
government to allocate public funds more effectively, directing them toward socially significant 
initiatives rather than disaster recovery.   
32. 
In terms of social impact, the project is specifically designed to benefit vulnerable 
populations, with a focus on gender equality. By actively involving women – who are 
disproportionately affected by disasters – in decision-making processes, the project aims to 
counter existing gender disparities in employment and social roles in Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
33. 
Environmentally, the project deploys EbA strategies and nature-based solutions like 
riparian plantings and agro-forestry. These measures serve multiple purposes: they enhance 
water retention, regulate hydrological flows, mitigate natural hazards like flooding and soil 
erosion, and provide habitat preservation and reforestation benefits. In the long run, these 
interventions will significantly boost the country's environmental resilience to climate-induced 
flood disasters, thereby aiding in the protection of valuable natural assets such as land and 
forest.  
34. 
The Global Framework for Climate Services (GFCS) identifies five priority sectors for 
national development planning: agriculture, food security, water, health, disaster risk reduction, 
and energy. The potential benefit-cost of return on investment could be up to 500:1 for flood-
prone areas and 2500:1 for heat waves in urban centers (Teisberg and Weiher,2008). The 
proposal could explore these benefits in a multi-hazard context for flood-related hazards and 
linkages to the other hazards of the GFCS priority sectors. The proposal would benefit from a 
clearer articulation and demonstration of health benefits from flood-related risk management. 
The proposal could benefit from more detailed elaboration of how these interventions could 
lead to health benefits from basic hydro-meteorological forecasting and impact-based 
forecasting. It is recommended that UNDP should consider laying the foundation for the 
establishment of the infrastructure and tools for multi-sectoral forecasts in the other four GFCS 
priority sectors through the GFCS user interface platform. We also proposed the multi-hazards 
forecasting system could follow overall value chain of risk information sectoral risk 
management. 
3.4 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
                             Scale: High 
35. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a middle-income nation with approximately 3.5 million 
residents. It is still grappling with the devastating effects of the 1992–1995 war, which 
decimated its human, economic, and social resources. These challenges are exacerbated by an 
ongoing transition toward a market economy that demands structural reforms and enhanced 
governance. Bosnia and Herzegovina's economy is in a transitional phase, heavily reliant on 
exports such as metals, energy, textiles and furniture, as well as on remittances and foreign aid. 
Poor governmental coordination and excessive bureaucracy have stifled economic growth and 
deterred foreign investment, making the economy one of the least competitive in the region.

=== PAGE 132 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 132 
 
 
36. 
Socially, poverty remains high, with 16.9 per cent of the population living below the 
poverty line as of 2015. While the Human Development Index showed improvement between 
2000 and 2019, the gains were significantly offset when adjusted for inequality. Additionally, 
the country's Gender Inequality Index ranks it 38th out of 162 countries. Climate change has 
further strained the slow post-war economic recovery, particularly impacting sectors like 
agriculture and hydropower due to increasing flood events.  
37. 
Vulnerable groups, including the rural poor and displaced individuals, have been most 
affected by flooding disasters. A lack of institutional capacity exacerbates these issues, with 
fragmented governance and poor communication hampering effective FRM. Key gaps in 
institutional capacity include insufficient hydrometric monitoring, outdated flood risk maps, 
and limited technical and financial resources for modern FRM strategies.  
38. 
The project aims to address these institutional challenges by implementing Flash Flood 
Early Warning Systems (FFEWS) based on clearly defined roles and responsibilities, creating 
protocols for effective FFEWS and FRM coordination, and employing state-of-the-art 
technologies and training to build capacity.  
3.5 
Country ownership 
                                                                  Scale: High 
39. 
The project demonstrates a strong national ownership, and has established the 
appropriate/relevant systems and processes (political, institutional and legal frameworks) for 
implementing its commitments under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change. This includes the adoption of its intended nationally determined contributions under 
the Paris Agreement, for the period until 2030, in October 2015, and the development of its 
nationally determined contribution  in November 2020. The nationally determined contribution 
provides guidance on the country’s climate change adaptation and contribution to climate 
change mitigation. It identified the following as the country’s most vulnerable/priority sectors 
to climate change, for intervention: agriculture, water resources, forestry, energy, tourism, 
biodiversity and sensitive ecosystems, and human health, with the two most vulnerable sectors 
being agriculture and water resource management. It outlines the role of detailed planning of 
short, medium and long-term adaptation measures, development of climate risk financing 
mechanisms, and strengthening the responsible institutions in monitoring, analysis and 
modelling of climate risk.  The proposal is also aligned with the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals (in particular target 13) and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk 
Reduction (in particular target G). 
40. 
The proposal is developed based on these national strategies and the application of 
international recommendations. Strong country ownership is also demonstrated by significant 
government and local institution co-financing commitments. Co-financing support for the 
project will be provided by the Government of Republika Srpska through a European 
Investment Bank (EIB) loan of USD 21.5 million for structural measures and additionally 
through USD 36.0 million of the public funds to be provided by the governments of both entities 
composing the country – the Governments of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and 
Republika Srpska for co-financing of EbA measures, the O&M of structural measures, 
hydrometric equipment, and modelling and FFEWS. 
3.6 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
                                                Scale: Medium 
41. 
The total budget for the proposed project is USD 72.69 million, of which GCF funding 
makes up 19.8 per cent, and co-financing accounts for the remaining 80.2 per cent. The 
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina is expected to contribute 42 per cent or USD 30.74 
million, while EIB will provide 29 per cent in the form of senior loans. Despite facing budgetary 
and economic challenges, the substantial investment by the Government of Bosnia and

=== PAGE 133 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 133 
 
 
Herzegovina underscores its commitment to the initiative and, more importantly, to its social 
responsibility to provide an FFEWS as an essential service to the population. 
42. 
The GCF contribution is projected to mobilize an additional USD 58.29 million from the 
public and private sectors. Both project partners and beneficiaries are expected to bear the 
O&M costs related to all the project-supported infrastructure and hydrological equipment. 
While the project aims to produce significant public benefits, it is also designed to engage the 
public sector in limited cost-recovery measures for the ongoing operation and maintenance of 
the monitoring and early warning systems.   
43. 
Based on a detailed economic analysis (annex 3), the project estimated an economic 
internal rate of return (EIRR) of 19.3 per cent, and economic net present value (ENPV) of USD 
44.92 million. The results were calculated over a 20-year time frame at the economic discount 
rate of 10 per cent. The economic analysis of the project was carried out in accordance with the 
GCF Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA) Guidelines, and was conducted at the national level 
and then for each river sub-basin included in the proposed investment project. The results of 
the EFA suggest that the proposed investments can be justified from the economic point of view 
as obtained measures, ENPV and EIRR ensure the economic viability of proposed investments 
(e.g. the ENPV is positive, and the EIRR is higher than the chosen economic discount rate). 
Furthermore, the results of the EFA suggest that the proposed investment will be beneficial to 
the entire economy as the benefits of the proposed interventions will outweigh the investment 
costs.  
IV. 
Assessment of consistency with GCF safeguards and policies 
4.1 
Environmental and social safeguards 
44. 
Project background. The project will upgrade and expand the coverage of the 
hydrometric network and develop an integrated impact-based centralized and community-
based flood forecasting and early warning system. The project will also implement structural 
and non-structural flood risk reduction measures and nature-based solutions and strengthen 
institutional capacity for flood risk management. In addition, it proposes to scale up flood 
protection measures through improved national and local investment frameworks. Some of the 
expected environmental co-benefits are water retention functions from riparian plantings and 
agro-forestry and reduced erosion. Social co-benefits of the proposal are improved resilience of 
communities’ physical assets and protection of people from major flooding hazards. 
45. 
Environmental and social risk category. The confirmed and assigned environmental 
and social risk category of the project is equivalent to GCF’s medium/category B. It is within the 
accreditation level of the accredited entity (AE). This is rationalized by structural and non-
structural flood reduction interventions that will be promoted by the project and are likely to 
have moderate risks which are generally reversible and site-specific which can also be readily 
managed with mitigation measures. Activity 2.2 non-structural measures include gabion walls, 
torrent and wicker barriers, and planting forest strips among others. Activity 3.3 structural 
measures include rehabilitation of river embankments, and canals and establishing dykes. 
Additionally, the associated risks and impacts of activities such as upgrading and expansion of 
the coverage of the hydrometric system and capacity-building such as training and development 
of guidelines, plans and frameworks are expected to be low and minimal.  
46. 
Safeguard instruments. The AE provided an environmental and social assessment 
report (ESAR) and environmental and social and management framework (ESMF) with the 
funding proposal as the safeguards document. The document provides an overview of the 
national context for environmental and social risk assessment, potential environmental and 
social risks likely to be associated with the project activities, including medium risk site-specific

=== PAGE 134 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 134 
 
 
environment and social studies that will be undertaken during the project’s implementation. 
Environmental impact assessment will be required for completely new facilities built by the 
project according to national regulations, however, other proposed activities such as the 
reconstruction of existing dykes and inlets fall within exemptions provided to the water 
authorities which will be confirmed prior to commencing implementation. 
4.1.1. 
Compliance with GCF’s environmental and social safeguards (ESS) standards.  
47. 
ESS 1) Assessment and management of environmental and social risks and 
impacts. The ESAR was prepared based on the environmental and social risks identified 
through the screening of activities using the AE’s procedure. It includes an assessment of the 
significance level of each risk that was identified under each activity. The ESMF provides an 
outline of a range of mitigation measures that will be undertaken when implementing the 
project to manage risks and impacts and the site-specific environmental and social assessments 
and management plans that will be prepared for moderate risk structural and non-structural 
flood protection measures, for which outlines of the documents are annexed into the ESAR and 
ESMF. Baseline environmental and socioeconomic information about Bosnia and Herzegovina is 
also presented in the ESAR and ESMF. The main outcomes of the environmental and social 
assessment undertaken, including the key risks and impacts and proposed measures to be taken 
to avoid, minimize and mitigate them are summarized below. A gap analysis of the AE’s 
environmental and social standards, those of EIB, a co-financier and national policies, legislation 
and regulations is included in the document. The AE is recommended to include GCF standards 
in the analysis.  
48. 
ESS 2) Labour and working conditions. There is a risk that work sites may flood 
during the implementation of flood protection measures. This will be mitigated by timing the 
works appropriately and monitoring of upstream rainfall and river levels prior and during the 
works. Contracts and working conditions for personnel working on the project will be in line 
with relevant national legislation and in compliance with UNDP Social and Environmental 
Standard 7. Appropriate personal protective equipment will be provided to personnel who need 
it. 
49. 
The AE is advised to ensure that vendors are evaluated during the procurement process 
and ensure inclusion of requirements and standards concerning irregular working conditions 
for hydrological, meteorological and precipitation stations’ solar components that may be 
procured by the project.  
50. 
ESS 3) Resource efficiency and pollution prevention. It is anticipated that most 
materials for construction purposes, particularly rocks, will come from quarries near the work 
sites. The project will ensure proper handling of materials, and where possible, recycling and 
reuse of any local materials may be considered. The key waste streams likely to be generated 
are residual sediment and construction wastes which will be minimized, have designated areas 
for temporary management and disposed of according to local requirements. Potential erosion 
and sediment movement may also occur during works that involve physical interventions. To 
avoid significantly increased sediment discharges and erosion, the AE will ensure project 
activities are not carried out during periods of rainfall. There is a small chance of water 
pollution from oil, grease and fuel spills, and other materials from vehicles working on site.  
51. 
ESS 4) Community health, safety and security. The project is expected to involve 
minor construction work impacts for the upgrade and expansion of the coverage of the 
hydrometric network. Other construction-related risks include noise and dust from heavy 
construction machinery and haul trucks. Some of the proposed mitigation measures are 
sourcing water for dust suppression during the implementation of activities that generate dust 
and restricting use of machinery and vehicles to normal working hours during the day.

=== PAGE 135 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 135 
 
 
52. 
Additionally, there is the possibility of mines and unexploded ordnance (UXO) 
disturbance by earthworks for which the project will update the magnetometry survey to 
confirm the presence or absence of UXO and the contractor will be required to detail procedures 
to safely handle and dispose of UXO if any UXO are encountered during works. 
53. 
Conflict sensitivity analysis is included in the ESAR and ESMF which assesses the conflict 
dynamics in the country and the project activities’ potential to cause conflict. Most risks are 
classified as low and low–medium. The AE concludes that the probability of conflicts occurring 
or being exacerbated due to the project interventions is slight. Recommended conflict 
mitigation measures include stakeholder engagement and the use of grievance mechanisms 
available for the project. 
54. 
ESS 5) Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement. Activities involving physical 
interventions may result in economic displacement from construction activities that alter 
people’s ability to move or access resources. The AE will be required to ensure that when this 
standard is triggered, plans for the restoration of livelihoods accompany the site-specific 
environmental and social assessments and management plans whether economic displacement 
is temporary or permanent. The AE is recommended to pay particular attention to related 
impacts on internally displaced persons who may be more vulnerable. The project will not 
result in physical displacement. Sites for physical interventions have been selected only where 
land tenure rests with the government, that is public land.  
55. 
ESS 6) Biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of living natural 
resources. Implementation of structural and non-structural measures proposed by the project 
may potentially cause habitat loss and disturbance of fauna. This will be mitigated by 
revegetation where vegetation is removed by the project, avoiding in-stream works during the 
spawning season and minimizing water turbidity during works on waterways. Disturbed areas 
will be revegetated using native and locally endemic species that have high habitat value. Native 
and locally endemic species will be used to revegetate to mitigate against invasive species. A 
biodiversity action plan may be prepared for the Krupa River site in case there are likely 
impacts to the Hutovo Blato Ramsar site. 
56. 
GCF Indigenous Peoples Policy and ESS 7) Indigenous Peoples. The AE confirmed 
there were no Indigenous Peoples or internally displaced persons affected by the project and 
that the EIB, which has a related investment and uses a similar Indigenous Peoples safeguard, 
had come to the same conclusion. Accordingly, the AE concluded that the Indigenous Peoples 
Policy, ESS 7 and its own Social and Environmental Standard 6 were not triggered.   
57. 
ESS 8) Cultural heritage. Screening for the project indicated that cultural physical 
resources were unlikely to be at risk as a result of the project’s implementation. Nonetheless, 
there is the possibility that unexpected cultural heritage items could be discovered during 
works. A chance finds procedure is annexed into the ESAR and ESMF for this eventuality. 
58. 
Sexual exploitation, sexual abuse, and sexual harassment (SEAH) safeguarding. 
The AE has identified the project’s moderate SEAH risks related to the construction work for 
implementing new ecosystem-based flood risk reduction and climate change adaptation 
methods, and when conducting regular project information and training sessions. The project’s 
ESAR and ESMF has triggered AE’s relevant policies, safeguard standards and programming 
principles on the prevention and elimination of SEAH. The AE will implement a SEAH Action 
Plan to address the potential risks and impacts of SEAH and will require the project’s 
contractors, suppliers and partners to adhere to zero tolerance for SEAH. The AE will terminate 
contractual arrangements with those who cannot conduct and commit to taking adequate action 
if faced with SEAH allegations. As part of the project’s SEAH Action Plan, the project will ensure 
the availability of an effective GRM with multiple channels to initiate a complaint, including 
confidential reporting with safe and ethical documenting of SEAH cases. The project will map 
out SEAH prevention and response actors in the project’s adjoining communities, develop

=== PAGE 136 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 136 
 
 
training materials and organize SEAH training for project workers and the local community, 
clearly define SEAH requirements and expectations in the bid documents, and undertake 
regular monitoring and evaluation of progress on SEAH prevention and response activities, 
including reassessment of risks as appropriate. In the event of gender-based violence/SEAH 
complaints, the project’s Gender Advisor will serve as the SEAH focal point to connect the SEAH 
survivor with relevant service providers. 
59. 
 Implementation arrangements. The Project Management Unit (PMU) will ensure 
timely remedial actions are taken by the contractor where necessary. The PMU will have an 
International Safeguards Officer responsible for overseeing and coordinating the 
implementation of safeguards across the project and ensuring consistent application of 
measures by the separate water agencies/contractors involved in the project. This officer will 
ensure that relevant standards are met. The Safeguards Officer will be supported by field 
officers who will be responsible for day-to-day inspection to ensure that the required 
safeguards are being implemented and monitored at the site level. Delivery organizations have 
the responsibility for ensuring that relevant employees and contractors are aware of the 
environmental and social safeguards requirements. Personnel working on the project will 
receive training in environmental, health and safety requirements. UNDP, as the AE, will 
maintain oversight on all matters related to environmental and social safeguards. A budget is 
included in the ESAR and ESMF with a breakdown of how resources allocated for the 
implementation of safeguards matters will be utilized.  
60. 
The AE is recommended to assess the capacity of the project’s delivery organizations 
and provide interventions that strengthen the relevant capacities that are required to undertake 
responsibilities related to environmental and social safeguards matters. 
61. 
Stakeholder engagement and information disclosure. Consultations on the project 
were undertaken during the design phase with a wide range of stakeholders, including relevant 
national authorities, industry groups, civil society organizations, and individual community 
members. A report on stakeholder consultations undertaken is presented in a stakeholder 
engagement plan. The AE and its partners will develop and release updates on the project on a 
regular basis to provide interested stakeholders with information on project status and 
circulate this through various media. Stakeholder engagement activities that will support 
project outcomes are listed in the plan according to project activities and stakeholders 
identified, their roles and means of participation.  
62. 
Grievance redress mechanism (GRM). Grievances can be registered by telephone via 
the project-level grievance redress mechanism that will be publicized and maintained 
throughout the project to serve as a point of contact for enquiries and grievances concerning the 
project. Complaints will be recorded on a register, including details of the response and 
investigation undertaken and actions taken to address the matter. The PMU Safeguards Officer 
will be responsible for the functioning of the grievance mechanism of the project. The process 
for responding to grievances is outlined in the ESAR and ESMF. Furthermore, details of how the 
AE’s institutional-level grievance mechanism and the GCF Independent Redress Mechanism can 
be contacted have been included in the document. 
4.2 
Gender policy  
63. 
The AE has provided a gender assessment and Gender Action Plan therefore complies 
with the requirements of the GCF’s Gender Policy and Gender Action Plan.  
64. 
The gender assessment describes the enabling environment and gender issues at the 
national level and indicates the existence of a national policy environment, supportive 
legislation and practices to promote gender equality. It also identifies gendered challenges and 
barriers that leave women more vulnerable to climate-related disasters. Despite a strong policy

=== PAGE 137 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 137 
 
 
and legal framework supporting gender equality and women are still largely excluded from 
political and decision-making processes; they have disproportionately limited access to 
employment and income, and many are subject to violence. There is particular concern with 
respect to women internally displaced persons, persons with disabilities, older persons and 
Roma women in Bosnia and Herzegovina, who are even more severely disadvantaged and 
marginalized. And institutional capacity to implement a normative framework for gender 
equality remains a serious challenge. The greatest obstacles to broader development and 
empowerment of women in rural areas are related to property rights, access to public services, 
finance, training, advisory services and mentorship, and limited time to engage in activities 
outside of their homes. Limited opportunities for employment and self-employment are 
perpetuated by low levels of understanding of opportunities coupled with a lack of access to 
information and training. A lack of affordable childcare and pre-schools in rural and smaller 
settlements is one of the central obstacles to women’s participation in trainings, entrepreneurial 
activities, and consequently, employment. There is also a limited number of women associations 
and cooperatives which exacerbates the lack of access to relevant information and services. 
Moreover, discrimination against Roma women is evident from the level of their formal 
employment. This discrimination, especially toward Roma girls, is also reflected in their right to 
education. Every second woman has experienced some form of gender-based violence from the 
age of 15, while every fifth woman has most likely experienced this over the past 12 months. 
There are several vulnerabilities that increase the risk to women from natural disasters, and 
based on experiences following the floods in 2014, the Republika Srpska Gender Centre has 
developed a Gender Action Plan for natural disasters and has incorporated measures into it to 
address these challenges. 
65. 
The AE has provided a programme-level Gender Action Plan, which includes activities, 
indicators, targets, budget, timeline and gender expertise to ensure that gender issues are 
incorporated into the project and GAP activities. While an initial gender analysis was conducted, 
further analysis will be undertaken to ensure that the baseline data set is sex- and age-
disaggregated and adequate for assessment of the project’s gender impacts. The gender 
analysiswill assess gender-specific vulnerabilities to flood risks through gender-responsive 
socioeconomic data collection, and ensure women’s participation and decision-making as well 
as information access and warning dissemination services. Further, the project will ensure 
women are involved in the processes of capacity-building for climate-induced hazard risk 
assessment within the FRM at all levels, but also in the development of public–private 
collaboration on building resilience by climate risk finance mechanism. Men and women of 
different age groups, as well as those from vulnerable communities will be involved in planning 
and implementation. Community consultancy groups with at least 40 per cent representation of 
women will be established. The project will ensure that information on hazards, their character, 
etc., reaches both women and men through appropriately focused channels. It will also tailor a 
warning to the gender-differentiated needs and capabilities of specific population groups, such 
as children, older persons, internally displaced persons, the sick and persons with disabilities.  
The project will also ensure that women have access to information and livelihood-generating 
activities. The project will strengthen social capital through the creation of community groups 
for planning for, safeguarding from and mitigating against adverse effects of natural disasters 
with at least 40 per cent women’s participation. Additionally, the project will conduct gender-
mainstreaming trainings and build capacity of national stakeholders targeted by the project and 
responsible for various disaster risk reduction functions. The project will ensure at least 30 per 
cent representation and active participation of women in project stakeholder consultations, and 
local and national decision-making bodies established and/or facilitated by the project. The 
project will secure participation of the gender institutional mechanism representatives in the 
consultations and decision-making. In developing an investment framework for climate-induced 
flood risk reduction and management, the project will include representatives from the gender 
mechanisms. A gender-responsive strategy and gender-sensitive tools for private sector 
engagement in long-term climate-proof risk management will be developed along with the

=== PAGE 138 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 138 
 
 
development of risk financing and transfer mechanisms based on detailed gender-sensitive 
assessment on socioeconomic risk, damages and losses. Multi-year climate resilient municipal 
investment plans and gender-responsive community preparedness plans will be developed in 
selected municipalities (10–12) and in one canton. The project will ensure men and women (40 
per cent) are represented in municipal investment planning process and that they actively 
participate in the formulation of community preparedness plans in selected municipalities and 
that the needs of women and other vulnerable (older persons, persons with disabilities, 
children, Roma) groups are incorporated into any plans developed. 
66. 
Finally, the project will implement climate-proof structural flood risk reduction and 
anti-erosion interventions in the Vrbas, Una-Sana, Bosna and Drina River Basins. Both, women 
(40 per cent) and men, and other vulnerable groups (older persons, persons with disabilities, 
children, Roma) will be included in processes of stakeholders’ consultation related to the 
implementation of climate-proof flood risk measures. The project will ensure that specific ways 
in which flood risk and erosion impact women are analysed and considered. Ensure that women 
and vulnerable group members can equally benefit from technical assistance. The AE will aim to 
ensure at least 50 per cent of women participants have benefited from the employment and 
income-making opportunities associated with implementing these measures. 
67. 
The project will engage a gender expert and the project implementation team, staff 
members will be trained on gender mainstreaming and on the social vulnerability approach. 
Project team leaders will ensure that all specialists are briefed on their responsibilities in 
relation to the Gender Action Plan upon mobilization. 
68. 
The AE is recommended to consistently mainstream gender throughout the project as a 
means to meet the needs of women and other vulnerable people. There is great potential to 
consider gender issues significantly and sufficiently in all flood risk information and warning 
messages, in amendments to all sectoral planning documents and feasibility studies on 
microinsurance and regional disaster risk insurance programmes and catastrophe bonds. 
Further concerns remain with the lack of clarity on indicators that will be used to measure 
women’s access and use of products and mechanisms such as risk financing, transfer 
mechanism products and responsible financial products with corresponding targets. These 
considerations, if taken seriously, will significantly contribute to women’s empowerment. 
4.3 
Risks  
4.3.1. 
Overall programme assessment (medium-high risk)  
69. 
GCF is requested to provide a grant of USD 14.4 million, which will be invested in flood 
risk management by strengthening the use of climate information, flood forecasting, early 
warning and emergency response systems to enhance adaptive capacity and resilience of at-risk 
communities. The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina will provide a senior loan of 
approximately USD 21.1 million which is from EIB. The government will also provide a grant 
along with other partners which will be a total of approximately USD 37.2 million. While tThe 
co-financing accounts for 80 per cent of the total budget of this project, some of the details 
around the co-financing will be further negotiated at the FAA stage 
70. 
The AE is requesting full grant support for this project. As the government will take out 
a loan from EIB to finance structural measures, the grant from GCF will finance timely 
complementary interventions such as non-structural measures and technical assistance. 
4.3.2. 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability to execute the current programme 
(Low risk)

=== PAGE 139 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 139 
 
 
71. 
UNDP is the AE and also the executing entity (EE) for the project. The project will be 
implemented by UNDP following UNDP’s Direct Implementation Modality (DIM). The AE has 
been operating in the country since 1996. As the funding proposal involves different 
government entities with the complex structure, UNDP's coordination role will be indispensable 
for successful project implementation. 
4.3.3. 
Programme-specific execution risks (medium-high risk) 
72. 
Complex governance structure. The AE has identified several governance-related risks 
in the funding proposal. The funded activities include a number of policy and regulation 
updates. For example, activity 2.1 is on financing the development of countrywide flood zoning 
policy and regulation. The governments of the two entities need to confirm their acceptance of 
the policy and regulations once they are updated. For activity 3.1, the project will facilitate the 
changes to the current regulations in the field of insurance. The relevant legal and regulatory 
provisions require adoption by the governments to enable the implementation of flood-risk 
financing instruments. The fragmented institutional structure of the governments and a lack of 
political consensus may hinder the process and limit the policy effectiveness even after the 
updates/changes. The AE will leverage the existing relationship and relevant experience from 
past projects to mitigate such risks.  
73. 
Co-financing risk. the ratio of GCF funding to co-financing is 1:4. The sizable co-
financing is critical for the funded activities, especially for activities which are implemented 
through blended funds from GCF and co-financers such as activity 2.1. If the disbursement of co-
financing is delayed or reduced, it will hamper project implementation. To mitigate this risk, it is 
recommended that the term sheet include a proportionate disbursement between GCF and co-
financing with a specific ratio which would be in line with the implementation plan each year. 
However, the details for disbursement and how to address the shortfall in co-financing will be 
further negotiated at the FAA stage.  
74. 
As part of risk financing and as a risk transfer measure, the project will provide technical 
assistance and training to financial institutions for the development of lending products and the 
use of climate risk information into their lending process to provide loans to climate-resilient 
enterprises in Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, technical assessment and training will not 
automatically lead to the provision of loans to enterprises unless there are incentives for the 
financial institutions. A specific target or indicator to monitor the number of loans to be 
provided and/or engagement of financial institutions will enhance the impact of the funding 
proposal.   
4.3.4. 
Compliance risk (medium risk)   
75. 
UNDP confirmed that it has conducted a risk assessment in relation to money-
laundering and the financing of terrorism risks. The probability of occurrence of a prohibited 
practice event has been assessed as low, whereas the impact severity of occurrence has been 
assessed as medium. 
76. 
UNDP confirmed that it has also conducted a risk assessment in relation to sanction 
risks. The probability of occurrence of a prohibited practice event has been assessed as low, 
whereas the impact severity of occurrence has been assessed as medium. 
77. 
UNDP noted that this project will be implemented under the DIM and will be guided by 
UNDP’s policy framework. UNDP, by virtue of being an organ of the United Nations and 
therefore being part of the same entity, is also beholden to the principles on anti-money-
laundering/countering the financing of terrorism.  
78. 
UNDP systematically screens all entities being considered to be contracted by or partner 
with UNDP against the Consolidated United Nations Security Council List. This is built into the

=== PAGE 140 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 140 
 
 
capacity-screening tools for partners, as well as in the SOPs for vendor management. UNDP also 
secures contractual representations from its national implementing partners that address risks 
of the funds received for implementation of projects being used to support individuals or 
entities associated with terrorism and recipients of any amounts provided by UNDP hereunder 
appearing on the Consolidated List. 
79. 
These internal controls are further supplemented by internal controls to mitigate the 
risks, including due diligence requirements for partners and private entities which UNDP 
intends to engage with. When developing a new project, UNDP ensures that risks are fully 
identified and considered in the project design and processes and that adequate and effective 
measures to prevent, monitor and address such risks are put in place.  
80. 
UNDP confirmed that there will be no third parties involved in the delivery of the GCF 
funds (such as the implementing party or responsible parties). UNDP will deliver all activities 
through the UNDP procurement process/UNDP-approved vendors. Therefore, the due diligence 
process for third parties was not triggered at the project proposal stage. However, UNDP has 
carried out the first level due diligence assessment of all co-financiers, including public and 
private co-financing entities, which will be implementing their respective co-financed activities 
in the framework of the project. The assessments have been carried out in line with UNDP’s 
policies and risk assessment tools.  
81. 
UNDP also referred to the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers (HACT) applied by 
UNDP, which represents a common operational (harmonized) framework for transferring cash 
to government and non-governmental partners (both implementing partners and responsible 
parties). This project initially does not envisage engaging responsible parties. However, in the 
event that responsible parties are engaged in the future for project implementation, the HACT 
framework will be applied by UNDP.  
82. 
The common objective of the HACT framework is to support the closer alignment of 
development aid with national priorities and to strengthen national capacities for management 
and accountability. It serves as a set of procedures on requesting, disbursing, providing 
assurance, and reporting on funds to effectively manage risks, reduce transaction costs and 
promote sustainable development in a coordinated manner. Cash transfers over a certain 
amount (above the threshold of USD 150,000 in a programme cycle, or otherwise in all 
circumstances where UNDP considers the operating environment high risk or has no prior 
experience with the partner) are presumed to present a material risk to UNDP and will require a 
HACT micro-assessment and risk rating by qualified third party service providers. Spot checks, 
programmatic output verification and auditing requirements are then determined and carried 
out at a frequency determined in line with the risk rating. 
83. 
UNDP confirmed that cash, vouchers, commodities or other items of value will not be 
distributed or disbursed to any beneficiaries involved in the project, either directly or indirectly. 
84. 
UNDP confirmed that it has carried out first-level due diligence assessment of all co-
financiers. For public-sector partners (five entities), UNDP’s Partner Capacity Assessment Tool 
(PCAT) has been used. For the private sector co-financiers (three entities), UNDP’s Private 
Sector Risk Assessment Tool has been used in line with the UNDP Policy on Due Diligence and 
Partnerships with the Private Sector.  
85. 
None of the co-financiers are listed on the Consolidated List, the UNDP Vendor Sanctions 
List or the United Nations Global Marketplace (UNGM) Ineligibility List. Assessments have not 
found any evidence of fraud, corruption or violation of programming principles or standards by 
these co-financing entities. These due diligence assessments have not revealed any violations or 
concerns over the partners’ capacities to deliver their co-financed activities in the framework of 
the project. In addition, co-financiers are required to reconfirm their commitments to meet the 
requirements of the UNDP social and environmental safeguards policy and standards prior to 
the launch of the project implementation.

=== PAGE 141 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 141 
 
 
86. 
UNDP confirmed that it has conducted a risk assessment in relation to prohibited 
practices risks. The probability of occurrence of a prohibited practice event has been assessed 
as low, whereas the impact severity of occurrence has been assessed as medium. 
87. 
UNDP stated that it applies a zero-tolerance policy in relation to fraud and corruption. 
The guiding principles of UNDP's commitment to prevent, identify and address all acts of fraud 
and corruption have been laid out in the UNDP Policy Against Fraud and Corrupt Practices (FCP 
Policy), which applies to all activities and operations of UNDP, including projects and 
programmes. The fundamental principles of UNDP's FCP Policy serve as the basis for and are 
integrated into UNDP's policy frameworks in relation to procurement, financial management, 
internal control and accountability, and staff rules and regulations.  
88. 
Under the terms of the FCP Policy and related policies, UNDP has a commitment, when 
developing a new programme or project, to ensure that risks related to fraud and corrupt 
practices are fully identified and considered in the programme/project design and processes 
and that adequate and effective measures to mitigate such risks are put in place. In this light, the 
processes and requirements for UNDP's PCAT require UNDP to carry out a thorough due 
diligence of the risks in relation to the programme/project it intends to engage in, as well as in 
relation to the potential partners who will be involved in the implementation of such 
programmes/projects.  
89. 
Such capacity assessments include, among other things, a screening of all entities being 
considered to be contracted by or partner with UNDP against the Consolidated List (to which 
UNDP, by virtue of being an organ of the United Nations and therefore being part of the same 
entity, is also beholden), an assessment of any history of fraud, corruption or other fraudulent 
practices and/or potential conflicts of interest. Based on this capacity assessment, UNDP then 
builds an internal control component into the design of the project/programme and ensures 
that its financial management contains adequate safeguards to prevent, monitor and address 
any risks and acts of fraud, corruption or anti-money-laundering/countering the financing of 
terrorism that may be identified. 
90. 
UNDP confirmed that the project has developed a grievance redress mechanism to deal 
with any complaints and issues that may arise because of the project. The GRM has been 
designed to ensure that an individual and/or group are not financially impacted by the process 
of making a complaint and/or grievance. The GRM complies with safeguard procedures of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina and UNDP. Furthermore, the GRM allows individuals and/or groups to 
also file a complaint with the Office of Anticorruption and Integrity within the UNDP or utilize 
the GCF independent Redress Mechanism should they have any concerns as to corruption, 
unethical behaviour or where they believe their complaint or grievance has not been adequately 
addressed. 
91. 
Compliance risk rating: The Secretariat has conducted a review of the project in 
accordance with relevant Board-approved policies and does not find any material issue or 
deviation with respect to compliance issues. Based on available information for this funding 
proposal, the Secretariat has determined a compliance risk rating of medium and has no 
objection to this proposal. 
4.3.5. 
GCF portfolio concentration risk (low risk)   
92. 
In the case of approval, the impact of this proposal on the GCF portfolio concentration in 
terms of results area and proposal is not material. 
4.3.6. 
Recommendation 
93. 
It is recommended that the Board consider the above factors in its decision.

=== PAGE 142 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 142 
 
 
Summary risk assessment 
Overall programme 
Medium-high 
Accredited entity/executing entity capability 
Low 
Project-specific execution 
Medium-high 
GCF portfolio concentration  
Low 
Compliance 
Medium 
4.4 
Fiduciary 
94. 
The UNDP will be the AE and the EE of the project. It will provide oversight and quality 
assurance in accordance with its policies and procedures, and any specific requirements in the 
accreditation master agreement (AMA) and project confirmation to be agreed with GCF.  
95. 
The project will be implemented by UNDP following UNDP’s DIM, according to the 
Standard Basic Assistance Agreement between UNDP and the Government of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina (1995) and the policies and procedures outlined in the UNDP Programme and 
Operations Policies and Procedures. 
96. 
The project will be audited following the UNDP financial rules and regulations noted 
under funding proposal section G.3 and applicable audit guidelines and policies. According to 
the current audit policies, UNDP will appoint the auditors. Scheduled audits will be performed 
annually, during the programme cycle, as per UNDP assurance/audit plans, on the basis of the 
implementing partner's risk rating and UNDP’s guidelines. The project’s financial statements 
will comply with international accounting standards. 
97. 
UNDP has procurement policies in place as outlined in the “Contracts and Procurement” 
section of UNDP’s Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures. The policies outline 
formal procurement standards and guidelines across each phase of the procurement process, 
and they apply to all UNDP procurements.   
98. 
  As of 7 pm on 2 October 2023, there remains a divergence of views between the GCF 
Secretariat and the AE concerning how co-financing would come through. Co-financing accounts 
for more than 80% of total funding, therefore clear mechanism and undertaking by the AE on 
how the co-financing would come through is important for the implementation per the outlined 
targets and implementation plan. Despite numerous rounds of reviews, the AE has not yet been 
amenable to including a covenant on co-financing. Given the GCF to co-financing ratio of 1:4, the 
Secretariat has been hesitant to advance the co-financing covenant discussions to the FAA stage. 
However, since no agreement on the co-financing covenants has been reached, we have to defer 
relevant clauses on co-financing to the FAA stage on a condition that the language of this 
covenant to set out a mechanism for the co-financing to be contributed by all the co-financiers 
listed in the FP in line with the targets, total amount, Budget and Workplan (per Annex 1) as 
outlined in the FP. We propose to include the proportionality of the GCF proceeds disbursed 
each year with the proceeds of co-financiers, inline with the Budget.  
4.5 
Results monitoring and reporting 
99. 
As an adaptation initiative, the project aims to generate various adaptation results 
across four GCF result areas. It is expected that 799,445 direct beneficiaries and 1,977,000 
indirect beneficiaries will receive adaptation benefits in Bosnia and Herzegovina, representing 
25 per cent and 80 per cent of its total population, respectively. The AE has provided a 
methodology for estimating numbers of direct and indirect adaptation beneficiaries based on

=== PAGE 143 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 143 
 
 
expected adaptation benefits. The Secretariat provided further guidance on how to disaggregate 
the beneficiaries against GCF results areas, which can feed into the target-setting of GCF core 
indicator 2 and its supplementary indicators in the logical framework. 
100. 
The theory of change diagram adequately captures various levels of expected changes 
and logical linkages between them from the goal statement to the proposed activities. The 
barriers and risks that may hinder the achievement of these changes are identified clearly and 
linked to pertinent activities.  
101. 
The logical framework is structured in alignment with the GCF integrated results 
management framework. It shows how the project can contribute to four GCF adaptation results 
areas with project outcomes and outputs. Relevant GCF core and supplementary indicators have 
been chosen for monitoring and reporting the key performance of the project. The project-
specific indicators also seem to be adequate to measure the progress of project implementation 
along with project deliverables.  
102. 
There have been discussions with AE on the project monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
plan (annex 11) and project implementation timetable (annex 5). The Secretariat recommended 
that the AE ensure that all M&E-related budgets, including project-specific indicators, are 
identified in the M&E plan and these should be identical to the M&E budget in the project 
budget plan. The AE has been responsive and annexes 11 and 5 have been revised accordingly. 
4.6 
Legal assessment 
103. 
The original AMA was signed with the Accredited Entity on 5 August 2016, and it 
became effective on 23 November 2016. The Accredited Entity’s first term of accreditation 
expired on 22 November 2021. The Accredited Entity was re-accredited by the Board pursuant 
to decision B.30/05. The first amendment and restatement agreement amending and restating 
the AMA was signed on 16 March 2023 and it became effective on 3 May 2023. 
104. 
The Accredited Entity has provided a legal opinion/certificate confirming that it has 
obtained all internal approvals and it has the capacity and authority to implement the project. 
105. 
 The proposed project will be implemented in Bosnia and Herzegovina, country in which 
GCF is not provided with privileges and immunities. This means that, amongst other things, GCF 
is not protected against litigation or expropriation in this country, which risks need to be 
further assessed. The GCF Secretariat provided a draft agreement on privileges and immunities 
and a background note to the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 11 May 2016. The 
latest communication was sent by the GCF Secretariat to the Government of Bosnia Herzegovina 
on 7 February 2018. 
106. 
The Heads of the Independent Redress Mechanism (IRM) and Independent Integrity 
Unit (IIU) have both expressed that it would not be legally feasible to undertake their redress 
activities and/or investigations, as appropriate, in countries where the GCF is not provided with 
relevant privileges and immunities. Therefore, it is recommended that disbursements by the 
GCF are made only after the GCF has obtained satisfactory protection against litigation and 
expropriation in the country, or has been provided with appropriate privileges and immunities. 
4.7 
List of proposed conditions (including legal) 
107. 
To address the matters raised in this section, it is recommended that any approval by 
the Board is made subject to the following conditions:  
(a) 
Signature of the funded activity agreement in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat within 180 days from the date of Board; and

=== PAGE 144 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 144 
 
 
(b) 
Completion of the legal due diligence to the satisfaction of the GCF Secretariat.

=== PAGE 145 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 145 
 
 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP216 
Proposal name: 
Scaling up climate resilient flood risk management in Bosnia 
and Herzegovina 
Accredited entity: 
United Nations Development Programme 
Country/(ies): 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Project/programme size: 
Medium 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Overview   
1. 
In its assessment, the independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) is guided by 
decision B.33/12 adopted by the Board, which explains the principles for demonstrating the 
impact potential of GCF-supported activities as well as other appraisal and assessment guidance 
in considering these investment criteria and as endorsed by the Board. 
2. 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has assessed the scientific 
literature regarding the impacts of climate change on Bosnia and Herzegovina and has reached 
several important conclusions. According to its findings, the country (and the wider region) is 
susceptible to a variety of adverse effects as a result of global warming.1 
3. 
One of the key impacts of climate change identified by the IPCC in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina is the alteration of precipitation patterns. It is projected that the country will 
experience an overall decrease in annual rainfall, coupled with an increase in the intensity of 
extreme weather events, such as heavy rainfalls and floods. This alteration in precipitation 
patterns is likely to exacerbate water-related issues, including water scarcity, droughts and 
potential threats to agriculture. 
4. 
Furthermore, rising temperatures are identified as a significant concern for Bosnia and 
Herzegovina and the region. The IPCC anticipates an increase in average temperatures, resulting 
in more frequent and prolonged heatwaves. This rise in temperature could have detrimental 
effects on ecosystems, agriculture and public health, notably increasing the risk of forest fires 
and heat-related illnesses. 
5. 
As such, recent research has indicated that climate change will likely exacerbate flood 
risks in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Rising temperatures have led to more intense rainfall and 
increased snowmelt, subsequently overwhelming drainage systems and increasing river flow. 
As Bosnia and Herzegovina is already prone to flooding due to its mountainous terrain and 
complex river network, the impacts of climate change will be particularly severe. Moreover, 
flooding poses a significant threat to the country’s infrastructure, agriculture and public health. 
Increased frequency and intensity of floods may damage roads, bridges and buildings, resulting 
 
1 See World Bank. 2021. Climate Risk Country Profile, Bosnia and Herzegovina. Available at 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/2021-07/15914-
WB_Bosnia%20Country%20Profile-WEB%20%281%29.pdf (accessed 15 September 2023). See also Government of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina. 2021. National Adaptation Plan – NAP with proposed measures, specifically chapter 7. 
Available at https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/NAP-Bosnia-and-Herzegovina%20.pdf (accessed 13 
August 2023).

=== PAGE 146 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 146 
 
 
 
 
in economic losses. Agriculture, a vital sector for the country’s economy, will also be adversely 
affected by floods, leading to a decline in productivity and potential food shortages. 
Furthermore, flooding increases the risk of waterborne diseases, posing a threat to public health 
and well-being. 
6. 
Considering these developments, the IPCC emphasizes the importance of adapting to 
climate change in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It suggests implementing strategies to mitigate the 
identified risks, including the development of resilient infrastructure, the promotion of 
sustainable agricultural practices, and the enhancement of early warning systems for extreme 
weather events.   
7. 
The project titled “Scaling up climate resilient flood risk management in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina” proposed by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) seeks to 
respond to this call for a strengthening of adaptive capacity in the country. The overall objective 
of the project is to establish a comprehensive and innovative flood risk management approach 
that is responsive to gender issues and climate change impacts. The project also seeks to 
enhance the capacity of institutions, both technically and financially, to implement long-term 
flood risk management strategies that incorporate a range of measures, including structural (i.e. 
physical construction) and non-structural (i.e. land-use planning and zoning) measures as well 
as ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA, working with nature and natural processes). Additionally, 
the project aims to improve the utilization of climate information, flood forecasting, early 
warning systems, and emergency response mechanisms to strengthen the adaptive capacity and 
resilience of vulnerable communities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The project aligns with the 
Early Warnings for All Initiative which was announced by the United Nations Secretary-General 
in March 2022.  
8. 
The project is designed to scale up the Technology Transfer for Climate Resilient Flood 
Risk Management (Vrbas project) that UNDP implemented between 2014 and 2020 with 
funding from the Global Environment Facility, and that focused on introducing state-of-the-art 
climate-resilient flood management (including, but not limited to, an upgrade and rehabilitation 
of the hydrometric monitoring network and development of a flood forecasting and enhanced 
the existing early warning system) for the Vrbas River Basin.2 
1.2 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
            Scale: Medium 
9. 
The funding proposal highlights various anticipated adaptation impacts resulting from 
the proposed project across various GCF adaptation results areas. Specifically, the funding 
proposal references two main project outcomes: 
(a) 
Outcome 1: Climate informed gender-responsive impact-based Flood Forecasting and 
Early Warning System and increased generation and use of climate data to reduce 
vulnerability to flood related disasters; and 
(b) 
Outcome 2: Vulnerable communities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including women, 
children, people with disabilities, and older persons, are better protected from and less 
exposed to climate induced flood risks through a combination of structural and non-
structural flood risk reduction solutions. 
 
2 That baseline project received a “Satisfactory” rating in the independent terminal evaluation report: “The project 
has achieved impressive results. The 638,600 ha VRB is under improved management for climate resilience through 
successful transfer of climate adaptation technology and advances to policy and regulatory frameworks. The strong 
emphasis on institutional strengthening has built an enhanced enabling environment for facilitating follow-up 
actions. The incremental benefits achieved through the GEF funding is confirmed through the replication that has 
occurred during the project implementation phase and the high potential and expected investments for upscaling” 
(annex 18, p. 90).

=== PAGE 147 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 147 
 
 
 
 
10. 
These outcomes are anticipated to be accomplished through three outputs, namely: (1) 
the implementation of a fully integrated impact-based FFEWS allows for prompt preparation 
and response; (2) the integration of non-structural flood risk reduction measures and nature-
based solutions in sectoral policies and plans, effectively contributing to the protection of 
people and livelihoods from climate-induced flood risk; and (3) the scaling-up of climate-proof 
flood protection measures through new and improved national and local investment 
frameworks increasing the resilience of the most vulnerable groups to climate-induced flooding. 
These outputs are organized into eleven distinct activities and 35 subactivities. 
11. 
In conjunction, the project interventions are expected to yield the following positive 
adaptation impacts in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as estimated below in relation to GCF core 
indicators and adaptation results areas: 
(a) 
799,445 direct and 1,977,244 indirect beneficiaries that benefit from reduced 
vulnerability to loss of life, property and critical infrastructure (core indicator 2); 
(b) 
22,516 direct and 741,339 indirect beneficiaries protected from extreme floods in those 
municipalities where interventions are implemented (adaptation results area 1 (ARA 
1));  
(c) 
77,929 direct and 1,995,257 indirect beneficiaries benefiting from improved health, 
well-being, food and water security as a result of enhanced access to timely early 
warning and climate information (ARA 2); 
(d) 
776,929 beneficiaries covered by new or improved early warning systems (ARA 
supplementary 2.4); 
(e) 
USD 501.8 million of household assets and USD 109 million of business assets made 
more resilient to the effects of climate change (ARA 3); 
(f) 
USD 83.5 million reduction in expected economic losses to households and USD 19 
million reduction in business assets (ARA 3 supplementary 3.1); 
(g) 
22,516 direct beneficiaries living in buildings that have increased climate resilience 
(ARA 3 supplementary 2.6); and 
(h) 
5,081 ha of land protected from extreme floods (ARA 4).  
12. 
The funding proposal contains a detailed description of the methodology adopted for 
the Geographic Information System-based risk and vulnerability modelling and mapping and 
cost–benefit options appraisal that forms the basis of the calculation of these anticipated 
adaptation impacts (annex E to annex 2). It also contains the results of the socioeconomic 
analysis across municipalities in Bosnia and Herzegovina (annex D to annex 2) under current as 
well as expected future climate change conditions, and an economic analysis comparing 
estimated costs and benefits of the project (annex 3a and 3b). However, the results of this 
modelling exercise need to be interpreted with caution. First, the iTAP found it somewhat 
challenging to reconstruct the stated adaptation impact targets of the project. The feasibility 
study (annex 2) refers to the calibration and validation of the underlying flood risk model but 
does not contain a comprehensive description of its results to gauge the degree of its precision 
and thus the confidence in the extent of future floods. Second, the estimated adaptation benefits 
are based on the detailed climate change flood hydrological and hydraulic modelling for the 
Vrbas River Basin that was conducted as part of the baseline project. In the absence of detailed 
hazard mapping for the other river basins, the overall modelling results for the entire proposed 
project region across five river basis assumes that the climate change scenarios and impact of 
proposed interventions will be similar for these other river basins (Una-Sana, Bosna, Neretva 
and Trebišnjica). While this may well be a reasonable assumption, the approach taken is overly 
simplistic and thus the results cannot be accepted with certainty without consideration of 
alternative scenarios or some insights related to land cover dynamics, among others, related to 
these other river basins.

=== PAGE 148 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 148 
 
 
 
 
13. 
Another methodological challenge is the choice of the Representative Concentration 
Pathway (RCP) scenario8.5 that is being utilized as the base scenario to inform the design of the 
proposed project interventions (as highlighted for example by the response of the accredited 
entity (AE) to the question-and-answer session (Q&A) with the iTAP). In the iTAP’s view, it 
would have been prudent to also model the design of project interventions based on alternative, 
and equally relevant scenarios such as RCP 4.5 or RCP 6 that include increasingly frequent and 
intense climate events for example (e.g. intense precipitation resulting in floods and landslides, 
heatwaves causing fast melting of snow which then trigger floods). These alternative scenarios 
are likely to have more significant negative impact on livelihoods and business operations over 
time and may require different interventions to support adaptation. The RCP 8.5 scenario (as a 
“high business-as-usual scenario”) generates a higher likelihood of large catastrophic events 
triggered by much more significant temperature increases towards the end of the century (akin 
to floods such as the 2014 flood in Bosnia and Herzegovina that represented a 1 in 500-year 
event). The RCP 8.5 scenario may result in higher costs for the adaptation measures at the 
expense of other important interventions. It may also create a false sense of security among 
stakeholders (e.g. communities, businesses, insurance) that the project interventions will 
deliver safe results as presumably they are designed to reduce loss of life and property in the 
event of catastrophic floods. This carries the risk of maladaptation. The iTAP recognizes the fact 
that the various scenarios track each other in terms of climate change impact in the medium 
term, and that the European Union (EU) – Bosnia and Herzegovina  has EU candidate status and 
seeks to achieve compliance with the region’s acquis communautaire – requires application of 
the RCP 8.5 scenario to comply with the EU Flood Directive; but recommends that the 
anticipated impact proposed project interventions be considered under alternative climate 
change scenarios by the AE prior to project commencement (recommendation).  
14. 
A major concern when evaluating the expected adaptation impacts of the proposed 
project relates to the lack of recent local stakeholder involvement in its design. Experience with 
similar projects strongly suggests that the success and sustainability of flood risk management 
approaches greatly depend on effective stakeholder consultation, and integration of different 
views from different groups into project design. While the AE has conducted some limited 
stakeholder consultations in 2018 and 2019 (21 bilateral meetings with individuals, including 
mayors, and representatives of civil protection departments and businesses), since then, no 
further consultations have been conducted. In the Q&A, the AE stated that between 2019 and 
2023 consultations with local stakeholders have continued via two UNDP-implemented projects 
(the GCF-funded “Advance the National Adaptation Plan (NAP) Process for Medium-term 
Investment Planning in Climate Sensitive sectors in B&H” and the Joint Swiss United Nations 
Development Programme “Disaster Risk Reduction for Sustainable Development in B&H”) but 
no summaries of these consultations have been made available. There is also no indication of 
how any feedback received may have been included in the design of the proposed project 
interventions. In the iTAP’s view, this presents a significant risk to the project. Thus, the iTAP 
recommends the Board adopt a condition as part of its approval of the funding proposal that 
would require the AE to conduct additional consultations covering the entire project region 
regarding the design of the project and how the local, entity, national and regional institutions 
may be involved, with a view towards future sustainability, in the production of the project’s 
results. The AE should submit a summary of the outcomes to the Secretariat (proposed 
condition 1, see below for more information). 
15. 
Likely the most significant challenge for implementation and thus the achievement of 
the anticipated adaptation impacts is related to the political and institutional complexity of the 
governance system in Bosnia and Herzegovina, driven (among other things) by i) ethnopolitical 
divisions (the country consists of two largely autonomous entities, Republika Srpska and the 
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, along with the Brčko District that are formed along 
ethnic lines, with separate government structures and decision-making processes); ii) 
complicated decision-making processes (the governance structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina

=== PAGE 149 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 149 
 
 
 
 
involves multiple layers of authorities, including a central government, entity governments, 
cantonal governments and municipal governments); iii) vetoes and blocking mechanisms 
(entities and ethnic groups have the power to veto decisions that go against their interests, 
resulting in a high level of political gridlock and difficulty in implementing necessary reforms); 
and iv) a lack of fiscal autonomy (the entities in Bosnia and Herzegovina are heavily reliant on 
financial transfers from the central government, which creates a financial imbalance and 
dependence). The funding proposal references these challenges, refers to UNDP’s experience in 
working successfully in this complicated environment and highlights the co-financing 
commitments that various Bosnia and Herzegovina entities have made as evidence that the 
project will have significant government buy-in and support. This highlights significant interest 
in the project and high likelihood of success in continued and formalized stakeholder 
engagement.  
16. 
In the iTAP’s view, however, the most effective mechanism to ensure that the project 
delivers sustainable results in this complex environment would be to implement the proposed 
project interventions in close partnership with the relevant entities and other institutions in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina on a day-to-day basis. The Direct Implementation Modality proposed 
by the AE, however, does not facilitate such extensive ownership of project implementation by 
relevant partners in the country (see also section 1.6 on country ownership). Indeed, the 
funding proposal makes only limited reference to how the AE will involve institutions of Bosnia 
and Herzegovina in the actual implementation of project interventions. The Project 
Management Unit will be hosted by the UNDP Country Office rather than a partner institution. 
(It is worthwhile noting in that context that the Project Implementation Unit supporting the 
implementation of the structural measures funded by the European Investment Bank (EIB) will 
be based at the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management of Republika Srpska.) 
In the iTAP’s view, the concentration of execution, implementation and project assurance 
responsibilities within UNDP presents a material risk for the project and may undermine its 
potential to achieve the envisaged adaptation impacts in a sustainable manner. To mitigate this 
risk, the iTAP recommends the Board adopt a second condition (condition 2), to be fulfilled 
before second disbursement, consisting of development of a sustainability plan by the AE. The 
sustainability plan, building on the updated stakeholder consultations, should outline the 
various local/entity/national/regional institutions’ mandates and roles in the production and 
maintenance of project results (see below for more information).  
17. 
Finally, under output 3 the funding proposal suggests implementing activity 3.1: 
“Develop a country-wide investment framework for climate induced flood risk reduction and 
management including provisions for private sector engagement in climate risk financing”. The 
deliverables under this activity largely consist of feasibility studies, as well as the development 
of strategies and tools to be developed by consultants. It remains unclear which partners the AE 
would work with in the development of these deliverables, and how the AE will ensure that 
these deliverables will translate into concrete results. This is especially relevant when the 
project proposes to improve the enabling environment (for example, for products related to 
national disaster insurance) which presumably would require engagement with policymakers 
and relevant regulators and government agencies, but where specific information on how such 
engagement will be initiated is not included. The funding proposal also references various 
public-private partnerships being established and public–private sector climate risk financing 
mechanisms and tools developed, but it remains unclear what private sector entities would be 
involved (aside from the co-financier) and who would ultimately utilize the various products 
and tools developed. In its implementation plan and reporting to GCF, the AE should provide 
further clarification on these matters to ensure that the project does not just result in studies 
and tools that do not find practical application (recommendation).  
18. 
Overall, the iTAP rates the impact potential for the project as medium, with potential 
for improvement if the issues highlighted above are adequately addressed.

=== PAGE 150 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 150 
 
 
 
 
1.3 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
 
 
Scale: Medium 
19. 
The project aims to transform the current flood risk management in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina in response to climate change by bolstering institutional capabilities at all levels, 
enhancing comprehension of risk through improved climate information, incorporating non-
structural ecosystem-focused risk management methods, involving the private sector, and 
ensuring that both public and private investments in flood risk management are resilient to 
climate impacts. The project anticipates achieving a paradigm shift in flood risk management on 
five levels: 
(a) 
Introduction of technological innovations (implementation of fully integrated impact 
based Flood Forecasting and Early Warning System based on state-of-the-art 
observation, modelling, forecasting and communication platforms and technologies); 
(b) 
Capacity development and enhancement (capacity to identify, plan and implement long-
term flood risk management strategies at the basin and sub-basin scale); 
(c) 
Mainstreaming of nature-based flood risk management solutions in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina (encompassing EbA approaches as well as non-structural solutions); 
(d) 
Development of long-term climate risk financing (including via the development of 
municipal risk management plans); and 
(e) 
Introduction of innovative approaches to flood risk management (including forecast-
based financing approaches). 
20. 
The iTAP recognizes the project’s potential to substantially improve current flood risk 
management practices in Bosnia and Herzegovina. For a comprehensive paradigm shift to occur, 
however, the different project interventions will have to demonstrate sustainability over time. 
The various commitments that relevant  partners of Bosnia and Herzegovina have made with 
regard to, for example, financing long-term operation and maintenance (O&M) expenses for the 
hydrometric network equipment procured and installed via this project are a positive 
demonstration of commitment. Many of the co-financing commitments included in the funding 
proposal reviewed by the iTAP date back to 2019/2020, however, and should be renewed and 
resubmitted to GCF, prior to project commencement (recommendation).  
21. 
In the Q&A, the AE indicates that it will take a comprehensive approach to ensuring 
reliability of long-term O&M finance from different (public and private) sources, an approach 
that the iTAP believes is crucial. The funding proposal, however, lacks clarity in terms of how 
the project would concretely leverage different funding sources, and on what timeline. It 
remains unclear, for example, how the project’s proposed activity 3.1 would directly generate 
private-sector funding streams in support of O&M and other flood risk management/early 
warning system financing requirements, except with regard to exploring the option to introduce 
insurance products at conceptual level via the production of feasibility studies. The AE should 
clarify this as part of its regular reporting obligations to GCF (recommendation). 
22. 
Apart from the important commitments partners of Bosnia and Herzegovina have 
provided regarding long-term O&M finance, the funding proposal lacks sufficient detail on how 
the project will ensure that the various activities it undertakes and that will require sustained 
attention after project completion will be taken on by the relevant institutions within the 
country. The AE should generate a detailed sustainability/handover plan, specifying which 
institutions it will engage and work with to ensure “institutionalized operationalization” (e.g. 
how the institutions that ultimately will be responsible for the system will be involved in 
specific tasks, such as developing standard operating procedures) and continuity of the various 
project activities after project closure (condition 3, see below for more information). This plan 
should be completed and submitted to the Secretariat prior to the second disbursement. This 
should include all project activities. Thus, the plan to be submitted to the Secretariat should

=== PAGE 151 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 151 
 
 
 
 
make specific operational, maintenance and sustainability provisions for each activity to be 
funded by GCF. 
23. 
A significant portion of the funding that GCF would provide to the project would be in 
support of implementation of eight non-structural flood risk reduction measures (roughly USD 
6,74 million of the USD 14,4 million requested in total). The funding proposal highlights the 
reality that owing to the predominant use of engineered structural measures in mitigation of 
flood risk in Bosnia and Herzegovina historically, there is a lack of knowledge about non-
structural measures and limited capacity to implement them. The iTAP welcomes the fact that 
this project (building on the experience with the implementation baseline Vrbas project) 
intends to further mainstream the utilization of non-structural (i.e. zoning and land-use 
planning) as well as EbA approaches to flood risk management in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It 
remains unclear, however, from the funding proposal how that mainstreaming is supposed to be 
accomplished. The proposed budget for that subactivity will be utilized entirely for consulting 
fees, and it is unclear how the project will engage with relevant institutions within the country 
to ensure mainstreaming does take place and will be reflected in relevant investment plans, etc. 
These aspects should be addressed in the sustainability plan (condition 2). 
24. 
Overall, the iTAP rates the potential for the project to effect paradigm shift as medium, 
with potential for improvement if the issues highlighted above are adequately addressed and 
the various recommendations are implemented. 
1.4 
Sustainable development potential  
 
Scale: Medium-High 
25. 
Within the limits of the modelling exercise as discussed earlier, the funding proposal 
presents a credible pathway for the project to generate the following sustainable development 
benefits: 
(a) 
Environmental co-benefits: The funding proposal states that the project will generate 
environmental co-benefits largely via the implementation of EbA) strategies to flood risk 
management. Since the specific EbA measures to be implemented by the project have 
not yet been defined, it is difficult to conclude with certainty what (if any) specific 
environmental co-benefits will be generated. However, the iTAP concurs with the AE 
that the generic examples of EbA strategies highlighted in the funding proposal should 
in theory generate environmental co-benefits. 
(b) 
Economic co-benefits: The economic co-benefits expected from the project are a 
function of the losses avoided from floods that are predicted to occur based on the 
project’s flood risk modelling exercise. It should be noted that the socioeconomic 
modelling contained in the feasibility study is largely based on out-dated data since the 
study was originally constructed in 2018/2019. For example, the costs for the 
reconstruction of buildings following floods are based on data calculated by the Centre 
for Development Bills of Quantities for public buildings in 2015. In the Q&A, the AE 
provided some indicative information on how price levels have moved since completion 
of the feasibility study(e.g. based on Consumer Price Index data). Especially with the 
impact of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) (e.g. supply chain challenges) and 
inflation, the modelling may significantly underestimate potential economic losses from 
floods. Also, and as previously discussed, considering that the flood risk modelling and 
the intervention design of the project are based on the extreme RCP 8.5 scenario, the 
modelling generates avoided losses from expected extreme weather events, and thus the 
results need to be interpreted with some caution. The estimates for avoided losses on 
business assets is based on a damage function for the non-residential sector in the 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Bosnia and Herzegovina is an 
upper-middle income country, and  should thus have been compared with upper-middle 
and lower-middle income countries (e.g. Albania, Botswana). The AE clarified that at the

=== PAGE 152 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 152 
 
 
 
 
time the feasibility study was compiled, no data from comparable countries were 
available. The AE also noted that for the purposes of the damage calculation, only 
damages to buildings were taken into account. Overall, the iTAP concurs that if 
implemented successfully and sustainably, the project should generate considerable 
economic co-benefits for Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
(c) 
Social co-benefits: In the discussion of the Theory of Change (section B.2a) for the 
project, the funding proposal refers to potential health benefits that the project is 
expected to engender. The improved health and reduced health risks of the project’s 
beneficiaries are presented as a function of the reduction in the number of flood-related 
injuries and exposure to waterborne diseases. In general, the iTAP agrees that such 
health benefits are likely to manifest themselves if the project is successfully 
implemented and sustainable over time. However, no specific data on the project region 
is presented in the funding proposal to support this supposition so it is not possible to 
quantify these potential health benefits. It is also noteworthy that these potential social 
co-benefits are not discussed again in section D.3 (“Sustainable development”) of the 
funding proposal. 
(d) 
Gender-sensitive development co-benefits: The funding proposal includes an 
evidence-based gender assessment (annex 8), the results of which have been 
incorporated into the project’s Theory of Change and the design of the specific proposed 
project activities. For each activity, the funding proposal highlights gender 
mainstreaming activities. The iTAP welcomes this structured approach to incorporating 
analysis on existing inequalities into project design across all levels.  
(e) 
Overall, the iTAP rates the sustainable development impact potential of the project as 
medium–high. 
1.5 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
Scale: Medium-High 
26. 
Following the war (1992–1995), Bosnia and Herzegovina faced a severe economic crisis. 
The conflict had devastating effects on the country's economy, leading to the destruction of 
infrastructure, the collapse of industries, and the displacement of the country’s population. In 
this post-war situation, Bosnia and Herzegovina heavily relied on external assistance and aid to 
recover and rebuild. International organizations, such as UNDP and the World Bank, played a 
critical role in providing financial support. The EU has also been a significant donor and partner 
in the country’s post-war recovery. Through various financial programmes and assistance 
packages, the EU has supported the state’s economic development, governance reforms and 
integration processes. The stabilization and association agreement, signed with the EU in 2008, 
aimed to boost the country's economic and political stability. Remittances from Bosnian citizens 
living abroad have also played a crucial role in the country's post-war economy. Many Bosnians 
migrated to Western Europe and the United States of America during and after the war, and 
their remittances have provided a significant source of income for their families and 
communities back home.  
27. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is an upper-middle income country and ranks 79th (out of 185) 
in the Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative Country Index (with a vulnerability score of 
0.348 and a readiness score of 0.365). The index assesses the country’s vulnerabilities as 
manageable but improvements in readiness are advisable. As also emphasized in the funding 
proposal, and despite the external assistance and aid, the post-war economic situation in Bosnia 
and Herzegovina has been, and remains, challenging. The war deeply impacted the country's 
industrial base, leading to a decline in manufacturing and limited economic diversification. The 
complex political system and disputes between the two entities, Republika Srpska and the 
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, have contributed to a slow pace of structural reforms 
and hindered economic progress. The impacts of climate change are likely to further stress

=== PAGE 153 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 153 
 
 
 
 
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s economy, with increasing risk of floods and associated damage being 
just one manifestation of how climate change may impact the country negatively in the years 
and decades to come. From that standpoint, the assistance potentially made available by GCF for 
this project will make an important contribution to strengthening readiness and mitigate 
growing vulnerabilities to the impacts of climate change, specifically in the context of increasing 
flood risks.  
28. 
The AE did not include, as part of the funding proposal, an analysis of alternative 
sources of financing that might potentially be available. The iTAP enquired whether any 
assistance may be available from the EU, considering that Bosnia and Herzegovina is an 
accession candidate and does receive support from the regional block to achieve compliance 
with the EU’s acquis communautaire. Compliance with the EU Directive on the assessment and 
management of flood risks (which compels EU member States and candidate countries to apply 
the RCP 8.5 scenario in their flood risk modelling) is one example of how Bosnia and 
Herzegovina tries to solidify its status as a potential EU accession country. The AE responded 
that the EU already makes assistance available to the project via the EIB’s concessional 
financing for structural measures, and that no further (grant) support is available under the 
Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance.  
29. 
The reliance on external assistance and aid since the end of the Bosnian conflict has also 
created a level of dependency that the country must reduce to achieve sustainable economic 
growth. While the proposed project has the potential to significantly improve flood risk 
management practices in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the proposed Direct Implementation 
Modality carries the risk of further aggravating such dependency if the relevant entities and 
other institutions are not properly capacitated to maintain and further extend the “soft” and 
“hard” flood risk management infrastructure that is being funded by the project. As noted 
earlier, the current lack of specifics on how the AE will engage with relevant  institutions within 
the country during project implementation and the lack of a proper handover (or exit) plan is of 
concern to the iTAP. 
30. 
Overall, the iTAP rates the potential for the project to serve the needs of the recipients 
as medium–high. 
1.6 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
Scale: Medium-High 
31. 
Coherence with existing policies: The proposed project is well aligned with national 
climate change strategies and plans of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Specifically, the funding 
proposal responds to the country’s nationally determined contribution for 2020–2030 that 
specifically references the need for strengthening adaptative capacity in light of growing, 
climate change-induced flood risk. The funding proposal also refers to the Climate Change 
Adaptation and Low Emission Development Strategy of Bosnia and Herzegovina as adopted by 
the country’s Council of Ministers in 2013 (updated in 2020) that highlights increasing flood 
risks and lays out various adaptation priorities which align with the overall objectives of the 
funding proposal. Finally, the funding proposal dovetails with the NAP concluded in 2021 and 
that specifically references increasing flood risks (chapter 7) and the need for more proactive 
flood risk management in response to increasing climate change hazards.3 The iTAP would also 
like to highlight the signficant share of co-financing commitments received from entities and 
institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina which signify buy-in and ownership (even though many 
of these commitments, as previously pointed out, are now dated and will have to be renewed). 
 
3 The NAP was developed with support from the GCF-funded “Advance the National Adaptation Plan (NAP) Process 
for Medium-term Investment Planning in Climate Sensitive sectors in B&H” (Readiness and Preparatory Support 
Project).

=== PAGE 154 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 154 
 
 
 
 
32. 
Capacity of the AE: UNDP has implemented USD 733 million worth of programmatic 
activities between 1996 and 2022 in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thus has a long and extensive 
track record working in the country. Through the baseline project, as well as other related 
engagements (“Advance the National Adaptation Plan (NAP) process for medium-term 
investment planning in climate sensitive sectors in B&H” (GCF Readiness and Preparatory 
Support Project) and “Scaling-up Investment in Low-Carbon Public Buildings”, co-financed by 
GCF (FP051)), UNDP has garnered significant experience working on adaptation issues within 
the country. 
33. 
Stakeholder consultations and engagement: As previously noted in section 1.2, the 
iTAP notes with concern the limited local stakeholder consultations that have been conducted 
for the preparation of this funding proposal that potentially undermines the project’s impact 
proposal, but also ownership (and thus long-term sustainability). The three proposed 
conditions provide a route to rectify this. 
34. 
The iTAP considers the alignment of the project with host country government priorities 
to be high but assesses the AE’s track record as medium. Overall, the iTAP rates country 
ownership of the funding proposal as medium–high. 
1.7 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
 
Scale: Medium 
35. 
The funding proposal highlights the following three aspects to demonstrate the 
economic soundness of the project: 
(a) 
A significant share of co-financing is from other public and private sector sources (GCF 
funding represents only 19.8 per cent of the estimated project cost); 
(b) 
The results of the economic analysis show an economic internal rate of return of 19.3 
per cent and thus demonstrate that the individual project interventions are 
economically efficient (with the exception of one); and 
(c) 
A cost of USD 80.50 per direct beneficiary for climate-resilient flood risk protection and 
early warning system support provided by the project which the AE deems as 
“comparable” to other projects of similar nature. 
36. 
Overall, the iTAP agrees that the proposed project performs satisfactorily with regard to 
the principles of economy and efficiency. However, the iTAP would like to make the following 
observations: 
(a) 
Regarding the first point, and as previously noted, the iTAP commends the large share of 
co-financing committed to this project from other sources, and particularly from Bosnia 
and Herzegovina’s partners. This signifies buy-in and ownership. The iTAP notes that 
the funding package for the project also includes a concessional loan from EIB with a 
volume of EUR 21.2 million (approximately USD 22.65 million at the exchange rate at 
time of writing), while the funding portion from GCF is expected to be made available in 
grant form. The AE notes that none of the interventions co-financed by GCF will result in 
any quantifiable earnings or savings for entities or local governments in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, that they are predominantly focused on providing technical assistance, and 
that as a result of the current economic crisis (aggravated by the COVID-19 pandemic), 
the government of Bosnia and Herzegovina is not in a state to raise additional external 
debt. However, the iTAP would like to emphasize that i) Bosnia and Herzegovina (with a 
2023 gross domestic product per capita of EUR 7,366 (projection)) is considered an 
upper middle-income country by the World Bank; and ii) per the International Monetary 
Fund’s latest 2023 Article IV Consultation Staff Report,4 the country’s external debt is 
 
4 International Monetary Fund 2023. Bosnia and Herzegovina. 2023 Article IV Consultation – Press Release; Staff 
Report; and Statement by the Executive Director for Bosnia and Herzegovina. See

=== PAGE 155 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 155 
 
 
 
 
assessed to be sustainable over the medium-term. The external debt to gross domestic 
product ratio has been declining consistently over the past few years (to about 52 per 
cent in 2022). In that context, the International Monetary Fund states “[…] that here is 
room to increase IFI [international financial institution] financing to boost investment 
and growth potential”.5 Investments in adaptation to enhance the country’s capacity to 
avoid economic losses as a result of flood events should be considered important 
investments into the country’s growth potential, and as such it is not immediately 
obvious to the iTAP why GCF co-financing should be provided in the form of a grant, 
especially considering the pressing needs for adaptation and mitigation financing in 
least developed countries that GCF needs to respond to. 
(b) 
Regarding section 36 (c) above, the AE does not provide any cost data from comparable 
projects, and thus makes validation of its claim difficult. Since adaptation investments 
also tend to be highly bespoke to the specific country and regional context in which they 
are made, the iTAP is not clear how presentation of such average cost per beneficiary 
data provides a useful indication of the economic soundness of the project. 
1.8 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
37. 
The iTAP endorses this funding proposal, suggesting that the Board approve it subject to 
the three conditions specified below. 
38. 
Overall, the funding proposal is comprehensive and ambitious, and has potential to 
generate significant adaptation as well as broader sustainable development benefits for Bosnia 
and Herzegovina. The project, if successfully implemented by and with local, entity and national 
institutions, will fundamentally upgrade flood risk management in the country across various 
dimensions, with significant socioeconomic, environmental and social benefits for the target 
population in the project region, and for the population of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole.  
39. 
The iTAP welcomes the significant share of co-financing raised from other international 
and local funding sources which underscores the relevance of the project as well as the degree 
of ownership by key public and private sector stakeholders in the country. UNDP has 
considerable experience in planning and implementing adaptation projects in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, and is thus well-positioned to lead the implementation of this project.  
40. 
In order to ensure that the project can unfold its full impact and paradigm shift 
potential, the iTAP recommends that the Board include the following condition to disbursement 
to its potential approval of this funding proposal: 
1.8.1. 
Stakeholder Consultation:  
41. 
The following condition to first disbursement should be fulfilled by the Accredited 
Entity, in form and substance satisfactory to the GCF: 
(a) 
“Deliver to  the GCF Secretariat a summary report of stakeholder consultations 
conducted pursuant to the covenant below including recommendations for project 
design and implementation modalities.” 
42. 
Inclusion of the following covenants in the FAA: 
(a) 
“Prior to the first disbursement of GCF proceeds, the Accredited Entity shall conduct 
local stakeholder consultations across the entire project area, including in each of the 
target river basins regarding project design. The local consultations shall be conducted 
 
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/CR/Issues/2023/09/05/Bosnia-and-Herzegovina-2023-Article-IV-
Consultation-Press-Release-Staff-Report-and-538832 (accessed 10 September 2023).  
5 Ibid., p.61.

=== PAGE 156 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 156 
 
 
 
 
with a view towards: (i) how flood risk reduction measures and nature-based solutions 
are to be mainstreamed into sectoral policies and plans of Bosnia and Herzegovina; and 
(ii) how the flood forecasting and early warning systems shall be operationalised and 
sustained.” 
(b) 
“Prior to submission of a summary report of stakeholder consultations to the Fund, 
deliver to the GCF Secretariat a copy of such summary report for the review and 
approval of the Fund.” 
1.8.2. 
Sustainability Plan:  
43. 
The following condition to second disbursement should be fulfilled by the Accredited 
Entity, in form and substance satisfactory to the GCF: 
(a) 
“Deliver to the GCF Secretariat a sustainability plan developed in close consultation with 
relevant entities and local government institutions, specifying their respective roles in 
project implementation, including policy mainstreaming and the operationalising and 
sustaining of the flood forecasting and early warning systems..” 
44. 
Inclusion of the following covenant in the FAA: 
(a) 
“Deliver to the GCF Secretariat a copy of the sustainability plan endorsed by the relevant 
institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina for the review and approval of the GCF 
Secretariat.” 
1.8.3. 
Operationalising Sustainability:  
45. 
The following condition to third disbursement should be fulfilled by the Accredited 
Entity, in form and substance satisfactory to the GCF: 
(a) 
“Deliver to the GCF Secretariat an updated oganization structure for the project for 
implementation of the sustainability plan.” 
46. 
Inclusion of the following covenant in the FAA: 
(a) 
“Deliver to the GCF Secretariat a detailed project organization structure, with equipment 
property rights assigned or handed over to the various institutions in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina that will operate and maintain it,for the  review and approval of the GCF 
Secretariat.”

=== PAGE 157 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 157 
 
 
 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical 
Advisory Panel's assessment (FP216) 
Proposal name: 
Scaling up climate resilient flood risk management in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina 
Accredited entity: 
United Nations Development Programme 
Country/(ies): 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Project/programme size:  
Medium 
 
Impact potential 
Paragraphs 12-13: UNDP acknowledges the iTAP’s observations regarding the methodology 
for the flood risk and vulnerability modelling and mapping that forms the basis of the 
calculation of the anticipated adaptation impacts.  
We are confident in the rationale behind the choice of scenario RCP8.5 for the estimation of 
impact of climate change-driven flooding in BiH, which is projected to result in increased 
frequency and intensity of flooding with the highest flood risk, highest flood levels and 
highest discharge of all CC scenarios. Large flood events such as expected under RCP8.5, are 
likely to result in substantial damage to infrastructure, agriculture, and communities.  The 
approach to adapting to these projections of future flooding risks is to invest in flood 
defenses, early warning systems, and sustainable land use planning.  
The modelled 100yr+CC (using RCP8.5) flood levels for Vrbas basin were found to be similar 
to the flood levels observed in the 2014 flood event. Given that the 2014 flood impacted all 
target basins and represented the worst flooding in each of these basins, it is reasonable to 
extrapolate the RCP8.5 flood impact modelled in Vrbas basin, to other basins. We are therefore 
confident that the use of RCP8.5 and its extrapolation to other basins, provides a robust climate 
change scenario for the assessment of flood risk (identification of population and assets at 
risk), the design of flood protection measures (structural, non-structural and NbS), and the 
impact of these adaptation measures. As noted by ITAP, this approach also follows the EU flood 
directive and was requested by stakeholders given they had already in the present day 
experienced what should have been an extreme flood under a future extreme scenario. We also 
note that since RCP8.5 gives the highest flood levels (of those tested) and that we expect it to 
produce the largest increases in rainfall intensity between the different RCP scenarios, the 
protection measures are expected to provide protection under both RCP6 and RCP4.5.    
Whilst flooding under moderate (RCP4.5) and intermediate (RCP6) climate change scenarios 
are likely to result in smaller magnitude, lower intensity events floods, they may occur more 
frequently and therefore (as noted by ITAP) still cause damage due to their shorter response 
time for authorities and communities to prepare, respond, and recover.  These types of events 
are likely to impact people and communities on an annual and seasonal basis and could be 
highly disruptive and economically costly. For these types of flood events, sustainable land use 
(through flood zoning, flood resilient agric. and forestry etc,), early warning systems (including 
CBEWS), preparedness (including FbF), insurance, investment planning (which will also factor 
in the economic impact and management of smaller more frequent floods), awareness raising 
and capacity building are most appropriate and are being implemented by the project. Their

=== PAGE 158 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 158 
 
 
 
design and implementation will, therefore, need to be fully informed by all relevant climate 
change scenarios to cover the full range of adaptation measures that will be required for 
different types of events.   
During year 1 and year 2 of implementation, the WBIF hazard maps for all basins will be 
enhanced and, in line with flood modelling and mapping best-practice, the impact on flooding 
of all relevant climate change scenarios will be simulated using individual calibrated hydraulic 
models for all basins, the results from which will be used to inform detailed design and 
implementation of flood risk reduction interventions. As recommended by ITAP, this will 
include using RCP4.5 for the hydrological simulations, but unfortunately RCP6.0 is not available 
for the EU-CORDEX regional climate models used to provide the climate forcing for the 
hydrological modelling. For the reasons noted above, RCP8.5 is likely to remain most relevant 
for the design and implementation of protection measures, while the lower impact RCP4.5 
scenario  will additionally inform other flood risk reduction measures.   
Paragraph 14: UNDP fully agrees that regular and effective stakeholder consultations and 
engagement are critically important for the success and sustainability of the flood risk 
reduction measures and for achieving the anticipated adaptation impact. This has been 
achieved through continuous consultations with the institutional stakeholders and local 
communities which have been ongoing throughout project preparation. Most recently, all 
institutional stakeholders (entity ministries of agriculture, forestry and water management, 
water agencies, civil protection units) were consulted through the GCF NDA in the process of 
securing the updated no-objection letter in June 2023. Consultations with the local 
communities to be targeted by this project were carried out during the project design and 
continued more recently in 2021-2023 via two UNDP implemented projects on the National 
Adaptation Plan (NAP) and on disaster risk reduction action.   
As noted above, UNDP agrees with the iTAP’s suggestions to reinforce stakeholder and 
community consultation processes, which are planned during the start of the project. The 
national and local stakeholder consultations will be carried out and reported during the 
project inception phase as part of the planned baseline assessments and then regularly 
during implementation through the stakeholder engagement mechanisms outlined in the 
stakeholder engagement plan. Please refer to our detailed feedback on the iTAP condition 1 in 
the Overall remarks Section. 
Paragraph 16: We are in agreement with iTAP highlighting that the sustainability of the 
project’s results and impacts in the complex institutional context requires implementation of 
the project interventions in close partnership with the relevant entities and institutions in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Please note, that unlike the EIB loan project, which operates only in 
one entity (Republika Srpska) and focuses on the implementation of infrastructural 
measures, the GCF project covers the whole territory of the country and a wide arrange of 
policy, regulatory, institutional, capacity building, structural and non-structural investments. 
Hence, the GCF PMU would need to work across entities and secure coordination across 
various institutions and workstreams.    
UNDP’s Direct Implementation Modality offers ample opportunities and concrete instruments 
to ensure and facilitate such extensive engagement and ownership by relevant partners in the 
country, while also mitigating the political and institutional risks to implementation noted by 
the iTAP. Over the decade of operating in the country, the UNDP Country Office in B&H has 
established operational practices facilitating engagement of the partner institutions in the 
project’s implementation, which will apply to the GCF project as follows:

=== PAGE 159 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 159 
 
 
 
- 
National institutions participate in the development and validation of the 
ToR’s for all activities relevant to their institutional mandates (e.g. for the 
procurement of hydro-meteorological stations, development of FFEWS, design 
of the non-structural measures, etc.). 
- 
The entities and their subordinate agencies and institutions will be members 
of the project working groups for the development of regulatory and legal 
documents, operational and financing strategies and plans (including O&M 
plans and investment strategy and plans), guidelines and studies. Every 
relevant institution will be asked to nominate a member to the working 
group/s and all deliverables/products will have to be approved by the 
working groups, prior to being sent to institutions for official adoption/ 
approval. 
- 
Republika Srpska Ministry for Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management 
will nominate a liaison officer to work closely with UNDP PMU on the 
implementation of infrastructural measures, including ones financed from the 
EIB loan. 
- 
Water authorities in both entities will nominate Field Officers who will be 
responsible for the day-to-day inspection and monitoring of sites.  The Field 
Officers are employees from the water agencies who are experienced with 
field operations and infrastructure delivery, inspection of sites, ensuring 
implementation of laws and regulations. 
- 
Selected municipalities will have designated officers who will be engaged in 
the development of community investment and preparedness plans. These 
plans will, in turn, be adopted by municipal authorities. 
Nevertheless, we appreciate and accept the condition proposed by iTAP consisting of 
development of a sustainability plan, building on the updated stakeholder consultations, 
which will outline the various local/entity/national/regional institutions’ mandates and roles 
in the production and maintenance of project results.  
 
Paragraph 17: The work on the risk finance and public-private partnerships represents one of 
the innovative areas in B&H and requires a considerable investment into enabling 
environment, leveraging partnerships and capacity building before these financing 
instruments could be picked up by the finance/private sector. As noted by the iTAP, the GCF 
project will invest in such enabling environment. The following specific deliverables will be 
produced under the Activity 3.1: 
• 
5 strategies and plans for long-term ongoing investment frameworks that would 
be required to address flood risk to each sector;  
• 
Sector-specific information dissemination portals as part of the information 
platform to be developed under 1.4.3;  
• 
2 risk financing and risk transfer strategies for private sector engagement in 
risk financing and risk transfer mechanisms for entity-level flood risk financing 
and resilience strategy;  
• 
3 natural disasters products developed;  
• 
3 Feasibility studies on micro-insurance, regional disaster risk insurance 
program and catastrophe bonds; 
• 
4 sector specific awareness campaigns;

=== PAGE 160 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 160 
 
 
 
• 
2 tools for appraisal-led design for structural and non-structural FRM measures 
based on cost benefit analysis (CBA) approaches. 
Additionally, these deliverables are supported by activities 1.2 and 1.3 which will develop the 
climate risk and vulnerability maps and impact-based forecasting which is needed to 
underpin an assessment of risk and related financing options. These activities will also 
engage stakeholders to ensure that sector-specific risks (particularly the agriculture and 
hydro-power sectors) and community-related risks are co-developed through local, national 
and regional forums (e.g. the national and regional climate outlook forums), thereby 
embedding these stakeholder needs in forums and processes beyond the immediate project 
related activities. The Logical Framework for the proposal, furthermore, includes the 
following indicators and targets for Activity 3.1: 
• 
2 Investment frameworks for climate induced flood risk reduction and 
management;  
• 
3 flood risk financing mechanism in place;   
• 
2 MoUs with private/productive sector actors 
The latter targets represent specific and tangible commitments and will be reported to GCF 
through the regular reporting instruments as recommended by the iTAP. In view of the above, 
we accept the iTAP recommendation and will be tracking and reporting on the progress and 
results under the Activity 3.1.  
Paradigm shift potential 
UNDP appreciates the recognition by the iTAP of the project’s potential to substantially 
improve current flood risk management practices in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We agree that 
securing long term sustainability is critical for achieving the paradigm shift. 
Paragraph 20: We are pleased to confirm that the co-financing commitments have been 
validated by GCF NDA with all the co-financing partners during renewal of NoL in 2022-2023. 
UNDP has been in regular contact with the project co-financiers. All the earlier co-financing 
commitments are valid. However, in response to the iTAP recommendation we will be 
reaching out to the co-financiers and will obtain the updated co-financing letters from them 
as suggested by the iTAP. Therefore, the iTAP recommendation is accepted.  
Paragraph 21: We also note and accept the iTAP recommendation related to defining and 
reporting on the project’s solutions aimed at ensuring reliability of long-term O&M finance. 
The project proposal defines a menu of options/financing sources for securing long term 
sustainable funding for the O&M. These options include above all public finance (improved 
budget allocations, ODA and IFIs, PPPs with e.g. hydropower operators, etc) and private 
sector finance (corporate sponsorships, user fees, partnerships with insurance sector, joint 
ventures engaging e.g. data and IT companies). The project will carefully consider the context, 
local regulations, and stakeholder needs when selecting financing mechanisms and 
developing long-term O&M financing strategies. Often, a combination of several mechanisms 
may be necessary to ensure a stable and diverse funding base for the long-term sustainability 
of the national hydrometric observation network and forecasting and early warning system.  
We accept the iTAP recommendation and will be reporting on this element of the project as 
part of our regular reporting obligations to GCF. 
Paragraph 22: UNDP notes iTAP comments on the need for a detailed sustainability/handover 
plan specifying which institutions it will engage and work with to ensure “institutionalized 
operationalization” and continuity of the various project activities. We agree with the

=== PAGE 161 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 161 
 
 
 
proposed condition for the sustainability plan which will be developed in close consultation 
with relevant entities and local government institutions. 
Paragraph 23: UNDP noted with thanks that iTAP welcomed this project’s plans to 
mainstream the utilization of non-structural and EbA approaches to flood risk management in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Such mainstreaming will involve a coordinated effort among various 
institutions and government partners, all of which are key project partners. The EbA 
mainstreaming activity (Activity 2.3) will build upon the outcomes of several other activities 
which are interlinked. Therefore, the stated mechanisms of delivering Activity 2.3 (i.e. the use 
of consultancy services) is one part of an integrated approach to mainstreaming EbA into 
FRM and a culmination of other project activities. Please also note a high co-financing ratio 
for the activities related to the non-structural and EbA measures (79% government co-
finance to 21% GCF financing), which demonstrates the strong government commitment to 
embedding NbS into FRM.  GCF funds will be used to provide relevant technical expertise and 
inputs to create enabling conditions for the implementation of non-structural and EbA 
solutions and the mainstreaming of EbA into FRM policy and practice. The following is a 
general roadmap for achieving mainstreaming. 
• 
Policy Framework. The entity governments will take the lead in developing the 
policy framework that integrates EbA into flood risk management which may 
involve creating or amending relevant entity laws and regulations. Key 
ministries, all project board members, will collaborate to ensure a holistic 
approach to EbA in flood risk management and the mainstreaming into policy.  
• 
Raising Awareness and Capacity Building. Awareness campaigns, workshops, 
and training sessions to educate stakeholders about the benefits of non-
structural measures and EbA in enhancing climate resilience and reducing risks 
(Activity 2.3).  
• 
Case studies.  The implementation of 21 non-structural and 5 EbA measures 
(Activity 2.2) will provide the basis for the development of methodologies, and 
best practices guidelines which would form the technical basis for policies. In 
addition, the project will collaborate with research institutions to gather 
scientific data on ecosystems, flood risk, and climate change impacts and 
provide evidence-based research to support policy advocacy efforts, and with 
environmental NGOs which can provide valuable expertise in assessing the 
ecological aspects of EbA solutions and can advocate for stronger EbA policies 
and 
regulations 
and 
hold 
the 
government 
accountable 
for 
their 
implementation. 
• 
Quantify Benefits and Co-Benefits.  Using the socio-economic modelling tool to 
be developed, the project will quantify the multiple benefits of non-structural 
measures and EbA, including flood risk reduction, improved water quality, 
carbon sequestration, and enhanced ecosystem services.  Through the project-
implemented measures the project will provide evidence of the cost-
effectiveness of non-structural and EbA solutions (under Activity 2.2), based on 
economic analyses comparing NbS to traditional structural approaches and 
highlighting the potential for reducing maintenance and operational costs over 
time.  This can demonstrate to stakeholders how non-structural measures and 
EbA solution can help achieve broader sustainability goals. 
• 
Link to Local Development Goals.  Non-structural and EbA measures will be 
included in the investment planning of high-risk municipalities as part of their 
overall FRM investment planning frameworks (under Activity 3.2), and will 
ensure alignment with local development goals, such as improved water 
management, sustainable agriculture, enhanced biodiversity, and resilient 
infrastructure.

=== PAGE 162 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 162 
 
 
 
• 
Access to finance and Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs).  The project is 
developing the risk financing mechanisms which will likely include PPPs.  The 
project will examine partnerships between government entities and the private 
sector to jointly invest in non-structural measures and EbA projects. Feasibility 
studies will be used to demonstrate how sharing risks, costs, and benefits in a 
balanced manner could make non-structural and EbA Solutions attractive. Risk 
financing feasibility studies may also examine and identify incentive 
mechanisms for implementing non-structural and EbA solutions, including 
fiscal incentives, subsidies, grants, or tax breaks for businesses and individuals 
that invest in non-structural measures and EbA projects and reward for entities 
that contribute to ecosystem restoration, conservation, and sustainable land 
use (Activity 3.1). 
• 
Enabling environment and capacity building. The project is developing the 
technical specification, standards and protocols for design and implementation 
of non-structural measures and EbA solutions as well as a knowledge portal for 
EbA.  The project is also building capacity, which will enable and encourage the 
uptake of non-structural and EbA approaches (Activity 2.3) and will work with 
training institutions to build the capacity of government officials, community 
leaders, and practitioners in EbA approaches (Activity 2.4).  The project is 
establishing a knowledge portal and common resource centre to collect, collate 
and share knowledge and fill these gaps to advance the uptake of Non-
structural and EbA solutions. 
As noted above, UNDP agrees with the condition of developing a sustainability plan 
addressing above all the roles and responsibilities of various national and local actors in 
mainstreaming and scaling up non-structural and ecosystem-based solutions in B&H. We 
therefore confirm that such plan will be developed (please also see our feedback on the 
proposed Condition 2). 
Sustainable development potential 
UNDP appreciates iTAP’s recognition of a credible pathway for the project to generate 
sustainable development benefits including environmental, economic, social, and gender 
mainstreaming benefits. As discussed with the iTAP and noticed in the iTAP’s review, the 
project is likely to result in greater economic [co-]benefits than presented in the proposal 
because the economic benefit analysis applied conservative methodologies in assessing 
projected flood losses. The iTAP welcomed the structured approach to incorporating analysis 
on existing gender inequalities into project design across all levels. The observations from 
iTAP are well noted. 
Needs of the recipient 
UNDP appreciates the assessment of this investment criteria as Medium-High.  
Paragraph 30: UNDP’s Direct Implementation Modality provides ample opportunities for 
engaging national and local partners in the project implementation and building capacities of 
the relevant national entities and institutions to maintain and further extend the “soft” and 
“hard” flood risk management infrastructure that is being funded by the project.  
Please refer to our responses in the Impact Potential Section regarding the specific ways the 
national institutions will be engaged in the project implementation, delivery of the project 
activities, and validation of the project results.

=== PAGE 163 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 163 
 
 
 
Finally, as we noted above UNDP agrees with the iTAP condition to produce a delated 
sustainability/handover plan in close consultation with relevant entities and local 
government institutions prior to the second disbursement. 
Country ownership 
UNDP appreciates the iTAP’s assessment of the alignment of the project with host country 
government priorities as high. The iTAP also highlighted the signficant share of co-financing 
commitments received from entities and institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina which signify 
buy-in and ownership. 
Paragraph 34: UNDP agrees with the critical importance of stakeholder consultations and 
engagement for the success and sustainability of the project highlighted by the iTAP. 
Continuous consultations with the institutional stakeholders and local communities have 
been ongoing throughout the project preparation and until recently. However, as noted 
above, UNDP agrees with the iTAP’s suggestions regarding the reinforced stakeholder and 
community consultation process. Please refer to our detailed feedback on the iTAP condition 
1. The national and local stakeholder consultations will be carried out during the project 
inception phase as part of the planned baseline assessments and then regularly during the 
implementation through the stakeholder engagement mechanisms outlined in the 
stakeholder engagement plan and in the full proposal. 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
We appreciate iTAP’s observation that the proposed project performs satisfactorily with 
regard to the principles of economy and efficiency. The iTAP also commended the large share 
of co-financing committed to this project, including a concessional loan from EIB and co-
financing from Bosnia and Herzegovina’s partners, which signifies buy-in and ownership.  
Paragraph 37: We concur with iTAP’s observations regarding the existing pressures on the 
B&H post-war economy described in the iTAP review for the Needs of the Recipient 
(paragraph 28). As we also demonstrated in the financial analysis (Annex III(c) to the full 
proposal), the existing economic risks and fiscal pressures further aggravated by COVID and 
the Ukraine-Russia conflict limit the ability of B&H to borrow. The shortfall in expenditure in 
B&H on climate change adaptation is due to the lack of financial capacity of the B&H 
Government to fund such activities without assistance.  
The GCF co-financing framework includes a significant co-financing from the Government 
including the EIB loan resources, which are utilized by the government to implement 
structural flood protection measures resulting in reduced damages and losses from floods. 
GCF co-financing will be used to create enabling environment, establish/improve risk 
knowledge and information baseline, mainstream innovative EbA solutions, and deliver 
capacity building required to achieve transformative shift in flood risk management in the 
country. The GCF support secures activities that enable and enhance the current and future 
floor risk reduction and protection interventions in the context of climate change. Therefore, 
we believe that the GCF grant resource are requested and justified for this intervention. 
None of the activities or outputs funded by GCF clearly result in direct and quantifiable 
earnings or direct and quantifiable savings to the project owners or the project beneficiaries. 
All the activities and outputs of this proposed project result only in non-attributable savings 
that are of public good in nature to the larger community of at-risk population in B&H. Hence, 
taking into consideration the factors such as the public good nature of benefits arising out of 
the project, climate change being the key driver, economic, geographic and demographic 
distribution of the target population, impact of COVID-19 and energy crisis, B&H’s current

=== PAGE 164 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 164 
 
 
 
economic situation, the persistent fiscal risks and the catalytic nature of GCF grants, the 
following has been concluded:  
1. There is significant co-financing from Government of B&H and there is no incremental 
ability to stretch their contributions owing to budgetary and fiscal consolidation 
reasons.  
2. The nature of the benefits does not accommodate repayment of capital in whatever 
form or serviceability of a loan instrument. 
3. The nature of the beneficiaries and the level of essentiality of the service do not 
accommodate repayment of capital in whatever form or serviceability of a loan 
instrument. 
4. Increase in government spending to address COVID-19 pandemic and energy crisis has 
strained public finances. 
 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
We thank the iTAP for the endorsement of the proposal noting the conditions and 
recommendations provided in the review. We appreciate iTAP’s acknowledgement of the 
comprehensive design, ambition, potential to generate significant adaptation and sustainable 
development benefits for Bosnia and Herzegovina, relevance and ownership of the proposal 
signified by the strong partner co-financing.  
 
iTAP condition 1:  
The following condition to first disbursement should be fulfilled by the Accredited Entity, in form 
and substance satisfactory to the GCF: “Deliver to  the GCF Secretariat a summary report of 
stakeholder consultations conducted pursuant to the covenant below including 
recommendations for project design and implementation modalities.” 
Inclusion of the following covenants in the FAA: 
a) “Prior to the first disbursement of GCF proceeds, the Accredited Entity shall conduct local 
stakeholder consultations across the entire project area, including in each of the target river 
basins regarding project design. The local consultations shall be conducted with a view 
towards: (i) how flood risk reduction measures and nature-based solutions are to be 
mainstreamed into sectoral policies and plans of Bosnia and Herzegovina; and (ii) how the 
flood forecasting and early warning systems shall be operationalised and sustained.” 
b) “Prior to submission of a summary report of stakeholder consultations to the Fund, deliver to 
the GCF Secretariat a copy of such summary report for the review and approval of the Fund.” 
 
As noted in our responses above, UNDP fully agrees with the spirit of this condition. 
Stakeholder consultations and engagement are critically important for the success and 
sustainability of the flood risk reduction measures and for achieving the anticipated 
adaptation impact.  As detailed in our responses under the Impact Potential section 
(paragraph 14), continuous consultations with the institutional stakeholders and local 
communities on the proposed project have been ongoing throughout the project preparation. 
Most recently, all institutional stakeholders (entity ministries of agriculture, forestry and 
water management, water agencies, civil protection units) were consulted through the GCF 
NDA in the process of securing the updated no-objection letter in June 2023.   
The next round of detailed stakeholder consultations aimed at validating and vetting the 
project strategy, design and implementation modalities by the national and local stakeholders

=== PAGE 165 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 165 
 
 
 
is planned as part of the baseline assessments phase. The PMU will be set up by that time and 
will be engaged in the stakeholder consultations. Local community consultations will be 
carried out in all 11 municipalities located in 6 river basins targeted by the project. During the 
project inception phase, the national and local stakeholder consultations will be carried out 
and will be documented and reported to GCF Secretariat as part of the planned “baseline 
assessments” milestone within twelve months after FAA Effective Date. We therefore suggest 
adjustment to the proposed timeline for the covenant while we fundamentally agree with its 
content.   
 
iTAP condition 2: 
The following condition to second disbursement should be fulfilled by the Accredited Entity, in 
form and substance satisfactory to the GCF: “Deliver to the GCF Secretariat a sustainability plan 
developed in close consultation with relevant entities and local government institutions, 
specifying their respective roles in project implementation, including policy mainstreaming and 
the operationalising and sustaining of the flood forecasting and early warning systems..” 
Inclusion of the following covenant in the FAA: “Deliver to the GCF Secretariat a copy of the 
sustainability plan endorsed by the relevant institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina for the 
review and approval of the GCF Secretariat.” 
 
We accept the condition, as per the elements outlined. We note that the sustainability plan as 
proposed by the iTAP will be developed in close consultations with the relevant entities and 
local government institutions and will encompass, above all, respective roles in project 
implementation, including policy mainstreaming and the operationalizing and sustaining of 
the flood forecasting and EWS. The plant will ensure “institutionalized operationalization” 
and continuity of the various project activities after the project closure. It will be important to 
include solutions/tools for the long-term financial sustainability of the project results and 
O&M in this plan. These solutions/tools will be developed throughout the project 
implementation. Therefore, we suggest shifting the fulfilment of this condition to the third 
disbursement. We also suggest integrating the detailed implementation structure for the 
sustainability plan discussed below under the Condition 3 in this plan (please also see below 
our feedback on Condition 3). 
 
iTAP condition 3: 
The following condition to third disbursement should be fulfilled by the Accredited Entity, in 
form and substance satisfactory to the GCF: “Deliver to the GCF Secretariat an updated 
oganization structure for the project for implementation of the sustainability plan.” 
Inclusion of the covenant in the FAA: “Deliver to the GCF Secretariat a detailed project 
organization structure, with equipment property rights assigned or handed over to the various 
institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina that will operate and maintain it, for the  review and 
approval of the GCF Secretariat.” 
 
Please note that the project organization structure is defined in the full proposal reflecting 
the key roles in the project governance and management in line with UNDP policies. As 
recommended by the iTAP, we will further detail the structure for the implementation of the 
sustainability plan, including roles and responsibilities for operationalization of the O&M 
across various national organizations. We suggest that this detailed implementation structure 
for the sustainability plan is developed, discussed, endorsed and shared with the GCF

=== PAGE 166 ===
GCF/B.37/02/Add.07 
Page 166 
 
 
 
Secretariat together with the sustainability plan itself. We also suggest that this structure is 
encompassed in the sustainability plan. We therefore recommend that conditions 2 and 3 
could be merged into one condition/covenant with the same implementation timeline as 
proposed here for Condition 3.  
However, in relation to the equipment property rights please note that the transfer of assets is 
regulated by the SBAA process between UNDP and the Government. Clause 23.4 of the AMA 
between UNDP and the GCF stipulates the following in this respect: “In relation to a Funded 
Activity that is a grant financed in whole or in part with GCF Proceeds, if any part of such 
grant is used to purchase any durable assets or equipment used to implement the relevant 
Funded Activity (such as vehicles or office equipment), upon completion of the Funded 
Activity or termination of the relevant FAA in accordance with its terms, the Accredited Entity 
shall take such steps in relation to such assets or equipment which it reasonably deems in 
the best interest of the continued operation of the Funded Activity taking into consideration 
the objectives of the Fund and the terms of the applicable SBAA.” UNDP therefore believes 
that the sustainability plan, while providing a general framework for roles in project 
implementation, including policy mainstreaming and the operationalizing and sustaining of the 
flood forecasting and early warning systems, should not preempt the rights and obligations of 
UNDP under the SBAA.  Given that this is already fully covered under the proposed condition 
for third disbursement, UNDP cannot agree to the additional covenant proposed under this 
Condition.

=== PAGE 167 ===
I
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023
1 
ANNEX 8 
Gender Assessment  
and Gender action plan 
Scaling up Climate Resilient Flood Risk Management in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
July 2023
Gender documentation for FP216

=== PAGE 168 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
2 
I. 
Introduction 
 
The GCF project will address the increasing vulnerability of BiH communities and livelihoods, to 
intensified climate-induced hydro-meteorological flood-related disasters (pluvial, fluvial, and 
torrential). One of the root causes of increasing vulnerability and damages from floods is lack of 
quality climate data and flood forecasting and early warning system. As a result, the BiH 
authorities are unable to make qualified decisions and the affected population cannot effectively 
cope with the risk. Lack of climate information and risk knowledge increase the vulnerability and 
costs from flooding.  
The GCF project will build resilience of BiH communities and livelihoods to climate-induced 
floods by catalyzing a nation-wide shift from ad hoc, a posteriori response approaches to holistic 
a priori flood risk management and adaptation approaches based on enhanced climate 
information, risk knowledge, flood forecasting and early warning. 
The project will scale-up successful prototypes tested under the UNDP supported GEF financed 
project “Technology transfer for climate resilient flood management in Vrbas River Basin”. 
This Gender Assessment and Gender Action Plan has been prepared for the submission to the 
Green Climate Fund with the proposal “Scaling up climate resilient flood risk management in BiH”. 
The assessment aims to provide an overview of the gender situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
identify gender issues that may be relevant to the project context, to develop recommendations 
for advancing gender equality and women’s empowerment through the financed activities, and 
to inform the development of the project’s gender action plan. Individual needs and contexts in a 
disaster situation are examined through the lenses of vulnerability, visibility, and voices. The 
analysis follows social vulnerability approach and further defines whose voice is seen as the 
default one, and whose is the most visible perspective. The assessment was based upon available 
data from the Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina, RS and FBiH, studies conducted by 
the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, international organizations, civil society 
organizations and any other sources as UNDP Technology transfer for climate resilient flood 
management in Vrbas River Basin project and includes: 
1. 
Undertaking a desktop review and aligning approaches in this proposal with the 
national priorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
2. 
Incorporating information and lessons learned from past studies and assessments 
on gender in Bosnia and Herzegovina from the Government of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, the United Nations, civil society organisations, and multilateral 
development banks.  
3. 
Conducting stakeholder consultations, including consultations with the Agency 
for Gender Equality of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the two gender centers (of 
Republika Srpska and Federation BiH), and engaging women/men/youth affected 
by the project and incorporating all points raised; and 
4. 
Integrating gender considerations in the project indicators, targets, and activities, 
identifying women as leaders and decision-makers 
 While it is noted that the Gender Analysis and Action Plan should specifically identify and analyze 
the most critical issues relevant to the project and whether the needs and priorities of an equal

=== PAGE 169 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
3 
number of women/girls/men/boys are being assessed, this Gender Analysis and Action Plan is 
based on available published and grey literature, consultation with civil society organizations 
participated in recovery project after the floods happened in 2014 in Bosnia and Herzegovina and 
Gender Agency of Bosna and Herzegovina. Further an institutional gender analysis has been 
undertaken (although there will be need for deeper analysis and close cooperation during the 
project implementation). During project implementation, further stakeholder consultation will 
be undertaken to assess the components in relation to gender, age, and other relevant 
intersecting social and economic strata. There may be a need for the Gender Analysis and Action 
Plan to be modified depending on stakeholder consultation during the implementation of the 
project. 
UNDP prioritizes gender mainstreaming as its main strategy to achieve gender equality and 
women’s empowerment. Gender mainstreaming is the process of assessing any planned action in 
all areas and levels to determine the implication for women and men. It is a strategy for making 
women’s, as well as men’s, concerns and experiences an integral dimension of the design, 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of projects so that women benefit equally. Gender 
mainstreaming aims to transform unequal social and institutional structures in order to make 
them profoundly responsive to gender, and, when realized, it ensures that both women and men 
benefit equally from the development process. It involves much more than simply adding 
women’s participation to existing strategies and programmes. Special attention and action are 
often required to compensate for the existing gaps and inequalities that women currently face.  
The UNDP Gender Equality Strategy 2022-2025 is aligned with the 2030 Development Agenda 
and UNDP’s Strategic Plan.  The strategy recognizes gender equality as a human right as well as 
instrumental to the achievement of sustainable development.  It considers women and men as 
active agents of change and development, not simply beneficiaries and vulnerable groups and it 
recognizes how working with men and boys is of critical importance to change gender norms and 
attitudes and achieve gender equality.  The gender assessment and action plan developed for the 
submission to the Green Climate Fund with the proposal “Scaling up climate resilient flood risk 
management in BiH” has been prepared to meet the requirements and standards in UNDP’s 
Gender Equality Strategy which meets or exceeds the requirements set forth by the Green Climate 
Fund Gender Policy and Gender Action Plan.   
Short background on Bosnia and Herzegovina and on EU Accession Process 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a potential candidate for EU membership. The Stabilization and 
Association Agreement between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the EU was ratified in 2011.  In 
February 2016, the country applied for EU membership and in September 2016 the European 
Council invited the European Commission to submit its Opinion on the merits of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina's application. In December 2016, the Commissioner for European Neighborhood 
Policy and Enlargement Negotiations handed over a comprehensive Questionnaire covering all 
EU accession criteria. The country's consolidated answers were finalized in February 2018 and 
the answers handed over to the President of the European Commission. The Commission has 
prepared its “Opinion” report in 2019, based on the country's answers to the Questionnaire and 
follow up inquiries, dedicated peer reviews as well as Commission's consultations with 
international organizations and civil society. This interim report on Bosnia and Herzegovina 
provides an update on the situation in the country as well as on key developments on

=== PAGE 170 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
4 
"fundamentals' first" areas: the rule of law and fundamental rights, public administration reform 
and economic development. According to the Opinion of EU the legislation and institutions on 
fundamental rights are largely in place; they should be fully implemented and substantially 
improved, including by harmonizing legislation within the country and aligning it with European 
standards, strengthening administrative capacity and providing adequate resources for the 
effective enforcement of fundamental rights. There are no countrywide strategies on human 
rights and on antidiscrimination. The equality of all citizens is not ensured. The laws on non-
discrimination and on gender equality are in place but not sufficiently enforced, including on 
gender-based violence. Bosnia and Herzegovina does not have any policy areas where the country 
has a good level of preparation or is well advanced regarding its capacity to undertake the 
obligations stemming from EU membership. Overall, considerable adjustments of the legal and 
institutional framework and of administrative and implementation capacity are needed across all 
policy areas to align the legislation with the EU acquis and to implement it effectively. 1Bosnia and 
Herzegovina continued to implement the Stabilization and Association Agreement and the 
meetings of the joint bodies under the agreement took place, except for the parliamentary 
committee which has yet to adopt its Rules of Procedures2.  
 
 
Overview on Bosnia and Herzegovina Government Construction 
 
The current Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina came into existence in 1995 as an Annex to 
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. While the General 
Framework Agreement for Peace in BiH ended the war and brought peace and stability, the extent 
to which the constitutional arrangement defined by its provisions is adequate under present 
circumstances, is widely debatable. According to the provisions of the Peace Agreement the State 
of Bosnia and Herzegovina is organized as a country composed of two entities with a broad set of 
competencies: the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) and Republika Srpska (RS). Some 
years after, an arbitration decision on the disputed areas of the country made Brčko District the 
third administrative unit of BiH. RS is a centralized entity whereas the FBiH is comprised of ten 
Cantons. 
 
The State level comprises a tripartite rotating Presidency, a Council of Ministers (executive 
branch) and a bicameral Parliamentary Assembly consisting of a House of Representatives (lower 
chamber) and a House of Peoples (upper chamber). The judicial branch established by Dayton 
consists of a State-level Constitutional Court. The High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council, as well 
as a State Court and Prosecutor Office, were established later.  
 
An international presence under UN auspices— the Office of the High Representative (OHR) — 
has been in place in Bosnia and Herzegovina since 1995.  The Peace Implementation Council 
Steering Board has set objectives and conditions to be met for the closure of the OHR3. Since the 
decoupling of the European Union Special Representative’s mandate from the OHR, the EU has 
reinforced its role in the country in line with the relevant Council Conclusions. The enhanced 
 
1 https://ec.europa.eu/neighbourhood-enlargement/sites/near/files/20190529-bosnia-and-herzegovina-opinion.pdf 
2 Bosnia and Herzegovina 2018. Report, https://ec.europa.eu/neighbourhood-enlargement/sites/near/files/20180417-
bosnia-and-herzegovina-report.pdf 
 
3 See details on the OHR website (www.ohr.int) under ‘5+2 Agenda’

=== PAGE 171 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
5 
presence of the combined EU Special Representative and the EU Delegation in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina have continued to be instrumental in communicating EU priorities to citizens and in 
implementing the objectives of the EU agenda in key areas. 
 
II. 
Gender Equality/Inequality in Bosnia and Herzegovina  
Before starting to analyze gender inequality in Bosnia and Herzegovina, it is important to make 
clear and to agree on the meaning of gender equality.  
 
Gender equality refers to the equal rights, responsibilities and opportunities of women and men 
and girls and boys. Equality does not mean that women and men will become the same but that 
women’s and men’s rights, responsibilities and opportunities will not depend on whether they 
are born male or female. Gender equality implies that the interests, needs and priorities of both 
women and men are taken into consideration, recognizing the diversity of different groups of 
women and men. Gender equality is not a women’s issue but should concern and fully engage men 
as well as women. Equality between women and men is seen both as a human rights issue and as 
a precondition for, and indicator of, sustainable people-centered development (UN Women, OSAGI 
Gender Mainstreaming - Concepts and definitions) 
 
The fundamental principle of human development is for people to enlarge their choices, to realize 
their potential, and to enjoy the freedom to lead lives they value or have reason to value. Equal 
opportunities in all spheres, for all people, women, and men alike, are at the heart of the human 
development. However, those options remain unequally distributed within and across societies 
and unfortunately many are still largely unavailable to women. Disadvantage and discrimination, 
lack of insights into what particularly affects women’s lives, including health (physical and 
emotional), reinforced by social norms and values, institutions, and public policies, exist in every 
sphere of women’s lives, manifested differently in different country settings. They limit women’s 
capabilities, opportunities, and choices, resulting in less progress than men in terms of health, 
education, standard of living, empowerment, personal security, and other critical dimensions of 
human development. Thus, the full potential of many women’s lives cannot reach optimal level 
and humanity as a whole does not reap its potentials (Issue papers, “Gender Equality in Human 
Development – Measurement Revisited”, Human Development Report Office, UNDP June 2015). 
 
According to the latest UNDP Human Development Report (2020), Bosnia and Herzegovina’s HDI 
value for 2019 is 0.780— which ranks it at 73 out of 189 countries and territories. Between 2000 
and 2019, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s HDI value increased from 0.679 to 0.780, an increase of 14.9 
percent. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress in each of the HDI indicators shows that between 
1990 and 2019, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s life expectancy at birth increased by 6.5 years, mean 
years of schooling increased by 2.8 years and expected years of schooling increased by 2.2 years. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s GNI per capita increased by about 737.8 percent between 1990 and 
2019. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s 2019 HDI of 0.780 is above the average of 0.753 for countries in 
the high human development group and below the average of 0.791 for countries in Europe and 
Central Asia.  The inequality HDI (IHDI) introduced in 2010, is basically the HDI discounted for 
inequalities. The ‘loss’ in human development due to inequality is given by the difference between 
the HDI and the IHDI and can be expressed as a percentage.  When discounted for inequality, 
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s HDI falls to 0.667, a loss of 14.5 percent due to inequality in the

=== PAGE 172 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
6 
distribution of the HDI dimension indices. This is above the average loss due to inequality for high 
HDI for Europe and Central Asia which is 11.9 percent. 
 
With regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina, there can be no dispute that significant advances have 
been made in the realization of the principle of the equality of women and men, which is a result 
of activities taken by all parties (Gender institutional mechanisms, as well as citizens through civil 
society organizations) responsible for implementing the Law on Gender Equality in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. Nonetheless, in spite of these positive changes, there are still a lot to be done.   
Through the years, several indices have developed to quantify the concept of gender inequality.  
The United Nations Development Programme uses the Gender Inequality Index (GII) and Gender 
Development Index (GDI).4 GII is a composite measure that shows inequality in achievement 
between women and men in reproductive health, empowerment, and the labour market while 
with a measures achievement in human development in three areas: health, education, and 
command over economic resources.  The GDI considers the gender gaps on human development 
between men and women. 
The Gender Development Index (GDI) based on the sex-disaggregated Human Development 
Index, defined as a ratio of the female to the male HDI is 0.937 for Bosnia and Herzegovina (female 
HDI = 0.753 and male HDI = 0.803).  This is below the average for Europe and Central Asia, which 
is 0.953, and placing it in Group 3 – which comprises countries with medium equality in HDI 
achievements between women and men. The Gender Inequality Index (GII) reflects gender-based 
inequalities in three dimensions – reproductive health, empowerment, and economic activity. 
Reproductive health is measured by maternal mortality and adolescent birth rates; 
empowerment is measured by the share of parliamentary seats held by women and attainment 
in secondary and higher education by each gender; and economic activity is measured by the 
labour market participation rate for women and men. The GII can be interpreted as the loss in 
human development due to inequality between female and male achievements in the three GII 
dimensions.  Bosnia and Herzegovina has a GII value of 0.149, ranking it 38 out of 162 countries 
in the 2019 index. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, 21.1 percent of parliamentary seats are held by 
women, and 74.0 percent of adult women have reached at least a secondary level of education 
compared to 89.3 percent of their male counterparts. For every 100,000 live births, 10.0 women 
die from pregnancy related causes; and the adolescent birth rate is 9.6 births per 1,000 women 
of ages 15-19. Female participation in the labour market is 35.4 percent compared to 58.1 for 
men.   
The Multi-dimensional Poverty Index (MPI), which identifies multiple overlapping deprivations 
suffered by individuals in 3 dimensions: health, education, and standard of living.  In Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, 2.2 percent of the population (73 thousand people) are multidimensionally poor 
while an additional 4.1 percent are classified as vulnerable to multidimensional poverty (135 
thousand people). The breadth of deprivation (intensity) in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is the 
average deprivation score experienced by people in multidimensional poverty, is 37.9 percent. 
The MPI, which is the share of the population that is multidimensionally poor, adjusted by the 
intensity of the deprivations, is 0.008.  Compared to Income Poverty, the multidimensional 
 
4 United Nations Development Programme. Human Development Report. http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/table-4-
gender-inequality-index.

=== PAGE 173 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
7 
poverty headcount is 2.1 percentage points higher which implies that individuals living above the 
income poverty line may still suffer deprivations in health, education and/or standard of living. 
The Global Gender Gap Index (GGGI) of the World Economic Forum examines the gap between 
men and women in four categories: economic participation and opportunity, educational 
attainment, health, and survival; and political empowerment.5 Out of 149 countries, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina ranks 16th out of 26 countries in the Europe and Central Asia Region and 76 out of 
155 countries globally.: 
Description 
Score 
Rank 
Economic participation and opportunity 
0.608 
115 
Educational attainment 
0.967 
110 
Health and survival 
0.974 
64 
Political empowerment 
0.302 
45 
Gender Gap Index 2018 
0.713 
76 
Table 1. Bosnia and Herzegovina rank based on GGGI in 2021, where   
Inequality = 0.00; Equality = 1.00. Source: The Global Gender Gap Report 2021 
 
. 
 
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) developed the Social 
Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI), a composite index that scores countries (i.e., 0 to 1) on 14 
indicators grouped into five sub-indices: discriminatory family code, restricted physical integrity, 
son bias, restricted resources and assets, and restricted civil liberties to measure the 
discrimination against women in social institutions across 160 countries. The 2018 SIGI value for 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is 22%, suggesting that discrimination against women is low.6  
Political participation and Public Life 
 
According to the 2013 Law on Amendments to the Election Law of Bosnia and Herzegovina, equal 
representation of genders exists when one of the genders is represented by at least 40% of the 
total number of candidates on that list (previously, the quota was 33%).  Nowadays, the 
percentage of women in legislative and executive authorities at all levels remains unsatisfactory 
(even the situation is better comparing 2014 and 2018 elections) and the newly introduced 40% 
representation quota has not yet been reached. 
 
The last General Elections were held in 2018 in Bosnia and Herzegovina (State, entities, cantonal 
level, and Brčko District level). The Governments are still not fully established, but the available 
figures give an overview of the gender reality in B&H. There are 9 (21.4%) female representatives 
in the House of Representatives of the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina out of 
42 members7 and 3 (20%) female delegates in the House of Peoples of the Parliamentary 
 
5 World Economic Forum. The Global Gender Gap Report 2021 Country Profiles. 
https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2021.pdf 
6 OECD (2019), Gender, Institutions and Development Database, https://oe.cd/ds/GIDDB2019. 
 https://www.genderindex.org/wp-content/uploads/files/datasheets/2019/BA.pdf 
7 Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Representatives of the House of Representatives, 
available at: https://www.parlament.ba/Content/Read/27?title=Statisti%C4%8Dkipodaci&lang=en

=== PAGE 174 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
8 
Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina, out of 15 members.8 At the time, this analyze was done, 
(after 2018 Elections) the BiH Council of Ministers was still not established. The Presidency 
consists of three persons, and all three are male, as was the case, with the composition of the 
previous Council which is still in power. The Council of Ministers consisted of nine ministries, and 
during the 2014 – 2018 mandate there were only two female ministers (22.20%). But just to have 
a wider picture, this document has analyzed male/female ratio more deeply (ministers and 
deputy ministers – 18 persons), and there are only two women (11.11%) out of 18 more 
influential persons in the B&H Government. 
 
In total, comparing to men, some more women are employed in state institutions (53%). 
However, gender imbalance is noticeable when observing the gender structure of managerial 
positions - the representation of men in managerial positions is considerably higher. 
 
The House of Representatives of the FBiH Parliament consists of 98 representatives, out of which 
25 (25.5%) are women9 and the House of Peoples of the FBiH Parliament counts 22 (24.8%) 
female delegates out of a total 55 (usually there are 58, but only 55 were appointed until 
28.03.2019.)10. The Government of FBiH (Prime-minister and 16 ministers), appointed after the 
last elections, in 2014, has had 4 female ministers (25%) and 12 (75%) male ministers11. The 
Prime minister was male. 
 
National Assembly of the Republic of Srpska counts 23 (27.7%) female representatives out of 83 
in total (Elections 2018)12. There are 6 (37.5%) female ministers, out of 16, appointed to the 
Government of the Republic of Srpska13 
  
Local/ municipal election were held in 2020. The electoral cycle was marked in particular by the 
minimal participation of women as candidates for mayoral positions. In the end, four women out 
of 425 mayoral candidates in total (out of which 29 were women mayoral candidates) were 
elected as mayors, mostly in small municipalities, which is a drop of over 50% in comparison to 
2016 local elections. 
All the city mayors in BiH are, currently, men. In the municipal/city councils and assemblies of 
municipalities/cities in BiH, every fifth term belongs to women14. 
 
When it comes to municipal/city councils/assemblies, in FBiH, women won 21.8% of mandates, 
i.e., 402 out of 1,845. Two municipalities (2.53%) elected less than 5% of women, namely 
municipalities Tešanj and Kalesija. Most of the municipalities (70.9%) elected between 11% and 
 
8 Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Delegates of the House of Peoples, available at: 
https://www.parlament.ba/delegate/list 
9 Federal Parliament, Representatives of the House of Representatives, available at: https://predstavnickidom-
pfbih.gov.ba/hr/page.php?id=8 
10 Federal Parliament, Delegates of the House of Peoples, available at: 
https://parlamentfbih.gov.ba/v2/hr/stranica.php?idstranica=6 
11 Government of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ministers, available at: 
http://www.fbihvlada.gov.ba/hrvatski/ministarstva/ 
12 National Assembly of the Republic of Srpska: https://www.narodnaskupstinars.net/?q=en 
13 Government of the Republic of Srpska: http://www.vladars.net/eng/Pages/default.aspx 
14 Official Gazette, Women and Men in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
http://www.bhas.ba/tematskibilteni/FAM_00_2017_TB_0_BS.pdf

=== PAGE 175 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
9 
30% of women, and only four municipalities (5%) elected more than 40% of women, namely 
municipalities Drvar, Dobretići, Kiseljak and Trnovo (FBiH). 
In RS, women won 17% of mandates, i.e., 214 out of 1,256. Seven municipalities (11.5%) elected 
less than 5% of women, namely municipalities Pelagićevo, Stanari, Ugljevik, Kneževo, Bratunac, 
Rudo, Milići. No women were elected in the Pelagićevo municipality. Most of the municipalities 
(63.9%) elected between 11% and 30% of women. Two municipalities (3.3%) elected more than 
40% of women, namely municipalities Kupres (RS) and Istočni Stari Grad. Kupres (RS) is the 
winner of the 2020 Local Elections when it comes to women’s representation – the municipal 
council now consists of 63.6% of women, i.e., women hold seven out of 11 mandates. 
 
 
Inhabitants15 
 
 
 
Local  
Elections 
2020 
Town 
Total 
Men 
Women 
Elected 
Men 
Women 
Bugojno 
31,470 
15,635 
15,835 
25 
21 
4 
Donji Vakuf 
13,985 
6,922 
7,063 
21 
17 
4 
Gornji Vakuf-Uskoplje 
29,933 
10,532 
10,401 
23 
18 
5 
Jajce 
27,258 
13,856 
13,402 
25 
20 
5 
Cazin 
66,149 
33,072 
33,077 
30 
23 
7 
Bosanska Krupa 
25,545 
12,548 
12,997 
24 
20 
4 
Bihać 
56,261 
27,041 
29,220 
30 
21 
9 
Sanski Most 
41,475 
20,826 
20,649 
31 
25 
6 
Bosanski Petrovac 
7,328 
3,678 
3,650 
17 
14 
3 
Ključ 
16,744 
8,365 
8,379 
25 
20 
5 
Usora,  
6,603 
3,266 
3,337 
13 
11 
2 
Tešanj, 
43,0632 
21.376 
21,687 
25 
24 
1 
Maglaj 
23,146 
11,430 
11.716 
25 
23 
2 
Lukavac 
44,520 
21,786 
22,734 
29 
25 
4 
Tuzla, 
110,979 
52,745 
58,234 
30 
21 
9 
Kalesija 
33,053 
16,597 
16,456 
26 
25 
1 
Živinice 
54,765 
28,714 
29,051 
31 
29 
2 
Žepče 
30,2019 
15,335 
14,884 
25 
19 
6 
Zavidovići 
35,988 
26,574 
26,908 
29 
27 
2 
Travnik 
53,842 
26,574 
26,908 
30 
24 
6 
Zenica 
110,663 
54,660 
56,003 
30 
27 
3 
Vitez 
25,836 
12,767 
13,069 
25 
16 
9 
Visoko 
39,938 
19,705 
20,233 
25 
21 
4 
Kakanj 
37,441 
18,651 
18,790 
29 
24 
5 
Ilidža 
66,730 
32,359 
34,371 
31 
21 
10 
Prozor-Rama 
14,218 
7,210 
7,070 
21 
18 
3 
Jablanica 
10,111 
5,027 
5,084 
19 
16 
3 
Konjic 
25,148 
12,360 
12,788 
27 
22 
5 
Mostar 
105,797 
51,210 
54,587 
 
 
 
Čitluk 
18,140 
8,937 
9,203 
25 
20 
5 
Čapljina 
26,157 
12,947 
13,210 
25 
19 
6 
 
15 Popis stanovništva 2013 - http://www.statistika.ba/#tab4 
http://fzs.ba/index.php/popis-stanovnistva/popis-stanovnistva-2013/konacni-rezultati-popisa-2013/

=== PAGE 176 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
10 
Table 216. Inhabitants and elected Members of Local Municipal Councils in the selected 
municipalities 
 
All the analyzed figures are fare from 40% stipulated by BiH Gender Equality Law. 
 
Education and Economic participation of women 
 
In general, BiH has adequate laws and regulations in place to ensure gender equality in the 
education sector. The right to equal education is provided by the Constitution of BiH (part II.3 
(L)) and the constitutions of the entities, and the Law on Gender Equality in BiH (Article 10). The 
Framework Law on Elementary and Secondary Education in BiH and the Framework Law on Pre-
school Upbringing and Education in BiH provide a legal framework for education. These laws 
empower and require that education authorities in the FBiH (including those in cantons), RS and 
BDBiH, implement and respect the principles and norms defined by these laws (GAP 2013-2017). 
 
Here we first look at the working age population of BiH (15-64), consisting of employed, 
unemployed and inactive persons, in accordance with the Labor Force Survey standards, to 
identify the gender gaps in education. 
  
Working aged women have lower educational attainment levels than men in BiH. 39.5 percent of 
working age population in BiH has only primary education, 51 percent has secondary or 
specialized education, and 9.5 percent has higher education. A considerably higher proportion of 
women than men have only a primary education (49 percent compared to 29 percent), with a 
similar achievement gap in favor of men present in secondary education (60.9 percent compared 
to 41.7 percent). The gender gap in higher education is considerably smaller, at only one 
percentage point in favor of men. The FBiH has the largest gender gap (over 20 percentage points) 
for primary and secondary education – more women with only primary and fewer with 
secondary. In the RS and BDBiH, this gender gap is in the 16 percentage point range for primary 
and 14 percentage point range for secondary education, respectively17.  
 
Education achievements of working age women in the entities and the Brcko District are similar 
to BiH levels. In the FBiH and RS, almost 50 percent of working age women have only a primary 
education and 41 percent and 44 percent, respectively, have a secondary education. The FBiH has 
the highest ratio of women with higher education (9.7 percent) and the RS, the lowest (7.7 
percent). The BDBiH has the highest ratio of women with only primary education (57.3 percent) 
and the lowest with secondary and tertiary (34.9 percent and 7.8 percent, respectively)18.  
 
By contrast, in the labor force (employed + unemployed), there is a significantly higher 
percentage of women than men with a university education (20.7 percent of women and 12.3 
percent of men), while it is the opposite for secondary education (60.4 percent of women and 
70.7 percent of men)19. On average, a greater percentage of employed women than men have a 
higher education. Women with higher education account for a quarter of all employed women, 
 
16 Table created by the Author 
17 LFS, 2015 
18 LFS, 2015: Graphs 6.1-6.3 
19 LFS, 2015: Graph 7

=== PAGE 177 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
11 
compared to one in seven men. At the same time, a greater percentage of women than men have 
only a primary education (three percentage point difference).  
 
Considering educational achievement and unemployment rates, except for primary education, 
women with secondary and university educations are also more likely to be unemployed than 
men with the same education. Among those with secondary education, women tend to be more 
often unemployed with a gender gap of nine percentage points. For university-educated women, 
the situation is slightly more favorable – the gender gap in favor of men is five percentage points20. 
For emphasis, note these figures do not account for men and women who are inactive. 
 
Men with higher education are less likely to be employed than women and more likely to be 
inactive. 58 percent of men with higher education are employed, compared to 62 percent of 
women with higher education. Men with higher education are more likely to be inactive than 
women by nine percentage points. However, women with higher education are more likely to be 
unemployed than men by five percentage points. One in six highly educated women is 
unemployed compared to one in ten men.  
 
Comparing the labor force (employed + unemployed) in the entities and BDBiH, found that the 
FBiH has the best educated female labor force. In the FBiH, 23.4 percent of women in the 
workforce have higher education, compared to 19.1 percent in the BDBiH, and 16.5 percent in the 
RS. The FBiH also has the lowest percent of workforce with primary education (16.5 percent). 
The FBiH and RS have almost equal proportions of workforce with a secondary education, 60.1 
percent, and 61.2 percent, respectively. The BDBiH has the highest percent of women with 
primary education (26.9 percent) and the lowest with secondary education (54 percent) (LFS, 
2015: Graphs 7.1 – 7.3). Looking at employed women only (LFS, 2015: Graphs 8.1-8.3), over half 
of them have a secondary education. The FBiH and BDBiH have the highest percent of employed 
women with higher education (27.9 percent and 26.6 percent, respectively). In the RS, 17.3 
percent of employed women have higher education. The RS also has the highest percent of 
employed women with only a primary education (25 percent) and the FBiH has the lowest (16.2 
percent). Women with secondary education also account for the highest percentage of 
unemployed women - 70.3 percent in the RS, 68.6 percent in the FBiH, and 50.6 percent in the 
BDBiH. The BDBiH stands out with 43.6 percent of unemployed women with primary education, 
compared to considerably lower rates of 15.2 percent in the RS, and 17.3 percent in the FBiH.  
 
Women’s and men’s choices in education have an impact on their earnings later in life. The “World 
Bank study on Bosnia and Herzegovina: Gender Disparities in Endowments, Access to Economic 
Opportunities and Agency (2015)” is, for the time being, the most current and relevant source of 
information on the gender wage gap. Their estimates show that the hourly-wage gap for the 
population 16-64 years of age working for salaries or wages, is nine percent. This means that the 
difference between men’s and women’s average hourly wage is nine percent of the men’s wage. 
The gap varies across education levels and age groups, but is always in favor of men, with the 
exception of the 15-24 and 55-64 age groups21. When controlled for factors such as age, industry, 
 
20 LFS, 2015, calculations 
21 WB, 2015: p. 52, based on LFS, 2013

=== PAGE 178 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
12 
occupation, gender and education, the latter being the main difference in observable 
characteristics between men and women, the wage gap persists22.  
 
There is clear evidence that gender norms translate into preferences and choices when it comes 
to the fields of study chosen by male and female students. In a number of instances, these choices 
have led to a ‘gender divide’ and occupational segregation, creating ‘feminization of professions.’ 
Overall, these feminized professions are characterized by lower salaries and, consequently, 
translate into lower lifetime earnings and social benefits.  Lower paid ‘women’s’ jobs exist in both 
public and private sectors and in the informal economy. Sectors primarily associated with lower 
earnings include education, health, culture, and agriculture.   
  
There is a serious problem of gender-based inequalities and discrimination in women’s access to 
the labour market, combined with structural stereotyping and the problem of unpaid work, which 
affects women disproportionately. All these combined factors are reflected in the low number of 
employed women in 2019: with 20.47%, 16.85% and 62.68% of females employed in agriculture, 
industry, and services sectors respectively23. It is also alarming that there are twice as many 
women than men with university degrees who are unemployed. There is a serious problem of 
gender-based inequalities and discrimination in women’s access to the labour market, combined 
with structural stereotyping and the problem of unpaid work, which affects women 
disproportionately.  The current employment strategies do not seriously address the issue of 
female participation in the labour market, the improvement of which would contribute to 
reducing poverty.  
 
 
 
Access to resources 
Women and men have equal legal rights to property ownership, management, and use, as well as 
equal legal status in relation to access to financing and services24. However, local traditions and 
customs persist in giving preference to men. Women are known to ‘voluntarily’ cede their right 
to a male relative or simply are not included in the deeds for land or housing (Interviews). 
Nationally, men account for over 70 percent of landownership and own 74 percent of dwellings. 
Women own 15 percent of all homes in 76 percent of female-headed households. Ten percent of 
dwellings has joint ownership25. Women hold joint ownership in 11 percent of male-headed 
households but only five percent of men have joint ownership in female-headed households. One 
possible explanation is that female-headed households are more likely to include women without 
partners. Across political entities, women own 16 percent of dwellings in the RS and BDBiH and 
14 percent in the FBiH. However, the FBiH has the highest joint ownership – 13 percent – 
compared to three percent in the RS and one percent in the BD26.  
 
There is considerable difference in dwelling ownership among men and women in urban and 
rural settings. Men own 80 percent of dwellings in rural areas and 66 percent in urban settings. 
For women, the trend is reversed – dwelling ownership among urban women is higher at 19 
 
22 WB, 2015 
23 WB Development Indices, 2021 data 
24 WB, Women, Business, and the Law, 2016: p. 94 
25 WB 2015: p. 79 
26 2011 BiH Household Budget Survey, in WB 2015

=== PAGE 179 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
13 
percent compared with 12 percent for rural areas. The same holds true in cases of joint ownership 
– 13 percent in urban settings and 8 percent in rural. Among landowners, 70 percent are men27.  
 
While only approximately 16 percent of women are heads of household, more non-poor than poor 
women are heads of households. In the top 60th percentile of the income category, women 
account for 17.8 percent of heads of household compared to 13.2 percent in the bottom 40th 
percentile category. More women are heads of household in urban settings (20 percent) 
compared to rural areas (13 percent). One explanation for this is that more income generation 
opportunities are available in urban areas than in rural and, consequently, women who are not 
able to support themselves and their families may not have an alternative option and choose to 
remain with their husbands (interviews). An additional likely factor is greater prevalence of 
traditional socio-cultural gender norms that support male ownership in rural areas. The share of 
households headed by women is similar in the three political entities: FBiH – 15 percent; RS – 17 
percent; BDBiH – 16 percent28.  
 
Level of financial inclusion in BiH is similar to the Europe and Eurasia (E&E) average but lags 
considerably behind upper-middle income countries. Financial inclusion has been broadly 
recognized as a central factor for promoting broad economic development and reducing poverty. 
According to 2014 FINDEX data, 53 percent of the BiH population had an account at a financial 
institution. This is slightly higher than the E&E average of 51 percent but considerably below 
upper-middle income countries at 71 percent. The percentage of account holders has declined by 
three percentage points in comparison with 2011, with a similar trend in E&E and upper-middle 
income countries. In 2014, 34 percent of the population in the 15-24 age group had an account, 
compared to 36 percent in E&E and 58 percent in upper-middle income countries. The rural 
population in BiH has higher ratios of access to a financial institution than in E&E – 52 percent 
compared with 46 percent. However, this falls considerably below the 69 percent in upper-
middle income countries. 
 
A considerable financial gender gap still exists in BiH. Only 47 percent of women have an account 
at a financial institution, compared to 59 percent of men. However, in comparison with 2011, the 
decline in the number of accounts among women was only one percentage point, compared to 
eight percentage points for men. While still low, men have higher ratios of savings than women – 
12 percent compared to six percent. And women have slightly higher rates of borrowing than men 
– 16 percent of women compared to 12 percent of men borrowed money from financial 
institutions. Nationally, financial institutions are sources for 14 percent of loans, and 7 percent 
come from family and/or friends. Looking at all sources of funding as a group, 27.5 percent of 
women borrowed money in the past year, compared to 22.6 percent of men (FINDEX, 2014). 
Other sources of finance include informal lenders, family and friends, shops, and employers.   
 
Women and men borrow for different purposes. According to FINDEX, women tend to borrow 
more for education or school fees (2.1 percent compared to 1 percent of men), health (4.5 
compared to 3.6 percent of men) and other immediate needs, while men borrow more in order 
to start, operate, or expand a farm or business (2.7 percent of men compared to 2 percent of 
 
27 WB, 2015 
28 Ibid, WB 2015

=== PAGE 180 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
14 
women (FINDEX, 2014). The World Bank (WB) approach to financial inclusion relies on three 
main dimensions: holding an account, formal savings, and formal borrowing. This data is available 
sex-disaggregated, as well as per rural/urban, age group, and education categories within the 
Databank of the WB29. 
 
 
 
Women in Rural Areas 
The agricultural sector employs slightly more men than women – 18.5 percent and 16.8 percent, 
respectively. For women, this represents a 2.4 percentage point decline since 2013. The RS has 
the highest percentage of their workforce employed in agriculture and the highest percentage of 
women in the sector. Twenty-nine percent of the workforce are in this sector in the RS, compared 
to 24.6 percent in the BDBiH, and 10.6 percent in the FBiH. Also in the RS, 28 percent of women 
are employed in agriculture, compared to 18 percent in the BDBiH, and 9.1 percent in the FBiH.  
 
Men and women tend to engage in different types of farm-related activities. Women more often 
are engaged in lower levels of agricultural activity, own smaller business, and are more likely to 
be engaged in more local and informal markets. By contrast, men are engaged in a wider spectrum 
of activities, have different levels of ownership and are more likely to be engaged in larger, formal 
markets. Farm activities performed almost exclusively by women include milking, picking fruit, 
and activities that require greater precision. Men tend to engage in contract labor, operation/use 
of machinery, transport of goods, marketing, and negotiating contracts30. 
 
In the RS, women in rural areas have very few (if any) opportunities for non-work or house social 
interaction. In preparation for developing a new strategic program for agricultural development 
by 2020, the RS Ministry of Agriculture conducted a detailed analysis of the situation in rural 
areas, administering 800 surveys to agricultural households. One issue raised by women that 
stood out and came as a surprise was the lack of and need for opportunities, services, and 
activities, for women to engage in socially. There are very few associations or activity groups that 
coalesce around different interests. This was surprising given the assumptions that in the age of 
global communication, even in rural settings, women would have more access to such activities. 
This finding provides additional validation to the existence of still-deep social gender stereotypes 
that restrict women’s involvement outside of household and family. In response to this finding, 
the new agricultural development plan in the RS includes strong emphasis on addressing this 
issue. Engagement in this area is a continuity of the 2010 rural development strategy and the RS 
Action Plan for the Advancement of the Position of Women in Rural Areas. The biggest limitation 
is lack of resources to address all needs.  
 
In many communities, NGOs were the first to assist in the protection and implementation of 
women's human rights and today are active in communities in empowering women at the local 
level. Their activities include providing free legal assistance in case of violation of women's rights, 
provide protection to victims of domestic violence and human trafficking, support women 
through programs of credit and economic literacy, employment, and self-employment, as well as 
activities aimed at empowering rural women, Roma women’s organizations etc. 
 
29 Financial Inclusion Data/Global Findex:  http://datatopics.worldbank.org/financialinclusion/country/bosnia-
and-herzegovina 
30 FARMA II Validation Workshop; Oxfam meeting, 2018

=== PAGE 181 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
15 
 
A significant mechanism for establishing partnerships between institutional mechanisms for 
gender equality and non-governmental organizations is the Financial Mechanism for the 
Implementation of the BiH Gender Action Plan (FIGAP), which operates since 2010. Its main 
objective is to strengthen capacity of gender institutional mechanisms and relevant institutions 
to integrate activities from the GAP BiH into regular plans and programs, as well as to support 
non-governmental organizations in the implementation of projects under FIGAP. 
 
In 2011, through FIGAP funds, 36 non-governmental organizations from all over BiH where 
supported to implement projects in total value of BKM 710,000. Implemented projects addressed 
issues of prevention and supporting victims of domestic violence, strengthening women's 
entrepreneurship through self-employment and employment programs, and strengthening the 
role of women in political and public life.31 
 
The actual number and types of women’s association and NGO’s that focus on gender equality in 
BiH is not known, but good reference is  Women’s Network of BiH which is an informal group of 
civil society organizations and individuals who represent and work on women’s rights and 
encourage gender equality,  promotes anti-discrimination, freedom of decision-making, equality, 
non-violence and anti-militarism, through acceptance of feminist values of action – peace, 
solidarity, trust, fellowship, equality and diversity. The network currently counts 40-member 
organizations, all from urban areas, of which 9 are registered in RS and 31 in FBiH. The network 
is supported by Royal Norwegian Embassy.32  
 
Women (and men) in less developed and poorer municipalities face greater challenges than 
women living in more developed areas. For example, in the northern part of the RS, the 
socioeconomic position of women is considerably better than in East Herzegovina (RS Ministry 
of Agriculture, interview). More women are co-owners of land and houses, while in the more 
culturally traditional southern part, female ownership is negligible. Similar differentiation exists 
in terms of access to public services, especially to healthcare, due to distance from relevant 
services and inadequate transportation. In the FBiH, issues of access to services and gender 
norms which, in practice, lead to an unfavorable position of women compared with men, are 
particularly important in mountain areas, and often exacerbated by natural disasters, such as the 
devastating landslides of 2014.   
 
The greatest obstacles to broader gender development and empowerment in rural areas faced by 
women are related to property rights, access to public services, finance, training, advisory 
services and mentorship, and limited time to engage in outside activities33. Only 12 percent of 
rural women own their dwellings compared to 80 percent of men and only eight percent of 
women have joint ownership, compared to 13 percent of urban women34. This likely holds true 
for other types of property, such as land, farm equipment, inheritance, and financial means (bank 
accounts, etc.). With absent support from a husband or other family members, this imbalance in 
 
31 Priručnik za ostvarivanje ravnopravnosti spolova na lokalnom nivou, mart 2015 (Manual for Achievement 
Gender Equality at Local Level, March 2015) 
32 http://zenskamreza.ba/en/about-us/ 
33 Ibid, FARMA II validation workshop; Oxfam meeting 
34 WB 2015, p. 79

=== PAGE 182 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
16 
property rights makes it practically impossible for women who would like to undertake new 
entrepreneurial activity to secure credit at reasonable rates. However, the situation seems to be 
improving among the younger women in terms of asset inheritance, co-ownership of land and 
dwellings, and increased decision-making (RS MoA interview).  
 
Women in rural areas have lower levels of employment and self-employment than women in 
urban areas. The UNDP 2013 report called, “Rural Development in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Myth 
and Reality,” indicates that self-employment rates and employment rates are lower for women in 
rural areas35. A World Bank analysis of the LFS data also confirms that the women’s inactivity rate 
in rural areas is much higher than in urban36.  
 
Limited opportunities for employment and self-employment are perpetuated by low levels of 
understanding of such possibilities, which is linked to inadequate (or non-existent) opportunities 
for information and training. As part of the preparations for the new RS agricultural strategy, the 
RS Ministry of Agriculture undertook an agricultural household survey with tailored questions 
for women in the households. Eighty percent of female respondents said that they never took part 
in educational or training activities about business (Interview and unpublished findings). It is 
reasonable to assume that the situation is probably not much different in the FBiH, but this kind 
of information is currently not available.  
  
Rural women have overall lower levels of education than women in urban areas, as well as limited 
facility with and access to the Internet. This limits their knowledge about what training 
opportunities might exist. In those instances that the services are available, women may not be 
able to access them because of the distance from their homes, times they are being offered, and 
the limited time they have for such activities because of their household responsibilities.   
 
Lack of affordable childcare and pre-schools in rural and smaller settlements is one of the central 
obstacles to women’s participation in trainings, entrepreneurial activities, and consequently, 
employment. The Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) showed that 25 percent of first-
graders in urban areas attended preschool, compared to 13 percent from rural areas37, and 22.8 
percent of urban children aged 36-59 months attended early childhood education compared to 
7.9 percent of rural children38. Part of the reason for such a rural-urban gap may be the difference 
in awareness of the importance of pre-school education, or the fact that the level of the mother’s 
education impacts how she views children’s needs during the child’s formative years. However, a 
portion of the difference can likely be attributed to inadequate availability of accessible and 
affordable childcare and pre-school education facilities in the rural areas.  
 
Women in rural areas have limited access to appropriate information and services. There is a very 
limited number of women associations and cooperatives which exacerbates the lack of access to 
relevant information and services. This undermines opportunities for women to engage, learn, 
and share information on more equal footing. Prevailing patriarchal/conservative social norms 
 
35 UNDP, 2013: p. 80 
36 WB, 2015: p. 80 
37 UNICEF, 2013: p.xix 
38 UNICEF, 2013: p. 76

=== PAGE 183 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
17 
are not conducive to women’s participation in associations with predominantly male 
membership. This is particularly true for women who are at the stage of considering 
entrepreneurial activity or who are engaged in micro-activity. Even women who are owners or 
co-owners of larger agricultural production firms face gender stereotypes in the market and often 
decide to include a husband or a male relative during business discussions39.   
 
Women’s participation in agricultural activities and decision-making varies by regions. Regional 
differences are along the levels of economic development, with less developed 
areas/municipalities showing lower levels of participation in agricultural activities and decision-
making. Women noted that lack of adequate financial assets as well as under-developed market 
channels are the greatest obstacles to increasing levels of economic activity (Interviews). 
 
Marginalized groups and Social Inclusion 
 
Marginalized groups considered in this section include Roma, persons with disabilities, and 
internally displaced persons, although the list of marginalized groups varies across agencies and 
institutions.  
 
International human rights law directly applies through the BiH Constitution, but the Constitution 
does not protect equal rights for all groups and individuals. Human rights and fundamental 
freedoms for all individuals are enshrined in the International Covenants on Civil and Political 
Rights, and Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, as well as the European Convention on Human 
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECtHR), directly applicable in BiH. Beyond clear-cut, direct 
discrimination issues confirmed in ECtHR judgments, gender-based discrimination, especially in 
the cases of multi-level discrimination (women with disabilities, Roma women with disabilities, 
etc.) is difficult to prove in court.  
 
Persons with disabilities in BiH find themselves in an extremely difficult situation. Due to 
fragmented policies, persons with disabilities face discrimination on the basis of their place of 
residence. Authorities and the private sector ignore affirmative measures related to their 
employment and rehabilitation40.  The most common forms of violation of the rights of people 
with disabilities in Bosnia and Herzegovina ‘are in the areas of social protection, health, 
education, rights of access to information, labor and employment, and in the field of organized 
action for people with disabilities. Even where laws exist to regulate this area, there is an evident 
record of discrimination in practice41.  
 
Women with disabilities face daily discrimination, both as women and as persons with 
disabilities. They often lack adequate health care and access to services and are often socially 
isolated. The latest census demonstrates that at least 294,058 out of the 3,531,159 residents of 
BiH (8,3% of the population) are diagnosed with some form of a disability and that 30% of the 
population is either directly or indirectly affected by the consequences of disability.  Women 
make for 50.9% of the population and 54.7% of all disabled people.  
 
 
39 FARMA II validation workshop 
40 Institution of the Human Rights Ombudsman of BiH, 2010 
41 MDG Progress Report, 2013

=== PAGE 184 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
18 
As the State and Gender Equality Agency recognizes, women with disabilities are especially 
vulnerable to being victims of multiple discrimination in BiH society, particularly in the areas of 
labour and employment, although BiH has ratified the UN Convention and adopted the EU 
standards, which require the rights of the disabled to be determined on the basis of their 
individual condition, not the cause of disability. However, this has never been implemented.   
 
The rights of people with disabilities are determined differently in Bosnia's two entities and, 
within one of them (the Federation of BiH), in each of the ten cantons. Both entities have adopted 
strategies to improve the rights of disabled people, as required by the Convention, but neither has 
implemented them. In the Federation of BiH, 248 people with disabilities have started to work in 
2015. Only 26.6% (66 out of 248) of them were women. In Republika Srpska, 547 disabled people 
were employed in the period from 2013 to 2016. An astounding 6.2% (34 out of 547) were 
women. The State has no special programs for employment, retraining or rehabilitation related 
to women with disabilities, nor does it have relevant statistics, data, or special measures for 
protection of women with disabilities in the areas of labour and employment42. 
 
Almost two thirds of all disabled persons in BiH live close to or below the poverty line. One of the 
major obstacles is a lack of statistical data and information on the extent, nature, and 
characteristics of people with disabilities. There is also no central registry of people with 
disabilities and gender disaggregated data is not available. It is especially alarming since women 
with disabilities are also more likely to be victims of domestic violence. Health care is a very 
problematic field, especially reproductive health protection and protection and care for pregnant 
women. 
 
In addition to the lack of appropriate examination tables for women in wheelchairs, the majority 
of health care workers are not trained for examinations or delivery when it comes to women with 
disabilities43. As it is mentioned in a report issued by NGOs on the Application of the Convention 
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, women with disabilities 
have problems getting custody of children after a divorce since there is a common belief that the 
child should be with the “healthy” parent, ignoring the child’s best interest, even in cases where 
the father was violent, and taking for granted that women with disabilities are not able to raise a 
child44. 
The most severe and most common forms of violating the rights of people with disabilities in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina are found in the fields of social protection, health, education, rights of 
access to information, labour, and employment and in the field of organized action for people with 
disabilities.  
 
 
42 BiH Combined Fourth and Fifth Periodic Report on the Implementation of the CEDAW 
43 Annex to the 3rd Alternative Report on the implementation of CEDAW and women´s human rights in BiH 
(2013) 
44 Prava za sve/ICVA: Izvještaj nevladinih organizacija. Primjena konvencije o pravima osoba sa invaliditetom 
u Bosni i Hercegovini (Report from the NGOs on the Application of the Convention on the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities in Bosnia and Herzegovina). July 2013, available at http://www.pravazasve.ba/publikacije-
bs/docs-bs/izvjestaj-nevladinih-organizacija.pdf

=== PAGE 185 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
19 
Levels of discrimination against Roma are not the same for men and women. Roma women 
experience multiple vulnerability factors compared to Roma men and are even less politically 
represented and economically secure than Roma men. The 2009 ruling of the ECtHR to amend 
the BiH Constitution and allow ethnic minorities to run as candidates for the presidency or the 
House of Peoples of BiH, has not yet been implemented. Even when the direct discriminatory 
provision gets removed, Roma women will still face indirect obstacles in running for office at any 
level. Among Roma representatives on municipal councils and assemblies, there are no Roma 
women, despite campaigning by the Roma Women’s Network before the 2016 local elections.  
 
Discrimination of Roma women is very evident when one considers the levels of their formal 
employment (Human Rights Ombudsman Institution, 2013). The Alternative Report on the 
Implementation of CEDAW for BiH (Prava za sve, 2010) reported that of the 595 Roma women 
surveyed, almost 82 percent were unemployed, only nine percent were working in the informal 
sector, and seven percent were begging for subsistence. Additionally, in 2008, only two to three 
percent of Roma, men, or women, were employed in the public sector45. Since the population 
census report did not include employment data broken down by ethnicity, it is not possible to cite 
more recent data on the employment of Roma women.  
 
The discrimination toward Roma, especially toward Roma girls, is also reflected in their rights to 
education. Percentages of children of primary school age attending primary or secondary school 
in 2011-2012 varied by sex for Roma children. Gender differences were larger in the FBiH than 
in the RS. In the FBiH 70.8 percent of Roma boys attended school compared to 66.9 percent of 
Roma girls. In the RS, 74.9 percent of Roma boys attended school, compared to 73.1 percent of 
Roma girls46. The number of girls who dropped out of primary school was greater than the 
number of boys47.  
 
However, ‘there are still no programs in place that would systemically improve the education of 
Roma girls and employment of Roma women and their access to health and social protection48. 
Roma women also experience very high levels of violence. Over 43 percent of surveyed Roma 
women self-reported being subjected to some form of physical violence49. The same survey also 
identified that 76 percent of them know a Roma woman who had been a victim of physical 
violence and 46.5 percent know a woman who has been subjected to sexual violence. In addition, 
there is an increasing number of Roma girls vulnerable to trafficking for forced marriages and a 
high percentage of arranged or paid marriages.  
 
Twenty-four years after signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement (DPA), 98,324 internally 
displaced people (IDPs), many of whom are women victims of war, and some 47,000 minority 
returnees in Bosnia and Herzegovina are still in need of solutions50. The revised strategy for 
implementation of annex VII of DPA was supposed to be implemented by 2014. 
 
 
45 Ministry for Human Rights and Refugees, MHRR, 2008 
46 UNICEF and BiH MHRR, 2013 
47 BiH Combined 4th and 5th CEDAW Reports, 2011 
48 UNICEF, 2013 
49 Rights for All, 2011 
50 MfHRR, 2017

=== PAGE 186 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
20 
The main issues are unclear status of IDPs after relocation, source of subsidized rents, lack of 
livelihoods solutions and inadequate public awareness. The public gaze of the media has long 
since moved on elsewhere and donors have shifted their resources. Displaced peoples have 
specific burdens over belonging, housing, occupation, welfare, security, and loss of communities. 
The decision whether to return to their homes is complex, with local and international political 
pressures adding to their uncertainties and insecurities. In addition, there is the impact of the 
war, the experiences of violence, the remembering and issues of reconciliation, and a variety of 
mostly unevaluated psychosocial programmes aimed at helping with these. All this has a 
profound impact on their health and well-being.  
 
According to Norwegian Refugee Council/Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (NRC/IDMC), 
Prijedor, Sanski Most, Banja Luka, Doboj, Modriča, Bijeljina, Zvornik, Bratunac, Srebrenik, 
Lukavac, Tuzla, Živinice, Zenica, Sarajevo, Gorazde, Mostar, Nevesinje, Čapljina and Trebinje  are  
municipalities with the highest level of IDPs in Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
 
BiH Ministry for Human Rights and Refugees, in close cooperation with UNHCR developed the 
Strategy of Supporting Solutions for Vulnerable Internally Displaced Persons and Returnees in 
BiH in 2017. 
 
International arena (international partners and donors), as well as BiH, are facing a great 
challenge with the global migration crisis. However, given the great disproportion between the 
investment and the real needs for implementing the strategic goals of the BiH Strategy for Annex 
VII Implementation, BiH Government hope that this challenge will not cause them to hesitate in 
the continuation of the work on a well-traced road of support to the return process in BiH. 
 
Gender-based Violence 
 
BiH ratified the Council of Europe Convention against Violence against Women and Domestic 
Violence in 2013 and the entities have their own strategic documents. In the RS, acts of domestic 
violence can be prosecuted as a misdemeanor or felony, and domestic violence is recognized in 
the Misdemeanor Code, and in the Criminal Code of the RS. The RS established an entity council 
for fighting domestic violence. In the FBiH, the acts are processed in accordance with the Criminal 
Code of FBiH. In this criminal code, each canton has a referral mechanism for responding to 
domestic violence.   
 
Every second woman has experienced some form of gender-based violence since the age of 15, 
while every fifth woman has probably experienced it over the past 12 months. Working with 
perpetrators of violence against women, especially in cases of domestic violence, is not yet a 
standard practice. Financing of safe houses is problematic in both the RS and FBiH, leading to a 
near closure of two out of nine safe houses. Victims of conflict-related sexual violence (CRSV) still 
lack socio-economic rights and legal protection. Victims of sexual violence are not treated equally 
in the two entities. While the government in BiH has made significant efforts toward eliminating 
trafficking, it still does not fully meet the minimum standards for doing so.   
The lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) community in BiH is for the most 
part absent from the public sphere due to pervading hostile attitudes among the majority of the

=== PAGE 187 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
21 
population, fear for physical safety, and discrimination by family, friends, and coworkers. 
Following the 2014 general election, sustained advocacy on the part of civil society and changes 
in government led to progress on several fronts in the protection of LGBTI human rights. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has yet to implement coordination and cooperation between 
government institutions at all levels in the context of preventing and combating violence against 
women, as well as to harmonize laws and entity public policies in this area, which leads directly 
to the inability to ensure the equal status and protection of rights of women who survived 
violence and their access to justice. Safe houses run by NGOs have neither the same legal status 
in both entities, nor a secured system support, which directly threatens the existing limited 
services to help women in the period of acute violence.51 
III. 
Mechanisms to address Gender Inequality in Bosnia and Herzegovina 
The introduction of the principle of the equality of women and men in all areas of public and 
private life does not only constitute the realization of one of the core standards required to 
achieve human rights and fundamental freedoms, nor can it be reduced merely to an issue of 
social justice, but rather and first of all it is a necessary precondition for the sustainable social and 
economic development of a country, with special emphasis on poverty reduction and the 
improvement of the quality of life for all citizens.  
Over the past twenty years significant efforts have been made in Bosnia and Herzegovina to 
develop a national legal, institutional, and political framework for the implementation of the 
principle of gender equality. 
Institutional gender mainstreaming mechanisms have been established within the system of 
legislative and executive power, at all levels, as a part of an overall effort to improve the status of 
gender equality (men/boys and women/girls) in Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
The BiH Law on Gender Equality (LoGE) was adopted in 2003 (BiH OG 16/03) and amended in 
2009 (BiH OG 102/09), including improved definitions and improved implementation provisions. 
An integrated text was published in 2010 (BiH OG 32/10). The law specifically addresses 
education, employment, labor and access to resources, social protection, healthcare, culture and 
sports, public life, and media. The Law provided the framework for the gender institutional 
mechanisms which implement it and monitor its implementation. The Law has established the 
Agency for Gender Equality of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the gender centres (Gender Centre of 
the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Gender Centre- Gender Equality Centre of the 
Government of Republika Srpska) which exist on the entity level. The Agency and the entity 
gender centres are public institutions i.e., governmental bodies. 
The BiH institutional mechanism on gender equality forms a network which includes institutions 
on the municipal, cantonal, entity and state level, both in the executive and the legislature. 
Unfortunately, those institutions on municipal and cantonal level were established through 
different projects supported by international community (2004, 2005, 2006) and after the 
projects were over the gender mechanisms did not continue with their active role.     
 
51 Alternative CEDAW Report, 2016

=== PAGE 188 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
22 
 
At the state (legislative) level there is a Commission for Gender Equality of the Parliamentary 
Assembly of B&H. At the entity level, there are Commissions for Gender Equality of the House of 
Peoples and the House of Representatives of the Parliament of the Federation of B&H, as well as 
the Equal Opportunities Committee of the National Assembly of Republika Srpska.  
 
All institutional mechanisms have precisely defined mandate, which shows governments’ 
commitment to achieve gender equality and inclusion of gender issue in all segments of social life. 
It is important to underline that the Agency and the entity Gender Centres represent the real 
drivers of the initiatives and measures, and the key implementers and monitors of the gender 
mainstreaming in BiH. These three institutional mechanisms for gender equality are crucial 
instrument in initiating and implementing activities in the area of gender equality. They have the 
prominent place considering their activities, projects, and measures which they have undertaken 
to strengthen and ensure sustainability of institutional mechanisms for gender equality. 
 
The LoGE prescribes those victims of discrimination may seek judicial protection in accordance 
with existing procedures. Special proceedings for protection from discrimination are possible in 
compliance with the Law on Prohibition of Discrimination (Official Gazette of BiH, No. 59/09).  
 
RS and FBiH Laws on Protection from Domestic Violence were adopted in 2012 and 2013, 
respectively. The laws replicate the definitions and elements of violence from an international 
framework. Domestic violence (DV), therefore, includes physical, psychological, or sexual pain 
and suffering, as well as economic damages against a family member.  
 
The first BiH Gender Action Plan (GAP) was adopted for the period of 2006 – 2011 and financed 
through the Financial Instrument for the Gender Action Plan (FIGAP) which aggregated funds 
from various donors.   
 
The new GAP for the period 2018 - 2022 builds on important international documents: CEDAW 
Convention and Recommendations of the UN CEDAW Committee, National Plan of Action based 
on the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, CoE recommendations, EU directives and 
regulations as well as a number of other binding and recommended UN, CoE and EU documents. 
GAP also refers to domestic documents such as the state, entity, and cantonal constitutions as well 
as the Gender Equality Law in BiH. GAP covers similar areas as the previous GAP and places 
significant focus on strengthening the gender machinery as one of the strategic goals, and on 
monitoring and reporting on the implementation of the GAP.   
 
GAP is a policy document that guides gender equality policies at lower levels of governance and 
includes direct obligations not only for the BiH institutions, but also for its entities. In accordance 
with the LoGE, many local self-governance units were adopting local action plans (during the 
period 2013 – 2017) which operationalized the GAP’s high-level priorities, bearing in mind local 
circumstances and competence of local self-governance units. However, the first local 3-5 year 
policies for women’s empowerment developed by the municipalities were only the first steps in 
changing the mindset of local authorities and were often of lower quality due to low capacities 
for gender analysis and limited sources of sex-disaggregated, statistically representative data.

=== PAGE 189 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
23 
Increasingly, and with guidance from the entity gender centers, the quality of data available for 
gender analysis is improving, as is the quality of gender analyses and policies themselves. 
 
Bosnia and Herzegovina developed an Action Plan for the implementation of Security Council 
Resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and Security, Bosnia and Herzegovina has failed to provide 
real mechanisms for its implementation and monitoring, without qualitative indicators of 
progress, and failed to ensure the involvement of institutions from lower governing levels and 
did not allow a broader involvement of civil society in its preparation and monitoring52. 
 
Bosnia and Herzegovina has prepared and submitted the Sixth periodic report to the CEDAW 
Committee on 19.04.2018.  
 
Institutional capacity to implement normative framework for gender equality remains to be one 
of the most serious challenges in BiH. The research about the institutional capacity to implement 
the Gender Equality Law and GAP in BiH, including Resolution 1325 (Ravnopravnost spolova i 
institucije BiH, GEA,2014;) has shown that there is a serious limited capacity of public institutions 
to implement the established legal framework. The mailed questionnaire has been sent to 22 
public institutions and 2,500 respondents. However, only a small percentage (325) has replied. 
Among those who replied, only 40% replied that they are familiar with the Law on Gender 
Equality, only 28% replied that they are familiar with the mandate of GEA, and only 9% that they 
had been involved with gender equality issues. Since it is reasonable to assume that responses 
were selective, in terms that those who were not familiar with the problem were also the ones 
who did not respond, this research is showing serious lack of present-day institutional support 
to gender equality in BiH. In addition, research revealed that great majority of responses has 
shown that there was a lack of institutional regulations related to gender discrimination and 
sexual harassment. This research actually has proven that there is a serious gap between 
normative and institutional aspects of gender equality in BiH which needs to be addressed by 
concrete set of measures and recommendations which will be fully contextualized in present day 
BiH society. 
 
Civil Society organizations (women/gender/DRR) 
 
Prior to the 1990s the associations, organizations, media, and trade unions that existed at the 
time were mainly part of the governmental machinery and thus could hardly be viewed as 
elements of civil society. This means that there were only a few organizations in former 
Yugoslavia that were able to function as a factor able to monitor and control the socialist 
Government; their work was also not directly related to the needs of the country’s population. 
These organizations generally included trade unions, chambers of commerce, sports and 
professional associations and women’s associations, which acted in accordance with the interests 
of the ruling socialist system. 
 
However, certain feminist initiatives were launched during the 1970s in the capitals of the former 
Yugoslav republics, in universities, academic circles and among intellectuals53 The first NGOs in 
 
52 Alternative CEDAW Report , 2016 
53 Lepa Mladenović: An article titled “Development of Feminism – a Women’s Movement in the Former Yugoslavia” 
(http://www.womenngo.org.yu/sajt/sajt/istorija.htm#per2).

=== PAGE 190 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
24 
the region, including BiH, were established at the start of and during the 1991-1995 war; they 
were aimed at calling for peace and organizing protests to support the cause of peace, to address 
the developing humanitarian crisis and to provide aid to refugees and the victims of war. Starting 
in 1996, after the Peace Accords were signed and the new Constitution had been adopted, a large 
number of NGOs were established in BiH in an attempt to rebuild confidence in the divided 
country, take part in the rebuilding of the country and its institutions and to provide services and 
support to people in need. A significant number of these newly established organizations were 
women’s organizations. These organizations were the first to cross the entity separation lines and 
to start rebuilding communication and trust. They began the process of raising awareness in 
society in regard to the effects of inequality and they organized activities related to the 
participation of women in politics, combating violence against women, the provision of assistance 
for the posttraumatic recovery of female victims of war, education, the need to empower women 
with a view to establishing groups and associations across the country, etc. Some years later, 
women’s NGOs even began to be established in the remote and rural areas of the country. 
Some civil society interventions include fragmented approaches to gender equality, but there are 
several areas that could be improved. Project design is rarely preceded by a gender analysis. 
Implementation is rarely monitored using gender sensitive indicators and sex-disaggregated 
data. Finally, advocacy initiatives rarely take a gender transformative approach. One of the 
interviewees noted that civil society actors have a limited understanding of gender 
mainstreaming and gender equality. (Centar za ekologiju i energiju, Tuzla, Gender Centers of RS 
and FBiH). Another interviewee emphasized that, as in other sectors, men are primarily the 
leaders of the biggest CSOs which do not specifically deal with gender issues. (Gender Agency BiH, 
Gender Centers RS and FBiH). At the other end, there are gender equality organizations where 
nearly all organization directors are women. The expertise of the most advanced women’s 
organizations is not properly deployed in the biggest civil society initiatives for capacity building 
and gender mainstreaming. On a positive note, organizations are increasingly working with men 
on gender equality in public and in private life. 
 
IV. 
Gender issue in addressing the increasing vulnerability to intensified climate 
and flood related disasters (pluvial, fluvial, and torrential) in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina  
The project objective is to address the increasing vulnerability of B&H communities and 
livelihoods to intensified climate-induced hydro-meteorological flood-related disasters (pluvial, 
fluvial, and torrential). This will be accomplished by adopting an integrated approach to flood risk 
management, resulting in strengthened institutional, technical, and financial capacity to 
implement long-term flood risk management strategies, including a combination of structural 
and non-structural measures which protect communities and employing eco-system-based 
approaches. In addition, strengthened early warning and emergency response systems will 
provide forecasts and early warning to at-risk populations. For achieving its objectives and 
targeting the GCF assistance the project employs social vulnerability approach. The various 
elements of this approach are discussed below in the context of gender equality and gender 
mainstreaming.

=== PAGE 191 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
25 
Climate change, climate variability and weather events pose a threat to the eradication of extreme 
poverty and should serve as a spur to hasten efforts not only to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 
but also to tackle other underlying risk drivers such as unplanned urban development, vulnerable 
livelihoods, environmental degradation, and gaps in early warnings. 
Families are displaced and victims lose shelter.  This is complicated further by immense 
shortages of food and drinking water. Severity of impact of natural hazards are often measured 
by the degree to which functioning of individuals, groups or organizations is disrupted.  The 
disruption can be caused by death of family member or friends, displacement, injury, separation 
from family and community, damage to vegetation and infrastructure, epidemics of 
communicable diseases, loss of land, house, crops, livestock, productive assets, and other 
property, loss of employment and trade, damage to infrastructure. 
Vulnerability describes the characteristics and circumstances of a community, system or asset 
that make it susceptible to the damaging effects of a hazard. There are many aspects of 
vulnerability, arising from various physical, social, economic, and environmental factors. The 
vulnerability is determined by the material and social assets that individuals and communities 
possess. The effect of possessing resources to a different degree is evident at all phases of disaster 
cycle, i.e., protection, response, impact, and recovery. 
The vulnerability of households also depends on their composition. Gender and age of household 
members, number of dependents and persons with disabilities, economic status, human, social 
and political capital - all have an effect on protection from, response to and impact or recovery 
from natural disasters.  Households can be nuclear, or three or four generational, male headed, or 
female headed, consisting of only a woman or a man. In all phases of disaster cycle it is important 
to consider composition of households and the ratio of dependents, these being children, seniors, 
and persons with disabilities (PWD). Concept of vulnerability is closely linked with resilience - 
“the capacity of a system to maintain its basic functions and structures in time of shocks and 
perturbations” (Birdman, 2006,15) 
Social vulnerability approach to disasters emphasizes the roles of social, economic, and political 
relations, it describes social distribution of risks: as “some groups in society are more prone than 
others to damage, loss, and suffering in the context of differing hazards” (Blake, et al 1994,9). In 
dealing with disasters next to their physical impact the social conditions that underlie different 
outcomes should be taken into consideration. Households rather than individuals should be taken 
as a unit for intervention strategies. 
Gender intersects with other characteristics such as poverty, disability, age, seniority, and 
displacement – which rarely act alone – to exacerbate inequality and vulnerability.  
Gender  
During the third week of May 2014, heavy rains fell in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) causing 
sudden and extreme flooding and landslides over one third of the country.  A similar flood event 
also occurred again in 2019. Urban, industrial, rural areas and roads were submerged; thousands 
were displaced and isolated without electricity or communications.  Many houses and businesses 
were destroyed or damaged, and the effect on agriculture and productive services was severe.  
More than one million people have been affected.

=== PAGE 192 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
26 
A government-led Post-Disaster Needs Assessment was conducted in 2014 by the World Bank, 
E.U. and UN, to identify damages, losses and needs, and to provide an estimate of national 
recovery costs54.   UN Women responded to the emergency by contributing a humanitarian 
gender expert to the PNDA team, to support analysis of gender issues and to ensure these will be 
addressed in response and recovery planning.   The PDNA estimates not only the replacement 
cost of damaged assets, but also the cost to “build back better”, to increase resilience and mitigate 
the effects of future catastrophic events.  
Having in mind all earlier mentioned, throughout the Gender Analysis, as well as the 2014 PDNA, 
it is clear that Gender inequality in Bosnia-Herzegovina has significant implications for disaster 
recovery.  There is a widely held perception that because of prevailing norms and attitudes flood-
affected women will experience greater difficulty compared to men in obtaining assistance. 
Therefore the PDNA 2014 Report among others,  recommends: provision of  training in gender-
sensitive disaster preparedness and response planning for municipal governments including 
preparation of gender-responsive disaster plans, compliance with existing requirements for 
disaggregated statistics at all levels of government, ensure transparency in the distribution of 
recovery funds and support that is  equitably provided to women and men, strengthen economic 
empowerment programmes for women as part of DRR, ensure meaningful participation of 
women, including marginalised and excluded women, in decision-making processes relevant to 
housing, land, property and agriculture etc. Also, the PDNA recognizes that ‘’funding for women’s 
economic and political empowerment, and for equal participation in all disaster-related 
discussions, is key to building back better to reduce future disaster risks’’. 
While the country is one of the most advanced in terms of legislation and policy on gender 
equality, women are largely excluded from political and decision-making processes; they have 
disproportionately limited access to employment and income, and many are subject to violence.   
There is particular concern with respect to women IDPs, disabled, elderly and Roma women in 
BiH, who are even more severely disadvantaged and marginalized.   
However, there is one promising example. Gender specific issues in state of natural disasters are 
recognized by RS Gender Center. Based on experiences from floods 2014 the Center has 
developed a Gender Action Plan for conditions of natural disaster. The Plan, among others,  
anticipates constant communication with relevant institutions in order to introduce gender 
perspective in all their activities related to rehabilitation, reconstruction and disaster relief, 
monitoring of disaster impact through defined gender-sensitive indicators, constant 
communication with women’s NGOs and local communities in order to assess needs of women, 
men and children during disaster, raising public awareness and information exchange to support 
population in need etc. 55  
 
Resilience-building against future shocks will require attention and funding directed toward 
reducing the severe economic and decision-making disparities between women and men. 
 
Gender issues related to different phases of disaster management cycle  
 
54 https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/BiH-rna-report.pdf 
55 Gender Action Plan for conditions of natural disaster, Gender Center of RS, 2014

=== PAGE 193 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
27 
The impact of all mentioned vulnerabilities is revealed at all phases of disaster management cycle, 
i.e., at prevention and protection, response, impact, and coping. The purpose of the gender 
mainstreaming throughout various phases of disaster management is to empower women and 
see them as capable agents of change, who can manage crisis, deal with its aftermath, and take on 
leadership roles in the family and community. Women play important economic and community 
roles that help in reconstruction and resilience building. Women often take on leadership roles in 
family and community in the face of death or disability.  
 
Summary of gender differences in vulnerability and adapting to disasters 
Disparities that increase risks for women in 
disasters 
• 
Higher levels of poverty 
• 
Extensive responsibilities of caring for others 
• 
Domestic violence 
• 
Traditional women’s occupations 
 
Disparities that increase risks for men in 
disasters 
• 
Occupational segregation 
• 
Internalized norms of masculinity 
• 
Roles in the family and in the home 
Gender experiences that can increase capacities 
for managing disaster situations:  
Women  
• 
Social networking 
• 
Caring abilities 
• 
Extensive knowledge of communities 
• 
Management of natural and environmental 
resources 
• 
High levels of risk awareness 
 
Gender experiences that can increase 
capacities for managing disaster situations 
by: 
 men 
• 
Professional and work contacts 
• 
Technical abilities 
• 
Limited childcare responsibilities 
 
 
Prevention and protection:  
Early warning system works as a potent protection mechanism against natural hazards. But as 
receivers of warnings are humans, for warranting the desired response a number of human 
related factors should be considered. Information on hazard risk can be delivered in time, but still 
the problem of understanding information, believing it, and acting according to provided 
recommendations and hence saving life, health and property remains problematic. That is for the 
messages on multi-hazard risk information are to be tailored to the needs and capabilities of 
vulnerable groups, targeting women, children, senior citizens, and persons with disabilities 
(PWDs). Education level, knowledge of language in which warning is communicated, problems of 
hearing and seeing constitute serious barriers for adequately grasping the threat.  
Men appeared to be more confident in managing an emergency situation, including the 
perception that they were better prepared to take action, including physical preparedness and 
response. Additionally, women had fewer opportunities to maintain a high level of social 
networking in the community, which may lead to them being less informed. Effective targeting 
requires utilization of both sources.56 
 
56 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6313390/

=== PAGE 194 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
28 
In general, men are less vulnerable to climate induced hazards than women, hence less prone to 
take self-protective actions. Men often label evacuation calls as panic and do not react. Besides, 
acting according to stereotypical gender roles men may decide not to evacuate to safeguard 
property. On the other hand, women are readier to respond to risk, but lack of social power deters 
them to mobilize family to respond, they also may be slow to react according to instructions until 
securing family members.57 Patriarchic structures and power imbalances in many countries tend 
to reduce women’s status in society, their access to resources, opportunities and power and 
subsequently lead to higher female vulnerability to natural hazards.58.Women’s vulnerability to 
the impact of disasters is also increased by socially determined differences in roles and 
responsibilities of women and men and inequalities between them in access to resources and 
decision-making power.59 
Children and people with low education level may encounter problems of understanding 
messages when they are worded in impersonal, official manner. Elderly citizens with the 
problems of hearing or seeing and living alone can be left out of reach in case of delivery of hazard 
risk massages only by printed or electronic media. 
Response to disasters:  
Effectiveness of response greatly depends on a well-planned emergency behaviour, 
preparedness, and social cohesion of community. Therefore, outlined below features should be 
reflected in emergency planning. Timely evacuation is a challenging issue for small children, 
seniors, and persons with disabilities, especially with problems of moving and of persons with 
poor health. People dependent on health services for survival (dialyses, cancer treatment) are 
faced with life threatening circumstances in disaster. 
Women’s, children’s, and elderly’s’ vulnerability is greater due to the mobility constraints. Both 
car ownership and having driver’s license is less frequent among women than men.  
It is important to have list of CSOs dealing with vulnerable groups in the flooding area and include 
them in the phases of disaster management cycle. 
Impact of disasters and coping:  
Psychological reaction to natural disaster can be: withdrawal, stunning, apathy, disbelief, but also 
increase in community bond and social cohesion. Experience of natural hazards may result in 
stress, anxiety, depression, and other mood disturbances. Effect usually is not long lasting, only 
25 percent of victims suffer psychological effects some months after disaster, but again a bigger 
percentage of women than men. Coping strategies of disaster affected population could include: 
raising of public awareness, information exchange and communication with citizens, 
improvement of preparedness, development of evacuation plans and preparation of evacuation 
centers, development of gender sensitive flood response plans (prior to  floods), or leaving area, 
 
57 https://socwomen.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/fact_10-2006-disaster.pdf  
58 Vulnerability to Natural Hazards: A Gender Perspective in Disasters, Carolin-Anna Achberger 
Karl-Franzens-Universität Graz 
59 https://www.who.int/gender/other_health/genderdisasters.pdf

=== PAGE 195 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
29 
over-exploiting resources in order to survive (e.g. cutting down trees for wood), liquidation of 
assets (e.g. livestock), reducing food intake (during the flood). 
As women, more so than men, depend on natural resources for livelihood (23% of woman 
employed in agriculture comparing to 19% men)60,  disaster has a more severe effect on women. 
At the same time women play key roles in the sustainable use and management of natural 
resources. As senior women considerably outnumber men, they are more likely to experience 
physical limitations that matter so much in emergencies. The burden of domestic work and care-
giving to children, as well as to ill and disabled family members mainly falls on women, so caring 
in aftermaths of disasters becomes more challenging for women. As men can decide to migrate 
due to property or employment loss, family burden increases for women. But also, more and more 
women decide to migrate for providing for the family, as the demand for domestic labour 
increases in EU countries.  The migration of family member also effects senior citizens as they 
have to look after grandchildren. 
Lesser political and professional representation, low involvement in consulting process of key 
stakeholders make women more vulnerable as their perceptions and needs are not reflected in 
planning of recovery process. Gender stereotypes negatively reflect on men. Men often are 
overwhelmed with emotions after disaster, but are constrained to express them, which has health 
related consequences and often stimulates substance abuse, domestic violence, gambling, and 
engagement in risky behaviours. 
Recommendations 
The analysis above shows that in order to set up effective national and community based early 
warning systems, climate-informed planning and improved resilience, gender consideration need 
to be integrated into the project implementation. The existing gender inequality factors (e.g., 
limited engagement of women in planning and decision making) and traditional distribution of 
gender roles in families and communities call for tailoring and targeting of the project solutions 
to outreach beneficiaries of both genders equally. Based on the analysis of the gender aspects of 
vulnerability to climate-induced natural disasters a number of recommendations for the 
proposed GCF project have been elaborated. These recommendations and the following Gender 
Action Plan are aimed at ensuring that the GCF project:  
 
• 
narrows gender inequality;  
• 
addresses the needs and constraints of women, girls, men, and boys;  
• 
avoid any risks of adverse gender impacts;  
• 
ensure women’s participation, promotes their leadership qualities; and  
• 
ensure women are included as planners, co–implementers and agents of change.  
 
As a result of the project implementation more lives, property and productive assets will be 
secured from the impacts of climate induced disasters.  Beneficiaries of this outcome will be all 
the population, but women’s benefits will be bigger as for the livelihood women more than men 
 
60 
http://www.odraz.hr/media/280503/izvjestaj_zene%20u%20lokalnom%20razvoju%20bosne%20i%20hercegov
ine_web.pdf

=== PAGE 196 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
30 
depend on natural resources. They also are poorer than men and hence proportionally loose 
more.  Moreover, after flood, majority of women is left with household and some farm works since 
their husbands are going out for cash. Women again have to be in charge of all the remaining 
stuff including restarting their productive work such as farms, preparing livestock for raising, or 
replanting vegetables for some small cashes. Food security, psychological stresses, households’ 
debts, and more labor-intensive works have degraded the wellbeing of women in the post-flood 
scenario61. The recommendations and the Gender Action Plan as summarized below have been 
designed to ensure that both men and women have full and equitable access to the Project’s 
resources and benefits, with specific actions and responsibilities aimed at ensuring the full 
participation of women in Project activities.  
 
At Project inception, additional gender analysis will be undertaken to ensure that the baseline 
data set is sex- and age-disaggregated and adequate for assessment of the gender impacts of the 
Project. At this time, the Gender Action Plan will be presented to the Project Implementation 
Team, including Government staff and consultants. In particular, the Project team leaders will 
ensure that all specialists are briefed on their responsibilities in relation to the Gender Action 
Plan upon mobilization. Progress reports will provide periodic updates on the effect of the Project 
on women, and regular UNDP review missions and the midterm review mission will review and 
monitor the gender impacts.  
 
Carry out gender responsive vulnerability assessment 
 
• 
Ensure that risk assessments are informed by gender analysis.   
• 
Subjecting 2013 Census data to additional analyses, providing sex- and age- 
disaggregated data on social vulnerability across regions, assessing employment, 
education, health problems connecting with adequate functioning, disability, physical 
abilities (to swim, climb and run), ownership of house and productive assets and 
farming opportunities, ratio of dependent persons in households, household 
composition-single member male and female, women headed households, livelihoods, 
unpaid care and domestic work responsibilities.  
• 
Mapping households receiving state subsistence allowance assistance by analysing social 
assistance database across chosen regions.  
• 
Carrying out group discussions and in-depth interviews with key stakeholders, ensuring 
an equal representation of women, persons over 65, disabled or family members of 
disabled, IDPs, community leaders and government officials for mapping hazards and 
risks, collection of existing community coping strategies, identifying local businesses and 
institutions able to contribute to DRM activities. To identify priority needs, responses to, 
separate coping mechanisms of women and men, elderly, disabled and poor. 
 
Ensure collection of sex- and age-disaggregated data for project indicators 
 
61 https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/KHM_0601_ImpactonWomen_AA2014-01.pdf

=== PAGE 197 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
31 
• 
Gender disaggregated reporting will be further introduced beyond the project level at the 
national level through the multi-hazard disaster risk information and knowledge system 
to be designed by the project   
 
Enhance gender considerations in disaster preparedness activities 
• 
Disaster preparedness and response plans should be based on gender analysis and 
include gender considerations 
• 
Men and women of different age groups, as well as those from vulnerable communities, 
should be involved in planning and implementation. Community consultancy groups with 
at least 40 percent representation of less represented sex  should be established. 
• 
Ensure that information on hazards, their character, probability of occurrence, threats to 
life, possible impact on livelihood, houses, crops, and livestock and on protecting 
measures is reaching both women and men through appropriately tailored channels.  
• 
Increase preparedness of educational institutions. Provide information to teachers, pupils 
and students, academic and other staff on different types of disasters and on effective 
immediate response to them. Create emergency plans for kinder-gardens, schools, 
vocational institutions, and Universities. Inform parents on them. Ensure they are 
practicing periodically. Provide the staff with first aid training.  
• 
Include Gender Mechanisms representative in disaster preparedness activities. 
 
Warrant universal access to disaster warnings 
• 
Tailor warning to the gender-differentiated needs and capabilities of specific population 
groups, such as children, senior citizens, IDPs, the sick and persons with disabilities.   
• 
Set up community based early warning systems and make sure that they are tailored to 
effectively serve both women and men, based on prior gender responsive assessment of 
proposed systems.  
• 
Use multiple methods for targeting messages for reaching broadest group of people, 
including TV, radio, Internet, sirens, flashing lights, registration-based alert systems 
sending messages to cell phones with information clearly stated orally and graphically. 
Use network of CSOs.  
• 
Include pregnant women, IDPs, the elderly and disabled in emergency planning. Include 
CSOs. 
 
 
Mainstream gender considerations and engagement of women in resilience building 
activities 
• 
Target 40 percent representation of less represented sex in capacity building and 
training activities supported by the project. 
• 
Make sure that women have equal access to livelihood generating activities facilitated by 
the project.

=== PAGE 198 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
32 
• 
Disseminate information and stimulate involvement of population of the hazard prone 
regions in insurance schemes, among them insurance of crops. 
• 
Disseminate information on risk zones with recommendations for construction of 
dwellings, agricultural activities, and livestock husbandry. 
• 
Support creation of employment opportunities for women and poor; ensure that women 
are part of employment-guarantee schemes planned in the framework of the 
community-based disaster risk management activities; provide social care services to 
redistribute burden of unpaid care work that falls on women. Provision of social care 
infrastructure can also generate jobs for women and men as part of disaster recovery.  
• 
Strengthen social capital through creating community groups for planning for, 
safeguarding from and mitigating adverse effects of natural disasters with at least 30 
percent less represented sex participations. 
 
Conduct gender mainstreaming trainings and build capacity of national stakeholders 
targeted by project and responsible for various disaster risk reduction functions  
• 
In 2016 UNDP Istanbul Regional Hub (IRH) developed and piloted a three-module 
training manual on Gender mainstreaming in disaster preparedness and response 
(GMiDPR). The tool is designed for UNDP staff and government officers working in 
disaster preparedness and disaster response in the Europe and CIS region. In 2017 the 
tool was piloted with the DRR project practitioners in the Western Balkans countries. But 
still there is a lack of knowledge within the governmental institutions, as well as CSOs 
organizations on GMiDPR.  There is a need to organize a series of training and capacity 
building workshop on gender mainstreaming based on the UNDP training manual 
targeting various stakeholders and practitioners (government, CSOs, community leaders, 
youth groups, women’s groups, farmers’ groups, as well as Gender institutional 
mechanisms) at the national and local levels.  
 
Engage women in decision-making 
• 
Ensure at least 40 percent representation of less represented sex and their active 
participation in project stakeholder consultations, local and national decision-making 
bodies set up and/or facilitated by the project. This includes ensuring that women are 
properly represented in municipal investment planning process, formulation of 
community preparedness plans and that the of women are incorporated in all products 
are truly designed to promote and advance gender equality and social inclusion. 
• 
Secure participation of the Gender Institutional Mechanism representatives from all the 
governmental level 
• 
In line with the recent CO Engagement Strategy for Women CSOs and Grassroots, women's 
groups and women's advocacy organisations will be invited to contribute to advocacy and 
awareness raising as well as development of risk financing and transfer mechanisms 
products and tools to influence the offer of inclusive, responsible financial products. 
Women’s associations know their real needs, barriers and main risks, which can support 
and guide the design of relevant products. Therefore, women’s groups and gender 
equality advocates will be engaged with development and finance institutions, and 
governments, civil society and affected communities themselves – to develop mechanisms 
that bring transformative benefits to women and girls.

=== PAGE 199 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
33 
 
Affirmative Measures 
• 
The recent UNDPs Intersectional Analysis of the COVID-19 and Inflation on Women 
confirms that 55.5% of women experienced a worsened financial situation while Report 
on Mapping the Gender Component in Data and Legislation in the area of Climate Change, 
Environment and Biodiversity discusses women's reduced access to credit as it requires 
land/asset ownership in order for commercial banks to approve credit funds. Therefore, 
affirmative measures will be provided for women led businesses and businesses that 
employ at least 50% of women and companies that have achieved parity in managerial 
positions-boards, by awarding additional scores to such companies by virtue of being 
embedded in the selection criteria. 
• 
Furthermore, feasibility studies on micro-insurance, regional disaster risk insurance 
program and catastrophe bonds will take into account specific barriers women face 
(taking into account local dynamics and whether insurance products are sold through 
male-dominated groups or cooperatives, and whether men have better access to these 
products and could purchase them more easily.), inform targeting and identify women 
centered solutions (for example, feasibility of women-specific micro-level risk insurance 
schemes) 
 
Requirements to the project staff 
• 
Gender-responsive social vulnerability approach can be realized only by the gender and 
social vulnerability sensitive staff of the project. Therefore, project staff should be 
composed of both women and men represented at all levels of decision-making. Staff 
members should have a record of participation in trainings on gender mainstreaming and 
on social vulnerability approach. Also, it is suggested that staff members 
participate/complete a specific Gender mainstreaming in disaster preparedness and 
response trainings. Even employing new stuff, the ToRs can consist of request of 
knowledge on gender mainstreaming.

=== PAGE 200 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
34 
References 
Women and Men in BiH, Sarajevo 2018., Agency for Statistics BiH, 
http://www.bhas.ba/tematskibilteni/FAM_00_2017_TB_0_BS.pdf 
Durham University, Rethinking flood risk communication, E. Rollason, L. J. Bracken, R. J. Hardy, A. R. 
G. Large,  http://dro.dur.ac.uk/24379/1/24379.pdf 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 2018. Report, https://ec.europa.eu/neighbourhood-
enlargement/sites/near/files/20180417-bosnia-and-herzegovina-report.pdf 
 
OHR (www.ohr.int) under ‘5+2 Agenda’ 
 
United Nations Development Programme. Human Development Report. 
http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/table-4-gender-inequality-index.  
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2018_human_development_statistical_update.pdf  
http://hdr.undp.org/en/towards-hdr-2019 
 
World Economic Forum. The Global Gender Gap Report 2018 Country Profiles. 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2018.pdf 
https://www.weforum.org/reports/the-global-gender-gap-report-2018  
 
OECD (2019), Gender, Institutions and Development Database, https://oe.cd/ds/GIDDB2019. 
 https://www.genderindex.org/wp-content/uploads/files/datasheets/2019/BA.pdf 
 
Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Representatives of the House of 
Representatives: 
https://www.parlament.ba/Content/Read/27?title=Statisti%C4%8Dkipodaci&lang=en 
 
Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Delegates of the House of Peoples, available at: 
https://www.parlament.ba/delegate/list 
 
Federal Parliament, Representatives of the House of Representatives, available at: 
https://predstavnickidom-pfbih.gov.ba/hr/page.php?id=8 
 
Federal Parliament, Delegates of the House of Peoples, available at: 
https://parlamentfbih.gov.ba/v2/hr/stranica.php?idstranica=6 
 
Government of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ministers, available at: 
http://www.fbihvlada.gov.ba/hrvatski/ministarstva/ 
 
National Assembly of the Republic of Srpska: https://www.narodnaskupstinars.net/?q=en 
 
Government of the Republic of Srpska: http://www.vladars.net/eng/Pages/default.aspx 
 
Official Gazette, Women and Men in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
http://www.bhas.ba/tematskibilteni/FAM_00_2017_TB_0_BS.pdf 
 
Popis stanovništva 2013 - http://www.statistika.ba/#tab4 
http://fzs.ba/index.php/popis-stanovnistva/popis-stanovnistva-2013/konacni-rezultati-popisa-2013/

=== PAGE 201 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
35 
Status of Gender Equality in Bosnia and Herzegovina, February 2018, BiH Gender Agency, 
https://arsbih.gov.ba/stanje-ravnopravnosti-spolova-u-bosni-i-hercegovini/ 
 
WB, Women, Business, and the Law, 2016: p. 94 
 
BiH Household Budget Survey, in WB 2015 
 
Ibid, WB 2015 
 
Financial Inclusion Data/Global Findex:  
http://datatopics.worldbank.org/financialinclusion/country/bosnia-and-herzegovina 
 
FARMA II Validation Workshop; Oxfam meeting, 2018 
 
Priručnik za ostvarivanje ravnopravnosti spolova na lokalnom nivou, mart 2015 (Manual for 
Achievement Gender Equality at Local Level, March 2015) 
 
http://zenskamreza.ba/en/about-us/ 
 
Institution of the Human Rights Ombudsman of BiH, 2010 
 
MDG Progress Report, 2013 
 
BiH Combined Fourth and Fifth Periodic Report on the Implementation of the CEDAW 
Annex to the 3rd Alternative Report on the implementation of CEDAW and women´s human rights in 
BiH (2013) 
 
Alternative CEDAW Report, 2016 
 
Prava za sve/ICVA: Izvještaj nevladinih organizacija. Primjena konvencije o pravima osoba sa 
invaliditetom u Bosni i Hercegovini (Report from the NGOs on the Application of the Convention on 
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in Bosnia and Herzegovina). July 2013, available at 
http://www.pravazasve.ba/publikacije-bs/docs-bs/izvjestaj-nevladinih-organizacija.pdf 
 
Lepa Mladenović: An article titled “Development of Feminism – a Women’s Movement in the Former 
Yugoslavia” (http://www.womenngo.org.yu/sajt/sajt/istorija.htm#per2) 
 
https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/BiH-rna-report.pdf 
 
Gender Action Plan for conditions of natural disaster, Gender Center of RS, 2014 
 
http://www.odraz.hr/media/280503/izvjestaj_zene%20u%20lokalnom%20razvoju%20bosne%20i%2
0hercegovine_web.pdf 
 
https://socwomen.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/fact_10-2006-disaster.pdf

=== PAGE 202 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
36 
Table 1: Gender Action Plan 
 
Gender Action Plan Template  
Project-level outcome (e.g., Systems and capacity for sustainable land management established) 
Gender-related 
activity 
Indicator 
Baseline 
Targets, including 
sex-disaggregated 
targets 
Budget 
Timeline  
Responsibility 
 
 
62 A budget of $100,640 has been allocated for the implementation of the Gender Action Plan and is included in the ESAR overall costs 
Gender-related activity 
  
Indicator 
Baseline 
Targets, including 
sex-disaggregated 
targets 
Budget 
USD62 
2,740,7
90 
Tim
elin
e 
Responsibility 
Impact Statement: Increase resilience and enhanced livelihoods of the most vulnerable people including women and girls, 
communities, and regions to the negative impacts of climate change.   
 
Outcome Statement: Gender-specific and gender-responsive climate risk and vulnerability information developed and used in 
decision-making; Reduced loss of life and assets of the most vulnerable including women, girls, disabled, old people through a 
strengthened country-wide gender-responsive flood forecasting and early warning system.  
Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems and capacity for gender sensitive climate responsive planning and decision-
making; Increased climate risk financial resilience of the most vulnerable including women and female-headed households, 
through the development of a national flood and disaster risk insurance scheme and other risk financing mechanisms; 
Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure of the most vulnerable households, in particular female-headed households 
to climate risk through the implementation of structural, non-structural and EbA flood protection measures;   
 
Output 1:  Fully integrated impact-based Flood Forecasting and EWS facilitates timely preparation and response. 
Output 1 statement: Gender-specific and gender responsive climate risk and vulnerability information developed and used in 
decision-making.   
Reduced loss of life and assets of the most vulnerable including women, girls, disabled, old people through a strengthened country-
wide gender-responsive flood forecasting and early warning system.

=== PAGE 203 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
37 
Activity 0: Consider modifying 
Gender Analysis and Action Plan 
based on the outcome of 
stakeholder consultations during 
project implementation.  
 
Indicators: 
Reviewed 
Gender Analysis 
and Action Plan  
Gender Analysis 
and Action Plan 
are not revised  
Targets: The Gender 
Analysis and Action 
Plan have been 
reviewed and adjusted 
to reflect the 
stakeholder's inputs 
following the 
consultation processes. 
This process will be 
done within the first 6 
months of the project. 
Note: The project is to 
ensure that the 
consultations 
process is participatory, 
consensus oriented, 
accountable, 
transparent, responsive, 
and inclusive. 
All potential changes to 
GAP will be 
communicated to the 
Secretariat through the 
APR. 
8,000 
Year 
1-4 
UNDP project 
team, 
stakeholders  
Activity 1.1: Upgrade and 
expand the coverage of the 
hydrometric network for 
enhanced monitoring of climate 
variables.   
Gender Mainstreaming 
Activities:  Upgrade and expand 
the coverage of the hydrometric 
network with the specific focus 
on ways in which climate 
Indicators: No 
of consultations 
on gender 
responsive 
hydrometric 
network 
expansion. 
No. of 
objections to 
new 
hydrometric 
network 
stations  
Relevant 
consultations 
on hydrometric 
network 
expansion are 
not organized 
and women do 
not participate 
 
Women do not 
sufficiently 
benefit from 
work, 
Targets: In 
consultations on 
hydrometric network 
expansions at least 5 
consultations are held 
within the first 2 years 
of the project, 40% are 
women participate, 
ensuring that their 
specific needs and 
experiences are 
adequately taken into 
consideration. 
30,000 
 
 
Year 
1 - 2 
UNDP project 
team 
Water agencies in 
cooperation with 
local communities

=== PAGE 204 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
38 
variables affect and impact 
women. Assess options and 
propose ways in which women 
can benefit from hydrometric 
network expansion in terms of 
employment and income making 
opportunities. Ensure 
participation of both men and 
women in consultation process 
during the installation of the new 
hydrometric equipment at 
catchments and torrents where 
it requires community 
consultation 
 
Number of 
women 
participating in 
consultations 
 
% of women 
that benefit 
from work and 
employment 
opportunities 
generated by 
implementing 
these measures 
 
 
employment 
and income 
making 
opportunities 
generated in 
implementing 
these measures  
 
 
No concerns or 
objections related to 
expansion of 
hydrometric 
equipment.  
Any complaints made 
are adequately 
addressed and resolved 
through the project 
complaints/grievance 
process. 
At least 30% of women 
participants have 
benefited from work, 
employment, and 
income making 
opportunities.  
Activity 1.2: Enhance climate-
induced flood hazard, risk and 
vulnerability information for 
strategic risk management and 
sound decision making for 
climate induced flood 
management. 
Gender Mainstreaming 
Activities: Datasets for socio-
economic risk and vulnerability 
assessment support gender 
disaggregated data for analyses 
and decision-making. 
Gender Advisor engaged to 
support gender mainstreaming 
activities. 
 
Indicators: % 
of women in 
stakeholder 
consultations.  
 
% Of sex-
aggregated 
socio-economic 
receptor 
vulnerability 
data collected 
for use in flood 
socio-economic 
risk and 
vulnerability 
modelling and 
mapping. 
% No. of 
datasets of 
gender-
17% women 
participated in 
stakeholders’ 
consultations 
 
16.6% Flood 
hazard, risk and 
vulnerability 
mapping is 
gender sensitive 
(in Vrbas basin 
only). 
16.6% gender 
responsive 
climate risk 
Targets:  
Gender expert, working 
as part of UNDP 
country office will be 
engaged immediately 
after project 
commencement and 
supported achievement 
of the following: 
 At least 40% 
participants of 
consultations are 
women.  
100% Flood hazard, 
risk and vulnerability 
mapping is gender 
responsible. 
  
192,300 
+ 
452,876 
governm
ent co-
financin
g 
Year 
1-3 
 
UNDP project 
team 
Water agencies in 
cooperation with 
local communities

=== PAGE 205 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
39 
responsive 
climate risk 
information 
produced and 
used.   
 
  
 
information 
generated 
Lack of expert 
support in 
gender 
mainstreaming 
in socio-
economic 
assessment, 
vulnerability, 
and risk 
mapping 
 
100% of climate risk 
information generated 
used in at least 1 
sectoral planning 
document. 
 
. 
Activity 1.3: Develop an 
integrated impact-based 
centralized and community-
based flood forecasting and early 
warning system. 
 
Gender Mainstreaming 
Activities:   Secure equal 
participation and active role of 
women and men, in developing 
of FFEWS; Ensure that training 
and capacity building 
programme on EFEWS are 
engendered; Implement 
workshops on gender 
mainstreaming for FFEWS 
members and policy makers. 
 
Indicators:  No. 
of men and 
women trained 
in the 
development, 
operation, and 
maintenance of 
the integrated 
centralized and 
community 
based FFEWS.   
 
 
0% participated 
in the 
development, 
operation, and 
maintenance of 
the integrated 
centralized and 
community 
based FFEWS.   
 
Targets:  At least 40% 
female participants 
trained in the 
development, 
operation, and 
maintenance of the 
integrated centralized 
and community based 
FFEWS.   
 
All the training and 
capacity building 
programmes in EFEWS 
are engendered (or 
gender expert 
participated in the 
development and 
implementation of the 
trainings and in the 
programmes.) 
 
337,500 
 
Year 
1 - 2 
UNDP project 
team 
Gender centers

=== PAGE 206 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
40 
Activity 1.4: Develop and 
implement protocols and SoPs 
on data generation, data 
management and 
communication for effective 
impact based FFEWS and flood 
risk management. 
 
Gender Mainstreaming 
Activities:    Review National 
protocols and SOPs from gender 
point of view; Ensure that flood 
risk information and warnings 
are adapted to the needs and 
capabilities of women and other 
vulnerable groups (Roma 
women, children, elderly people, 
disabled, returnees); Develop 
communication products 
considering specific needs of  
man, women and other 
vulnerable groups, aiming  to 
share information and raise 
knowledge on FFEWS;  Use NGOs 
networks to reach women and 
the most vulnerable groups. 
 
 
Indicators:  No. 
of Gender 
responsive 
national 
protocols and 
SOPs;  
Flood risk 
information and 
warning 
messages 
meeting the 
needs of women 
and other 
vulnerable 
groups (Roma 
women, 
children, elderly 
people, 
disabled, 
returnees).  
No. 
Communication 
products 
engendered and 
adapted to the 
needs of all 
vulnerable 
groups. 
 
Number of 
gender-focused 
NGOs involved 
in development 
of SoPs and 
protocols on 
awareness 
raising, 
Data sharing 
platform 
protocol 
developed for 
Vrbas and Una-
Sana  
Targets:    Gender 
responsive national 
protocols and SOPs 
developed for data 
generation, data 
management and EWS 
communication.  
At least 3 different 
types of flood risk 
information and 
warning messages 
developed to meet the 
needs of women and 
other vulnerable 
groups (Roma women, 
children, elderly 
people, disabled, 
returnees).  
 
At least 2 gender-
focused NGO groups 
engaged developing 
SoPs and protocols 
communication, 
awareness raising, 
knowledge and 
information sharing on 
FFEWS   
 
176,000 
_+ 
100,000 
governm
ent co-
financin
g 
Year 
1 - 4 
UNDP project 
team, water 
agencies, gender 
centers

=== PAGE 207 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
41 
knowledge and 
information 
sharing on 
FFEWS.   
 
 
 
Output 2: Non-structural flood risk reduction measures and nature-based solutions mainstreamed in sectoral policies and plans 
and effectively contribute to protection of people and livelihoods from climate-induced flood risk. 
Output 2 statement:  Strengthened institutional and regulatory systems and capacity for gender sensitive climate responsive 
planning and decision-making; Increased climate risk financial resilience of the most vulnerable including women and female-
headed households, through the development of a national flood and disaster risk insurance scheme and other risk financing 
mechanisms; 
Activity 2.1: Mainstream climate 
induced flood risk reduction into 
sectoral planning (agriculture, 
hydropower, critical 
infrastructure) and spatial 
planning. 
Gender mainstreaming 
Activities:  Ensure participation 
of both men and women, but also 
representation of vulnerable 
groups into consultative 
processes organized to 
mainstream climate induced 
flood risk reduction into sectoral 
planning. 
Conduct gender mainstreaming 
trainings and build capacity of 
national stakeholders targeted 
by project and responsible for 
Indicators:  % 
of FRM decision 
makers and 
practitioners 
are trained on 
gender 
mainstreaming 
in FRM.  
No. of sectoral 
planning 
documents 
(reviewed by 
gender advisor) 
amended to 
include gender 
considerations.   
No. of 
women/men 
within the 
planning teams 
and 
consultation 
groups. 
FRM decision 
makers and 
practitioners 
are not trained 
on gender 
mainstreaming 
in FRM 
 
Sectoral 
planning 
documents are 
not consulted 
with gender 
advisor 
 
 
 
Targets: At least 80% 
of FRM decision makers 
and practitioners are 
trained on gender 
mainstreaming in FRM. 
At least 3 sectoral 
planning documents 
amended to include 
gender considerations.  
Minimum of 40% of 
less represented 
gender participated the 
planning teams and 
consultation groups. 
 
88,000 + 
90,000 
governm
ent co-
financin
g 
 
Year 
2 - 6 
UNDP, sectoral 
ministries, gender 
centers

=== PAGE 208 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
42 
various disaster risk reduction 
functions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 2.2: Implement and 
mainstream new ecosystem-
based flood risk reduction and 
climate change adaptation 
methods 
Gender mainstreaming 
Activities:  Review of the 
community based EbA and EbA 
approaches piloted by the 
UNDP/SCCF Vrbas River project 
by gender expert to identify 
gender gaps,  locate 
mainstreaming opportunities 
and uncover specific ways in 
which flood risk and climate 
change impact women, taking 
into account gender specific 
vulnerabilities and intersectional 
issues (single parenthood, age, 
income levels, disability, etc.); 
Mainstreaming of gender 
throughout all the new 
ecosystem-based flood risk 
reduction and climate change 
adaptation methods (e.g., 
afforestation, agroforestry) 
Conduct assessment and make 
Indicators: % 
of community 
based EbA 
approaches that 
are gender 
responsive.  
Gender 
mainstreaming 
annex of new 
EbA methods 
and guidance 
documents to 
be applied in 
communities.   
 
% Of 
participants in 
local 
consultations 
related to EbA 
measures are 
women. 
 
% of women 
benefitting from 
work, 
employment 
and income 
making 
opportunities 
generated by 
EBA FRM 
measures are 
not 
implemented 
 
Women 
insufficiently 
benefit from 
work, 
employment 
and income 
making 
opportunities 
generated in 
implementing 
these measures  
 
 
Targets: 100 % of 
community based EbA 
approaches that are 
gender responsive.  
 
Gender mainstreaming 
annex of new EbA 
methods and guidance 
documents to be 
applied in 
communities.   
 
At least 40% 
participants in local 
consultations related to 
EbA measures are 
women. 
 
At least 30% of women 
participants have 
benefited from work, 
employment and 
income making 
opportunities.  
 
 
8,000 
 
 
Year 
2 - 4 
UNDP project 
team, gender 
centers, local 
communities

=== PAGE 209 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
43 
adequate provisions to ensure 
that women can equally benefit 
from the work, employment and 
income making opportunities 
associated with implementing 
these measures. 
 
 
implementing 
these measures. 
Activity 2.3: Codify and 
mainstream EbA solutions into 
policies and regulations and 
promote non-structural 
measures. 
Gender mainstreaming 
Activities:  Review of the 
existing policies and regulations 
by a gender advisor to identify 
gender gaps and mainstreaming 
opportunities; Include gender 
expert in the teams working on 
the preparation of new policies, 
plans and regulations and in 
promotion of new FRM concepts. 
 
Indicators: No. 
of policies and 
regulations 
related to EbA 
solutions 
including 
gender equality 
considerations 
and 
mainstreaming 
 
 
Lack of policies 
and regulations 
related to EbA 
solutions  
Targets:  Country-wide 
best-practice 
guidelines, technical 
specification, 
standards, and 
protocols for the 
application of eco-
system based non-
structural measures 
include gender equality 
considerations and 
mainstreaming 
63,000 + 
90,000 
governm
ent co-
financin
g 
 
Year 
3 - 6 
UNDP project 
teams, gender 
agencies, water 
management 
ministries

=== PAGE 210 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
44 
Activity 2.4:  Review and 
strengthen institutional capacity 
and develop long-term 
institutional capacity 
development plans for climate 
resilient FRM. 
 
Gender mainstreaming 
Activities: Gender sensitive 
review of institutional capacity. 
Participation of Gender expert in 
development of national training 
programmes in the technical and 
practical areas of flood risk 
management for practitioners, 
decision-makers, communities, 
emergency responders;  
Indicators:  
No. of 
institutions for 
which 
assessments of 
gender equality, 
and gender 
responsiveness 
of FRM is 
undertaken. 
No. of gender-
responsive 
long-term 
Capacity 
Development 
and training 
FRM plan.  
 
Min % female 
attendees to 
training in 
technical and 
practical areas 
of flood risk 
management 
for 
practitioners, 
decision-
makers, 
communities, 
emergency 
responders  
 
  
Assessments of 
gender equality, 
and gender 
responsiveness 
of FRM are not 
implemented 
for FRM 
institutions 
 
 
Lack of 
coherent 
institutional 
capacity 
development 
framework that 
embeds FRM 
and FFEWS 
capacities into 
relevant 
institutions 
Targets: Assessments of 
gender equality, and 
gender responsiveness 
of FRM is undertaken 
for all FRM institutions 
in both entities. 
 
Gender-responsive 
long-term Capacity 
Development and 
training FRM plan 
developed for 
institutions in both 
entities.  
 
At least 40 % female 
attendance to 3-day 
training courses in 
technical and practical 
areas of flood risk 
management for 
practitioners, decision-
makers, communities, 
emergency responders 
held every year for the 
first 3 years of project 
duration,   
151,000 
+ 
150,000 
Govern
ment co-
financin
g 
Year 
1 – 6 
 
UNDP project 
team, gender 
centers, water 
management 
ministries

=== PAGE 211 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
45 
Output 3 - Climate-proof flood protection measures scaled-up through new and improved national and local investment 
frameworks increasing resilience of the most vulnerable groups to climate induced flooding 
Output 3 statement:  Strengthened adaptive capacity and reduced exposure of the most vulnerable households, in particular 
female-headed households to climate risk through the implementation of structural, non-structural and EbA flood protection 
measures 
 
Activity 3.1: Develop investment 
framework for climate induced 
flood risk reduction and 
management.  
Gender mainstreaming 
Activities:  Representatives from 
the Gender mechanisms included 
in the teams for development of 
a national investment 
framework for climate induced 
floods risk reduction and 
management; Development of a 
gender responsive strategy and 
gender sensitive tools for private 
sector engagement in long-term 
climate-proof risk management. 
Development of risk financing 
and transfer mechanisms based 
on detailed gender sensitive 
assessment on socio-economic 
risk, damages, and losses. 
 
Indicators: 
Gender 
responsive 
national 
investment 
framework for 
combating 
floods 
established and 
integrated into 
key 
development 
strategies/actio
n plans.  
 
Ratio of women 
owner of 
private 
companies 
informed, 
consulted, and 
participating 
and benefitting 
from the 
development of 
the strategies 
and tools to the 
development of 
risk financing 
and transfer 
mechanism.  
Insurance 
product 
developed for 
Vrbas basin 
applied gender 
responsive 
approach 
 
Gender 
mechanisms 
where not 
included in the 
teams for 
development of 
insurance 
products  
 
No other 
private sector 
investment 
frameworks in 
place 
Targets: Two gender 
responsive national 
investment 
frameworks for 
combating floods 
established and 
integrated into key 
development 
strategies/action plans 
(one for each entity).  
 
At least 30% of private 
companies informed, 
consulted, and 
participating and 
benefitting from the 
development of the 
strategies and tools to 
the development of risk 
financing and transfer 
mechanism and women 
owned.  
 
Gender sensitive socio-
economic risk, 
damages, and losses 
assessment for each 
basin, for the 
development of risk 
financing and transfer 
mechanisms. 
193,400 
+ private 
sector 
co-
financin
g 
285,714 
 
 
 
UNDP project 
team, gender 
institutions, 
ministries of 
finance

=== PAGE 212 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
46 
 
Gender 
responsive 
socio-economic 
risk, damages, 
and losses 
assessment for 
the 
development of 
risk financing 
and transfer 
mechanisms. 
 
 
 
Activity 3.2: Formulate multi-
year climate resilient municipal 
investment plans and gender 
responsive community 
preparedness plans in selected 
municipalities (10-12) and in 
one canton. 
Gender mainstreaming 
Activities:  Both, men and 
women are adequately 
represented in municipal 
investment planning process; 
Men and women actively 
participate in formulation of 
community preparedness plans 
in selected municipalities; Needs 
of women and other vulnerable 
(elderly, disabled, children, 
Indicators:  No. 
of gender-
responsive 
municipal 
investment 
plans 
developed. 
% Of women 
comprising the 
community 
planning teams 
and 
consultation 
groups. 
 
 
Municipal 
investment 
plans are not 
developed; 
Targets:  10-12 
gender-responsive 
municipal investment 
plans developed. 
40 % of women 
comprising the 
community planning 
teams and consultation 
groups  
200,000  
 
 
Year 
3- 6 
UNDP project 
team, selected 
municipalities, 
gender 
institutions

=== PAGE 213 ===
I 
Annex 8 – Gender Assessment and Gender action plan 
Green Climate Fund Full Proposal 
7. Gender documentation_FP216_UNDP_BiH_26 Sep 2023 
47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
Roma) groups are incorporated 
in developed plans. 
Activity 3.3: Implement climate-
proof structural flood risk 
reduction and anti-erosion 
interventions in Vrbas, Una-
Sana, Bosna and Drina River 
basins 
 
Gender mainstreaming 
Activities: Both, women and 
men, and other vulnerable 
groups (elderly, disabled, 
children, Roma) are included in 
processes of stakeholders’ 
consultation related to 
implementation of climate-proof 
flood risk measures; Ensure that 
specific ways in which flood risk 
and erosion impact women are 
analyzed and considered. Ensure 
that women and vulnerable 
group members can equally 
benefit from technical assistance 
ensured with GCF funds, to 
develop climate proofed designs 
based on new climate risk 
information and design methods. 
Assess and make provisions for 
women to equally benefit from 
the work, employment and 
income making opportunities 
associated with implementing 
these measures. 
Indicators: % 
women and % 
men 
represented in 
the community 
consultation 
groups 
 
% Of women 
and men 
involved and 
benefited from 
GCF funds and 
technical 
assistance. 
 
% Of women 
that have 
benefited from 
the work, 
employment 
and income 
making 
opportunities 
associated with 
implementing 
these measures. 
0%- climate-
proof structural 
flood risk 
reduction and 
anti-erosion 
interventions 
are not 
implemented 
 
Women do not 
proportionately 
benefit from the 
work, 
employment 
and income 
making 
opportunities 
Targets: at least 40% 
of less represented 
gender comprising the 
community 
consultation groups;  
 
At least 30% of less 
represented gender 
involved and benefited 
from GCF funds and 
technical assistance. 
 
At least 50% of women 
participants have 
benefited from the 
work, employment and 
income making 
opportunities 
associated with 
implementing these 
measures.  
 
 
125,000  
 
 
Year 
2 - 6 
UNDP project 
team, water 
agencies, local 
communities
