=== DOCUMENT METADATA ===
format: PDF 1.7
title: 
author: Sunny Kim
subject: 
keywords: 
creator: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 23.3.20201
producer: Adobe Acrobat Pro (64-bit) 23.3.20201
creationDate: D:20230619155711+09'00'
modDate: D:20230619183317+09'00'
trapped: 

=== PAGE 1 ===
Consideration of funding 
proposals – Addendum VIII 
Funding proposal package for FP213 
GCF/B.36/02/Add.08 
19 June 2023 
Meeting of the Board 
10 - 13 July 2023 
Incheon, Republic of Korea 
Provisional Agenda Item 12 
Summary  
This addendum contains the following fix parts: 
a) A funding proposal summary titled “The Blue Green Bank (BGB)” submitted by Pegasus 
Capital Advisors (PCA); 
b) No-objection letter issued by the national designated authorities or focal point(s); 
c) Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure;  
d) Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment; 
e) Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s 
assessment; and  
f) 
Gender documentation of the funding proposal. 
These documents are presented as submitted by the accredited entity and the national designated 
authority(ies) or focal point(s), respectively. Pursuant to the Comprehensive Information Disclosure 
Policy of the Fund, the funding proposal titled titled “The Blue Green Bank (BGB)” submitted by 
Pegasus Capital Advisors (PCA) is being circulated on a limited distribution basis only to Board 
Members and Alternate Board Members to ensure confidentiality of certain proprietary, legally 
privileged or commercially sensitive information of the entity.

=== PAGE 2 ===
GCF/B.36/02/Add.08 
Page b 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Funding proposal submitted by the accredited entity                                                                           1 
No-objection letter issued by the national designated authorities or focal point(s)                    71 
Environmental and Social report(s) disclosure                                                                                       73 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment                                                                            75 
Response from the accredited entity to the independent Technical Advisory Panel’s                87 
assessment 
Gender documentation                                                                                                                                    90

=== PAGE 3 ===
Project/Programme title: 
The Blue Green Bank (BGB). 
Country(ies): 
Barbados 
Accredited Entity: 
Pegasus Capital Advisors  
Date of first submission: 
[2023/02/02]  
Date of current submission  
2023/06/14 
Version number 
[V.011]

=== PAGE 4 ===
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 0 
 
Contents 
 
Section A 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME SUMMARY 
 
Section B 
PROJECT / PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
 
Section C 
FINANCING INFORMATION 
 
Section D 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
 
Section E 
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Section F 
RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 
Section G 
GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
 
Section H 
ANNEXES  
 
Note to Accredited Entities on the use of the funding proposal template 
• 
Accredited Entities should provide summary information in the proposal with cross-
reference to annexes such as feasibility studies, gender action plan, term sheet, etc. 
• 
Accredited Entities should ensure that annexes provided are consistent with the details 
provided in the funding proposal. Updates to the funding proposal and/or annexes must be 
reflected in all relevant documents.  
• 
The total number of pages for the funding proposal (excluding annexes) should not 
exceed 60. Proposals exceeding the prescribed length will not be assessed within the usual 
service standard time. 
• 
The recommended font is Arial, size 11.  
• 
Under the GCF Information Disclosure Policy, project and programme funding proposals 
will be disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, 
subject to the redaction of any information that may not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. 
Accredited Entities are asked to fill out information on disclosure in section G.4.  
 
Please submit the completed proposal to: 
fundingproposal@gcfund.org 
Please use the following name convention for the file name: 
“FP-[Accredited Entity Short Name]-[Country/Region]-[YYYY/MM/DD]”

=== PAGE 5 ===
A 
 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 1 
 
 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME SUMMARY  
A.1. Project or 
programme 
Programme 
A.2. Public or 
private sector 
Private 
A.3. Request for 
Proposals (RFP) 
If the funding proposal is being submitted in response to a specific GCF Request for Proposals, 
indicate which RFP it is targeted for. Please note that there is a separate template for the Simplified 
Approval Process and REDD+. 
 
Not applicable  
A.4. Result area(s) 
 
Check the applicable GCF result area(s) that the overall proposed project/programme targets 
below. For each checked result area(s), indicate the estimated percentage of GCF and Co-
financers’ contribution devoted to it. The total of the percentages when summed should be 100% 
for GCF and Co-financers’ contribution respectively. 
 
GCF  
contribution 
Co-financers’ 
contribution1 
Mitigation total 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☒ Energy generation and access 
50 % 
50 % 
☐ Low-emission transport 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐ Buildings, cities, industries and appliances 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐ Forestry and land use 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
Adaptation total 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☐ Most vulnerable people and communities 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
☒ Health and well-being, and food and water security 
15 % 
15 % 
☒ Infrastructure and built environment 
35 % 
35 % 
☐ Ecosystems and ecosystem services 
Enter number % 
Enter number % 
A.5. Expected mitigation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, avoided 
or removed/sequestered) 
Lifetime: 16,736,509 
tCO2e reduced emissions 
after 25 years 
 
Implementation Period: 
6,946,692 tCO2e reduced 
emissions after 15 years 
A.6. Expected 
adaptation 
outcome 
 
(Core indicator 2: 
direct and indirect 
beneficiaries reached) 
Indicate the total number of direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
Direct: 
226,000 
50% Female 
Indirect: ~65,200 
51% female 
80% of the 
total 
population 
Remaining 20% of 
the total population 
A.7. Total financing 
(GCF + co-finance2)  
30,500,000 USD  
A.9. Project size 
Small (Upto USD 50 million) 
A.8. Total GCF funding 
requested 
15,500,000 USD 
 
 
 
1 Co-financer’s contribution means the financial resources required, whether Public Finance or Private Finance, in addition 
to the GCF contribution (i.e. GCF financial resources requested by the Accredited Entity) to implement the project or 
programme described in the funding proposal. 
2 Refer to the Policy of Co-financing of the GCF.

=== PAGE 6 ===
A 
 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 2 
 
 
A.10. Financial 
instrument(s) requested 
for the GCF funding 
 
☐ Grant 
Enter number 
 
☐ Loan  
☐ Guarantee 
the  
☒ Equity  
 
 USD15,500,000 
☐ Results-based payment Enter number 
A.11. Implementation 
period 
15 years 
A.12. Total lifespan 
25 years 
A.13. Expected date of 
AE internal approval 
 
Click or tap to enter a date. 
 
A.14. ESS category  
 
I-2  
A.15. Has this FP been 
submitted as a CN 
before? 
Yes ☒ No ☐ 
A.16. Has Readiness or PPF 
support been used to 
prepare this FP? 
Yes ☒ No ☐ 
A.17. Is this FP included 
in the entity work 
programme? 
Yes ☒ No ☐ 
A.18. Is this FP included in 
the country programme? 
Yes ☒ No ☐ 
A.19. Complementarity 
and coherence  
Does the project/programme complement other climate finance funding (e.g., GEF, AF, CIF, etc.)? If yes, 
please elaborate in section B.1.  
 
Yes ☒ No ☐ 
A.20. Executing Entity 
information 
The project will be implemented through four executing entities, Pegasus Capital 
Advisors (PCA), the Blue Green Bank, GCF BGB Holdings, L.P. and Pegasus BGB 
Holdings GP, LLC. Specifically, Pegasus Capital Advisors will hold responsibility for 
Output 1.1, which will include the establishment of the BGB, alongside the finalisation of 
the shareholder agreements, governance structures and operational processes, as well 
as gaining regulatory approval. Once fully established and onboarded, the senior 
management team of the BGB will take over the EE responsibilities for Output 1.2 and 
2.1. These responsibilities will include crowding in public and private investment, as well 
as identifying, structuring and financing eligible climate investments. The BGB’s 
management team will also be responsible for managing, monitoring and reporting on 
all investments made through the bank. BGB will be registered as a company with the 
Corporate Affairs and Intellectual Property Office (CAIPO) in Barbados and will receive 
an operational license from the appropriate financial regulator in Barbados. Two 
additional entities – to be established – will also be engaged in project execution: an 
SPV, tentatively named GCF BGB Holdings, L.P., will be formed as a Delaware limited 
partnership to serve as the holding company for GCF’s equity interest in the BGB. Its 
general partner will be a Delaware LLC, tentatively named Pegasus BGB Holdings GP, 
LLC, which will be wholly owned by PCA. 
A.21. Executive summary (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages) 
The people of Barbados are being severely impacted by climate change, constraining the sustainable development 
ambitions of the country and threatening the lives and livelihoods of vulnerable communities. These climate impacts 
are driven largely by the increased frequency and intensity of tropical storms and hurricanes — along with the 
associated impacts of sea level rise and storm surge — as well as decreasing rainfall with longer dry spells, lower 
soil moisture and increased aridity. Urgent adaptation action is, therefore, needed to reduce the wide-reaching 
impacts on key economic sectors and secure a sustainable future for all Bajans. In addition to these core adaptation 
needs, the country recognises the vital importance of global mitigation efforts to reduce the threat of future climate 
change exacerbating these impacts. To this end, despite contributing significantly less than 0.01% of global GHG 
emissions, Barbados’ resilience strategy includes highly ambitious mitigation targets, including a transition to 100% 
renewable energy by 2030. These ambitious targets are intended to demonstrate the country’s commitment to 
climate action, as well as to serve as an example to the rest of the world of the feasibility of the transition when 
innovative approaches are adopted. 
Unfortunately, despite these commitments, progress has been slow — especially in adopting renewable energies 
and water conservation initiatives by middle- to low-income households. This relates primarily to the structure of 
ownership of capital in the Barbados economy and the financial ecosystem (see Barriers below for more detail).

=== PAGE 7 ===
A 
 
  GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 3 
 
 
Given the existing fiscal constraints, Barbados’ resilience strategy — encompassed in the Roofs to Reefs 
Programme (R2RP) — recognises the need to partner with the private sector to mobilise finance for innovative 
climate investments that are, or can be made, bankable. Such an approach will enable the government to direct the 
limited concessional finance available towards public-good resilience measures that do not have direct financial 
returns. 
There is a discernible gap in the market in Barbados and the Caribbean for a financial institution that can provide 
opportunities for existing financial institutions and capital markets to mobilise funds, whether through conventional 
bank lending or alternative securitisation of revenue streams deriving from climate change mitigation and adaptation 
activities, thereby creating stronger and more diversified capital markets.  
To address the urgent need for innovative finance in Barbados, the proposed project will establish a sustainable 
climate finance vehicle — the Blue Green Bank (BGB) — to stimulate innovation in the financial sector with the goal 
of mobilizing the securities and loan markets in order to unlock additional funding for climate-responsive initiatives. 
The BGB will be a joint public-private sector effort to create an improved financing infrastructure that works closely 
with other financing players — such as commercial banks, credit unions, pension funds, and insurance companies 
— to crowd in private capital alongside public capital, rather than crowding out the significant investment 
opportunities offered by these key financial institutions. For such institutions to become involved in climate change 
mitigation and adaptation activities, the leadership should be provided by a third party putting the deal together, for 
which it must establish the appropriate capacities in technical and HR terms, as well as appropriate management 
and institutional arrangements. 
The BGB is designed to become a significant institution for practical and strategic financing of climate change 
adaptation and mitigation policies and measures, supporting the Government of Barbados to achieve national 
resilience and emissions reduction targets. As a partnership which brings together public (Government of Barbados), 
private and multilateral institutions at the level of equity, the BGB can present a holistic view of the market and the 
potential for green financing by ensuring that new projects align with Barbados’ Nationally Determined Contributions 
(NDC) targets. Because the BGB’s goal is national climate adaptation and mitigation, it will seek not to replace other 
financial institutions but to act as a partner and support system for them in this underdeveloped market segment. 
To this end, the bank will be wholesale in operation, providing support in the form of funds, guarantees or other 
mechanisms for eligible projects directly as well as through intermediaries such as existing lenders, whether banks, 
credit unions, insurance companies etc to facilitate the funding of blue/green climate-responsive programs 
contemplated by government climate policy. The BGB will also serve as a conduit between local financial institutions 
and the Government of Barbados, allowing the BGB to identify market opportunities, and provide feedback and data 
to inform policy decisions more effectively. 
Once established, the BGB will engage with investors, including private investment firms, development banks, 
philanthropic organisations and other sources of finance to continue to capitalise on the bank over the long term. 
The bank will maintain a debt-finance to equity ratio of 7:1, aiming to mobilise at least USD 5.8 billion of investment 
in climate projects over the next 15 years3. 
Overall, the BGB will promote a paradigm shift towards investment in resilient livelihoods and low-carbon 
technologies, with emphasis on low-income, vulnerable households and the energy, housing, agriculture and 
transport sectors. The project will also build the wider community's awareness of climate investment opportunities 
in support of a more resilient and sustainable Caribbean. Finally, by focusing on climate resilience and adaptation 
for middle to low-income households — including a specific focus on women and other highly vulnerable groups — 
the BGB would aim to attract more concessional or philanthropic providers of capital, expanding the goals of climate 
action in Barbados without the need for further injections of money by the Government and GCF. This will create 
long-term sustainability and scalability in the banking sector, with the potential to scale beyond Barbados into the 
broader Caribbean region over time. 
 
3 With potential to be double that if the additional targeted equity is successfully raised

=== PAGE 8 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 4 
 
 
 
4 IPCC 2022. The Physical Science Basis 
 PROJECT/PROGRAMME INFORMATION 
B.1. Climate context (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Climate Change Problem  
Barbados — a small island developing state (SIDS) 
located in the Atlantic Ocean outside the southern 
reaches of the Lesser Antilles in the Caribbean 
(Figure 1) — is highly vulnerable to the impacts of 
climate change, which is constraining the sustainable 
development 
ambitions 
of 
the 
country 
and 
threatening the lives and livelihoods of vulnerable 
communities. Full details of the observed and 
projected future climate change hazards and impacts 
for Barbados can be found in Annex 2.1. These 
climate impacts are driven largely by the increased 
frequency and intensity of tropical storms and 
hurricanes — along with the associated impacts of 
sea level rise and storm surge — as well as 
decreasing rainfall with longer dry spells, lower soil 
moisture and increased aridity (Figure 2). It is globally 
recognised that such rapid changes observed in the 
world’s climate system are overwhelmingly due to 
human influence through greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions4. In response to the impending risks posed 
by climate change — not to mention the impacts 
already being felt — the Government of Barbados 
(GoB) recognises the vital importance of global 
mitigation efforts to reduce the threat of future climate 
change exacerbating these impacts. To this end, 
despite contributing significantly less than 0.01% of 
global 
GHG 
emissions, 
Barbados’ 
Nationally 
Determined Contribution (NDC) includes highly ambitious mitigation targets, including a transition to 100% renewable 
energy by 2030. These ambitious targets are intended to demonstrate the country’s commitment to climate action, as 
well as to serve as an example to the rest of the world of the feasibility of the transition when innovative approaches 
are adopted. At the same time, the country recognises the need to urgently adapt to the inevitable impacts of those 
changes which have already occurred, along with those anticipated in the future. Figure 2 below provides an overview 
of the climate change impacts being experienced in Barbados, with further details on the science basis for these climate 
change impacts presented in Annex 2.1. 
Figure 1. Map of Barbados and it’s relative position in the
Caribbean.

=== PAGE 9 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 5 
 
 
 
5 National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) 2020 for Barbados 
 
Figure 2. Climate change impact pathways in Barbados under the SSP2-4.5 scenario, as identified in the Barbados Climate 
Country Report (Annex 2.1).  
Country context 
Physical environment context  
Barbados is a SIDS with a land area of only 432 km2 and a population of 281 200 (2021) at a density of 661 persons 
per km2 — making it one of the world’s most densely populated islands. Most of the population and infrastructure are 
located along the coastal zone, which given the low-lying topography of the island makes them highly vulnerable to 
coastal hazards such as sea level rise and storm surges.  
Natural Environment Context 
Barbados has rich marine biodiversity; although terrestrial diversity is limited as an artefact of the islands’ remote 
location outside of prevailing currents and winds from the nearest landmass, exacerbated by clear-cutting associated 
with a colonial past and plantation agriculture. Several plant and animal species are endangered due to existing threats 
and climate change will exacerbate conditions, especially for coral reefs. The National Biodiversity Strategy and Action 
Plan (NBSAP) 2020 for Barbados5 provides a full account of the flora and fauna of the country, including drivers of 
biodiversity loss which include habitat fragmentation, invasive species, pollution and over-harvesting of species.  
Barbados is home to several types of marine/coastal ecosystems which contribute greatly to environmental health and 
tourism on the Island. Marine biodiversity is particularly under threat with all three species of marine turtles, two of 
which are nesting in Barbados, listed as endangered or critically endangered by the International Union for 
Conservation of Nature (IUCN). 
The country has four species of seagrasses which have been impacted by coastal and land-based sources of pollution. 
There are 10 species of soft coral and 31 species of hard coral, all of which are greatly under threat by climate change. 
Coral reefs support more than 25% of all marine species, making them the most biologically diverse of marine 
ecosystems and serve as natural breakwaters along the coasts. Furthermore, the coral reefs generate significant 
revenues for local fishermen and the tourism sector through snorkelling and scuba diving.  
In addition to biodiversity, the NBSAP identifies several critical ecosystem services which may be impacted or 
exacerbated by climate change. Of provisioning services, fisheries which are critical to livelihoods, tourism and food 
security are threatened by overfishing, pollution and climate change. The tourism sector in Barbados employs about 
26,000 persons (9% of the total population) and indirectly contributes to about 40% of Barbados’ earnings, making

=== PAGE 10 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 6 
 
 
 
6 UN Water SDG 6 Snapshot in Barbados 
7 Barbados Second National Communication (2018) 
8 Barbados Water Authority, 2023 
9 UN FAO, 2015 
10 Central Bank of Barbados, 2017 
climate change a great threat to the island’s main economic earner which derives its value from the natural economy. 
Supporting services such as erosion control are also critical for adapting to climate change however habitat loss and 
conversion can reduce the effectiveness of these natural solutions for climate change adaptation. 
Water is another critical provisioning service due to the reliance on groundwater as the only source of potable water 
on the island. Fresh, potable water resources are scarce in Barbados. Barbados is considered a highly water-
stressed country as 88% of the renewable water resources are being withdrawn (SDG indicator 6.4.2)6. Barbados is 
among the most water-scarce countries in the world with only 305-310 m3 per person per year of water available.7 
Surface water sources, including rivers, streams, dams and ponds, are few and the majority of water is abstracted 
from subsurface groundwater via wells and boreholes. These water resources exist deep below ground level. As a 
small coral limestone island, the water supply in Barbados is limited. With ~85% of the island covered by Pleistocene 
reef limestone, a succession of terraces, slopes and scarps create a landscape of steep gullies and ravines from the 
central highland to the coastline that strongly influence the island’s drainage system and result in limited surface 
water. Consequently, 98.6% of the island’s potable water comes from groundwater abstractions. Natural reservoirs 
within the unconfined aquifer – which serve as collection points for groundwater – are supplied with fresh water by 
underground streams which are in turn recharged from the surface through sinkholes and fissures. Water availability 
in Barbados is affected by the periods and intensities of the wet and dry seasons and by extreme weather systems 
such that even short dry spells of only 7-10 days affect water availability. As the effects of climate change worsen 
and the sea level rises, these underground water sources are increasingly exposed to salt infiltration threatening 
Barbados’ water supply.￼ 
The Barbados Water Authority (BWA) is responsible for supplying fresh water to the island and providing services for 
wastewater treatment and disposal for sewered regions8. Water resource volumes, demand and withdrawal data 
were retrieved from the UN FAO AQUASTAT Country Profile Report for Barbados9 as shown in Section 3.1.2 of 
Annex 2: Feasibility Study. 
Socio-Economic Context  
Barbados has transformed itself from a low-income 
economy reliant almost solely on sugar production to 
having one of the highest per capita incomes in the 
Caribbean at USD 17 225, driving the economy to upper-
middle-income status. Although Barbados’ economy has 
shown fairly consistent growth over the last half-century 
— driven largely by a shift from a reliance on primary 
production focussed on sugar cane to tertiary industries, 
such as tourism, real estate and the finance sector — the 
country’s GDP growth rate has been negative since 2019 
with its most recent annual growth rate being -0.2 in 2021 
(World Bank, 2023). The most significant recent 
contributors to GDP include the financial services sector, 
government, distribution and tourism as shown in Figure 
3 10 , whilst it is expected there will be additional 
contributions to economic growth from the construction 
and renewable energy sectors in coming years. 
Despite the relatively high GDP per capita, the Barbados economy exhibits characteristics commensurate with many 
SIDS. These characteristics include a lack of economic diversification, vulnerability to natural disasters and climatic 
events, limited natural resources and a high reliance on imports and exports. Given its dependence on external markets 
and economies, it is highly susceptible to market fluctuations, limiting its potential for economic growth and international 
competition.  
Figure 3. GDP contribution by sector in Barbados

=== PAGE 11 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 7 
 
 
 
11 UNDP Human Development reports – https://hdr.undp.org/data-center/specific-country-data#/countries/BRB  
12 Ranking 70th globally, 9th in the Latin America and Caribbean (LAC) region 
13 Government of Barbados. (2020). Barbados GHG profile-NDC. 
In addition to these external influences, the legacy of colonialism in Barbados has had an impact on the country’s 
social and economic structures — resulting in persistent disparities in wealth and income. The country's post-colonial 
society has seen the development of an economic system that is heavily skewed towards a small group of individuals 
(primarily the descendants of the plantocracy) and companies, with a significant percentage of the population falling 
behind in terms of economic development. This legacy has led to a situation in which a small portion of the population 
controls the majority of the wealth. This is exemplified when considering Barbados’ Human Development Index (HDI)11 
— which is relatively high at 0.79012, but drops 16.8% when adjusted for inequality. 
Based on the 2010 Population and Housing Census, almost 80% of houses have corrugated metal sheets for roofing 
and over 90% of homes have piped water directly into the dwelling. That Census also found that almost 75% of the 
dwellings are owner-occupied, with the remaining houses privately rented or subsidized government-rented housing 
units. 
Mitigation Needs 
Barbados’ greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are negligible on the global scale, totalling only 1,558 GgCO2e in 2018 
— significantly less than 0.01% of global emissions. The majority of Barbados’ GHG emissions come from the energy 
sector, which was responsible for ~54% of GHG emissions in 2020, followed by the waste sector with a 20% 
contribution. The domestic transport sector accounts for 15% of the total emissions, while the industrial processes 
sector contributed 10% and the Land-use, Land-use Change, and Forestry (LULUCF) sector contributed less than 1% 
(Figure 4)13. Barbados’ GHG emissions decreased by 26% between 2008 to 2020, this is primarily due to the decrease 
in the domestic transport sector emissions. Further details on the country’s GHG emissions profile are presented in 
Annex 2.1: Barbados Country Climate Change Analysis Report.  
Despite the country’s relatively low contribution to global GHG 
emissions, Barbados continues to pursue an ambitious mitigation 
pathway. 
Barbados’ 
first 
intended 
Nationally 
Determined 
Contribution (NDC) was submitted in September 2015 and 
updated in 2021 to better reflect Barbados’ commitment to the 1.5 
degrees objective of the Paris Agreement. With this NDC update, 
Barbados is accelerating its decoupling of economic development 
from emissions growth, providing targets that are significantly 
more ambitious than the initial targets. This includes the 
unconditional commitment to a fossil fuel-free electricity sector by 
2030, combined with the actions to significantly enhance the 
resilience of its people and economy — as reflected in the 
Barbados National Energy Policy (BNEP). 
To meet the ambitions of Barbados’ NDC and the BNEP, 
significant additional investments are urgently needed for the 
energy sector. To this end, an Integrated Resource and Resilience 
Plan (IRRP) was finalised in 2022 to guide the implementation of 
the BNEP in the electricity sector. The IRRP provides a roadmap 
and action plan for the energy transition, which includes the need 
for utility-scale solar (180MW by 2030), along with rooftop solar 
(100MW by 2030) and solar thermal energy (60MW by 2030). The 
plan also identifies a number of pilot projects as a key area for 
budget allocation, including lithium-ion batteries, solar PV, vehicle-
to-grid (V2G) technology-embedded electric vehicle chargers, and 
high-power DC vehicle chargers. 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Barbados’ Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions/Removals by Sector in 2020

=== PAGE 12 ===
B
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 8
14 Recent hurricanes that affected neighbouring countries such as Dominica, Barbuda, St. Maarten, British Virgin Islands and The Bahamas 
amounted to loss and damage of over 200% of GDP for those countries. 
Adaptation Needs 
Given the multitude of potential climate change hazards combined with the vulnerabilities and exposure that the country 
faces due to the socio-economic and natural environment context as a SIDS, the magnitude of climate change impacts 
in Barbados is clear and urgent support is required to help vulnerable communities adapt. The government has 
estimated that Barbados needs ~$2 billion (40% of GDP) to achieve climate resilience. 
Although there are multiple climate change hazards at play in Barbados, as outlined above, this project focuses on 
two specific hazard and risk areas – hurricanes/storms and increased water stress – as these are both critical areas, 
with the potential for high impact from interventions and identified as priorities by the government as part of the Roofs 
to Reefs Programme (R2RP, outlined below). The adaptation needs identified recognize the importance of 
interventions that build synergies between adaptation, mitigation and development. This approach reflects the recent 
IPCC AR6 reports focus on Climate Resilient Development and the need to build not only adaptive and absorptive 
capacity, but also transformational capacity as outlined in the NDC of Barbados.  
Targeted adaptation needs ( Table 1) have been identified for Barbados based on the risks determined as a function 
of climate change hazards and vulnerability and exposure as a function of socio-economic and natural environment 
context (Figure 5). This considers the historical conditions as well as projected changes to the climate and society, 
including population and economic growth and ensures that interventions respond to the two key risks – water stress 
and hurricanes/storms — in ways that are compatible with the development vision and priority of the country and 
benefit vulnerable low- and middle-income households. The interventions identified, focused on hurricane-resilient 
housing and water conservation, target not only adaptation needs but also several Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs; see Section D.4 below) and simultaneously address critical economic stresses that can occur as a result of 
hurricanes which incur major economic losses14. Moreover, investments in hurricane-resilient roofs provide a 
foundation for rooftop PV — a critical component for a resilient energy transition.

=== PAGE 13 ===
B
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 9
15 Details on the extent and the science basis of these hazards are presented in Annex 2.1: Barbados Climate Country Report 
Table 1: Priority risks and adaptation needs in Barbados 
Risk 
Climate change 
hazards15 
Vulnerability and Exposure 
(Socio-economic and Environmental) 
Impacts 
Adaptation Needs 
Increased Water Stress 
Changes in 
precipitation 
(shorter wet 
season and 
prolonged dry 
season) and 
more frequent 
drought 
• Population reliant on scarce
groundwater reserves.
• Available water resources are
~305-310m3 per person per
year.
• Groundwater contamination
from pollution.
• Lack of water saving/
conservation at household and
small business levels.
• Upfront financial burden of
water saving/conservation for
households and small
businesses.
• Water demand for major
economic sectors – agriculture
and tourism.
• Aquifer recharge is directly
affected by cycles and intensities
of the wet and dry seasons and
by increases in the frequency
and intensity of extreme weather
systems such as tropical storms
and hurricanes in the region.
• A projected increase in intense
rainfall events will result in
increased surface runoff and
reduced aquifer recharge, with
much water being lost to the sea.
• Reducing water
demand through
improved household-
level conservation
measures and in-situ
rainwater storage to
minimize water stress
• Reducing run-off and
groundwater
contamination from
pollution
Increasing air 
temperatures at 
a rate of 
0.24°C/decade 
• Increased water demand for
domestic and industrial use.
• Increased evapotranspiration,
leading to increased water
demand for natural environments
and agriculture.
• Alternative irrigation
water supplies using
recycled water and
harvested
stormwater.
• Increased water
augmentation and
recharge.
Figure 5. Climate risk nexus (IPCC)

=== PAGE 14 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 10 
 
 
Sea Level Rise 
averaging 1.8 
mm per year, 
rising by 0.5 to 
1.4 meters by 
2100 
• Rising sea levels and decreasing 
aquifer recharge are resulting in 
saltwater intrusion into 
groundwater aquifers, 
threatening critical freshwater 
reserves.  
• Increasing water 
collection and 
recycling from non-
groundwater sources 
to improve water 
supply. 
Increased damage from tropical storms and hurricanes 
Increased 
intensity and 
frequency of 
hurricanes  
• Many buildings, infrastructure 
and utilities are not built to 
withstand hurricane-strength 
winds. Those that are 
hurricane resilient are 
generally only rated to 
Category 3.  
• Majority of roofs in residential 
dwellings are made from 
corrugated metal sheets and 
lack hurricane strapping. 
• Most buildings and 
infrastructure are in highly 
exposed low-lying coastal 
zones. 
• Lower- to middle-income 
groups lack access to 
affordable finance to purchase 
hurricane-resilient homes or to 
retrofit existing structures. 
• Higher levels of vulnerability of 
low-income households. 
• Unsustainable land use 
practices result in runoff during 
extreme rainfall events, 
polluting and degrading marine 
ecosystems  
• Floods and strong winds 
resulting in damage to buildings, 
and loss of roofs. 
• Projected future increase in 
exposure and risk. 
• Strong winds and floods 
associated with tropical storms 
and hurricanes damage utility 
infrastructure, impacting 
centralised energy supplies, as 
well as water, gas and 
telecommunications 
infrastructure.  
• Increasing the climate 
resiliency of the 
housing stock, 
infrastructure and 
utilities. 
Increased sea 
surface 
temperatures 
and sea level 
rise 
• Negative impact on health from 
being displaced by storms. 
• Negative impact on household 
finances if rebuilding post-
hurricane is needed. 
• Damage to marine ecosystems 
from strong winds and storm 
surge, as well as runoff pollution, 
reducing ecosystem service 
provision, thereby increasing 
coastal community exposure to 
storm surge and reducing fish 
breeding grounds. 
• Increased financial 
assistance for 
vulnerable 
households to 
minimize the financial 
impact of hurricanes 
• Increasing 
protections of marine 
ecosystems to build 
their climate 
resilience 
 
Barbados’ Resilience Strategy: The “Roofs to Reefs Programme” (R2RP) 
To address the country’s urgent adaptation needs, the Government of Barbados launched the Roofs to Reefs 
Programme (R2RP) — an ambitious and comprehensive resilience agenda that aims to protect private and community 
roofs of Barbados from extreme weather events, while encouraging the use of renewable energy sources, rainwater 
harvesting and nature-based solutions to build climate resilience. The R2RP responds at the individual, community 
and country levels to improve living conditions, social and environmental conditions and improving post-disaster 
recovery and response. Responding directly to the Barbados Physical Development Plan (PDP), the R2RP aims to 
create a roadmap for the sustainable growth and development of Barbados, while facilitating and guiding public and 
private investment. It is also included in the latest NDCs as well as the Marine Spatial Plan for Barbados, demonstrating 
the integrated nature of the project across sectors and considering its systemic impact on both people and nature. 
While the R2RP provides the overarching framework that allows the integrated approach to addressing climate change 
impacts, the structure of the programme allows for projects to be prepared at the sector level. The Programme works 
to identify critical projects and programs that address the country’s climate change mitigation and adaptation needs, 
along with their associated costs, and to find and take advantage of funding opportunities to bring them to fruition. The 
R2RP also provides the vehicle through which public investment will be directed. 
The main objectives of the R2RP are: 
• 
to make low- and middle-income homes more resilient to extreme weather events and their impacts, such as 
possible loss of access to electricity and potable water distribution systems; 
• 
to increase freshwater storage capacity and water use efficiency and reduce emissions through the deployment of 
distributed renewable energy generation; 
• 
to decrease land-based sources of marine pollution through more sustainable land use practices; 
• 
to make critical utility, water and sanitation and road infrastructure climate resilient; and,

=== PAGE 15 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 11 
 
 
• 
to restore vulnerable coral reef ecosystems, particularly on the west and south coasts of the island. 
These objectives have been categorised into six target sectors, namely shelter (for example, housing upgrades); water 
(including rainwater harvesting, stormwater capture, groundwater, potable water, and wastewater); energy; waste; land 
use (including use of the EEZ and terrestrial agriculture); and ecosystems (including gully and wetland ecosystems, 
terrestrial biodiversity, coral reefs and other marine ecosystems and biodiversity). These sectors were chosen because 
they are interlinked and fundamental to human well-being. The shelter sector also reinforces bringing the programme 
to the level of the individual household. Table 1 on the priority risks and adaptation needs demonstrates how for two 
hazards, there are vulnerability, exposure, impact and adaptation needs related to shelter, water, waste, land use and 
ecosystems for increased water stress and all six sectors are affected by increased damage from tropical storms and 
hurricanes. Further details of the R2RP and the pipeline of projects identified to date are presented under Section 3.5.1 
of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.  
Complementarity with ongoing and planned initiatives 
As described above, Barbados has developed detailed and ambitious climate change adaption and mitigation 
strategies. To achieve these strategies, the GoB has paid close attention to the available options, including public, 
private and donor finance, to create a roadmap towards climate resilience. This roadmap is encapsulated in the R2RP. 
The proposed programme forms a key component of the GoB’s overarching strategy, specifically designed to fill a 
finance niche for potentially bankable initiatives that will free up public fiscal space to invest in climate action where 
the potential for financial returns is constrained by the public good nature of the benefits. By designing the programme 
to fill this niche, it will be inherently complementary to other ongoing initiatives in the country, including those funded 
by the GCF. A summary of the country’s GCF pipeline and the complementarity of the proposed programme is provided 
in Table 2 below.  
Table 2. Alignment with ongoing and planned GCF initiatives in Barbados.  
Project 
Objectives 
Key Considerations for Complementarity 
Three Rs (Reduce, Reuse 
and Recycle) for Climate-
Resilient Wastewater 
Systems in Barbados (3R-
CReWS)  
AE: CCCCC  
Approved 2022 
 
• Promote the use of carbon-neutral and 
climate-resilient water and energy 
management technologies and strategies that 
ensure water is protected, managed, recycled, 
reused, and conserved. This will include an 
upgrade of the Bridgetown Sewage Treatment 
Plant (BSTP) to a tertiary treatment system 
and the installation of wastewater treatment 
systems in two Zone A locations in Barbados 
to harness reclaimed water, which will be 
utilized for aquifer recharge and agricultural 
irrigation. 
• Incentive programme to encourage water 
conservation, recycling and re-use in the 
private sector, supported by the expansion of 
the Revolving Adaptation Fund Facility 
(RAFF). 
Wastewater recycling under the HOPE 
initiative will complement the utility-scale 
processes promoted under Three Rs – 
contributing to the overarching objective 
of creating a circular economy for 
wastewater. Moreover, the innovative 
water conservation initiatives identified as 
an initial pipeline activity for the BGB will 
be directly complemented by the efforts 
under Three-Rs to strengthen the 
enabling environment for private sector 
adoption of wastewater technologies and 
reuse options. To this end, the BGB will 
leverage the nationwide public education 
and awareness campaign on the nexus 
between climate change and water 
availability to mobilise private finance in 
the sector. 
E-Mobility Programme for 
Sustainable Cities in Latin 
America and the Caribbean 
(Regional)  
AE: IDB  
Approved 2022 
The E-Mobility Programme links EV deployment 
with sustainable low-carbon urban development 
and increased climate-resilience of urban 
transport infrastructure and the grid. Programme 
components include climate-resilient transport 
infrastructure; increased climate-resilience of the 
grid with green hydrogen and vehicle-to-grid 
(V2G) pilot projects; and electrified integrated 
urban mobility. 
The BGB has the potential to introduce 
innovative financial products to support 
the roll-out of e-mobility programmes in 
Barbados. In particular, V2G and 
associated EV charging infrastructure has 
been identified as a potential area where 
BGB involvement could mobilise private 
sector investment.

=== PAGE 16 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 12 
 
 
Water Sector Resilience 
Nexus for Sustainability in 
Barbados (WSRN S-
Barbados)  
AE: CCCCC 
Approved 2018 
The project aims to: i) build greater resilience to 
extreme storm events and drought conditions by 
utilizing cleaner energy sources, decentralising 
water storage, promoting rainwater harvesting at 
the household and community level, and 
improving the efficiency with which rainwater 
runoff replenish aquifers in Barbados; ii) further 
advance adaptation and mitigation initiatives in 
the water sector of Barbados by redirecting and 
mobilising local funds through a revolving 
adaptation fund; iii) reduce the greenhouse gas 
emissions intensity of water provision; iv) 
capacity building via knowledge sharing and 
lessons learnt platforms; v) support the review 
and development of a legislative framework to 
supports climate-smart development and water 
sector resilience; vi) collate and disseminate 
lessons learnt for use in developing further 
adaptation and mitigation initiatives and raising 
public awareness about climate change and 
water conservation. 
As with the e-mobility programme above, 
the BGB has the potential to introduce 
innovative financial products to support 
the roll-out of water conservation 
initiatives introduced through the WSRN 
S-Barbados project – including by 
promoting private investment in the nexus 
of water and energy. The BGB will also 
draw on the lessons learned to identify 
scalable options that support water 
conservation efforts for lower- to middle-
income groups.  
 
Operation Coastal 
Resilience (OCR): 
Innovative financing for 
nature-based solutions that 
support climate-resilient 
coastal areas in the 
Caribbean. 
Regional 
AE: TNC  
CN Under Development 
 
OCR is a regional programme aiming to 
establish innovative financial mechanisms 
(IFMs) for nature-based solutions in the coastal 
zones of four Caribbean countries. The 
programme will use a combination of regional 
and national funds to channel finance to projects 
that use nature-based solutions to generate 
public goods by leveraging innovative finance 
options.  
The BGB is targeting a separate niche in 
the financial space for climate action in 
Barbados from that targeted by OCR. 
Specifically, it is envisioned that OCR will 
act more in the public space, identifying 
options for funding nature-based solutions 
to coastal resilience that do not yield 
direct financial returns, instead using 
financial mechanisms such as payments 
for ecosystem services and 
philanthropic/donor funding to finance 
public-good initiatives. By contrast, the 
BGB will strengthen the capital market 
and package initiatives to improve 
bankability, with the aim of mobilising 
private finance for climate action targeting 
lower- to middle-income groups. 
R2RP Readiness 
Ministry of the Environment 
and National Beautification 
Approved Readiness 
As a response to these climate change 
challenges, the GOB launched the Roof to Reef 
Programme (R2RP). The R2RP provides the 
overarching framework that allows the 
integrated approach to addressing the negative 
impacts of climate change. The R2RP is the 
Government’s sustainable development model 
for the next decade and represents the country 
programme for Barbados. The primary focus is 
on improving the social and environmental 
circumstances of the people in Barbados. The 
R2RP will enhance the country’s ability to 
recover from climatic events. The R2RP is 
hinged on six thematic areas: Shelter, Water, 
Energy, Waste, Land Use, and Ecosystems 
Management. The thematic areas under the 
R2RP are aligned with Barbados’ NDC priority 
areas. Barbados has developed and is seeking 
to develop a pipeline of projects under the R2RP 
that will improve the country’s resilience to 
The BGB has been designed to align 
closely with the R2RP, intended to fill a 
niche gap in the financing of initiatives 
under the R2RP. For example, the initial 
pipeline investments through the HOPE 
Programme are directly listed as a priority 
intervention under the R2RP. To this end, 
the BGB will engage with the R2RP 
implementation teams to draw on the 
readiness work being conducted to 
identify investment opportunities and to 
package projects to create bankable 
opportunities.

=== PAGE 17 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 13 
 
 
climate change as well as increase its push to 
become carbon neutral by 2030.  
B.2 (a). Theory of change narrative and diagram (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagram) 
Problem Statement 
The people of Barbados are being severely impacted by climate change, constraining the sustainable development 
ambitions of the country and threatening the lives and livelihoods of vulnerable communities. These climate impacts 
are driven largely by the increased frequency and intensity of tropical storms and hurricanes — along with the 
associated impacts of sea level rise and storm surge — as well as decreasing rainfall with longer dry spells, lower soil 
moisture and increased aridity. Urgent adaptation action is, therefore, needed to reduce the wide-reaching impacts on 
key economic sectors and secure a sustainable future for all Bajans. In addition to these core adaptation needs, the 
country recognises the vital importance of global mitigation efforts to reduce the threat of future climate change 
exacerbating these impacts. To this end, despite contributing significantly less than 0.01% of global GHG emissions, 
Barbados’ resilience strategy includes highly ambitious mitigation targets, including a transition to 100% renewable 
energy by 2030. These ambitious targets are intended to demonstrate the country’s commitment to climate action, as 
well as to serve as an example to the rest of the world of the feasibility of the transition when innovative approaches 
are adopted. 
Unfortunately, despite these commitments, progress has been slow — especially in adopting renewable energies and 
water conservation initiatives by middle- to low-income households. This relates primarily to the structure of ownership 
of capital in the Barbados economy and the financial ecosystem (see Barriers below for more detail). Given the existing 
fiscal constraints, Barbados’ resilience strategy — encompassed in the Roofs to Reefs Programme (R2RP) — 
recognises the need to partner with the private sector to mobilise finance for innovative climate investments that are, 
or can be made, bankable. Such an approach will enable the government to direct the limited concessional finance 
available towards public-good resilience measures that do not have direct financial returns. 
Goal Statement 
If innovative and affordable climate finance is mobilised in Barbados through the establishment of the Blue Green 
Bank, then the transition to a fossil fuel-free energy supply, as well as hurricane-resilient infrastructure and a secure 
water supply will be accelerated because climate-responsive investments from the private sector will be securitised, 
de-risked and packaged, increasing private capital and opening the climate finance market to lower-income groups 
and small businesses that are otherwise unable to access loan finance from commercial banks. 
 
 
Barriers 
Several barriers currently constrain the financing of potentially bankable climate investments in Barbados – particularly 
when considering the potential involvement of low- to middle-income households. These barriers are detailed below. 
Barrier 1: The government of Barbados is constrained in its capacity to take on additional debt to finance climate 
action. 
It is estimated that Barbados needs to invest approximately USD 2 billion in climate-responsive initiatives to achieve 
resilience. Given the size of investment required relative to the country’s GDP (~40% of GDP), Barbados currently 
does not have the financial resources to meet its adaptation needs and mitigation ambitions. This financial shortfall is 
exacerbated by Barbados being classified as a highly indebted country, constraining the government’s ability to take 
on additional debt to meet climate investment needs. The total government debt reached ~144% of GDP at the end of 
2020, with the most significant contributor to increased debt levels recently having been the loss and damage arising 
from climate-related and other natural disasters alongside the necessary expense to protect the land and marine 
environment. Given the growing cost of loss and damage from natural disasters, it is recognised that a failure to invest 
in resilience will worsen the country’s debt position.

=== PAGE 18 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 14 
 
 
 
16 For example, a green bond valued at BB$ 14 M was issued by RF Merchant Bank & Trust Limited in 2021 for Williams Renewable Energy Limited 
(WREL), which formed part of a larger BB$ 34 M programme. 
17 Royal Bank of Canada; Scotiabank; CIBC FirstCaribbean; First Citizens; Republic Bank; and Sagicor Digital 
18 Costs of finance and access to financial services are noted among the most significant constraints facing Barbadian firms in terms of their 
productivity and performance. – IDB 2020. Barriers to Financial Access in Barbados — Key Challenges and Focal Areas for Reform. 
To help with managing this debt, Barbados has entered into an agreement under the Extended Fund Facility of the 
International Monetary Fund, the commitments of which limit the ability of the country to take on additional debt. 
Moreover, because its GDP per capita is above the eligibility threshold, Barbados does not qualify for concessionary 
loans from the World Bank and other Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs).  
As a result of these constraints, the GoB is unable to access adequate, affordable debt to finance climate action. Those 
limited funds that are available are needed for investments in public-good nature interventions, highlighting the need 
for private investment to be mobilized to bridge the finance gap and meet the adaptation needs and mitigation ambitions 
of Barbados.  
Barrier 2: Limited capital markets for climate investments in Barbados. 
While there has been an increase in the issuance of green bonds in Barbados in recent years16, the capital market for 
climate investments remains limited. These limitations on the capital market are largely driven by the small number of 
participants in the market, relying largely on a relatively small banking sector (see Barrier 3 below), that exhibits 
considerable market overlap and limited portfolio diversification. As a result, market innovation is largely stifled, limiting 
private investment in climate action. As noted above, such private investment is essential to bridge the finance gap to 
meet the country’s adaptation needs and mitigation ambitions. 
Barrier 3: Commercial banks in Barbados are typically risk-averse and focus on collateralised loans. 
The banking sector in Barbados is limited, with only six banks17 operating in the country, all of which are headquartered 
abroad — including several in Canada and one in Trinidad & Tobago — and take a "branch banking" approach. While 
the banks operate legally as local subsidiaries subject to local regulation, the banks are controlled and regulated from 
head offices based abroad, which influences their operations and appetite for risk in a significant way. This risk aversion 
is reinforced by an international bank de-risking process initially spurred by global anti-money laundering efforts. While 
this is a worldwide phenomenon, de-risking has hit the Caribbean region more heavily than any other, evidenced by 
the 25% loss of correspondent banking relationships. Perceptions of risk and the resulting enhanced due diligence 
have raised the cost of banking and reduced the attractiveness of small jurisdictions for international banks. Moreover, 
the increasing dependence on a narrowing set of correspondent banks for cross-border payments has led to further 
general risk aversion by the banks. 
As a result of the factors above, commercial banks in Barbados typically focus on providing mainly collateralised loans 
such as mortgages and car loans to a narrow set of borrowers. These loans primarily target high-income households, 
which are seen as the primary source of near-term profits. The near-term focus of commercial banks in Barbados has 
been linked to the possibility of the sale of subsidiaries, with each of the Canadian-headquartered banks having sold 
sizeable parts of their Caribbean subsidiaries over the past decade. In addition to these factors, the high lending 
interest rates and relatively short tenors available significantly constrain the banking sector’s ability to finance resilience 
and sustainable projects, especially those that target low-income households or small businesses18. This overall 
situation means that the local financial market cannot match the scale of funding required to deliver the green 
transformational impacts planned and required to build resilience to future climate scenarios and transition the energy 
sector. In particular, by targeting high-income households, the banking sector has largely excluded potential investment 
from the sizeable lower- to middle-income groups, restricting the adaptive capacity of much of the population. 
Barrier 4: Lower and middle-income groups in Barbados have limited collateral and limited credit histories to access 
loan finance from commercial banks. 
Following decades of free public education, health and other social investments, many Barbadians have the material 
comforts of a “middle-income” economy and relatively low poverty levels. However, like in other post-colonial societies, 
the ownership of capital remains highly skewed, with some in the lower- to middle-income groups not owning land or 
other major capital assets. This lack of capital ownership impedes access to finance, as they lack the collateral required 
by the risk-averse banking sector in Barbados (see Barrier 3). While this bank risk aversion can be offset by savings

=== PAGE 19 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 15 
 
 
and investment institutions — such as mutual funds and private equity firms — in the Caribbean and other small, 
developing states with skewed ownership of capital, the market is not there for this to happen on its own. A combination 
of weak credit profiles and a low savings ratio which characterizes lower- to middle-income groups in Barbados means 
that these groups have difficulty in securing finance for investments at a household level which would otherwise make 
economic sense. As a result, this important sector of the economy is largely excluded from the climate finance 
landscape, preventing investment at the scale needed to address climate change impacts in Barbados. This exclusion 
is particularly problematic given that these lower- to middle-income groups are also the most vulnerable to climate 
impacts and most in need of urgent action.  
Barrier 5: Limited familiarity among financial institutions with opportunities provided through climate finance. 
The packaging of climate investments with other complementary initiatives has been identified as an innovative solution 
for the financing of what may otherwise appear as un-bankable initiatives when viewed in isolation. For example, 
packaging solar PV with hurricane resilience and land ownership support programmes, as is being done with the 
Government’s HOPE programme, can help securitise and de-risk loans for investment in green homes. However, 
commercial banks in Barbados have a limited understanding and technical capacity to identify opportunities for 
packaging initiatives. Furthermore, such packaging often requires specialised bridging finance to establish securities 
and initiate/unlock the bankability of such investments. The role of packing initiatives to increase bankability extends 
to the potential of leveraging economies of scale — for example through bulk procurement. This is particularly important 
for SIDSs, where emerging technologies (such as solar PV and battery storage) generally need to be imported, often 
at high costs. Bulk procurement of such technologies can significantly decrease costs and increase potential returns; 
however commercial banks lack the capacity to initiate and operate the schemes necessary to manage bulk 
procurement. 
Market Opportunity 
There is a discernible gap in the market in Barbados and the Caribbean for a financial institution that can provide 
opportunities for existing financial institutions and capital markets to mobilise funds, whether through conventional 
bank lending or alternative securitisation of revenue streams deriving from climate change mitigation and adaptation 
activities, thereby creating stronger and more diversified capital markets. Experience to date has demonstrated that 
the absence of such a market player has left banking liquidity underutilised. Such an institution could be a partnership 
between public and private stakeholders, ensuring that all parties value and recognise the financing potential of such 
investments driven by the local government policy via a regulatory regime for the promotion of climate resilience and 
transition to low-carbon futures. Such an institution should equally serve to focus efforts on low- to middle-income 
households in the interests of wider national economic and social development. By showing that climate investments 
are bankable and profitable, disseminating market knowledge, and encouraging best practices, a PPP financial 
institution can close the existing climate finance gap — not merely as a tool for deploying capital, but playing a crucial 
role in changing market behaviour, educating key stakeholders, and informing future policy goals. 
Although international initiatives directed at the provision of finance for climate change mitigation and adaptation have 
been present for over twenty years, the national commercial banking market in small economies has, despite 
possessing adequate liquidity, often remained on the sidelines, with much of the running being made by multilateral 
institutions such as the IADB or the World Bank. Aside from a certain institutional prudence described earlier, the low 
participation of the Barbadian banking sector in activities of this kind can also be ascribed to the historical absence of 
a broad, coherent package of measures driven by the government to introduce the necessary reforms. Such programs 
as HOPE and the broader ambitions of R2RP mean that financing opportunities will grow both numerically in terms of 
individual operations as well as in size, given the more significant funding requirements relating to housing, flood 
control, desalination plants, Waste To Energy (WTE), or ecosystem protection. Not all of these projects will be 
inherently financially viable and appropriate project finance structuring will need to be undertaken. While some of the 
projects in the R2RP portfolio can generate income and therefore are viable in financing terms, others (for example, 
coastal management activities) will require more innovative solutions and forms of partnership with the private sector, 
as providers of services as well as inward investment.  
Project Approach

=== PAGE 20 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 16 
 
 
The proposed project will establish a sustainable climate finance vehicle — the Blue Green Bank (BGB) — in Barbados 
to stimulate innovation in the financial sector with the goal of mobilizing the securities and loan markets in order to 
unlock additional funding for climate-responsive initiatives. The BGB will be a joint public-private sector effort to create 
an improved financing infrastructure that works closely with other financing players — such as commercial banks, 
credit unions, pension funds, and insurance companies — to crowd in private capital alongside public capital, rather 
than crowding out the significant investment opportunities offered by these key financial institutions. For such 
institutions to become involved in climate change mitigation and adaptation activities, the leadership should be 
provided by a third party putting the deal together, for which it must establish the appropriate capacities in technical 
and HR terms, as well as appropriate management and institutional arrangements. 
The BGB is designed to become a significant institution for practical and strategic financing of climate change 
adaptation and mitigation policies and measures, supporting the Government of Barbados to achieve national 
resilience and emissions reduction targets. As a public-private partnership (PPP) that brings together public 
(Government of Barbados), private and multilateral institutions at the level of equity, the BGB can present a holistic 
view of the market and the potential for green financing by ensuring that new projects align with Barbados’ NDC targets. 
Because the BGB’s goal is national climate adaptation and mitigation, it will seek not to replace other financial 
institutions but to act as a partner and support system for them in this underdeveloped market segment. To this end, 
the bank will be wholesale in operation, providing support in the form of funds, guarantees or other mechanisms to 
existing lenders, whether banks, credit unions, insurance companies etc to facilitate the funding of blue/green programs 
contemplated by government policy. The BGB will also serve as a conduit between local financial institutions and the 
Government of Barbados, allowing the BGB to identify market opportunities and provide feedback and data to inform 
policy decisions more effectively. Details on the BGB’s barrier removal strategy are presented in Table 3. 
Table 3: Barrier removal strategy for the BGB. 
Barrier 
Barrier removal strategy  
Barrier 1: The government of 
Barbados is constrained in its 
capacity to take on additional debt to 
finance climate action. 
 
The establishment of the BGB (Output 1.1) will mobilise finance for bankable climate 
initiatives, thereby reducing pressure on the country’s constrained fiscal space, and 
enabling the government to direct limited concessional finance towards non-
bankable adaptation initiatives, for which the benefits are largely public goods.  
Barrier 2: Limited capital markets for 
climate investments in Barbados. 
 
The nature of the BGB will enable it to strengthen the capital market for climate 
investments. By playing a catalytic role in support of the financing of climate change 
mitigation and adaptation activities (Output 2.1), the BGB should find ways to 
mobilise and enhance capital market liquidity directed at this area. This will include, 
for example, the trading of existing blue/green bonds with financial institutions on 
condition that the mobilised funds are used to buy new blue/green bonds, thereby 
enabling institutions to diversify portfolios while expanding the capital market. The 
BGB will also create an enabling environment to foster innovation in the climate 
finance sector.  
Barrier 3: Commercial banks in 
Barbados are typically risk-averse 
and focus on collateralised loans. 
 
The BGB will fund initiatives to demonstrate the bankability of such investments, 
including through the: i) packaging and project structuring of programmes and 
initiatives to improve bankability (Activity 2.1.3); ii) provision of bridging finance to 
support packaged initiatives in securing collateral for low- to middle-income 
households (Activity 2.1.4); and iii) provision of guarantees or other securities for 
supported initiatives (Activity 2.1.3). 
 
By partnering directly with commercial banks, who will act as intermediaries for 
investment in the GoB projects or programme (Activity 2.1.2), the BGB will unlock 
financial resources for low- to middle-income households as well as small 
businesses to invest in climate-responsive initiatives – thereby significantly 
increasing the potential for climate action in Barbados. 
Barrier 4: Lower and middle-income 
groups in Barbados have limited 
collateral and limited credit histories 
to access loan finance from 
commercial banks. 
 
Barrier 5: Limited familiarity among 
financial institutions with 
opportunities provided through 
climate finance. 
 
The BGB will work with various partners, including government-run programmes, to 
package climate-responsive initiatives and create bankable projects, thereby 
strengthening a “learning by doing” approach. This can include the financial 
structuring/design of individual projects (Activity 2.1.3) or programmes as well as the 
provision of bridging finance where necessary to support the securitisation of the 
packaged investment options (Activity 2.1.4). Such an approach will leverage the

=== PAGE 21 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 17 
 
 
 
19 Further details on the eligibility criteria are presented in Appendix C to Annex 2: Feasibility Study. Please note, while the high-level criteria are set, 
the specific eligibility factors considered under each of these categories will be finalised by the BGB Board at the early stages of the establishment of 
BGB.  
combined benefits of packaged investments to maximise the cost efficiency and 
effectiveness of climate investments made through the BGB. 
 
Once established, the BGB will engage with investors, including private investment firms, development banks, 
philanthropic organisations and other sources of finance to continue to capitalise the bank over the long term. The 
bank will maintain a debt-finance to equity ratio of 7:1, aiming to mobilise at least an additional USD 5.8 billion of 
investment in climate projects over the next 15 years. 
Initially, the BGB will target three priority sectors that have been identified under the GoB’s resilience strategy, namely: 
i) renewable energy; ii) climate-resilient infrastructure and housing; and iii) water conservation. These sectors have 
been assessed to have significant potential for establishing bankable initiatives that target low- and middle-income 
households when partnered with appropriate initiatives, such as the government’s HOPE and SHIFT initiatives. 
Additionally, the BGB will explore options for providing additional security to such lenders (possibly in the form of full 
or partial guarantees to the banks for their funding of specific projects or programmes) to ensure competitive pricing 
of their loans.  
While it is expected that the initial BGB investment portfolio will be focused on elements such as land acquisition, solar 
installations and mortgage finance promotion relating to the HOPE programme, along with retrofitting of existing 
buildings for hurricane resilience and water-saving devices through the SHIFT and water conservation programmes, 
this technically simple approach would serve as the gateway to a broader spectrum of climate-finance related 
operations and more complex project finance structuring. This business progression should also allow for the 
generation of early income, whilst the BGB’s HR and technical capacities were being refined in line with the institution’s 
evaluation of the market potential. The HOPE programme would also open the door to a dialogue between BGB and 
the Barbadian financing community, with a view to developing a proactive dialogue with the latter in order to identify 
and develop projects and programmes which, on the basis of project finance structuring, would enable this community 
to deliver its full potential. This expected expansion of the investment portfolio will be overseen by the BGB’s 
Investment Committee (see Section B.4 below), following the explicit due diligence processes and investment eligibility 
criteria developed specifically for BGB.  
The BGB will be able to target other sectors specifically or more generally through the financing of green bonds and 
other capital market instruments. Through this approach, the BGB could provide finance for private and public initiatives 
for green, affordable, gender-inclusive housing, food security and low-carbon transport, in addition to the primary 
sectors identified above. The eligibility of initiatives and activities to be funded through the BGB will be determined 
based on four criteria, which will be assessed in detail by the BGB management team and Investment Committee (see 
Section B.4 for details on the assessment roles and responsibilities)19: 
• 
Climate basis: how does the initiative address a climate change problem, considering both adaptation and 
mitigation benefits? 
• 
Financial feasibility: is the proposed initiative financially viable, with suitable risk mitigation and potential return on 
investment to be considered bankable? 
• 
Environmental and Social Safeguards: does the proposed initiative align with the bank’s environmental and social 
safeguard policies and management systems? 
• 
Gender Responsiveness: Is the proposed initiative gender-responsive, equitable and aligned with the bank’s 
gender action plan? 
Overall, the BGB will promote a paradigm shift towards investment in resilient livelihoods and low-carbon technologies, 
with emphasis on low-income, vulnerable households and the energy, housing, agriculture and transport sectors. The 
project will also build the wider community's awareness of climate investment opportunities in support of a more 
resilient and sustainable Caribbean. Finally, by focusing on climate resilience and adaptation for middle to low-income 
households — including a specific focus on women and other highly vulnerable groups — the BGB would aim to attract 
more concessional or philanthropic providers of capital, expanding the goals of climate action in Barbados without the

=== PAGE 22 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 18 
 
 
need for further injections of money by the Government and GCF. This will create long-term sustainability and 
scalability in the banking sector, with the potential to scale beyond Barbados into the broader Caribbean region over 
time. 
 
Figure 6. Strategic overview of the BGB investment framework.

=== PAGE 23 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 19 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Theory of Change of the GCF-supported project to establish the BGB. 
B.2 (b). Outcome mapping to GCF results areas and co-benefit categorization 
Outcome 
number 
GCF Mitigation Results Area (MRA 1-4) 
GCF Adaptation Results Area (ARA 1-4) 
MRA 1 
Energy 
generation and 
access 
MRA 2 
Low-emission 
transport 
 
MRA 3 
Building, cities, 
industries, 
appliances 
MRA 4 
Forestry and 
land use 
ARA 1 
Most vulnerable 
people and 
communities 
ARA 2 
Health, well-
being, food and 
water security 
ARA 3 
Infrastructure 
and built 
environment 
ARA 4 
Ecosystems 
and ecosystem 
services 
Outcome 1 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
Outcome 2 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☒ 
☐

=== PAGE 24 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 20 
 
 
 
20 Draft Incorporation documents are provided as Annex 9 
21 Preliminary discussions have been held with the Central Bank during stakeholder engagement process for the development of the project. The CBB 
22 A digital bank is a financial institution that operates primarily online, offering services such as online banking, mobile banking, and other digital financial 
services. Refer to Annex 21 for further information. 
23 As a wholesale bank, the BGB will not deal directly with retail customers.  
Co-benefit number 
Co-benefit 
Environmental 
Social 
Economic 
Gender 
Adaptation 
Mitigation 
Reduction in air pollution and its associated 
impacts on public health 
☒ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Gender mainstreaming into climate finance  
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
Improved groundwater reserves and quality 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
Job Creation 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
Accelerated energy transition 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☐ 
☒ 
B.3. Project/programme description (max. 2500 words, approximately 5 pages) 
The proposed GCF-funded project will establish the Blue Green Bank (BGB) in Barbados to stimulate innovation in the 
financial sector with the goal of unlocking the financial market and mobilising additional investment in climate-
responsive initiatives. The project is structured with two primary Outputs that will achieve two paradigm-shifting 
Outcomes. The first Output will focus on the establishment of the BGB, including formalising the operational 
arrangements, setting up the policy environment and building the technical and operational platforms. The second 
Output will focus on crowding in additional private investment to strengthen the local capital market for blue-green 
investments, by acting as a catalyst to develop bankable projects. Finally, activities under the third Output will structure 
and package climate solutions to securitise and ultimately execute blue-green investments. 
 
Outcome 1: Innovative financial structures operating in Barbados to overcome barriers to climate finance. 
The establishment of the Blue Green Bank under Outcome 1 will create an enabling space for financial innovation in 
the climate change adaptation and mitigation spaces. The public-private partnership (PPP) nature of the bank, 
combining the local interests of the Government of Barbados with the ambitious focus of GCF, will enable the bank to 
take the lead and incentivize the commercial banks to play a fuller role, via the development of innovative financial 
structures that will crowd in private investment for climate-responsive initiatives. By catalysing innovation in the 
financial market, the BGB will demonstrate the potential for significant GHG emission reduction and investment in 
climate resilience. The foreseeable impact of such investments is far above what is typical of many GCF projects and 
programs due to the bank’s revolving nature and its indefinite lifetime.  
 
While the BGB aims to enable GCF to exit within a 15-year timeframe, the bank will continue to exist in the long term, 
attracting funding from the public and private sectors to drive transformational projects. Overall, the establishment of 
the BGB and the resulting crowding in of private investment is expected to overcome two key barriers to climate action 
in Barbados, specifically those related to the historical reluctance or inability of commercial banks to play their full part, 
and the constraints on the Government of Barbados’ capacity to take on additional debt to finance climate action (see 
Barriers 1 and 2 in Section B2 above). 
Output 1.1: Blue Green Bank (BGB) established and capitalised 
The BGB will be incorporated as a corporation under the Companies Act of Barbados20. Once incorporated, the bank 
will apply for regulatory approval as a wholesale bank from the Central Bank of Barbados21. The BGB will be 
established as a digital22, wholesale23 bank, with a shareholding structure that will maximise the benefits of the PPP 
model. This includes the Government of Barbados holding non-majority equity, in its capacity as the prime promoter 
of opportunities for climate change investment and potentially facilitating future expansion across the Caribbean. The 
BGB’s Board will be made up of 5 — 9 members (see Section B.4: Implementation Arrangements below). Details of 
the initial capitalisation are as follows:  
Partner 
Contribution 
Government of Barbados 
US$ 10,000,000 Equity 
GCF BGB Holdings 
US$   5,000,000 Equity 
US$ 10,000,000 Loan (Output 2) 
Other 3rd party investors 
US$   5,000,000 Equity

=== PAGE 25 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 21 
 
 
Following incorporation and regulatory approval, which will involve the formalisation of the shareholder term sheets 
and agreements for capitalisation, appointment of board and senior management as well as the finalisation of the 
Bank’s Governance and Operational Policies. Finally, the technical and operational platforms will be built ahead of the 
launch of the bank – including setting up and staffing necessary operational departments within the bank. Full details 
on the planned legal and operational arrangements are presented in Annexes 9 and 21, respectively.  
 
To enable the Bank to structure and package bankable financial products, suitable legal contracts and document 
templates will be prepared to address borrower needs as well as meet bank and investor requirements (Activity 1.1.7). 
This will help operationalise the funding activities of the Bank and unlock access to local and international capital 
markets for incremental funding for eligible climate-responsive projects. Through this process, the Bank will develop a 
variety of tools and mechanisms to facilitate and channelise incremental funding including: managing investor 
engagements and negotiations, preparation of Info memo and documentation related to financing options, enabling 
the issuance of bonds or other capital market instruments, managing operational activities and fund transfer process, 
developing suitable monitoring and reporting mechanisms for the investors. 
 
Activity 1.1.1: Incorporate the Blue Green Bank 
The BGB will be incorporated as a company under the Barbados Companies Act, CAP308, 2002. The incorporation 
will be done through an application to the Corporate Affairs and Intellectual Property Office (CAIPO). This Activity will 
be executed by PCA, together with GCF BGB Holdings and Pegasus BGB Holdings GP. 
 
Activity 1.1.2: Formalise shareholder term sheets and agreements for capitalisation. 
Shareholders committing equity to BGB will be formally onboarded. The processes will include the finalisation and 
formalisation of the shareholder term sheets as well as finalising agreements for the capitalisation of the bank. This 
Activity will be executed by PCA, together with GCF BGB Holdings and Pegasus BGB Holdings GP. 
 
Activity 1.1.3: Apply for regulatory approval from the Central Bank to operate as a Bank. 
Once registered as a company, the BGB will be licenced as a merchant bank with the appropriate regulator, providing 
the necessary regulatory approval to operate as a bank in Barbados. This Activity will be executed by PCA and BGB. 
 
Activity 1.1.4: Hire a management team and appoint a board. 
The BGB recruit experienced professionals with a strong track record of managing operational risks and financial risks 
to form the management team of the BGB. A board of between 5 and 7 members will be appointed, ensuring 
compositional alignment with the guidelines provided by the CBB. This Activity will be executed by PCA and BGB. 
 
Activity 1.1.5: Finalise Governance and Operational Policies. 
Building on the draft policy recommendations developed during project preparation, the BGB’s management team will 
review and finalise all governance and operational policies. This includes all policies identified under the Legal and 
Policy review to ensure compliance with regulatory processes. The board will be responsible for the final sign-off and 
adoption of all policies. This Activity will be executed by BGB. 
 
Activity 1.1.6: Build the technical and operational platform for the launch of the Bank. 
As a digital bank, the BGB will require a robust technical platform for its operation. Professional services will be 
procured to work alongside the BGB management team to develop the technical platform and train all staff on its 
operation. Once operational, the BGB will be publicly launched. This Activity will be executed by BGB. 
 
Activity 1.1.7: Significantly increase new private investment by creating the right tools and mechanisms for their 
participation and monitoring. 
The bank will use the information generated through initial engagements with investors under Activity 2.1.1 to structure 
and package financial products that address investor concerns and unlock the capacities of the local capital market. 
Through this process, the project will develop a variety of products, tools and mechanisms for non-governmental

=== PAGE 26 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 22 
 
 
 
24 Funded by the GCF equity contribution 
25 Projects in this sense are considered as the deal between the BGB and the intermediary, rather than between the intermediary and the final beneficiary.  
financing of investments, as well as negotiate with potential investors to co-develop packages that will mobilise private 
finance for eligible projects. This Activity will be executed by BGB. 
 
Outcome 2: Affordable finance crowded in and mobilised for investment in priority government initiatives 
targeting low-carbon and climate-resilient development in Barbados. 
The core role of the BGB will be to mobilise finance for climate-responsive projects by securitising investments and 
strengthening local capital markets. While part of this function will be achieved through the structuring and trading of 
financial products (such as Green Bonds) using tools developed under Output 1.1, the bank will support the direct 
financing of eligible climate-responsive initiatives under Output 2.1. The project pipeline for Output 2.1 will be 
approached in two phases: an initial phase of initiatives that have been identified as high priority under Barbados’ 
Roofs to Reefs Programme (R2RP); followed by a second phase of projects that will expand the impact of the bank by 
opening to new, innovative initiatives. The mandate of the bank will be specifically to mobilise additional private finance 
for climate-responsive projects – including adaptation, mitigation, and cross-cutting initiatives – working alongside 
existing financial institutions to not crowd out, but rather collaborate and crowd in additional investment.  
In addition to the initial equity contributions, GCF BGB Holdings 24  will provide USD10 million towards initial 
capitalization in the form of a convertible loan, with the BGB then raising additional finance that will strengthen and 
upscale the balance sheet to enable the bank to structure project financing beyond the initial pipeline of projects 
identified at the initiation of the bank (see the outline of initial pipeline investments presented below). A total of at least 
USD 5.8 billion is anticipated to be mobilised within the first 15 years of the funding cycle, with the potential to increase 
if additional equity is successfully raised. Furthermore, the long-term mission of the BGB, along with governance 
policies that ensure significant reinvestment of profits, will enable the bank to recover and re-invest funds in the medium 
or long term. 
Output 2.1: Blue-green investments identified and executed in Barbados 
Under Output 2.1, the BGB will engage with government programmes and other intermediaries to identify, develop 
and execute eligible climate projects. Once the BGB has been established and is fully operational, the bank’s 
management team will engage in activities to unlock financial resources to fund climate-responsive projects, 
programmes and activities. This will include actively engaging with potential investors and identifying specific needs, 
concerns and barriers to investment (Activity 2.1.1). The BGB will then work with intermediaries to structure solutions 
to optimise the initiative, packaging options to mitigate risks and ensure the bankability of individual investments. All 
projects will be screened against the bank’s specific eligibility criteria which have been developed to ensure that all 
initiatives financed by the bank are fully aligned with its core objective and operational policies, as well as those of the 
key equity shareholders – including the GCF (Activity 2.1.2). These criteria include four core categories of assessment, 
namely the climate change basis; the financial feasibility; the environmental and social safeguard considerations; and 
the gender responsiveness (described in more detail under Section B.2 above). Further details on the proposed 
investment criteria are presented as an appendix under Annex 2: Feasibility Study. While intermediaries can develop 
and propose projects25 to the BGB, the selection of projects for funding will be entirely controlled by the BGB. Candidate 
projects will be screened by the BGB’s investment committee, which will be responsible for all necessary due diligence 
on behalf of the bank. In addition to the BGB’s due diligence processes, all intermediaries will be expected to have 
suitable internal due diligence in their own planning processes. The bank will also be responsible for monitoring and 
recording lessons learned from individual investments, creating a best practice database that will demonstrate 
successful initiatives that can be scaled up or replicated in other areas.  
Two initiatives have been identified under the R2RP for the initial pipeline — specifically the HOPE and SHIFT 
programmes. In addition to these two core programmes, opportunities will be sought to finance water conservation 
initiatives, which have been identified as a key adaptation need with the potential for creating bankable investments. 
These three initiatives provide a stepwise progression for BGB investment, from HOPE, which has a clear model ready 
to go that will kickstart the bank’s operations, to SHIFT which has a relatively defined model, but needs support from 
the BGB to formalise the packaging of the project. Finally, the water conservation initiative is relatively theoretical at

=== PAGE 27 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 23 
 
 
 
26 Note that the project pipeline phases are not mutually exclusive in time, and the second phase will likely begin before the projects under the initial phase have 
been concluded. Instead, the initial phase is intended to provide a suitable pipeline to initiate the BGB’s activities while the additional pipeline for the second 
phase is developed.  
this point, without a specific project operational at this time. In this instance, the BGB will play more of a deal-maker 
role to get an intermediary on board and develop the final model.  
In addition to the core projects prioritised for the initial phase of investment, several investment areas have been 
preliminarily identified for expanding the impact of the bank. These include initiatives that reduce the reliance on, and 
reduce emissions from food imports (particularly for the hotel and the tourism industries), climate-resilience agriculture 
to increase food security in the context of future climate events and vehicle-to-grid electric vehicle charging 
programmes to promote grid stability. In such sectors, the BGB will work with various partners to identify and package 
financial solutions that unlock private investment. Depending on the nature of the project, different financial solutions 
may be applied (Activity 2.1.3). The details of what solutions are best suited to each project, particularly for the second 
phase of the BGB’s project pipeline, will be determined by 
the bank’s management team, taking into consideration 
the state of the capital market and what options can be 
best implemented by the BGB26. One key solution that has 
been identified is the selling of cash-flow generating assets 
via securitization to create capital optimization for the 
BGB, whereby the risk can be tranched for the capital 
markets (Figure 8). Other financial solutions could include: 
i) Public Private Partnership (PPP) structures; ii) 
guarantees, including credit guarantees, performance risk 
guarantees, or partial risk guarantees; iii) interest make-up 
arrangements; and iv) insurance. 
An overview of the initial pipeline projects is presented in the sections that follow. Further details are provided in Annex 
2: Feasibility Study.  
 
Activity 2.1.1: Engage with potential investors to negotiate, structure and package financial products which take 
account of investor concerns and facilitate investments into eligible projects 
The BGB Management team will actively engage with potential investors to identify specific needs, concerns and 
barriers to investment. This information will inform bank operations to enhance the role of BGB as an arranger in the 
financial sector. The BGB will then structure and package financial products to crowd in investment for eligible projects. 
The BGB will negotiate terms with investors and enter agreements for investments using the tools/mechanisms 
developed under Activity 1.1.7. This Activity will be executed by BGB. 
 
Activity 2.1.2: Partner with government programmes and local intermediaries to identify eligible climate projects for 
investment. 
The BGB investment teams will engage with government programmes and local intermediaries to identify eligible 
climate projects for investment by the bank. These efforts will initially focus on the three priority pipeline initiatives with 
HOPE, SHIFT and BWA, but will eventually branch out to identify additional opportunities. A key role of BGB in this 
process will be as a dealmaker, actively seeking opportunities to package deals that improve the bankability of projects. 
This Activity will be executed by BGB. 
 
Activity 2.1.3: Structure optimum solutions by mitigating risks and ensuring financial feasibility. 
Once opportunities are identified, the BGB investment teams will engage with intermediaries to structure solutions to 
optimise their bankability. This process will start with HOPE, where the model is already in an advanced stage – looking 
for opportunities to strengthen the existing model to maximise the benefit offered by BGB over alternative sources. 
This will be followed by firming up arrangements for SHIFT, and finally taking a broader deal-maker role for water 
conservation initiatives with BWA as an intermediary partner. In phase 2, the BGB will branch out beyond these initial 
pipeline initiatives, seeking opportunities to strengthen the capital market and securitise investments for a broader 
range of climate adaptation and mitigation options. This Activity will be executed by BGB. 
 
Figure 8: Tranched capital market model for securitised assets.

=== PAGE 28 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 24 
 
 
 
27 https://www.hopebarbados.com/  
28 As far as is feasible under the constraints of land availability, the selection of land for HOPE developments will account for potential climate change 
hazards, particularly for flood and coastal hazards. Where possible, high risk areas will be avoided. However, when alternative locations are 
constrained and some level of hazard is identified for a particular location, the design of the development will account for the hazard and implement 
suitable risk-reduction measures, including through adequate stormwater systems.  
29 Note: the power generated through the rooftop PV will be on a separate grid connection to the household usage, with the full value of the feed-in 
tariff from BLPC directed to Legacy PV, and not offset against household usage.   
30 Legacy PV Inc will be a new state-owned enterprise. 
Activity 2.1.4: Finance projects through securitisation and other means to upscale climate investments, initiating the 
process with the HOPE and SHIFT programmes. 
Once deals are identified and packaged, BGB will mobilise funds to finance eligible and approved projects. Initial 
agreements will be made with HOPE, which provides a ready-to-finance project model to kickstart bank operations, 
followed by SHIFT. This Activity will be executed by BGB. 
 
Activity 2.1.5: Manage, monitor and report on investments. 
The BGB management team will take responsibility for actively managing the accounts of all financed projects, 
including through regular monitoring and reporting on investments. This Activity will be executed by BGB. 
 
HOPE Programme27: HOPE Inc. is a Barbados government state-
owned enterprise established in November 2020 to fill an important 
social need for hurricane-resilient houses for lower-income markets. 
Through the HOPE programme, the land is purchased28 from public or 
private sources and developed as a housing estate along with all 
associated infrastructure — including water, roads and sewage. The 
houses, which are built to withstand the impacts of at least a Category 
3 hurricane and are fully kitted with rooftop PV, are then sold to low-
income, first-time buyers, with the proceeds going to repay the initial 
investment costs. A transformative aspect of HOPE’s business model 
is the use of feed-in tariffs for energy generated by the rooftop PV to 
subsidise the developments, allowing HOPE to sell the houses at 
affordable prices (below market value), while simultaneously 
contributing to the Government of Barbados’ ambitious mitigation 
targets. Moreover, in exchange for maintaining the rights to the income 
generated from the rooftop PV29, HOPE is able to provide the land to 
eligible buyers free of charge, providing them with the collateral 
needed to access finance from commercial banks for the purchase of 
the house.  
The role of BGB in the HOPE programme will be to provide the finance 
needed to purchase land, as well as to purchase, install and maintain 
the rooftop PV systems. To this end, HOPE will partner with the soon-to-be-established Legacy PV Inc30 which will be 
responsible for the installation and management of rooftop PV systems under the HOPE programme. The PV systems 
will then be funded through 15-year loans issued by the BGB. 
The HOPE programme targets 10,000 hurricane-resilient homes powered by renewable energy. In addition to 
hurricane-proof roofs and rooftop PV, several other climate-responsive considerations have gone into the design of 
the houses being built through the HOPE programme. For example, the houses are designed to allow natural lighting 
and cooling, thereby improving energy efficiency, while water-saving toilets and fittings are being used to promote 
water conservation. The water conservation potential of HOPE is further enhanced through the programmes Water 
Reclamation Initiative. Under this initiative, grey and black water is channelled separately from stormwater into a central 
sewage treatment plant with tertiary treatment capability. After treatment, the clean water is pumped into large 
catchment ponds established by HOPE near each development, along with rainwater runoff from the houses and 
stormwater drainage systems. The water in these catchment ponds can then be used for irrigation systems for nearby 
Figure 9. Artist’s rendering and site layout of a 
HOPE housing estate. (Source: HOPE Inc)

=== PAGE 29 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 25 
 
 
agricultural projects, drawing on government-regulated consumption-based tariffs to help sustainably fund the 
operation. 
Ultimately, the HOPE business model is designed to fill the need for hurricane-resilient housing for lower-income 
households without any permanent call on limited government resources — with co-benefits in terms of emissions 
reduction, water conservation and food security (via the irrigation supply to agriculture from captures and reclaimed 
water. 
 
Figure 10. Schematic diagram of the HOPE model. The sequence of steps, labelled in red, is presented below.  
1. 
BGB provides a tranched loan package to HOPE to purchase land, develop utilities and houses, and install solar PV systems.  
2. 
HOPE uses the initial loan to develop the land.  
3. 
HOPE provides land to eligible buyers to serve as collateral for accessing a commercial home loan, on condition that HOPE retains the right 
to produce power from rooftop PV of beneficiary houses. 
4. 
Beneficiaries get a commercial loan to purchase a house from HOPE, repaying the loan through private funds. 
5. 
HOPE signs a 20-year power purchase agreement with BLPC to generate income from the power produced through PV installed on 
beneficiary houses. 
6. 
Income generated from the PV is used to repay the remaining debt over 15 years.  
 
Table 4: Typical cost breakdown of a HOPE house in USD 
Finance 
Mechanism 
Cost Category 
Two-bedroom house 
Three-bedroom house 
Actual Cost 
Assessed Value 
Actual Cost 
Assessed Value 
BGB Loan 
Purchase Land 
7,800 
46,000 
7,800 
46,000 
Install Infrastructure 
14,375 
14,375 
Purchase and install PV 
17,060 
17,060 
22,117 
22,117 
Mortgage Loan 
Construction 
costs, 
legal 
costs & bridging interest 
90,000 
129,000  
(excl. land) 
121,000 
161,500  
(excl. land) 
 
Small Home Income Generating Facility Trust (SHIFT): The SHIFT programme, still in the conceptual stage, is a 
government initiative to support homeowners to invest in climate resilience and renewable energy. Closely linked to 
the GoB’s Householders' Right to Renewable Energy (RTRE) policy, SHIFT will address a core constraint on rooftop 
PV – the hurricane resilience of roofs. The nexus of energy production and hurricane-resilient roofs is at the core of 
R2RP, and SHIFT will form part of the action plan to bridge the gap between R2RP and RTRE. Specifically, SHIFT will 
support existing homeowners to retrofit their houses for hurricane resilience, leveraging feed-in tariffs for rooftop PV 
to finance the efforts. This approach will be based on the second model of BGB investment (Figure 11) outlined in 
Section 7.2 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study, whereby SHIFT signs a deal with homeowners to retrofit houses for hurricane 
resilience, in exchange for the rights to put PV on the roof. SHIFT takes a loan from BGB to finance the retrofitting and

=== PAGE 30 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 26 
 
 
PV installation, and structures the repayment around the income from feed-in tariffs for the solar energy 
generated. Under this model, SHIFT targets equipping 50,000 homes with climate-resilient roofs and rooftop PV.  
 
 
Figure 11. Schematic diagram of the theoretical framework of the BGB model for packaging projects to create bankable 
repayment models through intermediaries, on which SHIFT will be based. 
Water Conservation: The proposed water conservation initiative is the least developed of the initial pipeline projects, 
although ongoing work is being conducted by the Barbados Water Authority (BWA) to set the foundation for water 
conservation through the Greening and Conservation Initiative Programme (GCIP). This programme includes several 
response areas for water conservation, including water-saving devices, personal storage tanks and aquifer recharge, 
alongside comprehensive awareness initiatives. It is anticipated that the BGB will engage with the GCIP to identify 
innovative financing options to support the implementation of these initiatives through potentially income-generating 
activities, with a particular focus on water-saving devices and storage. The conceptual framework will be based on 
Model 2 of the BGB investment options (as prescribed for SHIFT, Figure 11). Under this model, BGB would partner 
with the Barbados Water Authority (BWA) as an intermediary, providing a loan for the installation of water conservation 
devices. These devices could include low-flow showers and toilets, faucet aerators, and rainwater harvesting tanks. 
BWA would then enter into agreements with homeowners and small businesses to install the equipment, with the cost 
being added on as a small additional tariff on their utility bill, which would be used to repay the investment from BGB. 
The cost to the end user would be offset by the water savings, minimising the financial impact on target households 
that are otherwise unable to finance such investments.  
As part of the ongoing GCIP efforts, a feasibility assessment is being conducted of financing modalities for supporting 
the introduction of water savings devices and the estimation of potential BWA cost savings through a reduction in water 
demand. This process will also identify evaluation protocols for water-saving initiatives. The BGB will work closely with 
BWA in developing a bankable initiative, building on the foundations being set, including leveraging the impact of the 
planning awareness initiatives. To ensure the application of best practices, the development of the water conservation 
pipeline project will draw from experiences of other countries and programmes, both regionally and further abroad. For 
example, the project will consider the progress under the ongoing GCF-supported Climate-Resilient Water Sector in 
Grenada (G-CREWS) project that is establishing a challenge fund targeting heavy waters from the tourism and 
agriculture sectors. The project will also explore the lessons learned from incentive schemes that promoted the uptake 
of water-efficient devices, such as the successful Water Smart Homes initiative from Sydney, Australia, which provided 
a rebate on water tariffs to users who adopted water-efficient technologies. The proposed project will innovate on these

=== PAGE 31 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 27 
 
 
models to leverage the opportunity for the BGB to support the upfront costs for communities that are unable to invest 
themselves but would be able to repay investments through ongoing tariffs (offset by water savings). 
B.4. Implementation arrangements (max. 1500 words, approximately 3 pages plus diagrams) 
Accredited Entity 
Overview 
Pegasus Capital Advisors, L.P. (Pegasus) – Pegasus is a private, alternative asset management firm founded by Craig 
Cogut that provides strategic growth capital to middle-market companies focused on the sustainability and wellness 
sectors. Pegasus has invested approximately $2.6 billion, across five private equity funds, and has completed over 90 
private equity transactions. Pegasus is also currently the first and only private equity fund manager accredited by the 
Green Climate Fund (GCF). In this role, Pegasus is currently partnering with GCF on several impact initiatives, 
including:  
• 
The Sub-National Fund (SnCF) – a USD 750M target impact fund focussed on sustainable and resilient 
infrastructure development; 
• 
The Global Fund for Coral Reefs (GFCR) – a USD 500M target impact fund focused on investments that enhance 
the resilience of coral reefs and the populations that depend on them; and  
• 
Catalytic Capital for First Private Investment Fund for Adaptation Technologies in Developing Countries (CRAFT) 
– an impact fund to scale up technologies for climate resilience and adaptation and apply them in developing 
countries using a south-south technology transfer mechanism. 
AE Role in Implementation 
The Programme will be implemented through a Funded Activity Agreement (FAA) between GCF and Pegasus. 
Pegasus will enter into an Implementation Agreement with Blue Green Bank, whereby Pegasus as the AE will pass 
down obligations in the FAA to the Blue Green Bank as the Executing Entity. This includes the establishment of a 
special purpose vehicle (SPV) and associated general partner, managed by Pegasus, to serve as the holding company 
for GCF’s equity interest in the BGB (see below for more detail). The SPV will, through a subsidiary agreement, be a 
party to the implementation agreements outlined below. 
 
Pegasus, as per its fiduciary agreement with GCF will be responsible for: 
• 
Overall implementation, oversight and coordination of GCF’s commitment to the BGB; 
• 
Proper use of GCF’s commitment to the BGB; 
• 
Ensure compliance of BGB activities with the FAA; 
• 
Ensure investments performed by the BGB respect GCF policies, as well as the project’s gender, social and 
environmental safeguard management plans; and  
• 
Reporting to the GCF on the BGB. 
 
To this end, Pegasus, as an Accredited Entity for the GCF, will  
• 
take on the oversight role for the equity funds received; 
• 
further administer the GCF funds (in the form of both equity and subordinated loan) and provide for the appropriate 
implementing arrangements with the EE(see below for details on the SPV to be established for this purpose); 
• 
review progress as reported by the EE to determine how best to maximize project performance; 
• 
review project progress against work plans, procurement and disbursement plans as submitted;  
• 
implement a team with requisite skills that further analyses technical and financial issues; and 
• 
provide a support and resource function to the EE to discuss ways to strengthen implementation and ensure its 
direction enhances the likelihood of achieving outcomes and impact, and efficiency. 
Executing Entities 
The project will be implemented through four executing entities, Pegasus Capital Advisors, the Blue Green Bank, GCF 
BGB Holdings, L.P., and Pegasus BGB Holdings GP, LLC – the latter three of which have yet to be established. The 
tentatively named GCF BGB Holdings, L.P. is an SPV (see below) that will be formed as a Delaware limited partnership 
to serve as the holding company for GCF’s equity interest in the BGB. Its general partner will be a Delaware LLC, 
tentatively named Pegasus BGB Holdings GP, LLC, which will be wholly owned by PCA and will manage the GCF 
BGB Holdings.

=== PAGE 32 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 28 
 
 
 
31 PCA confirms its intention to have a Board seat. This arrangement builds on the fact that PCA is sponsoring the BGB and will have an equity interest in 
the BGB going forward. 
Pegasus will hold responsibility for the first two activities under Output 1.1, which will include the establishment of the 
BGB, alongside the finalisation of the shareholder agreements, governance structures and operational processes, as 
well as gaining regulatory approval. Once fully established and onboarded, the senior management team of the BGB 
will take over the EE responsibilities for the rest of Output 1.1 and for 2.1. These responsibilities will include crowding 
in public investment, as well as identifying, structuring and financing eligible climate investments. The BGB’s 
management team will also be responsible for managing, monitoring and reporting on all investments made through 
the bank.  
BGB Governance Structure 
BGB Board of Directors (The Board): 
The Board will comprise 7 – 9 Directors, initially commencing with a board of 5 directors31, with the ability to increase 
the number of directors depending on a number of factors such as the growth of BGB or any potential recommendations 
from CBB to appoint more Directors. The initial Board will target at least 30% female representation, with the aim to 
increase it to 50% in time. In line with regulatory guidelines, the Board will comprise a balance of executive and non-
executive directors, and will include independent directors that have the ability to exercise objective, independent 
judgment after fair consideration of all relevant information and views without undue influence from executives or 
inappropriate external parties or interests. The Board will also be required to have the right balance of expertise, which 
could include finance, issuing loans, governance, legal, technology, renewable markets and climate policy to operating 
in the Caribbean.  
The Board will meet at least quarterly, while maintaining the option to have additional meetings as needed from time 
to time.  
Senior Management:  
A senior management team will be appointed by the Board, comprising a core group of individuals who are responsible, 
and should be held accountable, for overseeing the day-to-day management of the BGB — serving as a link between 
the Board and staff. Responsibilities of senior management will include:  
• 
Providing adequate oversight of those they manage, and ensuring that the BGB’s activities are consistent with the 
business strategy, risk tolerance/appetite and policies approved by the Board; 
• 
Keeping the Board adequately informed about the performance of the institution through financial and management 
reports and such other reports prepared for example by internal auditors, external auditors and the compliance 
officer; 
• 
Advising the Board on the appropriate organisational structure, and ensuring that the quantity and quality of staff 
resources are available to carry out all tasks, including internal audit and compliance; 
• 
Ensuring that legal and regulatory requirements related to human resources are met within the required timelines; 
• 
Implementing and maintaining risk management systems appropriate to the scale, nature and complexity of the 
institution; 
• 
Delineating and documenting the areas of responsibility for each staff member; 
• 
Communicating the strategic direction, reporting lines and risk tolerances throughout the organisation; and 
• 
Overseeing management information systems to enable timely and accurate implementation and reporting. 
Committees of BGB 
The bank governance structure will include several board and management sub-committees, in line with CBB 
guidelines. These committees include: 
• 
Investment Committee: Comprised of senior members of the Board, as well as potentially members of Senior 
Management. The composition of the Investment Committee will be set out in its Charter under Output 1.1. The 
Investment Committee will include two sub-committees, namely the Screening Committee (responsible for 
assessing the pipeline investments and doing initial due diligence to assess red flags) and the Final Investment 
Committee (responsible for final decision-making on all investments). The decision-making power of the Investment

=== PAGE 33 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 29 
 
 
Committee will be agreed upon with the Board, whereby a monetary threshold will be set for investments and other 
monetary-related matters within its mandate, above which Board approval will be required.  
• 
Audit Committee: An Audit Committee will be established, comprised of all non-executive Directors — the majority 
of whom are independent. This committee will be responsible for overseeing the BGB’s financial reporting process, 
including its financial disclosure obligations; overseeing the internal and external audit functions, including 
approving the respective audit plans and engagement letters; meeting with and receiving reports from the BGB’s 
internal and external auditors; and monitor management’s response to regulatory, internal and external audit 
reports/letters ensuring timely and appropriate resolution of all matters. 
• 
Risk Committee: The Risk Committee is mandated by CBB and will be responsible for advising the Board on the 
overall current and future risk tolerance/appetite and strategy, and for overseeing Senior Management’s 
implementation of that strategy. This will include strategies for capital and liquidity management, as well as for 
credit, market, operational, compliance and reputational risk.  
• 
Additional Committees: In addition to the above mandatory committees, the BGB Board will, as required, establish 
several other committees, potentially including: Credit; Human resources; Asset and liability management; Social 
and Ethics; and Group Remuneration committees. 
The Governance structure is summarized in Figure 12 below, with the flow of funds demonstrated in Figure 6 above. 
GCF funds will be provided in the form of a USD15 million equity contribution to an SPV (see below), which will then 
channel the funds to the BGB via a USD5M equity contribution and a USD10 million convertible subordinated loan. 
The subordinated loan will be structured such that it counts towards tier 2 regulatory capital for BGB. This loan will 
contain provisions for automatic conversion to equity shares such that as far as possible, GCF (acting through the 
SPV) maintains a 25% equity interest in the BGB whenever additional equity is raised by BGB. 
 
Figure 12. The governance structure for BGB

=== PAGE 34 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 30 
 
 
 
32 See ESMS, Annex 6 
Portfolio Management and Investment Eligibility  
The management of the BGB’s project portfolio will be a joint effort between the Senior Management team and the 
Investment Committee, which itself is comprised of two sub-committees: the Screening Committee and the Final 
Investment Committee. Detailed investment eligibility criteria have been set (see Annex 2.2) for the BGB and will be 
formalised during project inception. The Investment Committee will take primary responsibility for screening projects 
against these eligibility criteria and formalising the bank’s project pipeline. Senior Management, together with the teams 
they oversee, will support the Screening Committee in identifying and packaging eligible projects for submission to the 
Final Investment Committee for approval. Once operational, the Senior Management team will be responsible for 
overseeing the implementation, monitoring and reporting on bank-supported projects.  
Investment process (preliminary) 
The evaluation process will be led by the investment committee consisting of a technical team of subject matter experts 
to assist with the deliberation including for Climate, gender, E&S or a sector-specific proposal (e.g., a housing or 
renewable energy expert). The process for determining a generally includes the following steps: 
1. Deal Sourcing: The investment committee receives investment proposals from the intermediaries to the BGB or 
referrals (where applicable). 
2. Initial Screening: The BGB’s screening committee conducts an initial review of the investment proposals to 
determine if they meet the organization's investment criteria (see below). This can involve a high-level analysis of 
financials, market trends, a climate assessment and other relevant factors. 
3. Due Diligence: If the investment proposal passes the initial screening, the Steering Committee conducts a more 
detailed due diligence process. This can include reviewing financial statements, assessing the climate impact, 
reviewing the E&S considerations, unpacking the gender assessment and action plan, interviewing management, 
assessing market trends, and evaluating other relevant data. 
4. Valuation: The committee uses financial models to determine the value of the investment opportunity and assess 
its potential returns. This involves analysing the company's financials and projections to determine its future growth 
potential. 
5. Investment Decision: After completing due diligence and valuation, the proposal is passed on to the Investment 
Committee which makes a final investment decision. This decision is based on the analysis conducted throughout 
the previous steps by the Steering Committee, and takes into account the committee's investment criteria, the 
potential returns, and the risks associated with the investment. 
6. Post-Investment Monitoring: After making the investment, the committee monitors the investment to ensure that 
it is performing as expected. This can involve regular reporting, reviewing financials, and making adjustments as 
necessary 
Investment criteria: 
The investment criteria for BGB will be used to evaluate the potential investments. These criteria are based on a 
combination of financial and non-financial factors that will assist the governing authorities to assess the risk of the 
investment. At the proposal stage, indicative investment criteria have been developed, which will be reviewed and 
refined by the BGB Board immediately after the bank’s inception. It is anticipated that the broad categories will not 
change, but the specific details of what qualifies under each will be refined. The initial eligibility criteria are as follows: 
• 
Geography: The project or programme located in Barbados  
• 
Financial: The amount requested has a positive financial return 
• 
Governance: the project does not fall into the prohibited or exclusionary investment list32  
• 
Climate: The project or programme is contributing to SDG 13–Climate Action by addressing a material climate 
risk and impact in its area of operation and/or reducing GHG emissions.

=== PAGE 35 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 31 
 
 
o Adaptation (if applicable): Proposals must clearly identify the specific climate-related risk/hazards — such as 
drought, floods or hurricane risk — being targeted and demonstrate the climate change attribution (current or 
future) to the increasing risk. The intervention strategy must show how the project or programme's activities 
will provide direct and/or indirect benefits to communities by increasing their ability to adapt to, or absorb, 
climate change stresses, shocks and variability and/or by helping reduce exposure to them.  
o Mitigation (if applicable): Proposals must present a clear emissions baseline from which the project will depart 
and demonstrate how the project or programme's activities contribute to the reduction of GHG emissions 
against the baseline and respective NDC targets. 
o Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS): The project or programme’s ESS risk is Category B or C  
• 
SDG: the project/programme is aligned or meets the SDG targets 
Climate expertise: 
The impetus for starting the BGB is to commit to exploring avenues to strengthen climate adaptation and mitigation in 
Barbados. Climate expertise is becoming increasingly important for financial institutions as climate change and 
sustainability are now major drivers of financial performance. BGB will thus ensure that a comprehensive 
assessment is undertaken by a climate expert with experience in climate-related issues in Barbados. A core 
responsibility of the climate specialist will be to technically assess all project proposals against the BGB’s climate 
investment criteria (see above) and make recommendations to the Investment Committee on climate eligibility. To this 
end, the climate specialist will not only form part of the technical team but will also be part of the Investment Committee, 
providing approval authority on the climate validity of the proposal.  
The investment committee is responsible for making investment decisions and is typically composed of experienced 
professionals with expertise in various areas of finance, including portfolio management, investment analysis, risk 
management, and compliance. The investment committee's primary role is to ensure that the bank's investment 
strategies are aligned with the bank's goals and objectives, as well as with the goals and objectives of its clients. This 
includes developing and implementing investment policies and strategies, setting investment targets, and monitoring 
investment performance. The climate specialist will be responsible for providing specialized knowledge and expertise 
and can help the investment committee to make informed and responsible investment decisions that align with the 
bank's and clients' goals and objectives. Overall, the climate specialist at the Bank is a crucial component of the Bank's 
investment management process. Their expertise and experience help to ensure that the bank's investments are 
managed prudently and responsibly, with the goal of maximizing returns while minimizing risk as they relate to climate-
related issues. 
In addition to the climate specialist noted above, the BGB will ensure that at least one Board Member is a climate 
finance expert. 
Special Purpose Vehicle  
A special purpose vehicle (SPV) is a separate legal entity created for a specific purpose or transaction, typically with 
limited liability and separate from its sponsors or investors. Pegasus Capital Advisors is the accredited entity (AE) that 
is authorised to receive funds from GCF and could invest in BGB on behalf of GCF. Subject to the approval of the 
following by the Board, a separate SPV will be established to channel funds from the GCF to BGB through Pegasus 
Capital Advisors. The main advantage of establishing the SPV is to ring-fence the GCF funds to finance BGB in a 
separate structure and thereby minimise the potential risk and liability of GCF and Pegasus Capital Advisors. It is noted 
that BGB will be established as a limited liability company and therefore all shareholders’ liability will be limited to the 
extent of their capital contribution. However, any of BGB’s creditors may still try to look to shareholders for outstanding 
debts and the SPV offers GCF (and Pegasus Capital Advisors) a level of protection from creditors and from reputational 
damage should BGB be unable to pay any of its debts. But the SPV is particularly relevant in the circumstances that 
a loan is made to BGB. An SPV would ring-fence the debt and protect GCF (and Pegasus Capital Advisors) from the 
increased risk of bankruptcy/insolvency should BGB fail to repay the loan.

=== PAGE 36 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 32 
 
 
Contracting arrangements 
GCF and the Accredited Entity will enter into a Funded Activity Agreement (FAA), which will reflect the terms and 
conditions described in this Term Sheet and the AMA. Subject to the terms of the FAA and the AMA, GCF will make 
disbursements under the FAA as and when the Accredited Entity submits a Request for Disbursement.  
GCF BGB Holdings, acting for the benefit of GCF, will enter into:  
• 
a short-form purchase agreement between BGB and GCF BGB Holdings for the subscription of shares to the 
value of USD 5 million in the share capital of BGB. The terms of the equity interest will be set forth in the articles 
of incorporation of the BGB.  
• 
a Loan Agreement between the BGB and GCF BGB Holdings, pursuant to which GCF BGB Holdings will lend 
BGB an amount of up to USD10 million. Portions of the loan will automatically convert to equity as and when 
the BGB raises additional equity capital such that GCF’s equity share is maintained at 33%.  
• 
a Shareholders Agreement with the BGB, Pegasus and the Government of Barbados that will set forth certain 
rights with respect to its equity interests.  
The Purchase Agreement, the Loan Agreement and the Shareholders’ Agreement will be executed by a representative 
of the Accredited Entity in such individual’s capacity as an authorized signatory of GCF BGB Holdings.   
GCF will subscribe to a limited partnership interest in GCF BGB Holdings pursuant to the terms of a Subscription 
Agreement to be entered into between GCF and GCF BGB Holdings. GCF will also be a party, together with the 
Holdings GP, to the Limited Partnership Agreement of GCF BGB Holdings. The Accredited Entity will also enter into 
an Implementation Agreement (the “Implementation Agreement”) with the BGB, GCF BGB Holdings and Pegasus BGB 
Holdings GP with respect to the implementation of the Funded Activity to pass down the relevant obligations under the 
AMA and FAA to such entities. The Holdings Subscription Agreement and Holdings LPA will be executed on GCF’s 
behalf by a representative of the Accredited Entity pursuant to a power of attorney granted by the GCF to the Accredited 
Entity, which will be included as part of the FAA. 
B.5. Justification for GCF funding request (max. 1000 words, approximately 2 pages) 
Barbados’ triple challenges to climate financing  
Context  
Barbados has one of the highest per capita incomes in the Caribbean with a total GDP of USD 4.84 billion and a per 
capita GDP of USD 17,225. Its economy has been able to transform itself from a low-income country, reliant largely 
on sugar production, to an upper-middle-income country with an economy that relies on a range of primary and tertiary 
sectors. These sectors include distribution (22%), financial services (21%), government (16%), tourism (12%), 
transport (10%), construction (5%) and others (14%).  
Despite a relatively high GDP per capita, the Barbadian economy exhibits characteristics commensurate with many 
SIDS. These characteristics include vulnerability to natural disasters and climatic events, limited natural resources and 
a high reliance on imports and exports. Given its dependence on external markets and economies, Barbados is highly 
susceptible to market fluctuations, limiting the country’s potential for economic growth and international competition. 
Consequently, Barbados faces several challenges to financing climate action, outlined below, necessitating the need 
for external support. 
Challenge 1: National Debt 
In recent years Barbados has found itself fiscally constrained with a debt-to-GDP ratio reaching a high of 158% in 
2017. In response, the Government implemented the Barbados Economic Recovery and Transformation (BERT) plan, 
aimed at restoring fiscal sustainability, increasing reserves, and unlocking growth potential, which has been effective 
in reducing the country’s debt to 118% in 2022 (IMF, 2023). However, in the context of growing development and 
climate requirements, Barbados’ level of indebtedness inhibits the government’s ability to respond adequately. 
Furthermore, the country’s status as a middle-income economy means that Barbados does not qualify for 
concessionary loans from the World Bank and other Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) owing to a per capita

=== PAGE 37 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 33 
 
 
funding threshold of USD 1,205. This further exacerbates funding gaps for the national response to climate change 
and development.  
Challenge 2: Accessing MDB financing.  
Barriers faced by Barbados in accessing multi-lateral funding due to GDP per capita thresholds are typical of small 
states on the front line of the climate crisis. The averaging effect of measures such as GDP per capita income has 
become increasingly unrepresentative of countries with small populations, as is the case with Barbados. GDP per 
capita also fails to consider that the level of income before a crisis does not capture the fragility and volatility of 
individual or national income, nor does it capture the state's capacity to respond after a disaster. The concept of using 
a threshold as a measure of need is based on the experience of previous generations which were typically smaller 
than the size of the economy - unlike the costs of adaptation to climate change. These factors place SIDS at a 
substantial disadvantage when trying to access funding from MDBs despite there being a clear need in these countries. 
Those funds which are accessed by the Government of Barbados from MDBs generally need to be directed to urgent 
development needs in the country, mostly targeting investments for the public good. According to the Ministry of 
Finance and Economic Affairs, Barbados has taken loans totalling ~USD1.8 billion since 2018, which included funds 
for water infrastructure development, COVID-19 response, public transport, tourism sector development, social 
development and economic recovery. 
Challenge 3: Absence of local appetite for climate finance.  
In addition to barriers in accessing financing from MDBs, global financial architecture also plays a role in 
disadvantaging SIDS like Barbados’ ability to access funds for climate-related projects. Local and regional banks find 
themselves overexposed to local customer risk and have little appetite to extend finance to small customers, especially 
in untraditional finance areas such as renewable energy projects. Furthermore, where lending for climate and mitigation 
projects does exist, this is limited to the most prominent commercial borrowers and there is little investment in 
developing products and standards that would allow finance to reach lower-income households. 
Private financial institutions in Barbados are few with almost all of them being foreign owned resulting in a risk being 
evaluated from a distance. The more distant and theoretical risks are, the more uncertain and higher they appear. The 
result is a more risk-averse lending environment which has been reinforced by a substantial restructuring of 
Government debt in 2018, which resulted in banks head-officed in Barbados making significant losses. Consequently, 
Barbados has seen little appetite from financial institutions to go beyond the traditional bounds of personal mortgages, 
car loans and credit cards.  
The reluctance of Barbados’ institutions to support non-traditional funding practices includes its hesitancy towards 
public-private partnerships (PPPs), which are often useful in attracting private-sector funding to public initiatives like 
climate activities. This remains the case in Barbados even where certainty over public sector revenues exists. As a 
consequence, there are few model agreements and agreed technical specifications that can be applied to fund 
Barbados’ green and climate-related infrastructure.  
The BGB  
In the face of fiscal, multi-lateral, and traditional lending barriers, new financial institutions such as the BGB are required 
to facilitate investment towards Barbados’ climate action in a financially sustainable manner that does not add to the 
Government’s existing fiscal burden. The BGB will act as a commercial lender responding to government incentives in 
climate adaptation and mitigation areas, while crowding in additional funding, including from private and multi-lateral 
sources. The Bank’s lending practices and products, will demonstrate that lending to climate-related projects and low-
income households can be profitable to draw in private lenders. The BGB's shareholders will mandate this focus and 
these priorities in a way that the management of the branches of foreign-owned banks does not; thereby mobilising 
Barbados’ capital markets towards investment in the country’s climate agenda while overcoming the triple barriers of 
the national debt, GDP per capita status and financial institutions.  
The total initial capital requirements of the BGB are determined based on an assessment of the immediate and long-
term needs of the government of Barbados. Initial equity of USD 23.25 million from multiple sources with an additional 
USD 6.75 million subordinated loan from GCF will cover the immediate investment needs of the BGB with USD 5

=== PAGE 38 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 34 
 
 
million for banking infrastructure and the remaining USD 25 million to be used for initial lending activities. This activity 
is forecast to increase to at least USD 5.8 billion over 15 years to meet Barbados’ climate funding gap.  
A 1:1 ratio of GCF to co-finance is expected in the initial investment with the Government of Barbados committing USD 
10 million, other third-party investors at least another USD 5 million and the GCF matching these commitments at USD 
15 million. This will ensure that the GoB and the GCF remain core shareholders in the BGB. Financing from the GCF 
will help the project overcome barriers to accessing concessional finance linked to the convention of focusing on levels 
of debt as a per cent of GDP as the basis of the IMF’s debt sustainability limits or ratings from the credit rating agencies. 
The revolving nature of the BGB will ensure its long-term operation, crowding in additional loan finance from private 
sources to expand the potential impact in the long term. It is anticipated that the GCF investment in the BGB will 
mobilise over USD 5.8 billion in additional finance, providing a ratio of leveraged finance of 7:1 against the initial GCF 
investment, including additional equity raised from third parties. 
Through the GCF investment, the BGB will be the primary investment vehicle for climate projects, partnering with 
government programmes and the private sector to roll out substantial investments in adaptation and mitigation across 
Barbados, and potentially across the broader Caribbean region over time.  
B.6. Exit strategy (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
In addition to supporting the establishment of the fund, the purpose of the GCF's investment is to enable the long-term 
sustainability of BGB. It is recognised that the institution's sustainability depends on the shareholding and governance 
structure, business model, and effectiveness and efficiency of its operations. The exit strategy for the proposed project 
has been considered from two main perspectives — ensuring the long-term sustainability of the BGB and creating an 
exit strategy for GCF’s equity investment.  
BGB Long-term Sustainability 
It is envisioned that the BGB will persist beyond the lifespan of the initial investment period to become a self-sufficient 
and sustainable finance vehicle for Barbados in the long term. To this end, sustainability has been a central design 
consideration for the BGB, including in its governance structure and business model, as well as in the monitoring and 
accountability systems. Key design considerations for the longevity of BGB are discussed below.  
Governance 
The BGB will apply international best practices in terms of corporate governance, with all governance structures having 
been developed in line with the guidelines provided by the Central Bank of Barbados – the regulatory body responsible 
for issuing licenses to all banks in the country. These structures are designed to ensure long-term sustainability and 
transparency in the operation of the bank, and to effectively manage and mitigate risk. The Board, appointed by the 
common shareholders, and the executive management team, appointed by the Board, will be responsible for daily 
operations. The AE, on behalf of the GCF and the Government of Barbados, will be actively involved in monitoring the 
BGB's processes and outcomes to ensure shareholders' interests are represented. These structures will ensure the 
BGB is able to operate independently over the long term. 
Business Model 
The BGB will be a financier that arranges, structures, and lends to climate-responsive projects in Barbados. The need 
for such an institution was identified through a thorough market assessment and consultative process, detailed in 
Annex 2 and 7, respectively. Lending will be wholesale in nature —not lending directly to the public but rather partnering 
with a range of intermediaries, such as the HOPE housing agency, to deliver impactful projects that maximise impact 
while limiting operational and credit risks. BGB will earn income through fees and net interest, with the income potential 
being boosted by a lower cost of capital resulting from its focus on climate- and gender-responsive projects targeting 
low-income households, which will allow the bank to capture funding from impact investors and MDB funding. 
Moreover, BGB will operate as a digital bank, ensuring that the operational costs will be modest. This combination of 
cheap financing, low costs, a range of fees, and net interest income will secure financial sustainability and strength.  
The longevity of BGB has also been considered in the bank’s reinvestment model. The Board will be responsible for 
distributing dividends for common shares based on financial performance, with all undistributed profits being re-

=== PAGE 39 ===
B 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 35 
 
 
 
 
invested into the capital of the BGB. All repayments and repurchases of equity investment will be in the same currency 
as the initial investment.  
The BGB programme considers the bank’s role as a conduit between local financial institutions and the Government 
of Barbados, allowing the BGB to identify market opportunities and provide feedback and data to inform policy 
decisions more effectively. By showing that climate investments are bankable and profitable, disseminating market 
knowledge, and encouraging best practices, the BGB will close the existing climate finance gap — not merely as a tool 
for deploying capital, but playing a crucial role in changing market behaviour, educating key stakeholders, and 
informing future policy goals. This will ensure the continuation of the program's impact beyond the life of the GCF's 
involvement. 
 
Monitoring and Accountability 
Through the active involvement of the Government of Barbados and the AE, the BGB will ensure that policy and 
investment objectives are appropriately translated into investment, risk and monitoring frameworks. BGB shall monitor 
the compliance of the agencies and financing partners with the eligibility criteria and programme requirements of BGB 
and its obligations. A Reporting Framework will be in place and transmitted to all partners. Formalisation of the 
monitoring and accountability structures into the operational systems of BGB during the initial phases of the programme 
inception will ensure they continue beyond the formal monitoring period of the proposed GCF programme. Details on 
the monitoring and evaluation framework are provided in Annex 11. 
GCF Exit Strategy 
At the end of the programme lifecycle, the GCF will have the option to exit its investment in the BGB by selling its 
equity to other interested parties. The BGB management team and the AE will provide assistance to GCF in disposing 
of their interest, particularly in terms of identifying and engaging third parties. The Shareholder's Agreement — which 
will be finalised under Output 1.1 — will include a provision for GCF to exit its position after 15 years.

=== PAGE 40 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 36 
 
 
 FINANCING INFORMATION 
C.1. Total financing  
(a) Requested 
GCF funding  
(i + ii + iii + iv + 
v + vi + vii) 
Total amount 
Currency 
15.5 
million USD ($)  
GCF financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Tenor 
Grace period 
Pricing 
(i) Senior loans 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter % 
(ii) Subordinated  
loans 
Enter amount 
 
 
Enter % 
(iii) Equity 
15.5 
 
 
Sustainable target 
RoE of 6%+   
(iv) Guarantees 
Enter amount 
Enter years 
 
 
(v) 
Reimbursable 
grants 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(vi) Grants 
Enter amount  
 
 
 
(vii) Results-
based payments 
Enter amount 
 
 
 
(b) Co-
financing 
information 
Total amount 
Currency 
15 
million USD ($) 
Name of 
institution 
Financial 
instrument 
Amount 
Currency 
Tenor & 
grace 
Pricing 
Seniority 
Government of 
Barbados 
Equity 
 
10 
million USD 
($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
 
Third Party 
Shareholders 
Equity 
5 
million USD 
($)  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
 
Click here to 
enter text. 
Options 
 
Enter 
amount 
Options  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
 
Click here to 
enter text. 
Options 
 
Enter 
amount 
Options  
Enter years 
Enter years 
Enter% 
Options 
 
(c) Total 
financing 
(c) = (a)+(b) 
Amount 
Currency 
30.5 
million USD ($)  
(d) Other 
financing 
arrangements 
and 
contributions 
(max. 250 
words, 
approximately 
0.5 page) 
In addition to the GCF and GoB equity contributions listed above, the BGB is 
seeking to raise between US$5 million and US$20 million in additional equity from 
third-party investors, ideally targeting US$15 million. Several potential investors 
have already been identified and indicated interest, with discussions underway to 
finalise contributions. These contributions will increase the total equity to between 
US$30 million and US$50 million. 
Following the initial equity contribution, the BGB will raise additional debt finance 
from various sources, targeting a debt-to-equity ratio not exceeding 7:1. The BGB’s 
own balance sheet lending, combined with the crowding in of private investment 
through the issuance of green bonds by the BGB and other instruments, will 
facilitate the mobilization of climate finance of an average of $342 million per 
annum over the course of 15 years.

=== PAGE 41 ===
C 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 37 
 
 
 
C.2. Financing by component  
Please provide an estimate of the total cost per component and output as outlined in section B.3. above and disaggregate by source of financing. More than one co-financing institution 
can fund a single component or output. Provide the summarised cost estimates in the table below and the detailed budget plan as annex 4.  
 
Component 
Output 
Indicative cost 
million USD ($) 
GCF financing 
Co-financing 
Amount 
million USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Amount 
million USD ($) 
Financial 
Instrument 
Name of 
Institutions 
Outcome 1: Innovative 
financial structures operating 
in Barbados to overcome 
barriers to climate finance. 
 
1.1: Blue Green Bank 
(BGB) established  
 
 
5.5 
2.16 
Equity 
3.34 
Equity 
GoB 
3rd Party investors 
 
Outcome 2: Affordable finance 
mobilised for investment in 
priority government initiatives 
targeting low-carbon and 
climate-resilient development 
in Barbados. 
2.1: Blue-green 
investments identified 
and executed in 
Barbados 
25 
13.34 
 
Equity  
7.66 
4 
 
 
Equity 
Equity 
 
 
GoB 
3rd Party investors 
 
 
 
Indicative total cost (million USD) 
30.5 
15.5 
15 
C.3 Capacity building and technology development/transfer (max. 250 words, approximately 0.5 page) 
C.3.1 Does GCF funding finance capacity building activities? 
Yes ☐ No ☒ 
C.3.2. Does GCF funding finance technology development/transfer? 
Yes ☐ No ☒ 
If the project/programme is expected to support capacity building and technology development/transfer, please provide a brief description of these activities and quantify the total requested 
GCF funding amount for these activities, to the extent possible.

=== PAGE 42 ===
D 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 38 
 
 
 EXPECTED PERFORMANCE AGAINST INVESTMENT CRITERIA  
This section refers to the performance of the project/programme against the investment criteria as set out in the GCF’s 
Initial Investment Framework.  
D.1. Impact potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The BGB is expected to yield considerable long-term positive impact, both in terms of mitigation and 
adaptation — with many of the pipeline investments providing cross-cutting benefits. The adaptation impacts 
are expected to predominantly benefit vulnerable groups who otherwise lack access to the funding required 
to adapt to climate change — particularly in terms of access to hurricane-resilient housing as well as 
participation in water conservation initiatives. Given the nature of the bank, the initial pipeline of investments 
is indicative and will likely expand even within the GCF project lifespan — resulting in what can be considered 
conservative estimates of the bank’s impact presented below. While the potential benefits of the initial equity 
investments alone will be considerable, the revolving nature of the bank, combined with the potential to crowd 
in significant private investment to drive transformational projects and the institution's indefinite lifetime, 
means that the ultimate impact potential of BGB could be significantly higher than these conservative 
estimates. The role of the BGB as a ‘dealmaker’ within the existing financial landscape is essential to fill a 
gap in the financial market for the extensive range of potential climate projects that are outside the scope of 
public-sector budgets but require de-risking/securitization to attract private investment. Without this extra 
layer of support, private investment will continue to focus predominantly on collateralized loans targeting 
high-income groups and large businesses, excluding the considerable investment potential from lower-middle 
income groups and small businesses that can be unlocked through the right packaged deals.  
Specific details of the mitigation and adaptation impact potentials are presented below, along with the 
potential for the BGB to contribute to a green recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Mitigation Potential 
The initial BGB pipeline will finance substantial investment in rooftop PV, which will contribute to Barbados’ 
ambitious mitigation goals. Specifically, through the HOPE and SHIFT programmes, BGB finance is expected 
to increase renewable energy generation by 914 MW – exceeding the minimum 100MW of rooftop PV 
generation capacity needed (as identified in Barbados’ IRRP). This will contribute directly to the GCF 
mitigation result area (MRA 1), with an expected emissions reduction over 25 years of 16,736,509 tCO2e. 
Beyond this initial mitigation potential, the long-term finance mobilised by the GCF is expected to further 
contribute to GoB’s mitigation ambitions through potential investments in vehicle-to-grid charging 
infrastructure as well as energy efficiency in homes, small businesses and tourism establishments.  
Adaptation Potential 
In addition to the mitigation potential, the projects supported by the BGB are expected to yield considerable 
adaptation benefits. Under the initial pipeline of projects, the adaptation benefits will focus primarily on 
hurricane-resilient housing and water security. Specifically, both the HOPE and SHIFT initiatives include a 
core focus on hurricane-proof roofs, with HOPE designing resilience into the construction of new homes and 
SHIFT retrofitting existing structures to be hurricane resilient. The decentralisation of energy generation 
through distributed rooftop PV will have additional adaptation benefits in relation to hurricanes33, reducing 
reliance on vulnerable centralised systems – enabling communities to recover faster following an extreme 
event.  
Water security will be increased under both the HOPE programme — through the water recycling initiatives 
being built into the housing estates — and the water conservation initiatives, which will promote water 
conservation practices and water harvesting measures at the household and small business levels. These 
 
33 Hurricanes can withstand Saffir-Simpson Category 3 hurricanes.  Saffir-Simpson Category 3 hurricanes pack 
wind speeds of 130 mph (on a 3-second gust basis, with a return period of 50 years) and possess extensive 
damage potential.

=== PAGE 43 ===
D 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 39 
 
 
water conservation and recycling practices will reduce pressure on already limited freshwater resources in 
Barbados, increasing overall water security.  
The design of the BGB investment criteria is such that it is open to any climate-change-related hazard, 
provided a clear case can be made for the climate change attribution. While the initial pipeline focuses 
predominantly on hurricanes and water scarcity, there is potential for a broader range of climate change 
hazards to be included on a needs basis. 
Beneficiaries 
The project will support a total of 226,000 direct beneficiaries, of which at least 50% will be women. 
Beneficiaries include the most vulnerable groups in the population, such as 10,000 low-income households 
that will benefit from affordable climate-resilient, green homes, as well as 50,000 lower- to middle-income 
households that will be able to access rooftop solar and water conservation measures (Error! Reference s
ource not found., with an expanded table provided in Section 4.1 of Annex 22). 
Table 5. Adaptation beneficiaries 
Pipeline Initiative 
Who Benefits 
Number of beneficiaries 
Assumptions 
Direct 
HOPE Project’s 
climate-resilient 
houses 
Lower-income first-time 
homeowners and their immediate 
families.  
50,000 people 
At least 50% women34 
• 10,000 homes built. 
• 1-2 people per bedroom 
• 50% 3-bedroom houses 
• 50% 2-bedroom houses 
SHIFT Project 
Lower-income households 
receiving climate-resilient roofs 
and de-centralised power 
production. 
176,000 people  
At least 50% women 
• 50,000 roofs made resilient. 
• Average household size of 3.52 
people35 
• 35,200 person overlap with Water 
conservation 
Water Conservation 
Households with increased 
access to water during dry 
periods and improved water-use 
efficiency. 
70,400 
At least 50% women 
• 20,000 homes targeted for water 
conservation.  
• Average household size of 3.52 
people 
• 35,200 person overlap with SHIFT 
Indirect 
Water Conservation 
Population benefiting from 
increased water availability 
resulting from water conservation 
initiatives  
65,200 
Introducing water conservation 
measures will reduce pressures on 
limited groundwater reserves, thereby 
increasing the availability of fresh 
water for domestic use. 
Covid-19 Green Recovery 
Establishing the BGB in Barbados will play a crucial role in supporting a green recovery from the COVID-19 
pandemic. The bank will provide financing and investment opportunities for renewable energy and energy 
efficiency projects, helping to reduce the island's dependence on fossil fuels and mitigate the effects of 
climate change. This, in turn, will create new jobs and stimulate economic growth in the green energy sector. 
Additionally, the bank can leverage private sector capital to maximize its impact, making a green recovery in 
Barbados more accessible and achievable. 
 
 
 
34 Based on gender ration in Barbados (51.5% women) 
35 Based on 2010 census numbers, with a total population at the time of 277,821 and a total of 78,936 dwellings

=== PAGE 44 ===
D 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 40 
 
 
D.2. Paradigm shift potential (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The design of the BGB is based on the idea of transforming the climate finance sector in Barbados to facilitate 
a shift in development pathways towards a focus on climate resilience and low emissions. The intention of 
establishing a new green bank is not merely to add a new source of finance into the mix, but rather to create 
an institution that has the mandate and structures needed to innovate, package and securitise investments 
to transform the market and mobilise finance for climate action at scale. To this end, the role of the BGB as 
a funder and potentially as an arranger has been designed with the primary aim of securitising revenue 
streams and making projects bankable to stimulate significantly greater participation by the national capital 
market. An increase in the number of bankable projects will lead not only to significant climate impacts, but 
also provide a broader catalytic effect in a market that has historically proven risk-averse and resistant to 
innovation. The BGB’s presence and dynamic role in the market will incentivise and create bankable 
opportunities for commercial banks to enlarge their green asset portfolios, as well as provide alternative asset 
classes such as green bonds and affordable green housing. Through its direct participation in the funding of 
Government-promoted climate change-related projects, alongside deploying its expertise to render projects 
bankable, the BGB — with its GoB shareholding — can be perceived as playing the part of a small national 
development bank, established to mobilize resources from third parties for the exclusive benefit of climate 
change mitigation and adaptation purposes.  
 
Progressive access to affordable and sustainable green finance opportunities made possible through the 
intervention of the BGB will create a significant opportunity for investment in climate action. Support for the 
rollout of key national climate change strategies and programmes such as the Roofs to Reefs Programme 
will shift the development pathway of Barbados. By facilitating access to climate finance for lower- and 
middle-income households and small businesses, GCF’s investment in the BGB will open up a significant 
new market. This will, in turn, reduce pressure on constrained public finances, and create the fiscal space for 
the GoB to direct limited concessional and public finance towards public good projects (particularly for 
adaptation) which are not inherently financially viable.  
 
Potential for innovation, scaling up and replication  
The establishment of the BGB will serve to crowd in additional debt and equity finance, thereby extending 
the available capital far beyond the bank’s initial equity investment. Output 1.2 of the programme is 
specifically directed towards such fund-raising, through direct engagement and negotiation with potential 
investors and lenders, by creating the right tools and mechanisms for their participation. As a ‘mission-driven’ 
institution, BGB will endow Barbados with more effective and agile mechanisms to access finance at scale 
and for multiple projects. A programmatic approach of the kind foreseen for the BGB will replace the 
piecemeal, project-by-project approach which is ultimately unsustainable when looking at the ambition of 
Barbados’ NDC. 
 
In addition to the mobilization of new funding, the revolving nature of the BGB will ensure that the investment 
process is maintained beyond the scope of the GCF-supported programme, creating sustained opportunities 
to increase the number of bankable projects through the replication of viable financing models in other 
sectors. The scope for reinvestment is also strengthened through the project’s operational and governance 
arrangements, with shareholder dividends being distributed based on financial performance and all additional 
profits being re-invested into the capital of the BGB. Moreover, the digital nature of the bank will ensure that 
operational costs are kept low, maximising the capital available for reinvestment and ensuring affordability 
while maintaining high standards of financial performance, management and transparency. The total 
investment potential of the bank over 15 years is anticipated to be ~USD 5.8 billion, enabling a 24-fold scaling 
of the initial investment.  
 
A further transformative aspect of the BGB’s operations is its potential to herald a more holistic approach to 
ESG. Given GCF’s core involvement, BGB has been set up to abide by the GCF’s stringent environmental 
and social standards, which when combined with the ‘green’ vocation of the bank, will bring additional value 
by delivering clear and tangible progress in the ESG space and act as a benchmark for the local banking 
sector.

=== PAGE 45 ===
D 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 41 
 
 
While the Barbados climate change project market is deemed sufficient to occupy the operations of the BGB 
in the long term, opportunities also exist for extending the operations of the bank beyond the borders of 
Barbados to support similar initiatives across the broader Caribbean region. Additionally, the successful 
rollout of the BGB would serve as a best practice model for other small, middle-income states on the frontline 
of climate change, facing similar challenges and constraints. Through its central role in championing 
innovative climate solutions on the global stage26, Barbados is well-positioned to demonstrate the viability of 
such a model to other developing states and support the dissemination of best practices.  
D.3. Sustainable development (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
In addition to the primary impacts described in Section D.1 above, the BGB will directly contribute to several 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and is expected to yield several environmental, social and economic 
co-benefits. Details of these are provided below.  
Table 6. Contribution of the project to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
Goal 
Relevant Targets  
Contribution 
SDG 5 – 
Gender Equality 
5.1: End all forms of discrimination against 
all women and girls everywhere. 
The eligibility criteria and frameworks for BGB 
will be gender inclusive and ensure equal access 
to finance for women.  
SDG 6 – Clean 
Water and 
Sanitation 
6.1: By 2030, achieve universal and 
equitable access to safe and affordable 
drinking water for all. 
6.4: By 2030, substantially increase water-
use efficiency across all sectors and ensure 
sustainable withdrawals and supply of 
freshwater to address water scarcity and 
substantially reduce the number of people 
suffering from water scarcity. 
The proposed project will promote water 
conservation and rainwater harvesting initiatives 
that will improve climate-resilient access to water 
for low-income households alongside improving 
water-use efficiency. 
SDG 7 – 
Affordable and 
Clean Energy 
7.1: By 2030, ensure universal access to 
affordable, reliable and modern energy 
services 
7.2: By 2030, increase substantially the 
share of renewable energy in the global 
energy mix 
7.3: By 2030, double the global rate of 
improvement in energy efficiency 
7.a: By 2030, enhance international 
cooperation to facilitate access to clean 
energy research and technology, including 
renewable energy, energy efficiency and 
advanced and cleaner fossil-fuel technology, 
and promote investment in energy 
infrastructure and clean energy technology 
The proposed project will establish sustainable 
and affordable financial mechanisms to mobilise 
finance for the uptake of renewable energy and 
energy-efficient technologies.  
SDG 11 – 
Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities 
11.1: By 2030, ensure access for all to 
adequate, safe and affordable housing and 
basic services and upgrade slums 
11.5: By 2030, significantly reduce the 
number of deaths and the number of people 
affected and substantially decrease the 
direct economic losses relative to global 
The BGB will fund the development of 10,000 
affordable green homes, as well as funding the 
uptake of climate-resilient roofs that will reduce

=== PAGE 46 ===
D 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 42 
 
 
gross domestic product caused by disasters, 
including water-related disasters, with a 
focus on protecting the poor and people in 
vulnerable situations 
the impact of hurricanes36 on vulnerable 
households.  
SDG 13 – 
Climate Action 
13.1: Strengthen resilience and adaptive 
capacity to climate-related hazards and 
natural disasters in all countries 
13.3: Improve education, awareness-raising 
and human and institutional capacity on 
climate change mitigation, adaptation, 
impact reduction and early warning 
 
The BGB will fund green projects that will 
improve the climate resilience of vulnerable 
communities in Barbados. The BGB will also 
serve as a conduit between local financial 
institutions and the Government of Barbados, 
allowing the BGB to identify market opportunities 
and provide feedback and data to inform policy 
decisions more effectively. By showing that 
climate investments are bankable and profitable, 
disseminating market knowledge, and 
encouraging best practices, the BGB will close 
the existing climate finance gap. 
Environmental co-benefits 
• 
Improved air quality: Supporting the transition from fossil fuel-based to renewable energy production 
through rooftop PV will reduce air pollution — including particulate matter, nitrogen oxides, and sulphur 
dioxide, which can cause respiratory problems and contribute to acid rain.  
• 
Reduced water usage: Fossil fuel-based energy production requires large amounts of water for cooling 
and other processes, whereas solar energy sources do not consume water. Therefore, by supporting the 
energy transition, the project will further contribute to water conservation efforts.  
• 
Improved groundwater reserves and quality: Water conservation initiatives will reduce demand on and 
extraction of limited groundwater resources, increasing the availability and quality of water for terrestrial 
and freshwater ecosystems. This will have positive impacts on biodiversity. Moreover, increased 
groundwater reserves will improve the hydraulic pressure of the freshwater lens, helping maintain the 
equilibrium between fresh, brackish and salt water — thereby reducing the threat of saltwater intrusion 
linked to sea-level rise.  
Social and Economic co-benefits 
• 
Living standards: Provision of affordable green housing will help improve the lives of low-income 
households, many of whom are currently paying more for rent in sub-standard housing than for a 
mortgage which could be provided under the HOPE programme.  
• 
Health: Improved air quality resulting from reductions in fossil fuel use will have a positive impact on 
human health, which in turn will have a positive knock-on effect on public health systems. Improved water 
security through water conservation and investment in adapting waste-water systems will further reduce 
potential health impacts of CC, including through the spread of waterborne diseases, especially after 
heavy rainfall events.  
• 
Food security: Eligible projects for the BGB will influence food security in several ways. First, improved 
water security provided through the proposed water conservation and recycling initiatives under the first 
phase of the project pipeline will increase water for agriculture, supporting local food production. This 
includes direct supply for irrigation, as well as indirect supply through reduced pressures on limited 
groundwater reserves. Potential projects under the second phase pipeline could include additional 
support to promote resilient agricultural practices and reduce imports through the promotion of locally 
produced foods.  
• 
Job Creation: The implementation of projects financed by BGB will create employment opportunities for 
Bajans, while also supporting local contractors and suppliers. Programmes such as HOPE have 
 
36 Hurricanes can withstand Saffir-Simpson Category 3 hurricanes.  Saffir-Simpson Category 3 hurricanes pack wind speeds of 130 mph 
(on a 3-second gust basis, with a return period of 50 years) and possess extensive damage potential.

=== PAGE 47 ===
D 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 43 
 
 
significant potential to strengthen employment in the construction sector, including by creating 
opportunities for upskilling young artisans. Moreover, investments directed to small businesses in the 
tourism industry will contribute to job security and creates employment opportunities that can help lift 
vulnerable populations out of poverty.  
• 
Financial security: Access to affordable finance will reduce debt burdens on low- and middle-income 
households who otherwise rely on costly short-term finance to adopt resilience measures or low-
emissions technologies. 
• 
Reduced economic downtime: Building the resilience of the population will reduce economic downtime 
which typically follows extreme events that disrupt transportation networks, damage power and water 
infrastructure, increase maintenance efforts at the household level, as well as disrupting the flow of 
tourists into the country. Reducing this downtime will have a notable benefit to the broader economy. 
• 
Energy transition: Decentralised energy production and private investment reduce financial pressure on 
the government for energy production and the transition to renewables. 
Gender-sensitive development  
The BGB will promote gender parity in the investment approach, incorporating gender mainstreaming into its 
operations, governance structure and investment eligibility criteria, with the goal of advancing equality and 
fighting discrimination. The BGB’s Board, staff, trainees and loan applications will have a reservation of 30%–
50% for women. Moreover, improved access to affordable energy is an essential prerequisite to achieving 
economic growth and poverty reduction. Increased access to non-polluting power for lighting, cooking, and 
other household and productive purposes can have dramatic effects on women’s levels of empowerment, 
education, literacy, nutrition, health, economic opportunities, and involvement in community activities. These 
improvements in women’s lives can, in turn, have significant beneficial consequences for their families and 
communities.37 
D.4. Needs of recipient (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
 
Vulnerability 
Barbados, as a SIDS, is highly exposed to the impacts of climate change. Several climate risks constitute 
significant threats to the country. The North and East coasts of the island are particularly exposed to strong 
wave action and ocean currents. Tropical storms and hurricanes also have considerable impacts on 
livelihoods and infrastructure. Flooding, strong winds and storm surges38 are common, with historical data 
showing that major flooding events occur every 12 years on average. These phenomena can be extremely 
problematic since most of the critical infrastructure and economic activity are in the coastal zone. For 
instance, the Deepwater Harbour — which facilitated 80% of the country’s imports in 2018 — is a key risk 
area due to its vulnerability to coastal hazards. It also handles the largest number of tourists per year in the 
Caribbean (800,000 in 2018). 
It is also worth mentioning that rising sea surface temperatures will have adverse effects on coral reefs, 
causing them to bleach. For Barbados, where foreign exchange earnings are heavily dependent on tourism 
services, such an occurrence will seriously affect the product offerings of the country. Moreover, the loss of 
coral reefs will have a detrimental impact on the natural defences against storm surge during a hurricane. 
The country is also facing serious water issues due to a combination of droughts, floods and rainfall variability 
— exacerbating the challenges of already scarce freshwater resources. Sea level rise and saltwater intrusion 
will also increase salinity, thus affecting the country’s water resources and intruding into aquifers. Changes 
in soil quality are also to be expected with indirect effects on nutrition and well-being due to the impact on 
agriculture and water resources. The existing water infrastructure is also at risk of destruction from extreme 
climate events, which creates a lot of uncertainty around water supply. Water scarcity has historically been a 
major concern in Barbados, with the country ranked 15th in the world. Annual freshwater withdrawals peaked 
 
37 https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/publications/genderengtoolkit.pdf 
38 an abnormal rise of water generated by a storm

=== PAGE 48 ===
D 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 44 
 
 
at over 100% in the late 1990s and early 2000s, according to the World Bank. Addressing infrastructure 
security and making sure it becomes climate-resilient is absolutely fundamental to the country’s future. 
Economic and social development 
Barbados has managed to transform itself from a low-income economy reliant almost solely on sugar 
production to having one of the highest per capita incomes in the Caribbean. With a GDP per capita PPP of 
$13,487 in 2021, Barbados has managed to diversify its economy to become services-driven and rely more 
on tourism as well as financial services. This reliance on tourism was a major factor behind the considerable 
negative economic effects of the Covid-19 pandemic, with a 14% contraction of GDP in 2020. However, the 
Barbadian economy has begun to show signs of recovery, with a GDP growth registered at 11.8% in the first 
quarter of 2022. The tourism sector has been an important driver of this growth. 
The country’s economy is marked by a huge amount of public debt. Typically, a nation saddled with debt 
means that it will have less to invest in its own future. However, efforts by the GoB to manage this debt means 
that the public debt has been gradually decreasing over the past several years – going from 157% of GDP in 
2018 to 131.9% in 2022. It has a debt-to-GDP target of 60% by the 2035/36 fiscal year (Economic Survey of 
Latin America and the Caribbean, 2022). 
The HDI, which measures the country's average achievements in three basic aspects of human development: 
health, knowledge and standard of living, is relatively high: 0.790 - ranked 70th globally and 9th in the LAC 
region, but drops 16.8% when adjusted for inequality. The female HDI (0.799) is higher than the male HDI 
(0.773), creating a GDI of 1.034 – the highest in the LAC region and among the highest in the world. 
Multi-dimensional poverty is low, with 2.5% of the population being multidimensionally poor – the equivalent 
of 7000 people in 2020 (Multidimensional Poverty Index, 2022). There is a narrow job market and a lack of 
job opportunities with an unemployment rate gradually increasing since 2018, reaching 10.41% in 2021. 
Alternative sources of financing 
As mentioned above, Barbados has a considerable amount of public debt, which significantly reduces its field 
of action when it comes to addressing climate mitigation and adaptation issues. Furthermore, given that its 
income status – which is skewed by the small size of the economy and extensive inequality in the distribution 
of wealth and assets — Barbados does not meet the eligibility criteria for concessional loans from many 
lenders, such as Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs). It is also worth mentioning that the local capital 
market has a fairly short history for climate investment with very few local private financial institutions – the 
rest of them being foreign-owned. These banks find themselves exposed to local risk and are often reluctant 
to invest in or lend money to small customers - especially in untraditional, risky or low-profit finance areas 
such as climate projects.  
As a result, available finance is directed to high-income households and focused on collateralised loans, with 
limited opportunity for most vulnerable groups. Loans outside of the primary offerings from banks are 
generally extremely high interest and short tenors, creating a barrier to investments in resilience. There is 
therefore a clear and substantial finance gap that urgently needs to be filled for Barbados to meet its ambitious 
climate objectives and build a sustainable, climate-resilient future for its people. 
D.5. Country ownership (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
The establishment of the BGB has been strongly country driven from its inception – holding support from the 
highest levels of government. The concept of a green bank to transform climate finance in Barbados was first 
proposed by Prime Minister Mia Mottley — born out of an ambition to help Barbados and other Caribbean 
countries meet the targets of their NDCs. To initiate the process, the GoB invited a delegation of GCF officials 
— including the Director of the GCF’s Private Sector Facility, Kavita Sinha, and the Fund’s Investment Officer, 
Tom Bishop — to Barbados for a three-day working visit, during which the green bank with the aim of 
becoming a major institution for financing climate action in the region was proposed and discussed. Since 
this inception, the GoB has remained closely involved in the development process, taking full ownership of

=== PAGE 49 ===
D 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 45 
 
 
the programme. To further promote country ownership, the GoB has ensured full engagement with key 
stakeholders at all stages of development — from the initial workshops with the GCF which were attended 
by numerous financial and development finance agencies as well as other key players in the renewable 
energy sector, through to in-depth consultations during the in-country mission by the project development 
team. This engagement is considered critical, as the success of the bank will be enhanced by developing 
strong partnerships with the financial sector and potential project intermediaries. Details on the stakeholder 
engagement process are presented in Annex 7, along with a detailed stakeholder engagement plan to ensure 
continued engagement throughout the implementation. The project development has also been closely 
monitored by the NDA — in the Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment’s Economic Affairs and 
Investment Division — to ensure that it aligns with the country’s climate action priorities and economic 
strategies. Moreover, because the Government of Barbados will have a vested interest in the bank’s success 
as a junior shareholder, the investment criteria have been designed to support Barbados’ NDC priorities 
ensuring that capital is channelled toward key sectoral priorities and opportunities. 
Relevance to and alignment with existing policies  
The approach of the BGB, along with its proposed pipeline and project eligibility criteria are all aligned with 
the policy and planning landscape in Barbados. This alignment has been a core consideration throughout the 
design process, with the BGB being specifically positioned to fill a niche within the country’s resilience and 
energy transition strategies. Key policies considered in the project are summarised below, with a more 
comprehensive list provided in Section 3.2 of Annex 2: Feasibility Study.  
Table 7. Alignment of the BGB with key national policies, plans and strategies 
Sector 
Policy or Strategy 
Alignment  
Climate and 
sustainable 
development 
Nationally Determined 
Contribution (NDC) - 
Update July 2021 
A core focus of the BGB pipeline is the potential to contribute to Barbados’ 
NDCs. In particular, the BGB will target contributions towards a 95% share of 
renewable energy in the electricity mix, and a 20% increase in energy efficiency 
across all sectors as compared to BAU. 
 
National Climate Change 
Policy (NCCP), 2012 
The policy aims to establish a national process for adaptation to climate change, 
reduce the country's greenhouse gas emissions, design appropriate 
mechanisms to respond to climate change, and move toward renewable energy. 
The BGB, as a government-driven initiative, has been initiated to support the 
government in the implementation of the mechanisms proposed under the 
NCCP.  
Roofs to Reefs 
Programme (R2RP) 
The R2RP is the core resilience strategy for Barbados and provides the vehicle 
through which public investment for adaptation will be directed. The BGB 
pipeline is fully aligned with the ambitions of R2RP and has been positioned to 
fill a specific niche in terms of financing core initiatives that have the potential to 
yield financial returns. This includes the priority objective of making low- and 
middle-income homes more resilient to extreme weather events and their 
impacts, such as possible loss of access to electricity and potable water 
distribution systems; and to increase freshwater storage capacity and water use 
efficiency and reduce emissions through the deployment of distributed 
renewable energy generation.  
Barbados' Sustainable 
Development Policy 
The over-arching goal of this policy is to ensure the optimisation of the quality of 
life for every person by ensuring that economic growth and development do not 
occur to the detriment of our ecological capital.  
Energy 
Integrated Resource and 
Resiliency Plan for 
Barbados, 2021 
The IRRP provides a roadmap and action plan for the energy transition, which 
includes the need for utility-scale solar (180MW by 2030), along with rooftop 
solar (100MW by 2030) and solar thermal energy (60MW by 2030). The plan 
also identifies a number of pilot projects as a key area for budget allocation, 
including li-ion batteries, solar PV, V2G technology embedded electric vehicle 
chargers, and high-power DC vehicle chargers. The BGB will provide finance to 
contribute to these targets, particularly for the rooftop solar components.

=== PAGE 50 ===
D 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 46 
 
 
Barbados Feed-in Tariffs 
for Renewable Energy, 
including Accelerated 
Investment Plan 
The BGB will leverage the Feed-in tariff (FIT) programme to establish innovative 
models, such as those under HOPE and SHIFT to finance the energy transition 
while simultaneously building climate resilience. The pre-existing RER terms 
include the $0.416/kWh rate for solar photovoltaic and the $0.315/kWh rate for 
wind. 
Water 
Barbados Water 
Conservation Plans 
(WCPs) 
The Barbados Water Conservation Plan is a comprehensive strategy for 
managing the country's water resources sustainably. The plan recognizes the 
importance of water as a finite and valuable resource and seeks to ensure its 
sustainable use and protection for present and future generations. The goal of 
the Water Conservation Plan is to ensure the long-term availability and quality of 
water for all the people of Barbados, while protecting the country's natural water 
resources for future generations. The water conservation projects supported by 
BGB will align with the priorities identified in the WCPs 
National Water Reuse 
Policy 
This policy examines current water demand and reuse, challenges and policy 
and legislative instruments in use. It provides a proposed policy to address 
critical issues within the context of national and international policy instruments 
and strategic plans.  
Revised Stormwater 
Management Plan 
Stormwater management systems proposed under the Hope initiative are 
designed in line with the provisions of the national Stormwater Management 
Plan.  
Development 
Planning 
National Strategic Plan 
of Barbados 2006-2025 
The objectives of BGB are aligned with Goal 4 of the National Strategic Plan of 
Barbados: Building a green economy – strengthening the physical infrastructure 
and preserving the environment. In particular, the project aligns with three of the 
core objectives under Goal 4: 
1. 
To promote and facilitate the sustainable use of our renewable resources 
and the wise management of our non-renewable natural resources. 
2. 
To maintain a safe and reliable water supply. 
3. 
To ensure an efficient and reliable energy sector 
Barbados Physical 
Development Plan (PDP) 
2021 
The 2021 Physical Development Plan is based on a vision of sustainable growth 
and development of Barbados. It addresses the critical impacts of climate 
change on Barbados through policies and strategies that enable the people to 
thrive and remain resilient under changing climate conditions. The alignment with 
the PDP is linked to the R2Rp, which operationalises the objectives of the PDP.  
Economic Recovery and 
Transformation (BERT) 
plan 
BERT 2022 succeeds BERT 2018 and lays out the GoB’s economic and 
financial programme for the next four years, focussing on achieving inclusive and 
sustainable growth, while maintaining fiscal and debt sustainability. Pillar 2 of 
BERT’s growth strategy incentivises low- and middle-income housing, with a 
specific focus on resilient housing stock through the HOPE initiative.  
D.6. Efficiency and effectiveness (max`. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
In the context of National fiscal constraints, the design of the BGB as a green merchant bank provides both 
an expedient as well as financially sustainable mechanism for financing Barbados’ climate response 
activities.  
Efficiency 
The institutional design and governance structures of the BGB provide a managed vehicle with well-defined 
mandates that can facilitate risk-taking investments in the form of equity to serve as base capital for the bank. 
The Government of Barbados has committed equity of up to $10 million. Discussions are also currently 
underway with third parties to secure additional equity commitments, including with USAID – from whom the 
project anticipates receiving US$5 million. Other equity commitments are being sought from foundations, 
high-net-worth individuals (HNWIs) and other institutions. This initial investment will be pooled along with the 
GCFs investment of US$15 million with the intention of using $5 million for the BGB’s infrastructure and the 
remaining US$30 million to finance lending activities.

=== PAGE 51 ===
D 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 47 
 
 
As a well-governed, equity-backed institution, the BGB’s design provides a risk-managed entity that can 
attract additional capital from private and public sources, while maintaining its ability to respond to Barbados’ 
climate needs. This is enabled by the BGB’s ability to play host to financing instruments and mechanism, 
such as green bonds and structure finance, that is envisioned to unlock an additional $5.8 billion in 
incremental financing. This not only enables Barbados to unlock additional funding without burdening the 
national finances but provides a level of concessionally that enables the realisation of Barbados’ climate 
response initiatives. To this end, the project is targeting a specific gap in the market for climate finance. While 
many initiatives are already underway, these still do not approach the level of investment required to meet 
the adaptation and mitigation needs of Barbados. It is therefore deemed essential that private finance be 
mobilized to increase investments to enable the government to focus the limited funds available through 
public budgets and international finance to be directed towards public-good projects. For this reason, the 
BGB will specifically not seek to target public-good projects, or those that are financeable through traditional 
commercial options, ensuring that the bank does not crowd out investment from other sources but rather fills 
a specific niche that currently lacks finance. 
Financial viability  
While the BGB will provide access to adequate financing and at the requisite level of concessionally, the 
Banks’ lending activities are intended to be financially sustainable. All BGB’s on-lending activities will be 
profit-generating with the appropriate measures taken to ensure estimated and actual credit losses are kept 
to a minimum. The BGB will also operate as a digital bank ensuring that not only are operation expenditures 
kept to a minimum, but the bank remains agile and responsive to the needs of Barbados. Robust governance 
and risk management structures will oversee the bank’s financial sustainability and ensure stringent 
regulatory compliance.  
Application of Best Practices 
The proposed programme has been designed with a specific focus on best practices, both in terms of the 
design of BGB itself, as well as the pipeline of climate-responsive projects that the bank will finance. A 
summary of the key considerations is provided below, with a more detailed analysis provided in Annex 2: 
Feasibility Study.  
Design of the BGB 
• 
A market assessment was conducted for the Barbadian financial sector, which identified gaps in the 
current market that could be filled by BGB to ensure that the new bank complements the existing 
structures, rather than competing with and potentially crowding out commercial banks.  
• 
An options analysis was conducted to identify the preferable financial mechanism under which the 
programme should operate. The analysis considered six potential financial mechanisms, namely: i) a 
green bank; ii) a public-private partnership (PPP); iii) a credit/guarantee facility; iv) a development fund; 
v) concessional and private equity funds; and vi) a government agency. These mechanisms were 
assessed against five criteria categories (mandate, function, financing, governance and others) and while 
each mechanism aligned with some of the criteria, the green bank was the only option that suited all the 
criteria. Based on this evaluation, the structures and framework of a bank were deemed best suited to 
facilitate the financial disbursement of funds required for the implementation of blue-green projects in 
Barbados. A secondary option analysis was then conducted to assess options for the type of bank, 
including: i) wholesale/investment; ii) commercials and retail; iv) cooperative; and v) credit union. Through 
this assessment, a wholesale bank was deemed best suited to the objectives of the BGB.  
• 
The governance and operational structures of the bank were compiled following an in-depth review of the 
relevant regulatory frameworks – as set out by the Central Bank of Barbados – and international best 
practice to ensure that BGB not only applies to the applicable legal and compliance requirements (as set 
out in Annex 9), but also ensures that each section/department within BGB exercises its mandate and 
operates with an aligned vision and ultimately strives towards a common vision and purpose. This

=== PAGE 52 ===
D 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 48 
 
 
includes consideration of international best practices on the transparency of performance and financial 
statements. 
Project Pipeline 
• 
Detailed investment eligibility criteria have been developed for the BGB to ensure that all supported 
projects align with the strategic objectives of the BGB and its core shareholders — particularly the GoB 
and GCF. These eligibility criteria were developed by assessing the mandate and requirements of the 
BGB s well as best practice standards. The eligibility of initiatives to be funded through the BGB will be 
determined based on four criteria: 
o Climate basis: how does the initiative address a climate change problem, considering both adaptation 
and mitigation benefits? 
o Financial feasibility: is the proposed initiative financially sound, with suitable risk mitigation and 
potential return on investment to be considered bankable? 
o Environmental and Social Safeguards: does the proposed initiative align with the bank’s 
environmental and social safeguard policies and management systems? 
o Gender Responsiveness: Is the proposed initiative gender-responsive, equitable and aligned with the 
bank’s gender action plan? 
• 
The governance structures of the BGB includes an investment committee that will be responsible for 
conducting necessary due diligence on projects to ensure that they are aligned with the BGB’s eligibility 
criteria, and that best practice has been applied in the design of all interventions.

=== PAGE 53 ===
E 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 49 
 
 
 LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
E.1. Project/Programme Focus 
Please indicate whether this proposal is for a mitigation or adaptation project/programme. For cross-cutting proposals, select both. 
☒ Reduced emissions (mitigation) 
☒ Increased resilience (adaptation) 
E.2. GCF Impact level: Paradigm shift potential (max 600 words, approximately 1-2 pages) 
Assessment 
Dimension 
Current state (baseline) 
Potential target scenario 
(Description) 
How the project/programme will contribute 
(Description) 
Description 
Rating 
Scale 
While there has been an increase in the 
issuance of green bonds in Barbados in 
recent years, the capital market for climate 
investments 
remains 
limited. 
These 
limitations on the capital market are 
largely driven by the small number of 
participants in the market, relying largely 
on a relatively small banking sector that 
exhibits considerable market overlap and 
limited portfolio diversification. Experience 
to date has demonstrated that the 
absence of such a market player has left 
banking liquidity underutilised and market 
innovation largely stifled (see ‘Market 
Opportunity’ under Section B.2). The low 
participation of the Barbadian banking 
sector in climate finance can also be 
ascribed to the historical absence of a 
broad, coherent package of measures 
driven by the government to introduce the 
necessary reforms. As a result of these 
baseline factors, there is currently a 
considerable finance shortfall to meet the 
needs of the country. For example, the 
government has estimated that Barbados 
Low 
Progressive access to affordable and 
sustainable green finance opportunities 
made possible through the intervention of 
the BGB will create a significant 
opportunity for investment in climate 
action. The BGB will provide 
opportunities for existing financial 
institutions and capital markets to 
mobilise funds, including through 
conventional bank lending and alternative 
securitisation of revenue streams 
deriving from climate change mitigation 
and adaptation activities, thereby 
creating stronger and more diversified 
capital markets.  
As a partnership which brings together 
public (Government of Barbados), private 
and multilateral institutions at the level of 
equity, the BGB will present a holistic 
view of the market and the potential for 
green financing by ensuring that new 
projects align with Barbados’ NDC 
targets. 
The proposed project will establish a sustainable 
climate finance vehicle — the Blue Green Bank 
(BGB) — in Barbados to stimulate innovation in 
the financial sector with the goal of mobilizing the 
securities and loan markets in order to unlock 
additional 
funding 
for 
climate-responsive 
initiatives. The BGB will be a joint public-private 
sector effort to create an improved financing 
infrastructure that works closely with other 
financing players — such as commercial banks, 
credit unions, pension funds, and insurance 
companies — to crowd in private capital alongside 
public capital, rather than crowding out the 
significant investment opportunities offered by 
these key financial institutions. 
 
By facilitating access to climate finance for lower- 
and 
middle-income 
households 
and 
small 
businesses, GCF’s investment in the BGB will 
open 
up 
a 
significant 
new 
market. 
The 
establishment of the BGB will serve to crowd in 
additional debt and equity finance for climate 
investments, making available extensive capital 
far beyond the bank’s initial equity investment.  
 
As a ‘mission-driven’ institution, BGB will endow 
Barbados 
with 
more 
effective 
and 
agile

=== PAGE 54 ===
E 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 50 
 
 
needs at least $2 billion (40% of GDP) to 
achieve climate resilience. 
mechanisms to access finance at scale and for 
multiple projects. A programmatic approach of the 
kind foreseen for the BGB will replace the 
piecemeal, project-by-project approach which is 
ultimately unsustainable when looking at the 
ambition of Barbados NDC.  
Replicability 
Given the barriers to financing climate-
responsive initiatives in Barbados, 
investments are generally made following 
a piecemeal, project by project approach 
which is ultimately unsustainable when 
looking at the ambition of Barbados NDC. 
Although notable progress has been 
made towards Barbados’ climate 
ambitions, without transformative actions 
in the finance sector, there will continue 
to be a finance gap preventing the 
replication of climate initiatives across the 
country and region.  
Low 
While the Barbados climate change 
project market is deemed sufficient to 
occupy the operations of the BGB in the 
long term, opportunities also exist for 
extending the operations of the bank 
beyond the borders of Barbados to 
support similar initiatives across the 
broader Caribbean region. Additionally, 
the successful rollout of the BGB would 
serve as a best practice model for other 
small, middle-income states on the 
frontline of climate change, facing similar 
challenges and constraints. Through its 
central role in championing innovative 
climate solutions on the global stage, 
Barbados 
is 
well-positioned 
to 
demonstrate the viability of such a model 
to other developing states and support the 
dissemination of best practices.  
 
Once established, the BGB will engage with 
investors, including private investment firms, 
development banks, philanthropic organisations 
and other sources of finance to continue to 
capitalise the bank over the long term. Output 1.2 
of the programme is specifically directed towards 
fund-raising, through direct engagement and 
negotiation with potential investors and lenders, 
by creating the right tools and mechanisms for 
their participation. The bank will target at least a 
7:1 debt-finance to equity ratio, aiming to mobilise 
at least USD 5.8 billion over the next 15 years. 
 
By focusing on climate resilience and adaptation 
for middle to low-income households — including 
a specific focus on women and other highly 
vulnerable groups — the BGB would aim to 
attract more concessional or philanthropic 
providers of capital, expanding the goals of 
climate action in Barbados without the need for 
further injections of money by the Government 
and GCF. This will create long-term scalability in 
the banking sector, with the potential to scale 
beyond Barbados into the broader Caribbean 
region over time (a possible outcome, although 
not directly intended at the inception of the BGB). 
Sustainability 
The generally risk-averse nature of the 
commercial banking sector in Barbados 
and 
the 
resultant 
focus 
only 
on 
collateralised loans generally excludes the 
lower- to middle-income groups from 
accessing adequate finance for climate 
action. This challenge is exacerbated by 
Low 
 
The BGB is designed to become a 
significant institution for practical and 
strategic financing of climate change 
adaptation and mitigation policies and 
measures, supporting the Governments of 
Barbados to achieve national resilience 
and emissions reduction targets. As a 
The BGB governance structures are designed to 
ensure the long-term operation of the bank — 
beyond the scope of the GCF-supported initiative. 
The scope for reinvestment is strengthened 
through the project’s operational and governance 
arrangements, with shareholder dividends being 
distributed based on financial performance and all

=== PAGE 55 ===
E 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 51 
 
 
the limited public resources to support 
these 
groups 
through 
government 
programmes. 
The 
resultant 
under-
representation of this portion of the 
population in terms of sizable investments 
in climate action reduces the overall 
sustainability of development in the 
country. While the policy and planning 
environment in the country actively targets 
inclusive sustainable action, the absence 
of innovative financial options stifles 
sustainable development actions. 
partnership which brings together public 
(Government of Barbados), private and 
multilateral institutions at the level of 
equity, the BGB can present a holistic 
view of the market and the potential for 
green financing by ensuring that new 
projects 
align 
with 
Barbados’ 
NDC 
targets.  
The revolving nature of the BGB will 
ensure that the investment process is 
maintained beyond the scope of the GCF-
supported programme, creating sustained 
opportunities to increase the number of 
bankable projects through the replication 
of viable financing models in other 
sectors. 
additional profits being re-invested into the capital 
of the BGB. Moreover, the digital nature of the 
bank will ensure that operational costs are kept 
low, 
maximising 
the 
capital 
available 
for 
reinvestment and ensuring affordability while 
maintaining 
high 
standards 
of 
financial 
performance, management and transparency.

=== PAGE 56 ===
E 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 52 
 
 
E.3. GCF Outcome level: Reduced emissions and increased resilience (IRMF core indicators 1-4, quantitative indicators)  
GCF Result Area 
IRMF 
Indicator 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final39 
 
MRA1 Energy 
generation and 
access 
 
Core 1: GHG 
emissions reduced, 
avoided or 
removed/sequestered 
• Electricity production  
• Data collected by official 
representatives who 
manage household 
meters (i.e., Barbados 
Light and Power).  
• Implementation reports 
and calculations on the 
estimated energy 
produced.  
2023 baseline: 
721,061 tCO2e  
1,252,280 tCO2e 
reduced emissions 
after 8 years. 
 
16,736,509 tCO2e 
reduced emissions 
after 25 years 
(lifetime) 
6,946,692 tCO2e 
reduced emissions 
after 15 years 
(implementation) 
• 2006 IPCC Guidelines for 
National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories  
• IRRP energy demand 
forecast  
 
Supplementary 1.3: 
Installed renewable 
energy capacity 
• Site visits to capture data 
on the number of solar 
panels per roof and the 
wattage of panels 
installed.  
• Implementation reports. 
Number of panels 
installed, the capacity of 
panels etc.  
2023: 
44 MW  
 
Additional RE 
Generation 
Capacity: 
426 MW (8 years) 
  
Additional RE 
Generation 
Capacity: 
914 MW (15-year 
implementation) 
• According to BLPC and 
sources contained within 
the Feasibility Study, 
renewable energy in 
Barbados is generated 
only from solar PV 
facilities (independently 
and BLPC owned). 
Supplementary 1.4: 
Renewable energy 
generated 
• Site visits to capture data 
on the number of solar 
panels per roof and the 
wattage of panels 
installed.  
• Implementation reports. 
Number of panels 
installed, the capacity of 
panels etc.  
2023: 
68,658 MWh  
 
Additional RE 
Generation 
Capacity: 
922,793 MWh (8 
year) 
Additional RE 
Generation 
Capacity: 
25,756,583 MWh 
(20-year lifetime) 
10,690,583 MWh 
(15-year 
implementation) 
• According to BLPC and 
sources contained within 
the Feasibility Study, 
renewable energy in 
Barbados is generated 
only from solar PV 
facilities (independently 
and BLPC owned). 
 
 
39 The final target means the target at the end of project/programme implementation period. However, for core indicator 1 (GHG emission reduction), please also provide the 
target value at the end of the total lifespan period which is defined as the maximum number of years over which the impacts of the investment are expected to be effective.

=== PAGE 57 ===
E 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 53 
 
 
Core 2: Direct and 
indirect beneficiaries 
reached 
Total 
• Housing surveys 
• Water Conservation 
project records HOPE 
and SHIFT 
implementation records 
0 
Direct: 113,360 
56,680 Female 
56,680 Male 
 
Indirect: 32,500 
16,250 Female 
16,250 Male 
Direct: 226,000 
113,000 Female 
113,000 Male  
 
Indirect: 65,200 
35,200 Female 
35,200 Male 
• Combination of water 
security and infrastructure 
resilience beneficiaries.  
• Water security 
beneficiaries are a subset 
of the infrastructure 
resilience beneficiaries.  
ARA1 
• Housing surveys 
• Water Conservation 
project records 
0 
Direct: 35,000 
17,500 Female 
17,500 Male 
 
Indirect: 32,500 
16,250 Female 
16,250 Male 
Direct: 70,400 
35,200 Female 
35,200 Male 
 
Indirect: 65,200 
35,200 Female 
35,200 Male 
• 20,000 homes targeted for 
water conservation, with 
an average household size 
of 3.52 people. 
• Benefits split with ARA 3 
ARA3 
• Housing surveys 
• HOPE and SHIFT 
implementation records 
0 
Direct: 113,360 
56,680 Female 
56,680 Male 
 
Indirect: 0 
Direct: 226,000 
113,000 Female 
113,000 Male 
 
Indirect: 0 
• 10,000 houses built 
through HOPE, with 4-6 
people per house. 
• 50,000 roofs made 
resilient through SHIFT, 
with an average household 
size of 3.52 people.  
• Benefits of SHIFT and 
water conservation split 
with ARA2 
ARA2 Health, well-
being, food and water 
security 
 
Supplementary 2.3: 
Beneficiaries 
(female/male) with 
more climate-resilient 
water security 
• Household Survey of 
water conservation 
devices 
• Site Inspection 
0 
10,000 households 
35,000 people 
17,500 women 
17,500 men 
20,000 households 
70,400 people 
35,200 women 
35,200 men 
Assume interest from 
households in utilizing and 
maintaining water 
conservation devices 
ARA3 Intrastructure 
and built environment 
 
Core 3: Value of 
physical assets made 
more resilient to the 
effects of climate 
change and/or more 
able to reduce GHG 
emissions 
• SHIFT implementation 
records 
• HOPE Implementation 
Records 
• Insurance valuation 
reports 
0 
USD1.8B 
USD5B 
The average lower- to 
middle-income house is 
valued at US$100,000

=== PAGE 58 ===
E 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 54 
 
 
 
E.4. GCF Outcome level: Enabling environment (IRMF core indicators 5-8 as applicable)  
Core Indicator 
Baseline context 
(description) 
Rating for 
current 
state 
(baseline) 
Target scenario 
(description) 
How the project will 
contribute 
Coverage 
Core indicator 7: Degree 
to which GCF 
Investments contribute 
to market 
development/transformat
ion at the sectoral, local, 
or national level 
While there has been an increase in the 
issuance of green bonds in Barbados in 
recent years, the capital market for climate 
investments remains limited. Although 
international initiatives directed at the 
provision of finance for climate change 
mitigation and adaptation have been present 
for over twenty years, the national 
commercial banking market in small 
economies has, despite possessing 
adequate liquidity, often remained on the 
sidelines, with much of the running being 
made by multilateral institutions such as the 
IADB or the World Bank. These limitations 
on the capital market are largely driven by 
the small number of participants in the 
market, relying largely on a relatively small 
banking sector that exhibits considerable 
market overlap and limited portfolio 
diversification. While the banks operate 
legally as local subsidiaries subject to local 
regulation, the banks are managed and 
regulated from abroad, which influences their 
operations and appetite for risk in a 
significant way. Consequently, the banks 
operating in Barbados are largely risk-
averse. This risk aversion is reinforced by an 
international bank de-risking process initially 
spurred by global anti-money laundering 
efforts. Perceptions of risk and the resulting 
enhanced due diligence have raised the cost 
low 
The existing financial 
institutions and capital markets 
are supported to mobilise 
funds, whether through 
conventional bank lending or 
alternative securitisation of 
revenue streams deriving from 
climate change mitigation and 
adaptation activities, thereby 
creating stronger and more 
diversified capital markets. 
This will unlock access to 
finance for low- to middle-
income households and small 
businesses in the interests of 
wider national economic and 
social development.  
 
The proposed project will 
establish a sustainable climate 
finance vehicle — the Blue 
Green Bank (BGB) — in 
Barbados to stimulate 
innovation in the financial 
sector with the goal of 
mobilizing the securities and 
loan markets in order to unlock 
additional funding for climate-
responsive initiatives. The 
BGB will create an improved 
financing infrastructure that 
works closely with other 
financing players — such as 
commercial banks, credit 
unions, pension funds, and 
insurance companies — to 
crowd in private capital 
alongside public capital, rather 
than crowding out the 
significant investment 
opportunities offered by these 
key financial institutions.  
As a partnership which brings 
together public, private and 
multilateral institutions at the 
level of equity, the BGB can 
present a holistic view of the 
market and the potential for 
green financing by ensuring 
National 
level (one 
country)

=== PAGE 59 ===
E 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 55 
 
 
of banking and reduced the attractiveness of 
small jurisdictions for international banks. As 
a result, market innovation is largely stifled, 
leaving banking liquidity underutilised. Aside 
from a certain institutional prudence 
described earlier, the low participation of the 
Barbadian banking sector in activities of this 
kind can also be ascribed to the historical 
absence of a broad, coherent package of 
measures driven by the government to 
introduce the necessary reforms. 
that new projects align with 
Barbados’ NDC targets. This 
will ensure that all parties 
value and recognise the 
financing potential of such 
investments driven by the local 
government policy via a 
regulatory regime for the 
promotion of climate resilience 
and transition to low-carbon 
futures.  
Core indicator 8: Degree 
to which GCF 
investments contribute 
to effective knowledge 
generation and learning 
processes, and use of 
good practices, 
methodologies and 
standards 
The packaging of climate investments with 
other complementary initiatives has been 
identified as an innovative solution for the 
financing of what may otherwise appear as 
un-bankable initiatives when viewed in 
isolation. However, commercial banks in 
Barbados have a limited understanding of 
the opportunities for packaging initiatives. 
The role of packing initiatives to increase 
bankability extends to the potential of 
leveraging economies of scale — for 
example through bulk procurement. This is 
particularly important for SIDSs, where 
emerging technologies generally need to be 
imported, often at high costs. Bulk 
procurement of such technologies can 
significantly decrease costs and increase 
potential returns; however commercial banks 
lack the capacity to initiate and operate the 
schemes necessary to manage bulk 
procurement. 
medium 
The finance sector in 
Barbados has a strong 
knowledge base for packaging 
climate investments to 
strengthen the capital market. 
Commercial banks, alongside 
the GoB, are adopting best 
practices generated through 
BGB-supported initiatives to 
inform investment and policy 
decisions, and to identify 
opportunities for leveraging 
finance through innovative 
packaged deals. 
The BGB will serve as a 
conduit between local financial 
institutions and the 
Government of Barbados, 
allowing the BGB to identify 
market opportunities and 
provide feedback and data to 
inform policy decisions more 
effectively. By showing that 
climate investments are 
bankable and profitable, 
disseminating market 
knowledge, and encouraging 
best practices, the BGB will 
close the existing climate 
finance gap — not merely as a 
tool for deploying capital, but 
playing a crucial role in 
changing market behaviour, 
educating key stakeholders, 
and informing future policy 
goals. 
National 
level (one 
country)

=== PAGE 60 ===
E 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 56 
 
 
 
E.5. Project/programme-specific indicators (project outcomes and outputs) 
Project/programme results  
(outcomes/ outputs)  
 
Project/programme-
specific Indicator 
 
Means of Verification 
(MoV) 
Baseline 
Target 
Assumptions / Note 
Mid-term 
Final 
Outcome 1: Innovative financial 
structures operating in 
Barbados to overcome barriers 
to climate finance 
Type of financial 
instruments/products on 
offer from the BGB 
targeting climate 
investment. 
• BGB governance and 
operations policy 
documents 
 
No financial 
instruments/product
s are available from 
BGB 
BGB offers loan 
finance 
BGB offers loan 
finance, 
guarantees and 
other securities 
and financial 
products  
The BGB is able to strengthen 
the capital market and expand its 
financial offerings over time.  
Amount of additional 
funding for future 
pipeline projects 
unlocked, managed and 
maintained by BGB  
• Official BGB Records 
• Audit documents 
No Finance 
unlocked by BGB 
Year 8: $48 
million 
 
Debt-equity ratio 
of 7:1 
 
CET1 12.5% 
threshold 
Year 15: $179 
million 
 
Debt-equity ratio 
of 7:1 
 
CET1 12.5% 
threshold 
BGB has a process in place to 
manage and maintain funds 
 
BGB undertakes the process to 
manage and maintain funds 
 
Capital isn't spent on other 
investments 
Output 1.1: Blue Green Bank 
(BGB) established and 
capitalised 
Operational status of the 
Blue-green Bank  
• Regulatory approval 
documents from the 
regulator 
• Company registration 
documents 
• BGB online platform 
BGB not yet 
incorporated or 
licensed by a 
competent 
regulator 
BGB is 
incorporated with 
CAIPO and 
licensed by the 
regulator. 
BGB digital 
platform 
developed and 
operational. 
BGB is 
incorporated with 
CAIPO and 
licensed by the 
regulator. 
BGB digital 
platform 
developed and 
operational. 
The BGB receives the necessary 
regulatory approval and licenses 
to operate as a wholesale bank 
in Barbados. 
Outcome 2: Affordable finance 
crowded in and mobilised for 
investment in priority 
government initiatives targeting 
low-carbon and climate-resilient 
development in Barbados 
Value of finance 
mobilised for investment 
in priority government 
initiatives targeting low-
carbon and climate-
resilient development in 
Barbados 
• Official BGB Records 
• Audit documents 
0 
USD1.47 B 
investment 
mobilised by 
year 8 
USD 5.8 B 
investment 
mobilised by 
Year 15 
The BGB is able to attract 
suitable funding to adequately 
capitalise the bank.  
Ratio of mitigation and 
projects implemented 
• 
Investment Committee 
records 
• 
Official BGB Records 
• 
Audit documents 
No projects funded 
70:30 climate 
mitigation vs 
adaptation 
projects  
50:50 climate 
mitigation vs 
adaptation

=== PAGE 61 ===
E 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 57 
 
 
Number of investments 
made in energy access 
and power generation 
(EA&PG) projects, 
health and well-being 
and food and water 
security projects, and 
infrastructure and built 
environment projects 
• 
Investment Committee 
records 
• 
Official BGB Records 
• 
Audit documents 
0 
At least 1 
EA&PG project 
At least 1 water 
security project 
At least 2 
housing projects 
 
At least 1 
EA&PG project 
At least 1 water 
security project 
At least 2 
housing projects 
 
Money received by lower-income 
groups and small businesses is 
spent on appropriate projects. 
 
Projects are successfully 
developed and implemented. 
Output 2.1: Blue-green 
investments identified and 
executed in Barbados 
Number of people living 
in hurricane-resilient 
houses, disaggregated 
by gender, built as part 
of the HOPE programme 
• Property transfer deeds 
and HOPE records 
• Construction reports 
detailing hurricane-proof 
designs 
0 
25,000 people 
12,500 women 
12,500 men 
In a total of 
5,000 homes 
50,000 people 
25,000 women 
25,000 men  
In a total of 
10,000 homes 
Houses accommodate 2 people 
per bedroom. 
Number of houses 
upgraded with 
hurricane-resilient 
roofing through the 
SHIFT programme 
• SHIFT Construction 
reports detailing 
hurricane-proof roofing 
design for retrofitted 
housing 
0 
25,000 
hurricane-
resilient 
upgraded roofs 
50,000 
hurricane-
resilient 
upgraded roofs 
Retrofitting houses with 
hurricane straps and other 
structural enhancements will 
adequately strengthen buildings 
to withstand hurricane-force 
winds.  
Number of households 
with water conservation 
devices installed funded 
by the BGB 
• Site inspections 
• Household Survey 
0 
10,000 
households 
20,000 
households 
The public is suitably sensitised 
to the need for water demand 
management and willing to adopt 
water conservation practices.  
Volume of water storage 
made available through 
rainwater harvesting 
tanks 
• Site inspections 
• Installation reports 
0 
2,000,000 L 
4,000,000 L 
Each home targeted for water 
conservation received a 2,000 L 
rainwater tank 
Project/programme co-benefit indicators 
Co-benefit 1. Reduction in air 
pollution and its associated 
impacts on public health 
Change in the 
concentration of specific 
air pollutants such as 
sulfur dioxide (SO2), 
nitrogen oxides (NOx), 
and particulate matter 
(PM) in the atmosphere. 
• Air quality sampling 
• Government records 
• Hospital records of 
respiratory illness-related 
air pollution.  
Levels of PM2.5 in 
2017 were 23 
micrograms per 
cubic meter. 
TBD at project 
inception 
TBD at project 
inception  
Increasing clean energy 
production leads to a decrease 
in production from burning fossil 
fuels through an energy 
transition, as opposed to adding 
to the total energy production.  
There will be no other significant 
polluting factors associated with 
the installation of clean energy 
systems.

=== PAGE 62 ===
E 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 58 
 
 
Co-benefit 2. Gender 
considerations integrated into 
climate finance to support that 
support women-headed 
households and women-owned 
businesses to adapt to climate 
change and/or adopt low-carbon 
solutions 
Percentage of projects 
funded by the BGB that 
demonstrate specific 
gender considerations 
and create 
empowerment 
opportunities for women 
to invest in climate 
action.  
• Gender action plans 
(GAPs) for BGB-supported 
projects 
• Monitoring reports for the 
GAPs 
0 
100% 
100% 
Effective sensitization and 
training within the BGB to design 
products that are gender-
responsive. 
Intermediaries actively 
implement gender-responsive 
actions identified in their GAPs.  
Women are actively engaged by 
intermediaries and take up 
finance options made available.  
  
Co-benefit 3. Improved 
groundwater reserves and 
quality 
Concentration of 
groundwater pollutants 
and salinity 
• Water quality monitoring at 
pump stations 
TBD at project 
inception 
TBD at project 
inception 
TBD at project 
inception 
Increasing water conservation 
efforts will reduce extractive 
pressures on groundwater 
resources, thereby increasing 
freshwater reserves, diluting 
pollutants and reducing saltwater 
infiltration.  
Co-benefit 4. Job creation in the 
renewable energy and resilient 
housing sectors.  
Number of new jobs 
created for climate-
resilient construction 
and RE installation and 
maintenance.  
• Employment records for 
service providers 
0 
TBD at project 
inception 
TBD at project 
inception 
Increased uptake of RE and 
resilient construction will create 
increased demand for services 
and thereby lead to job creation.  
Co-benefit 5. Accelerated 
Energy transition.  
Change in the uptake 
rate of rooftop solar on 
private residents and 
small businesses 
• BLPC records of offtake 
agreements.  
TBD at project 
inception 
TBD at project 
inception 
TBD at project 
inception 
Increase accessible finance for 
lower- to middle-income 
households will increase the 
uptake of RE solutions, thereby 
accelerating the energy 
transition in Barbados. 
Co-benefit 6: Increased Energy 
Efficiency in Households 
Supplementary 1.1: 
Annual energy savings 
• Aligned with CDM 
methodology AMS-
III.AE. 
• Post-completion 
inspection. 
• Household energy 
consumption data 
0 
404 tCO2e 
mitigated 
2 273 tCO2e 
mitigated 
Household energy consumption 
estimated at 41 kWh per month 
on average. Electricity savings 
due to natural lighting, 
ventilation, and access to real-
time consumption data estimated 
at 4.66% compared to the 
baseline. 
E.6. Project/programme activities and deliverables  
Activities 
Description 
Sub-activities 
Deliverables

=== PAGE 63 ===
E 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 59 
 
 
Activity 1.1.1: Incorporate the 
Blue Green Bank 
The BGB will be incorporated as a company 
under the Barbados Companies Act, CAP308, 
2002. The incorporation will be done through an 
application to the Corporate Affairs and 
Intellectual Property Office (CAIPO).  
This Activity will be executed by PCA, together 
with GCF BGB Holdings and Pegasus BGB 
Holdings GP. 
Sub-activity 1.1.1.1. Draft incorporation 
documents 
Sub-activity 1.1.1.2. Submit documents to the 
Corporate Affairs and Intellectual Property Office 
(CAIPO) 
Registration documents for the 
BGB compliant with the 
Barbados Companies Act, 
CAP308, 2002 
Activity 1.1.2: Formalise 
shareholder term sheets and 
agreements for capitalisation 
Shareholders committing equity to BGB will be 
formally onboarded. The processes will include 
the finalisation and formalisation of the 
shareholder term sheets as well as finalising 
agreements for the capitalisation of the bank.  
This Activity will be executed by PCA, together 
with GCF BGB Holdings and Pegasus BGB 
Holdings GP. 
Sub-activity 1.1.2.1. Engage with equity 
shareholders to finalise the terms of the 
shareholder agreement and contributions to 
capitalisation. 
Sub-activity 1.1.2.2. Shareholder agreement 
negotiated and executed. 
Sub-activity 1.1.2.3. BGB is capitalised as per 
the terms of the shareholder agreement. 
Signed agreements with all 
shareholders.  
Activity 1.1.3: Apply for 
regulatory approval from 
regulators to operate as a Bank 
Once registered as a company, the BGB will be 
licenced as a merchant bank with the appropriate 
regulator, providing the necessary regulatory 
approval to operate as a bank in Barbados. 
This Activity will be executed by BGB. 
Sub-activity 1.1.3.1. Prepare necessary 
documentation for submission to the regulator. 
Sub-activity 1.1.3.2. Submit an application for 
regulatory approval. 
Regulatory approval certificate 
from the Central Bank of 
Barbados 
Activity 1.1.4: Hire a 
management team and appoint 
a board 
The BGB recruit experienced professionals with a 
strong track record of managing operational risks 
and financial risks to form the management team 
of the BGB. A board of between 5 and 7 members 
will be appointed, ensuring compositional 
alignment with the guidelines provided by the 
CBB. 
This Activity will be executed by BGB. 
Sub-activity 1.1.4.1. Finalise ToRs for core 
positions and advertise.  
Sub-activity 1.1.4.2. Engage with shareholders 
to select suitable Board members 
Sub-activity 1.1.4.3. Formally appoint board 
members 
• 
Signed employment 
contracts for all 
management positions. 
• 
Signed agreements with 
all board members 
Activity 1.1.5: Finalise 
Governance and Operational 
Policies 
Building on the draft policy recommendations 
developed during project preparation, the BGB’s 
management team will review and finalise all 
governance and operational policies. This 
includes all policies identified under the Legal and 
Policy review to ensure compliance with 
regulatory processes. The board will be 
responsible for the final sign-off and adoption of 
all policies.  
Sub-activity 1.1.5.1. Review draft policy 
recommendations developed during project 
preparation. 
Sub-activity 1.1.5.2. Update and finalise all 
governance and operational policies, getting 
final approval from the board 
• 
Corporate Governance 
Policy  
• 
Risk Management Policy 
• 
Investment Policy 
• 
Loan Policy 
• 
Asset/liability management 
policy 
• 
AML/CFT policy 
• 
Code of Conduct

=== PAGE 64 ===
E 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 60 
 
 
This Activity will be executed by BGB. 
• 
Conflict of Interest Policy 
• 
ESG policy. 
• 
FACTA policy. 
 
Activity 1.1.6: Build the technical 
and operational platform for the 
launch of the bank 
As a digital bank, the BGB will require a robust 
technical platform for its operation. Professional 
services will be procured to work alongside the 
BGB management team to develop the technical 
platform and train all staff on its operation. Once 
operational, the BGB will be publicly launched.  
This Activity will be executed by BGB. 
Sub-activity 1.1.6.1. Procure the services of a 
suitable provider to develop the digital platform 
for the operation of the bank. 
Sub-activity 1.1.6.2. Launch the platform and 
train staff on its operation. 
Sub-activity 1.1.6.3. Publicly launch the bank 
Digital operational platform for 
BGB 
Activity 1.1.7: Create tools and 
mechanisms to increase 
significantly new private 
investment through participation 
and monitoring 
The bank will use the information generated 
through Activity 1.2.1 to structure and package 
financial products that address investor concerns 
and unlock the capacities of the local capital 
market. Through this process, the project will 
develop a variety of products, tools and 
mechanisms for non-governmental financing of 
investments, as well as negotiate with potential 
investors to co-develop packages that will 
mobilise private finance for eligible projects. 
This Activity will be executed by BGB. 
Sub-activity 1.2.2.1. Develop suitable tools for 
attracting investment based on 
recommendations from 1.2.1. 
Sub-activity 1.2.2.2. Draft legal structure 
templates for investor agreements on the 
financial tools and mechanisms developed.  
• 
Legal structure templates 
for investor agreements 
Activity 2.1.1: Engage with 
potential investors to negotiate, 
structure and package financial 
products which take account of 
investor concerns and facilitate 
investments into eligible projects 
The BGB Management team will actively engage 
with potential investors to identify specific needs, 
concerns and barriers to investment. This 
information will inform bank operations to enhance 
the role of BGB as an arranger in the financial 
sector. The BGB will then structure and package 
financial products to crowd in investment for 
eligible projects. The BGB will negotiate terms 
with investors and enter agreements for 
investments using the tools/mechanisms 
developed under Activity 1.2.2. 
This Activity will be executed by BGB. 
Sub-activity 2.1.1.1. Host engagement 
workshops with potential investors 
Sub-activity 2.1.1.2. Hold bilateral discussions 
with individual investors to identify specific 
needs in the market.  
Sub-activity 2.1.1.3. Negotiate agreements with 
investors to secure funding for eligible projects 
Sub-activity 2.1.1.4. Package deals are based 
on agreed terms. 
Sub-activity 2.1.1.5. Sign funding agreements 
with investors 
• 
Funding agreements 
signed with investors 
Activity 2.1.2: Partner with 
government programmes and 
local intermediaries to identify 
The BGB investment teams will engage with 
government programmes and local intermediaries 
to identify eligible climate projects for investment 
by the bank. These efforts will initially focus on the 
Sub-activity 2.1.2.1. Engage with HOPE, SHIFT 
and BWA to confirm project pipelines and 
timelines. 
• 
Published call for 
proposals. 
• 
Refined pipeline of eligible 
projects

=== PAGE 65 ===
E 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 61 
 
 
eligible climate projects for 
investment 
three priority pipeline initiatives with HOPE, SHIFT 
and BWA, but will eventually branch out to identify 
additional opportunities. A key role of BGB in this 
process will be as a dealmaker, actively seeking 
opportunities to package deals that improve the 
bankability of projects.  
This Activity will be executed by BGB. 
Sub-activity 2.1.2.2. Engage with government 
agencies to identify additional eligible 
opportunities for investment.  
Sub-activity 2.1.2.3. Release a call for 
applications for eligible projects. 
Sub-activity 2.1.2.4. Screen all projects against 
the BGB eligibility criteria and conduct 
necessary due diligence.  
Activity 2.1.3: Structure optimum 
solutions by mitigating risks and 
ensuring financial feasibility 
Once opportunities are identified, the BGB 
investment teams will engage with intermediaries 
to structure solutions to optimise their bankability. 
This process will start with HOPE, where the 
model is already in an advanced stage – looking 
for opportunities to strengthen the existing model 
to maximise the benefit offered by BGB over 
alternative sources. This will be followed by 
firming up arrangements for SHIFT, and finally 
taking a broader deal-maker role for water 
conservation initiatives with BWA as an 
intermediary partner.  
In phase 2, the BGB will branch out beyond these 
initial pipeline initiatives, seeking opportunities to 
strengthen the capital market and securitise 
investments for a broader range of climate 
adaptation and mitigation options.  
This Activity will be executed by BGB. 
Sub-activity 2.1.3.1. Engage with HOPE Inc to 
package a deal for the financing of hurricane-
resilient housing estates, funded through feed-in 
tariffs for rooftop PV. 
Sub-activity 2.1.3.2. Engage with the SHIFT 
programme team to progress the concept and 
package a deal to finance the retrofitting of 
houses for hurricane resilience funded through 
feed-in tariffs for rooftop PV 
Sub-activity 2.1.3.3. Engage with BWA to 
identify and package options for the installation 
of water conservation and harvesting devices 
and infrastructure on residential homes and 
small businesses, financed through levies 
placed on utility bills and offset for end-users by 
water savings.  
Sub-activity 2.1.3.4. Identify opportunities for 
expanding the financial offerings of BGB, 
including through the issuance of guarantees 
and green bonds. 
• 
Packaged deals with 
HOPE, SHIFT and BWA 
• 
Mechanisms for packaging 
future projects 
• 
Green bonds issued 
and/or traded. 
 
Activity 2.1.4: Finance projects 
through securitisation and other 
means to upscale climate 
investments 
Once deals are identified and packaged, BGB will 
mobilise funds to finance eligible and approved 
projects. Initial agreements will be made with 
HOPE, which provides a ready-to-finance project 
model to kickstart bank operations, followed by 
SHIFT. 
This Activity will be executed by BGB.  
Sub-activity 2.1.4.1. Sign loan agreements with 
HOPE and SHIFT 
Sub-activity 2.1.4.2. Release funds in line with 
the provisions made in each agreement under 
2.1.4.1. 
Sub-activity 2.1.4.3. Sign loan agreements with 
additional eligible intermediaries. 
Sub-activity 2.1.4.4. Release funds in line with 
the provisions made in each agreement under 
2.1.4.3.  
• 
Loan agreements signed 
with HOPE, SHIFT and 
BWA

=== PAGE 66 ===
E 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 62 
 
 
Activity 2.1.5: Manage, monitor 
and report on investments 
The BGB management team will take 
responsibility for actively managing the accounts 
of all financed projects, including through regular 
monitoring and reporting on investments.  
This Activity will be executed by BGB. 
Sub-activity 2.1.5.1. Provide active risk 
management on the loan portfolio. 
Sub-activity 2.1.5.2. Provide support to 
borrowers to develop suitable reporting 
frameworks. 
Sub-activity 2.1.5.3. Monitor and prepare 
reporting documents on the performance of 
investments, ESG and climate performance.  
Sub-activity 2.1.5.4. 
• 
Reporting frameworks for 
all borrowers 
• 
Quarterly monitoring 
reports 
E.7. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation arrangements (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Monitoring 
The M&E structure for the BGB has been developed on two levels, targeting the GCF-supported project Outcome and Output key performance indicators 
(KPIs; listed above) and the broader bank performance, respectively. The performance monitoring will be conducted by the BGB’s dedicated M&E officer 
with close oversight from Pegasus, with the GCF-supported project KPIs being monitored during the implementation period as a subset of the broader 
performance monitoring of the BGB operations over the long term. The responsibilities of the M&E officer will include: 
• 
Data collection and performance measurement. 
o The M&E officer will work closely with each project intermediary, to aggregate data on the non-financial fund metrics obtained directly from the 
intermediaries. This will include data to support the development of site-specific baselines and aggregated investee business plans pertaining to 
market share, sales, and economic activity in the sector. Additional data will be periodically and systematically aggregated during implementation 
relating to production, sales volumes and value, human resources, among others.  
o Period site visits will be conducted to assess and verify the results presented by the intermediaries.  
o When appropriate and deemed necessary, external consultants may support the data collection and measurement process.  
• 
Performance assessment and recommending corrective actions: Based on the predefined output and outcome targets and metrics, corrective actions 
may be defined by engaging with the intermediary.  
• 
Reporting: Performance against the Outcome and Output KPIs are reported to the GCF via the AE annually. 
 
The monitoring and reporting on the Outcome and Output KPIs will be integrated into the broader performance monitoring system for BGB. This M&E system 
for BGB will be validated and finalised by the BGB Investment Committees during the bank’s inception, and will be continually refined as the bank's operations 
progress. The BGB Board will also work with the M&E Officer to evaluate the causal relationships among the project indicators and results to understand the 
overall effectiveness of the monitoring system and refine it as needed.  
 
Evaluation 
The project performance will be independently evaluated against the Outcome and Output KPIs at the mid-term and final stages of the project implementation 
period, specifically in years 8 and 15. These evaluations will be conducted by an independent evaluation specialist, under the oversight of Pegasus. 
 
Financial Reporting

=== PAGE 67 ===
E 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 63 
 
 
 
The BGB Management, under the oversight of Pegasus, will provide financial information to the BGB’s partners each quarter, along with a quarterly report 
that summarizes material developments of the Bank. Pegasus has established valuation processes and procedures in accordance with US GAAP and fair 
values for the underlying portfolio investments are done in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (ACS) 820-10 on a semi-annual basis on June 
30th and December 31st.

=== PAGE 68 ===
F 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 64 
 
 
 RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
F.1. Risk factors and mitigations measures (max. 3 pages)  
Selected Risk Factor 1 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Credit 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
There are risks that interest rates rise, and economic activity slows, making it hard to raise social impact investments 
or to find climate-related assets. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The BGB will mitigate these risks firstly by reducing exposure to the interest rate and economic cycles through long-
term contracts not unusual in power purchase agreements around renewables. Moreover, initially, the focus will be on 
government-supported affordable housing and water-related projects, which will also be, if not entirely so, less sensitive 
to market risks. 
Selected Risk Factor 2 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Credit 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
Retail financial institutions have to assess individual credit risks or even the chance that small and medium enterprises 
cannot pay their financial obligations.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Credit risks in the initial pipeline are reduced by focusing on income streams from the private power utility (Emera, a 
highly rated Canadian firm) and water rates and not directly from individuals, and by writing contracts so that these 
credit risks are not mediated through individual households. Under this model, operational risks behind the assessment 
of credit risks also will be reduced. 
Selected Risk Factor 3 
 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Credit 
Low 
High 
Description 
A potential risk is that a mismatch between the term periods of assets and liabilities leads to a shortfall of structural 
liquidity that may result in the bank being unable to honour its funding liabilities.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Liquidity risks will be managed low because the BGB will be funded by patient capital and long-term social impact 
investors and not by overnight deposits or short-term money markets. This is less speculative than it may be elsewhere. 
Barbados is already working closely with US-based The Nature Conservancy (TNC) on long-term debt for marine 
conservation and through this has become exposed to and familiar with long-term social impact investors. Moreover, 
the assets of the BGB and predictable income from the private electricity and public water utility companies could be 
securitised into tradeable and marketable securities, increasing the liquidity of the assets on the balance sheet. 
Selected Risk Factor 4 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Low 
Medium 
Description

=== PAGE 69 ===
F 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 65 
 
 
Potential risk has been identified linked to the operational structures of the BGB. This includes potentially high 
operational costs, which reduce the financial viability of the bank, and inexperience of staff in conducting business in 
a newly formed bank, potentially constraining the banks’ ability to identify and package suitable deals.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Operational risks will be managed low by establishing the institution as a digital, wholesale institution and not a retail 
brick-and-mortar firm. The small number of counterparties will also keep operational risks low. And the intention is to 
recruit experienced professionals with a strong track record of managing operational risks and financial risks. 
Selected Risk Factor 5 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Credit 
Low 
Medium 
Description 
A lack of interest from donors and funders to invest in a new programme due to economic and social uncertainty 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
Tracking the economic climate and potential investors’ appetite for investment will be crucial for the executive director. 
This will be reported to the Bank’s shareholders.  
Engagement with donors and financiers to gauge their appetite and engage with financiers to secure funding 
commitments (or statements of intent) for the establishment and operations of the Bank.  
Selected Risk Factor 6 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Credit 
Low 
Select 
Description 
The Bank is unable to establish financial sustainability over the long term due to a slow project pipeline development, 
or delays from an intermediary in implementing the pipeline projects.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Bank’s long-term financial plans are being devised for various sources of future funding, including financing from 
private-sector investors, and multilateral and relevant government agencies. The Bank will aim to make a sound case 
for investment that is attractive to and targeted at different financial audiences. Moreover, the Bank will scope a more 
concrete and committed project pipeline of additional projects that will benefit Barbados as one of its formative steps 
to establishment once operational. The diversification of the pipeline over time will further mitigate risks of individual 
projects slowing the rollout of investments, while rigorous due-diligence processes during project formulation will ensure 
that the BGB engages intermediaries who have adequate systems in place to streamline investments and meet impact 
targets.  
Selected Risk Factor 7 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Reputational 
Low 
High 
Description 
The Bank’s credibility and reputation are negatively impacted by errors and omissions in reporting; and/or a lack of 
results/realization of goals. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Bank’s operation processes will be continually enhanced – both at inception and throughout operation), ensuring 
effective checks and balances are in place to mitigate the risks of errors and omissions. Similarly, these changes create 
focus and increase the chance of realizing the timely impact. Realistic, yet meaningful objectives will also be established 
to mitigate the risk of failure. 
Selected Risk Factor 8 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Reputational 
Medium 
Medium

=== PAGE 70 ===
F 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 66 
 
 
Description 
Existing ‘players’ construe the BGB as a threat to their position (e.g., local authorities or commercial banks) which could 
also affect other stakeholder perceptions. 
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The Bank will use the best practice stakeholder engagement process to deeply understand each stakeholder's 
aspirations, interests and influence coupled with routine and purpose-driven engagement to avoid this potential. The 
Bank’s objectives have also been defined to be complementary to other key stakeholders, thus avoiding overlap 
(competition). 
Selected Risk Factor 9 
Category 
Probability 
Impact 
Technical and operational 
Medium 
Medium 
Description 
The stakeholder landscape is fragmented with multiple authorities governing the various sectors, resulting in a potential 
lack of synergy and coordination for effective implementation.  
Mitigation Measure(s) 
The design of the BGB has factored in the need for extensive and continual stakeholder engagement processes that 
will improve coordination to address these challenges. Moreover, by employing these best practice stakeholder 
engagement processes — strengthened further by the direct involvement of the GoB in its operation — the BGB will 
be positioned to not only mitigate this risk but also to contribute to mapping an effective solution for the financial sector 
as a whole. 
 GCF POLICIES AND STANDARDS 
G.1. Environmental and social risk assessment (max. 750 words, approximately 1.5 pages)  
The Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) guides BGB in integrating environmental and 
social risk assessments into its transaction processes. A key component of the ESMS is BGB’s 
Environmental and Social (E&S) Policy, which sets out the organisation’s commitment to embedding E&S 
considerations into its day-to-day business activities and transaction processes. This includes BGB’s E&S 
Guiding Principles, E&S Risk Standards and Requirements and Core E&S Commitments. BGB’s E&S Policy 
is aligned with GCF’s E&S requirements. The scope of the ESMS will include all transaction and trading 
activities of BGB, including loans, guarantees and acquiring bonds.  
The ESMS identifies four stages at which E&S assessments are conducted throughout the transaction 
process of loans: (1) E&S Screening, (2) E&S Due Diligence, (3) Transaction Structuring and Approval and, 
(4) E&S Monitoring: 
1. The purpose of E&S Screening is to identify E&S red flags and key E&S risks of the transaction at an 
early stage of the transaction. There are two types of E&S red flags. The first are business activities that 
would trigger BGB’s Exclusion List and the second are business activities that, based on an initial 
assessment of key E&S risks associated with the transaction, are categorized as Category A or FI-1 (in 
accordance with IFC’s E&S Risk Categorization Framework). In both cases, BGB will abandon the 
transaction without further consideration. If the subproject is not categorized as FI-1 or Category A and 
if the subproject is in alignment with BGB’s Eligibility List, BGB will assign an E&S Risk Category (B or 
C for non-financial intermediaries and FI-2 or FI-3 for financial intermediaries) and proceed to the E&S 
Due Diligence stage. A key factor in assigning the E&S Risk Category of a transaction is the E&S risks 
associated with the subprojects that the intermediary will finance.  
2. The way E&S Due Diligence (ESDD) is conducted is determined by the E&S Risk Categorization. ESDD 
for FI-3 or Category C transactions are conducted by BGB internally. ESDD of FI-2 or Category B 
transactions can be conducted by BGB internally or by an external specialist. An external specialist will 
be engaged if the E&S risks associated with a transaction trigger any of the IFC Performance Standards

=== PAGE 71 ===
F 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 67 
 
 
5-8 or if BGB’s internal E&S capacity is insufficient to adequately assess the E&S risks of a transaction. 
ESDD will result in an E&S Action Plan (ESAP), which lists the identified gaps in the intermediary’s E&S 
risk management practices and/or sub-project-specific E&S risk management as well as proposed 
measures to close these gaps.  
3. During the Transaction Structuring and Approval stage, BGB Investment Committee formally approves 
the transaction. BGB will then define the E&S conditions of the transaction, which will be highlighted in 
all relevant legal documents between BGB and the borrower prior to disbursement. An important aspect 
of the E&S conditions is that BGB’s E&S requirements are passed down from the borrower to the 
subproject.  
4. BGB will implement a multi-layered monitoring and reporting process. This includes reporting from 
subprojects to intermediaries, from intermediaries to BGB and from BGB to investors. These reporting 
processes are guided by the monitoring and reporting requirements that BGB will impose on the 
intermediaries and which intermediaries must pass down to the subprojects. These include periodic 
reporting on E&S KPIs, reporting on ESAP progress and major incident reporting. 
As BGB’s exposure to E&S risks is smaller with guarantees than with loans, the E&S assessments of 
guarantees will be slightly lighter than those of loans.  
Key requirements for intermediaries and subprojects include requirements on stakeholder engagement and 
grievance redress mechanisms (GRM). The ESMS includes a Stakeholder Engagement Plan template for 
developing effective stakeholder engagement mechanisms at the subproject level as well as a GRM 
appendix that outlines the different steps of the grievance redress process of GRMs at the borrower and 
sub-project level and the requirements of both GRMs. Further, the ESMS includes safeguarding instruments 
to be deployed at the sub-project level (when relevant) such as a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Action 
Framework, a potential Sexual Exploitation, Sexual Abuse, Sexual Harassment (SEAH) report template and 
an E&S Impact Assessment (ESIA) table of contents. 
Full details on the ESMS are provided in Annex 6 of the Funding Proposal. 
G.2. Gender assessment and action plan (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page)  
A gender assessment was conducted for the BGB, to ensure that women and other vulnerable members of 
society who are disproportionately impacted by climate change are included and benefit from the 
programme. The BGB gender assessment has informed the development of the BGB’s Gender Framework 
that will ensure that the principles of gender equality, natural resources management and environmental 
sustainability are mainstreamed through its operations. This Framework will underpin the BGB’s gender 
policies, which will, in turn, form the basis of one of the BGB’s four core investment eligibility criteria. To this 
end, each project supported by the BGB will have to conduct a suitable project-level Gender Assessment 
and develop an appropriate Action Plan in line with the principles laid out in the BGB’s Gender Framework. 
The project-level Gender Assessments and Action Plans will ensure that each activity financed by the BGB 
is designed and implemented in support of/alignment with other national development strategies that 
promote equal opportunities, poverty reduction and sustainable use of natural resources from a national, 
regional and sector-specific perspective — including the prevailing national gender strategy of Barbados 
(once finalised) or other public policies that are relevant to the Bank. The BGB is thus committed to being 
gender-responsive – through its financed activities – to support gender equality and women’s empowerment 
and to monitor the links between gender equality, climate mitigation and adaptation, and environmental 
sustainability.  
As such, the BGB will commit to the following principles in its investments and engagements, and will ensure 
that intermediaries, partners, project owners and borrowers apply the subsequent considerations to the 
extent that is relevant to each of them: 
1. Project proposals must consider key issues and requirements of gender-sensitive design and 
implementation.

=== PAGE 72 ===
F 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 68 
 
 
2. A sufficient budget is allocated to conduct the gender assessment and compile the action plan. 
3. The project owner should establish meaningful gender performance indicators for the project. 
4. There is alignment with the Sustainable Development Goals and a commitment to gender equality and 
women’s empowerment (SDG 5) as well as relevant cross-cutting themes. 
5. The project/programme is aligned with national development strategies that promote equal opportunities, 
whether in the intervention region or the sector. 
6. Stakeholder consultations and engagements are undertaken and are in line with the BGB’s Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan (Annex 7).  
7. The project is aligned with existing country policies and strategies and best practices (in the gender 
assessment, a policy, legal and regulatory review must be undertaken by the project owner and checked 
by the intermediary and thereafter reported back to the BGB). 
 
Finally, once the Bank is operational, it will aim to achieve the following targets and incorporate the respective 
recommendations: 
1. Dedicate necessary finances and human resources to implement this Gender Action Plan, with indicator 
data disaggregated by sex to ensure reportable progress. 
2. Develop a BGB Gender Policy and Sexual Harassment Policy (including procedures) and training kit 
that aids in understanding the nexus between gender and climate finance. 
3. Include gender-responsive elements in the eligibility criteria and post-evaluation criteria. 
4. Develop mechanisms to assess gender impacts of projects submitted by intermediaries but also to 
internally monitor, report and verify gender impacts and other co-benefits project levels. 
5. Ensure the representation of women in the Board and/or key decision-making and advisory bodies of 
the BGB. 
 
G.3. Financial management and procurement (max. 500 words, approximately 1 page) 
Pegasus maintains an Accounting Policy designed to ensure financial transactions are properly authorized, 
documented and executed. Pegasus’ funds are audited by an independent auditor on an annual basis and 
Pegasus also undergoes a compliance audit conducted by a third-party compliance consultant on an annual 
basis.  
All cash movements and disbursements (e.g., for funding investments and paying fees/invoices) are subject 
to review by multiple parties and subject to specific approval thresholds and processes depending on the 
type of disbursement.  
The Blue Green Bank, the GCF BGB Holdings, and the Pegasus GCF Holdings GP will all be managed in 
accordance with industry best practices. The BGB senior management team will draft detailed financial 
management and procurement policies at the bank’s inception, which will be ratified by the BGB Board. The 
presence of representatives of the Accredited Entity — acting on behalf of Pegasus and the GCF — will 
ensure that the financial management and procurement policies align with the general principles of both 
organisations. Once the BGB has been established, the procurement of future goods and services will be 
managed directly by the BGB management team following the agreed procurement policy. Sound 
procurement will be characterized by the following standards:  
• 
Fairness, integrity and transparency  
• 
A competitive procurement environment that ensures purchases are made in the best interest of PCA  
• 
Impartial selection process based on price and qualifications  
• 
Quality goods, works and services delivered at the time and place required by responsible and reliable 
suppliers  
• 
Well-documented selection process

=== PAGE 73 ===
F 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | 69 
 
 
When evaluating a particular need for goods or services, PCA and the BGB will consider, among other 
things: 
• 
The cost of the provider compared to others in the market and whether multiple bids should be 
solicited. Generally, most procurement needs should have multiple bids. However, PCA recognizes 
that for some needs such a bidding process is not appropriate or advisable. 
• 
The reputation of the provider in the marketplace 
• 
PCA’s prior experience with the provider 
• 
Where PCA does not have experience with a provider (or may have insufficient experience with such 
a provider), the feedback from other market participants on the provider’s performance 
• 
The required timeframe for procuring the goods or services 
• 
Documentation of decisions and awards - Pegasus and BGB should document the procurement process 
to memorialize the reason why a particular provider was chosen. All services should be provided 
pursuant to a binding, executed legal agreement that sets forth the terms for the goods or services to 
be received. 
 
G.4. Disclosure of funding proposal  
Note: The Information Disclosure Policy (IDP) provides that the GCF will apply a presumption in favour of disclosure for all information 
and documents relating to the GCF and its funding activities. Under the IDP, project and programme funding proposals will be 
disclosed on the GCF website, simultaneous with the submission to the Board, subject to the redaction of any information that may 
not be disclosed pursuant to the IDP. Information provided in confidence is one of the exceptions, but this exception should not be 
applied broadly to an entire document if the document contains specific, segregable portions that can be disclosed without prejudice 
or harm. 
 
Indicate below whether or not the funding proposal includes confidential information. 
 
☐ No confidential information: The accredited entity confirms that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may be 
disclosed in full by the GCF, as no information is being provided in confidence. 
☒ With confidential information: The accredited entity declares that the funding proposal, including its annexes, may 
not be disclosed in full by the GCF, as certain information is being provided in confidence. Accordingly, the accredited 
entity is providing to the Secretariat the following two copies of the funding proposal, including all annexes: 
• 
full copy for internal use of the GCF in which the confidential portions are marked accordingly, together with an 
explanatory note regarding the said portions and the corresponding reason for confidentiality under the 
accredited entity’s disclosure policy, and 
• 
redacted copy for disclosure on the GCF website. 
The funding proposal can only be processed upon receipt of the two copies above, if containing confidential 
information.

=== PAGE 74 ===
H 
 
 
GREEN CLIMATE FUND FUNDING PROPOSAL V.3.0 | PAGE 70 
 
 
 
 
* Please note that a funding proposal will be considered complete only upon receipt of all the applicable supporting documents. 
 ANNEXES 
H.1. Mandatory annexes  
☒ 
Annex 1 
NDA no-objection letter(s) (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 2 
Annex 2.1 
Annex 2.2 
Feasibility study - and a market study, if applicable 
Feasibility Study – Barbados Climate Change Country Report 
Feasibility Study – Investment Eligibility Criteria 
☒ 
Annex 3 
Economic and/or financial analyses in spreadsheet format 
☒ 
Annex 4 
Detailed budget plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 5 
Implementation timetable including key project/programme milestones (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 6 
E&S document corresponding to the E&S category (A, B or C; or I1, I2 or I3):  
(ESS disclosure form provided) 
☐ Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or  
☐ Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or  
☒ Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 
☐ Others (please specify – e.g., Resettlement Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, 
Indigenous People’s Plan, Land Acquisition Plan, etc.) 
☒ 
Annex 7 
Summary of consultations and stakeholder engagement plan  
☒ 
Annex 8 
Gender assessment and project/programme-level action plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 9 
Legal due diligence (regulation, taxation and insurance) 
☒ 
Annex 10 
Procurement plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 11 
Monitoring and evaluation plan (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 12 
AE fee request (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 13 
Co-financing commitment letter, if applicable (template provided) 
☒ 
Annex 14 
Term sheet including a detailed disbursement schedule and, if applicable, repayment schedule 
H.2. Other annexes as applicable 
☐ 
Annex 15 
Evidence of internal approval (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 16 
Map(s) indicating the location of proposed interventions 
☐ 
Annex 17 
Multi-country project/programme information (template provided) 
☐ 
Annex 18 
Appraisal, due diligence or evaluation report for proposals based on up-scaling or replicating a 
pilot project 
☐ 
Annex 19 
Procedures for controlling procurement by third parties or executing entities undertaking projects 
financed by the entity 
☐ 
Annex 20 
First-level AML/CFT (KYC) assessment 
☒ 
Annex 21 
Operations manual (Operations and maintenance) 
☒ 
Annex 22  
Assessment of GHG emission reductions and their monitoring and reporting 
☐ 
Annex X 
Other references

=== PAGE 75 ===
The Hon. Ryan Straughn, M.P. 
MINISTER IN THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE & ECONOMIC AFFAIRS 
Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment 
Government Headquarters,  
Bay Street, St. Michael, BB11156, Barbados, W.I. 
  Our Ref.:  I051/1 Vol. I 
       Tel.: (246)535-5300
       Fax: (246)535-5629 
       Date: April 3, 2023 
Mr. Henry Gonzalez 
Executive Director (ag.) 
The Green Climate Fund  
Songdo Business District Incheon 
REPUBLIC OF KOREA 
Dear Mr. Gonzalez,       
Funding Proposal for the Green Climate Fund (GCF) 
by Pegasus Capital Advisors Regarding 
The Blue Green Bank 
We refer to the programme titled Blue Green Bank in Barbados as 
included in the funding proposal submitted by Pegasus Capital Advisors to us 
on February 23, 2023. 
The undersigned is the duly authorized representative of Economic 
Affairs and Investment Division, Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and 
Investment, the National Designated Authority of Barbados. 
Pursuant to GCF decision B.08/10, the content of which we 
acknowledge to have reviewed, we hereby communicate our no-objection to 
the programme as included in the funding proposal. 
By communicating our no-objection, it is implied that: 
(a)
The Government of Barbados has no-objection to the programme
as included in the funding proposal;
(b)
The programme as included in the funding proposal is in
conformity with the national priorities, strategies and plans of
Barbados; and
GOVERNMENT OF BARBADOS
Page 71

=== PAGE 76 ===
- 2 -
(c)
In accordance with the GCF’s environmental and social
safeguards, the programme as included in the funding proposal
is in conformity with relevant national laws and regulations.
We also confirm that our national process for ascertaining no-objection 
to the programme as included in the funding proposal has been duly followed. 
We also confirm that our no-objection applies to all projects or activities 
to be implemented within the scope of the programme. 
We acknowledge that this letter will be made publicly available on the 
GCF website. 
Yours sincerely, 
HON. RYAN STRAUGHN, M.P. 
Minister  
Page 72

=== PAGE 77 ===
Page 73 
 
Environmental and social safeguards report form pursuant to para. 17 of the IDP 
 
Basic project or programme information 
Project or programme title 
The Blue Green Bank (BGB) 
Existence of subproject(s) to 
be identified after GCF Board 
approval 
Yes 
Sector (public or private) 
Private 
Accredited entity 
Pegasus Capital Advisors (PCA)  
Environmental and social 
safeguards (ESS) category 
Category I-2 
Location – specific 
location(s) of project or 
target country or location(s) 
of programme 
Barbados 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Environmental and Social Management (ESMS) (if applicable) 
Date of disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
Tuesday, June 6, 2023 
Language(s) of disclosure 
English 
Explanation on language 
English is the official language of Barbados. 
Link to disclosure 
https://d1xeoqaoqyzc9p.cloudfront.net/app/uploads/2023/06/B
GB_Annex-6_ESMS-Manual_06.06.2023_Final.pdf 
Other link(s) 
https://www.pcalp.com/impact/ 
Remarks 
An ESMS consistent with the requirements for a Category I-
2 project is contained in the “Environmental & Social 
Management System Manual”.  
Any other relevant ESS reports, e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), IPP Framework (if applicable) 
Description of 
report/disclosure on 
accredited entity’s website 
N/A 
Language(s) of disclosure 
N/A 
Explanation on language 
N/A

=== PAGE 78 ===
Page 74 
 
Link to disclosure 
N/A 
Other link(s) 
N/A 
Remarks 
N/A 
Disclosure in locations convenient to affected peoples (stakeholders) 
Date 
Tuesday, June 6, 2023 
Place 
The Barbados National Designated Authority (NDA) was 
provided the link to the ESMS documents, which are also 
accessible from the Barbados NDA office: 
 
Government Headquarters 
Bay Street 
St. Michael 
Barbados, W.I. 
Date of Board meeting in which the FP is intended to be considered 
Date of accredited entity’s 
Board meeting 
Monday, July 10, 2023 
Date of GCF’s Board meeting  
Monday, July 10, 2023 
 
Note: This form was prepared by the accredited entity stated above. 
 
 
________

=== PAGE 79 ===
GCF/B.36/02/Add.08 
Page 75 
 
 
 
 
Independent Technical Advisory Panel’s assessment of 
FP213 
Proposal name: 
The Blue Green Bank (BGB) 
Accredited entity: 
Pegasus Capital Advisors  
Project/programme size: 
Small 
I. 
Assessment of the independent Technical Advisory Panel 
1.1 
Overview 
 
1. 
Barbados is a small island developing State (SIDS) that is vulnerable to climate change 
impacts. These impacts are driven largely by the increased frequency and intensity of tropical 
storms and hurricanes – along with the associated impacts of sea level rise and storm surge – as 
well as decreasing rainfall with longer dry spells, lower soil moisture and increased aridity. The 
national development plans and nationally determined contribution (NDC) of the Government 
of Barbados include building resilience to climate change and transitioning to one hundred per 
cent renewable energy by 2030. Mobilization of finance for these efforts will be key to a 
successful transition.  
2. 
The funding proposal identifies several local market barriers to mobilizing finance 
notwithstanding Barbados’ relatively robust economy. Access to finance for lower income 
communities, smaller-scale projects and adaptation interventions has proven to be a challenge. 
To address these barriers, the aim of the funding proposal is to establish a new national climate 
finance vehicle – the Blue Green Bank (BGB).  
3. 
Green banks are designed to address investment barriers in climate mitigation and 
adaptation by using limited public funds strategically to leverage far greater private investment. 
In practice, many of the green banks that have been established are not regulated as banks, nor 
do they perform the same functions as retail banks, under their respective local laws, but 
instead are hubs of local climate finance capacity and mission-oriented capital. By developing 
innovative finance and market development solutions, green banks can address barriers that 
currently restrict low carbon economic growth. To date, green banks have channelled billions of 
USD in public and private capital into climate action across the globe.  
4. 
The proposed BGB will be a joint public-private sector effort to be developed by Pegasus 
Capital Advisors (Pegasus) as the accredited entity (AE) in close coordination with the 
Government of Barbados. Pegasus will also function as one of four executing entities (EEs), 
along with three entities still to be established: Blue Green Bank; GCF BGB Holdings LP; and 
Pegasus BGB Holdings GP, LLC. BGB would be a start-up effort and GCF is being asked to provide 
both funding support and input into developing the entity’s climate policies and structure. 
5. 
BGB would invest in Barbadian national priority adaptation and mitigation projects for 
primarily micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) and households. The funding 
proposal intends that BGB will offer a variety of financial products designed to overcome 
market barriers, crowd in the local financial sector, and increase access to climate finance for 
businesses and households. Longer term, the project sponsors hope to expand BGB operation 
throughout the Caribbean region.

=== PAGE 80 ===
GCF/B.36/02/Add.08 
Page 76 
 
 
 
 
6. 
The bank will also seek to be a market maker by partnering with existing finance 
institutions and government programmes to lead on the creation of climate finance 
opportunities and to broaden and accelerate current programmes. BGB will initially finance 
rooftop solar, resilient housing and water conservation through national programmes that have 
already been developed but need financing, including Roofs2Reefs, HOPE and SHIFT (see 
funding proposal for a description of these programmes). A key feature of BGB (and all green 
banks) is that it will seek not to replace other financial institutions but instead to function as a 
partner. To this end, the bank’s operations will be wholesale in nature, providing support in the 
form of funds, guarantees or other mechanisms for eligible projects, directly as well as through 
intermediaries such as existing lenders, whether banks, credit unions, or insurance companies, 
to facilitate the funding of climate-responsive programmes contemplated by government 
climate policy.  
7. 
GCF is being asked to provide USD 15.5 million in finance to BGB in a combination of 
equity (USD 5.5 million) and convertible loan commitments (USD 10 million). The Government 
of Barbados will provide an additional USD 10 million in equity on a pari passu basis with the 
GCF equity. As noted above, Pegasus will act as the AE and one of the EEs. Pegasus intends to 
take an active role in setting up BGB and will maintain a seat on the BGB board of directors. 
8. 
Once established, BGB will engage with investors, including private investment firms, 
development banks, philanthropic organizations, and other sources of finance to continue to 
capitalise on the bank over the long term. Several potential investors have already been 
identified by the AE, with discussions underway around possible contributions. The funding 
proposal sets a target of raising between USD 30 million and USD 50 million total equity. The 
BGB sponsors assert that they will maintain a debt-finance to equity ratio of 7:1, aiming to 
mobilize at least USD 5.8 billion of investment in climate projects over the next 15 years. 
1.2 
Impact potential  
 
 
 
 
Scale: Low - Medium 
9. 
The funding proposal credibly articulates that Barbados (particularly as a SIDS) is 
already impacted by climate change, facing increased frequency and intensity of tropical storms 
and hurricanes, sea level rise and storm surge, decreased rainfall, and worsening soil fertility. 
These climatic changes threaten lives and livelihoods of vulnerable communities and have a 
dramatic effect on key economic sectors in the country. Additionally, Barbados has taken on 
mitigation goals that, if achieved, can generate significant greenhouse gas reductions relative to 
the size of the Barbadian economy and population base.  
10. 
A well designed and functioning green bank can significantly contribute to financing and 
mobilizing other sources of funding for interventions that can yield considerable long-term 
positive impact, both in terms of mitigation and adaptation. Reviewing the indicative BGB 
pipeline, we can discern that many of the programmes BGB intends to support can derive cross-
cutting benefits for the people of Barbados. Moreover, the adaptation impacts are expected to 
benefit vulnerable groups who otherwise lack access to the funding required to adapt to climate 
change – particularly in terms of access to hurricane-resilient housing, as well as participation 
in water conservation initiatives.  
11. 
We also note that the public sector in Barbados is fiscally constrained and on its own is 
unlikely to fully finance many of the climate programmes described in the BGB pipeline. 
Additionally, the local financial sector is overweighted to branches of foreign-owned banks, 
which may be willing to bank larger projects and lower risk projects (highly collateralised 
standard financial products such as mortgages and car loans) but have been more risk averse 
when it comes to smaller projects and lower income communities.  
12. 
According to the funding proposal, BGB will initially focus on rooftop solar through the 
HOPE and SHIFT programmes. The project sponsors claim that BGB is expected to increase

=== PAGE 81 ===
GCF/B.36/02/Add.08 
Page 77 
 
 
 
 
renewable energy generation by 914 megawatts (MW), which in turn will contribute directly to 
an expected emissions reduction over 25 years of 16,736,509 tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent (t CO2 eq). Based on our assessment, we view these mitigation claims to be 
overstated.  
13. 
Currently in Barbados there are various local initiatives to encourage certain segments 
of the Bajan population to purchase and install solar panels, including some private sector 
financing sources. In our view, the realistic size of the finance demand for solar sector 
investments will be substantially lower and limited to lower income communities who cannot 
access the commercial products on offer. Additionally, it is worth noting that the installed 
energy capacity of Barbados in 2021 based on International Renewable Energy Agency 
information was approximately 300 MW. The funding proposal presumes that BGB will finance 
914 MW of renewable energy capacity, which is three times the current total capacity. Total 
electricity generation to be supported by BGB annually from 2037 onwards is to exceed 1,500 
gigawatt hours, which is 40 per cent more than the total electricity generated by Barbados in 
2021. Total business as usual CO2 emissions from the electricity sector are estimated by the AE 
at 0.8 megatonne of carbon dioxide (Mt CO2) in 2030, while the project is to reduce 0.98 Mt CO2 
per annum as of 2037. Given these estimates, the project will reduce more than the current 
emissions of this sector by 2031.1  
14. 
The funding proposal presumes that the above discrepancies will be addressed by 
substantial increases in energy demand, as well as an eventual expansion to other Caribbean 
markets. In our view, the AE was not able to credibly demonstrate the likelihood of energy 
demand increasing apace in Barbados, nor, importantly, a viable path to expansion of financing 
services across the Caribbean in the short to medium term.  
15. 
Notwithstanding our above overestimation concerns, we note that some renewable 
energy finance will be needed in Barbados for it to meet its climate targets. These levels may be 
less than estimated in the funding proposal, but they are not negligible. Moreover, BGB will not 
be limited to rooftop solar finance. Successful green banks must be flexible to remain on the 
cutting edge of local climate finance needs, while ensuring that they do not calcify in a narrow 
sector, risking crowding out other participants. The funding proposal does demonstrate that 
Barbados has additional climate finance needs beyond solar energy installation. Notably, there 
is a significant need around resilience-building initiatives where existing financial products are 
falling short. There are also other potential mitigation investments in vehicle-to-grid charging 
infrastructure as well as energy efficiency in homes, small businesses, and tourism 
establishments.  
16. 
On the adaptation front, the funding proposal makes a clearer case for the role of BGB. 
Under the initial pipeline of projects, the adaptation benefits will focus primarily on hurricane-
resilient housing and water security. Specifically, both the HOPE and SHIFT initiatives include a 
core focus on hurricane-proof roofs, with HOPE designing resilience into the construction of 
new homes and SHIFT retrofitting existing structures to be hurricane resilient. Water security is 
also another area of need, in the face of changing rainfall patterns with longer dry spells. 
Investments in water recycling initiatives can help to reduce pressure on already limited 
freshwater resources in Barbados. The adaptation impacts are expected to benefit vulnerable 
groups who otherwise lack access to the funding required to adapt to climate change.  
17. 
The creation of a functioning green bank in Barbados has the potential to engender 
positive climate impacts. Green banks, when well-designed and executed, have proven to be 
 
1 This is an indication that calculations done by the AE are incorrect with the potential mitigation impact being considerably 
lower than suggested by the AE. It is recommended that the GCF Secretariat reviews emission reduction calculations with 
more care and assesses their plausibility, to avoid overstatements of mitigation impacts from over optimistic assumptions 
of the economic cost of reducing carbon emissions.

=== PAGE 82 ===
GCF/B.36/02/Add.08 
Page 78 
 
 
 
 
instrumental in helping jurisdictions achieve their climate goals in a manner that is both 
financially sustainable and catalytic of other sources of finance. They are not a panacea and not 
suitable for all jurisdictions, however they can be impactful in markets that have a functioning 
financial system and dynamic investment opportunities. While we have questions about some of 
the projections presented in the funding proposal, these concerns touch on the potential scale of 
impact, and not on whether BGB can have a positive climate change mitigation impact in 
Barbados. The latter seems clear to us. The bank will provide financing and investment 
opportunities for renewable energy and energy efficiency projects, and in turn these will help to 
reduce Barbados’ dependence on fossil fuels and mitigate the effects of climate change.  
18. 
The potential benefits of BGB’s equity investments could be even more considerable as 
relates to adaptation interventions. Without support, private investment is likely to continue to 
focus on collateralized loans that target high-income groups and large businesses, excluding the 
considerable investment potential from lower-middle income groups and small businesses, 
which can be unlocked through a combination of BGB finance and BGB ability to act as a 
facilitator and market educator. It is key that BGB does not become static but should instead 
have a charter and mission focused on evolving along with market needs. Effectively, green 
banks should seek to be replaced by other market participants by drawing them into new 
sectors through a combination of catalytic finance, demonstration effect and investment and 
capacity-building. 
19. 
Importantly, the funding proposal intends that BGB will act as a market maker or a 
“dealmaker” within the existing financial landscape. This is an essential role to fill and key to 
advancing potential climate projects that are outside the scope of public-sector budgets but 
require de-risking/securitization to attract private investment. This market-making function is 
a typical remit of green banks. In additional to financial resources provided, impactful green 
banks understand that their most valuable asset is the willingness and ability to contribute the 
“sweat equity” that private players are often unwilling to provide, while the public sector often 
lacks such capacity. Sweat equity in this case involves the time and human capacity contribution 
to arrange investment opportunities and to structure transactions that would otherwise not be 
of interest to the market because of the perceived effort needed to reach financial close.  
20. 
We applaud BGB’s recognition of the need to play a market-making role. However, a 
green bank’s ability to perform this role well is dependent on a variety of factors, including but 
not limited to: (i) the professional qualifications and expertise of staff and management; (ii) 
market perception of the staff and management by developers, other financial institutions and 
capital markets; (iii) understanding of local market players and dynamics; and (iv) an 
independent governance system (procedures and individuals) that aligns the bank’s activities 
with the commercial and climate needs of the market. The BGB proposal is very much at the 
start-up stage and the above issues have not yet been addressed. There is a plan in place to 
build-out the institution, but considering the importance of human capital to impact, we must 
significantly discount our impact assessment.  
21. 
Overall, the independent Technical Advisory Panel (iTAP) regards BGB’s impact 
potential as low to medium at its current state of development. This rating of the funding 
proposal derives primarily from uncertainties around its mitigation impacts described above, 
and most importantly, the amount of development work that remains to be done in establishing 
the bank. The entity currently does not have a Board, a leadership team or even a legal 
personality. However, the plan in place for development, combined with the clear political 
desire to see this project go forward in Barbados, gives us comfort that it can be fit for purpose 
eventually. The iTAP believes that if the concerns outlined above can be addressed as per our 
conditions herein, the rating for impact potential can be much improved. 
1.3 
Paradigm shift potential 
 
 
  
Scale: Medium - High

=== PAGE 83 ===
GCF/B.36/02/Add.08 
Page 79 
 
 
 
 
22. 
BGB is intended to act as a market maker and market filler in Barbados to address the 
financial barriers that hamper climate projects. As a market filler it will be able to complement 
public-sector budgets and provide funding for climate interventions that would normally not be 
in the purview of private investment. Additionally, as a market maker the bank will work to 
develop financial products and tools that can partially de-risk transactions on the island to 
crowd in other sources of finance and, importantly, do the leg work of originating, structuring 
and shepherding climate impact transactions to closing. Without the financial heft and capacity 
that BGB can provide, it is likely that private investments in Barbados will continue to focus 
predominantly on collateralized loans targeting high-income groups and large businesses, 
excluding the considerable investment potential from lower-middle income groups and small 
businesses that can be unlocked through the right package of financing. 
23. 
The paradigm shift potential of green banks rests on their ability to address investment 
barriers by using limited public funds strategically to leverage far greater private investment. A 
green bank is typically designed to achieve this in a sustainable manner, meaning supporting 
environmental sustainability but also remaining financially sustainable as an institution. Those 
institutions that expect periodic infusions of public funds are not truly green banks and have 
limited paradigm shift potential.  The financial returns sought may be more modest than those 
sought by purely commercial entities, but they should be sufficient to secure the financial 
health, credit rating and longevity of the green bank itself. BGB is designed to be an institution 
with indefinite duration and ability to raise additional funding beyond its initial capital raise. 
The proposed BGB design provides for legal authority to raise capital on the open market once 
the bank aggregates a performing portfolio of assets. This will require BGB to operate in a 
financially sustainable way. The investment discipline engendered by having a return 
requirement will help BGB to become a trusted partner for other sources of co-finance.  
24. 
We note positively that most of the GCF funding requested is in the form of a loan facility 
which requires payback of equity and interest, albeit highly concessional interest. We also note 
that the funding proposal anticipates providing shareholders with a dividend return 
commensurate to their shareholding. Moreover, the proposal foresees a financial exit for GCF in 
the future, once the BGB can access capital markets for additional finance and refinancing of its 
portfolio. This pragmatic approach is in line with green bank best practices and indicates that 
the project sponsors intend to establish a useful entity.  
25. 
BGB also has the potential to drive policy innovation and ambition by demonstrating 
what is possible in Barbados and providing policymakers with a tool to further accelerate 
mitigation and adaptation ambitions. An increase in the number of bankable projects will not 
only lead to significant climate impacts, but also provide a broader catalytic effect by driving 
finance into ‘hard to reach’ sectors such as climate adaptation projects. 
26. 
We also note positively that BGB, like other green banks, will be well positioned to 
develop and disperse market knowledge in the local financial sector as well as drive cross-
sector collaboration in project development. Lastly, BGB can also function as a trusted partner 
to cross-border capital providers. One of the impediments to attracting finance into developing 
markets from international private sources is country risk perception. These risks can be 
mitigated by having a local finance partner that understands local political and economic 
realities.  
27. 
Similarly, BGB can function as a trusted partner to both domestic and international 
partners as relates to the green or climate credibility of transactions. More investors are looking 
for assets that have sustainability at their core, while still generating an appropriate risk-
adjusted return. Green banks that maintain high impact standards and enforce high quality 
screening, oversight and reporting can improve the attractiveness of co-investments in their 
markets. Co-investors will perceive that project climate attributes are credible when BGB is part 
of the transaction, consequently reducing perceived environmental impact risk.

=== PAGE 84 ===
GCF/B.36/02/Add.08 
Page 80 
 
 
 
 
28. 
The funding proposal provides that BGB will be established to adopt and adhere to the 
GCF environmental and social standards. The proposal relies heavily on GCF core involvement 
to help deliver an institution that is highly credible from a climate impact standpoint. A 
weakness of the proposal is the expectation that GCF funding will be provided before many of 
the actual operations and BGB structure are developed. This would leave GCF with few leverage 
points to ensure that these high standards are truly embedded. Moreover, the AE in this case is 
also acting as an executing entity, making the alignment of interests even more critical. We 
suggest that GCF funding be tranched and linked to progress on the development of BGB.  
29. 
The funding proposal also projects that BGB will eventually expand beyond Barbados to 
support market transformation throughout the Caribbean. We do not assess this possibility as 
likely or well planned for now. While we discount the probability of a BGB expansion across the 
region, we do recognize that a successful BGB launch and operation in Barbados can serve as a 
model for other countries and subnational regions facing similar climate finance barriers. 
30. 
Overall, we rate the potential for BGB to effect paradigm shift as medium to high.  
1.4 
Sustainable development potential  
 
 
Scale: High 
31. 
The BGB proposal credibly demonstrated its potential to contribute to the sustainable 
development of Barbados beyond mitigation and adaptation impacts, including: 
(i) 
Improved air quality: supporting the transition from fossil fuel-based to renewable 
energy production through rooftop photovoltaic panels will reduce air pollution;  
(ii) 
Improved groundwater reserves and quality: water conservation initiatives can reduce 
demand on and extraction of limited groundwater resources, increasing the availability and 
quality of water for terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems. Moreover, increased groundwater 
reserves can improve the hydraulic pressure of the freshwater lens, helping maintain the 
equilibrium between fresh, brackish, and salt water, thereby reducing the threat of saltwater 
intrusion linked to sea level rise;  
(iii) 
Living standards: development of additional housing (built with hurricane resilience in 
mind) will help improve access to housing for low-income households, many of which are 
currently paying more for renting sub-standard housing than for a mortgage which could be 
provided under the HOPE programme;  
(iv) 
Health: improved air quality resulting from reductions in fossil fuel can have a positive 
impact on human health, which would also reduce the burden on Barbados’ public health 
system. Similarly, improved water security can further reduce potential health impacts, 
including through the spread of waterborne diseases, especially after heavy rainfall events;  
(v) 
Job creation: the implementation of projects financed by BGB will create employment 
opportunities for Bajans, while also supporting local contractors and suppliers. Programmes 
such as HOPE have significant potential to strengthen employment in the construction sector, 
including by creating opportunities for upskilling young artisans. Moreover, investments 
directed to small businesses in the tourism industry will contribute to job security and create 
employment opportunities that can help lift vulnerable populations out of poverty; and  
(vi) 
Reduced economic downtime: building the resilience of the population will reduce the 
economic downtime which typically follows extreme events that disrupt transportation 
networks, damage power and water infrastructure, and increase maintenance efforts at the 
household level, as well as disrupting the flow of tourists into the country. Reducing this 
downtime will have a notable benefit to the broader economy. 
32. 
Gender: BGB intends to incorporate gender mainstreaming into its operations, 
governance structure and investment eligibility criteria. BGB’s board, staff, trainees, and loan

=== PAGE 85 ===
GCF/B.36/02/Add.08 
Page 81 
 
 
 
 
applications will have target of 50 per cent for women with a minimum reservation of 30 per 
cent.  
33. 
Overall, iTAP rates the sustainable development potential of BGB as high.  
1.5 
Needs of the recipient  
 
 
 
 
Scale: High 
34. 
Barbados is highly exposed to the impacts of climate change, including tropical storms 
and hurricanes that are having increasing negative impacts on livelihoods and infrastructure. 
Flooding, strong winds and storm surges are common, with most of the country’s critical 
infrastructure and economic activity in the coastal zones.  
35. 
Barbados also faces water issues, due to a combination of droughts and increased 
rainfall variability. These impacts create stress on the island’s scarce freshwater resources. Sea 
level rise and saltwater intrusion will also increase salinity, thus affecting the country’s water 
resources and intruding into aquifers. The existing water infrastructure is also at risk of 
destruction from extreme climate events, which creates further uncertainty around water 
supply. Addressing infrastructure security and making sure it becomes climate-resilient is 
fundamental to the country’s future. 
36. 
Barbados has a diversified economy and a relatively stable economic outlook, including 
one of the highest per capita incomes in the Caribbean. However, Barbados has a high amount of 
public debt which constrains public finance efforts around national priority climate projects. 
Given its income status, Barbados does not meet the eligibility criteria of many concessional 
lenders, such as multilateral development banks. This leaves the private sector as the only 
viable option; however, the local financial sector only consists of branches of foreign-owned 
banks. These banks are highly risk averse and are not financing climate projects for vulnerable 
borrowers. BGB will specifically target these types of projects and borrowers to function as a 
dealmaker and crowd in investment from these institutions. 
37. 
Overall, iTAP rates the needs of the recipient as high.  
1.6 
Country ownership 
 
 
 
 
 
Scale: High 
38. 
The BGB concept was proposed by the Government of Barbados. We have assessed that 
there is substantial political support and intention on the part of the Bajan public sector to 
establish the bank to facilitate their climate goals. We note that the concept was first proposed 
by Prime Minister Mia Mottley. The Government of Barbados has provided a no-objection letter.  
39. 
We understand from our review that the Government of Barbados has been highly 
involved from the conceptual phase through to the design of BGB, including the selection of 
Pegasus as the AE.  
40. 
Importantly, Barbados will provide USD 10 million for the initial capitalization of BGB. 
This is a high indicator of country ownership. As a result, Barbados will be a significant 
shareholder in BGB and will have representation on the board of directors on an ongoing basis. 
Barbadian representation on the Board is useful to provide a strong nexus between national 
climate policy and the activities of BGB. To succeed and operate effectively and efficiently, BGB 
should have a current understanding of government climate initiatives and access to 
government programmes. The difficult balance will be for BGB to have a governance model that 
can work with government without being part of government. It will be critical that BGB 
maintains a maximum level of independence from government itself. We would recommend 
that the BGB board be made up of professional appointments including the appointments made 
by the Government of Barbados as a shareholder. A useful approach used by other green banks

=== PAGE 86 ===
GCF/B.36/02/Add.08 
Page 82 
 
 
 
 
is to have key government board members serve in an ex officio capacity (non-voting) providing 
a connection to government, while voting board members will be appointed for their specific 
expertise. We also assess that it will be critical for BGB to be seen as an independent institution 
in order to attract private sector investment.  
41. 
We also take note that the Government of Barbados has engaged with multiple relevant 
stakeholders in the course of developing the BGB concept. These engagements have included 
financial and development entities as well as players in the renewable energy sector. The BGB 
development team also engaged the private banking community in Barbados. Often, green 
banks encounter initial resistance from local financial institutions who can be wary of new 
public institutions that could potentially distort the market through excessive 
subsidy/concessionality or through blurring lines between political and private realms. Against 
this backdrop, the BGB concept was generally welcomed, especially once clarifications 
regarding its wholesale status and business model were provided. According to the AE, the main 
concern expressed by local financial institutions during their consultations revolved around 
whether BGB would target large commercial customers – which are currently fully banked. 
Again, the AE reports that this concern was dispelled once the BGB business model was 
explained, with the financial institutions engaged during the consultations providing positive 
feedback about the engagement with HOPE to date and the opportunities generated through it. 
Lastly, the funding proposal provides a stakeholder engagement plan to ensure continued 
engagement throughout implementation.  
42. 
We also note that the BGB initiative appears to be aligned with existing Barbadian 
policies and planning, including its NDC which targets a 95 per cent share of renewable energy 
in Barbados’ electricity mix, and a 20 per cent increase in energy efficiency across all sectors as 
compared to business as usual projections, and highlights the adaptation goals of the Roofs to 
Reefs resilience programme. 
43. 
One area of concern is the lack of direct green bank experience on the part of the AE and 
the lack of direct experience in Barbados on the part of members of the AE’s BGB team. 
Additionally, Pegasus has several other GCF-funded initiatives under development and 
fundraising concurrently. These elements represent AE capacity risk considering the amount of 
BGB development work yet to be conducted. However, we take some comfort in the fact that the 
AE was specifically selected by Barbados after reviewing several other options. The BGB 
concept did not originate with the AE but instead, Pegasus was specifically recruited by 
Barbados.  
44. 
The iTAP considers BGB to be aligned with host country priorities, and we assess 
involvement and ownership on the part of Barbados to be significant. Overall, we rate country 
ownership of the funding proposal as high.  
1.7 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
 
 
 
 
Scale: Medium 
45. 
The establishment of a national climate finance vehicle, in the form of a green bank, 
aligns with GCF’s Private Sector Strategy. Specifically, it will build the capacity of national 
financial institutions for climate finance (through the creation of BGB), and it will mobilize 
private climate finance at scale by de-risking investments for other commercial institutions. 
Further, it will primarily aim to increase access to finance for MSMEs and households that 
struggle to obtain affordable financing due to high collateral requirements from the foreign-
owned financial institutions that are currently their only option for financing in Barbados. 
46. 
Other green banks have shown an impressive track record in catalysing new low-carbon 
markets and crowding in private investment over the past decade and a half. Notably, the “State 
of Green Banks 2020” report found that twenty-seven existing green banks situated in twelve 
countries invested nearly USD 25 billion of their own capital since their respective inception

=== PAGE 87 ===
GCF/B.36/02/Add.08 
Page 83 
 
 
 
 
and were supporting projects with a total value of USD 70 billion as of mid-2020. More than USD 
45 billion (64 per cent) of this sum came from the private sector.2 As specialized financing 
institutions, green banks function as the focal point for accessing, mobilizing, and scaling up 
foreign and domestic investment in climate solutions, while simultaneously enabling domestic 
ownership of project development and NDC implementation.  
47. 
As noted above, green banks can be transformational. However, the efficiency and 
effectiveness of a green bank model requires that the home jurisdiction be sufficiently 
developed economically and that the bank be designed with best practice principles in mind. In 
this case, the Barbadian economy and needs appear to be well suited for a green bank, albeit not 
necessarily of the long-term target size indicated in the funding proposal. In terms of green bank 
principles, we note the following key factors described below as they relate to Barbados.  
48. 
Independence: an independent and de-politicised decision-making process is essential. 
BGB should ensure proper governance, including an appropriate degree of autonomy, 
transparency, and professional capacity, as this is essential to build confidence in the institution. 
In the case of BGB, the funding proposal identifies the importance of independence in 
governance and market perception. However, this is an area where additional clarity will be 
useful once the actual institution and its governance model is built out. The intention is correct, 
but independence will only be evident once the entity is legally created (details of its charter), a 
board appointed, and a process established to select key management roles.  
49. 
Political consensus: stakeholders and donors want to see a strong political consensus 
around the role of the green bank. The clearer the signal of governmental support from the 
highest levels, the more likely it is the bank will attract adequate donor support. In the case of 
BGB there is substantial evidence of political consensus. 
50. 
Financial wherewithal and security: a green bank should have an adequate and 
sustainable source of operational revenues, including from multiple sources. Relatedly, a green 
bank should be perceived as having longevity and ultimately seeking financial sustainability. 
BGB is designed with the goal of financial sustainability in mind and is seeking an initial 
capitalization that appears to be more than adequate. While BGB will provide access to 
adequate financing and concessionality when necessary, the funding proposal states that BGB’s 
lending activities are intended to be financially sustainable. All BGB’s on-lending activities will 
be profit-generating, with the appropriate measures taken to ensure estimated and actual credit 
losses are kept to a minimum. Moreover, BGB is intended to operate as a digital bank to 
minimize operational expenditures.  
51. 
Clear remit: the mission of the green bank should be well understood and defined 
around the specific environmental and social challenges that the bank is seeking to solve and 
how it will measure success. The funding proposal demonstrates effectively how climate 
impacts will be embedded into the BGB decision-making process. Additionally, the proposed 
BGB is intended to be a “climate impact first” organization. However, the mechanics of how all 
this will come together are still a work in progress.  
52. 
Local context: a successful green bank must be fit for purpose considering the local 
context and reality. Similarly, it should understand the local market (and the local market 
failures) to have confidence in the project pipeline that the green bank will support. BGB 
leadership and staff are yet to be identified and the expectation is that, as a virtual bank, it will 
have a light local touch.   
53. 
Execution capacity calibrated to the green bank’s remit: the breadth and scope of the 
bank’s mandate, product offerings and operational modalities should be aligned with the 
 
2 Whitney, A., Grbusic, T., Meisel, J., Becerra Cid, A., Sims, D., Bodnar, P. (2020) The State of Green Banks 2020, Rocky 
Mountain Institute.

=== PAGE 88 ===
GCF/B.36/02/Add.08 
Page 84 
 
 
 
 
available human resources and capabilities. It is better to have a narrow focus that can be 
properly administered versus a wide mandate that cannot. A green bank should also build 
flexibility to adapt to changing market conditions and needs, as well as expand the remit over 
time, based on track record and capacity. The BGB model assumes that it will be an evolving 
organization and allows for flexibility. The level of alignment between execution capacity and 
BGB’s remit remains unclear, as additional build-out will need to occur; however, the project 
sponsors have proposed an adequate plan. 
54. 
Human capital: human capital at a green bank is nearly as important as monetary 
capital. Green banks should recruit top professional talent to lead and staff the institution. This 
may require seeking talent external to the local market and/or building a transition period for 
capacity-building of local teams; in both cases competitive remuneration is necessary. As noted 
in our assessment, the composition of the BGB board and team remains an open question. 
55. 
Complementarity: a green bank should be complementary to the existing financial 
system. The bank should determine how best to work with existing local financial institutions so 
as not to compete with, but rather enhance, their capacity to deliver outcomes consistent with 
the mission of the bank. It is thus important to understand and define the roles of the green 
bank versus the roles of local financial institutions in delivering the outcomes, so as not to risk 
crowding out financial partners. BGB in its feasibility studies and design efforts has adequately 
taken the realities of the local existing financial system into account.  
56. 
Civil society: civil society buy-in is critical for a green bank’s credibility and market 
acceptance. The bank must ensure inclusive stakeholder engagement and buy-in so that it is 
understood and welcomed by the market. BGB has conducted extensive outreach and has a plan 
for continued activity.  
57. 
In our view, the BGB design has a well-defined mandate that can facilitate risk-taking 
investments in support of climate interventions in Barbados. We view very favourably the 
commitment of the Government of Barbados to provide USD 10 million in equity. We also note 
that discussions are underway with other third parties to secure additional equity 
commitments. Additional funding is expected to come from donor countries, philanthropies, and 
high-net-worth individuals. The commitment by Barbados will be instrumental in attracting 
other funds. Without such a strong financial signal from Barbados, we suspect that investors 
and donors would have reason to question the wherewithal and sustainability of the institution.  
58. 
We also applaud the legal ability of BGB to eventually issue securities such as green 
bonds that can attract additional capital from private and public sources. Raising capital is 
always a challenge. Many variables will impact the perception of BGB in the future, including 
whether it has deployment capacity and sufficient demand; however, building in the legal 
authorities now is an important market signal regarding the BGB trajectory.  
59. 
One concern raised by iTAP is whether BGB runs the risk of crowding out other 
initiatives (public and private) that are already underway, considering the relatively small size 
of Barbados. The AE has made the argument that these other initiatives do not approach the 
level of investment required to meet the adaptation and mitigation needs of Barbados. We agree 
that there is a gap but, as noted above, we do not agree on the actual size of this financing gap. 
For this reason, we appreciate the AE’s specific commitment that BGB will not seek to target 
public-good projects, or those that are financeable through traditional commercial options, 
thereby mitigating the risk of crowding out investment from other sources. BGB will, instead, fill 
a specific niche that currently lacks finance.  
II. 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel

=== PAGE 89 ===
GCF/B.36/02/Add.08 
Page 85 
 
 
 
 
60. 
Green banks are a critical climate mitigation and adaptation financing tool because they 
open the door for public and private capital for projects that would not have succeeded in the 
absence of green bank interventions. They do this by providing financing and other assistance 
to project developers, which can help to reduce the cost and risks (real and perceived) of 
investments in climate change mitigation and adaptation, making their financial products more 
accessible to a wider range of people and organizations around the globe. Successful green 
banks deploy not only their own capital, but also drive significantly higher amounts of private 
investment, which can help to further accelerate the transition to a more sustainable economy.  
61. 
While BGB has not yet been operationalized, funded by the Government of Barbados or 
even formally created, the efforts made thus far have moved significantly in the direction of a 
successful launch of BGB. However, in our view, there are some concerns that have made our 
assessment decision difficult, as discussed in the body of this document. To summarize a few 
areas of risk: (i) we note that the finance demand arguments made in the funding proposal 
appear to be overstated; (ii) the BGB concept is still quite early in development with gaps in 
personnel, operational tools and underlying legal and institutional frameworks; and (iii) there 
are questions around the local expertise and ability of the AE to execute. Taken together, and 
along with the early stage of development, these concerns give us pause on whether the funding 
proposal is ready for endorsement.  
62. 
Nevertheless, we have ultimately decided to provide an endorsement with conditions 
(see below). This has been a challenging decision, but several factors tip the scale for 
endorsement of this particular effort. First, the size of the funding request is relatively modest 
and matched by commitments from Barbados. Second, it is clear to us that Barbados has a 
serious political commitment to create BGB and to do so correctly. Third, Barbados is one of the 
SIDS, which are a GCF priority and particularly susceptible to the impacts of climate change. 
Lastly, we acknowledge the effectiveness of local green bank efforts and the amount of design 
that has already taken place. We think it is imperative to provide a path forward so that the 
work on this important initiative continues.  
63. 
Therefore iTAP endorses this funding proposal subject to the conditions below: 
(a) 
Conditions to be met prior to the effectiveness of the Funded Activity Agreement (FAA): 
(i) 
Delivery by the Accredited Entity to the GCF, in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat, of a disbursement plan under the FAA with the amount and schedule for each 
disbursement tranche aligned with BGB development milestones as agreed between the 
Accredited Entity and the GCF Secretariat; and 
(ii)  Delivery by the Accredited Entity to the GCF, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF 
Secretariat, of the final form of the BGB’s Investment Policy, Investment Committee Terms of 
Reference, Board Terms of Reference, Board Risk Committee Terms of Reference, BGB 
procurement policy and updated procurement plan, and Board Audit Committee Terms of 
Reference.    
(b)  
Conditions to be met prior to the first disbursement under the FAA: 
(i) 
Delivery by the Accredited Entity to the GCF, in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat, of evidence of the incorporation and registration of BGB in Barbados and the 
legally binding subscription for common shares in the share capital of BGB by the Government 
of Barbados (or an entity representing the Government of Barbados) in the minimum amount of 
USD10 million; and 
(ii) Delivery by the Accredited Entity to the GCF, in a form and substance satisfactory to the GCF 
Secretariat, of evidence of (A) the appointment of the Board of Directors of BGB,  (B) the 
establishment of the Investment Committee of BGB, which shall include a climate impact 
specialist with experience in Barbados, whose role is to provide approval authority on the

=== PAGE 90 ===
GCF/B.36/02/Add.08 
Page 86 
 
 
 
 
climate validity of BGB financing; and (C) the appointment of the initial Chief Executive Officer 
(CEO) and Chief Investment Officer (CIO) of BGB, in the case of the climate impact specialist and 
the initial CEO and CIO, to be approved by GCF BGB Holdings in its capacity as a shareholder of 
BGB, as a shareholder reserved matter in accordance with the process set out in the 
Shareholders’ Agreement.  
(c) Conditions to be met prior to the second disbursement under the FAA: 
(i) 
Delivery by the Accredited Entity to the GCF, in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat, of a financial breakdown of the start-up costs incurred by BGB or on behalf of 
BGB prior to the request for second disbursement under the FAA which shall  include evidence 
indicating the status and amount of any Co-financing received and applied to the BGB start-up 
costs, up to the date of the Request for Second Disbursement;  
(ii) 
Delivery by the Accredited Entity to the GCF, in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat, of a track record of investment activities undertaken in accordance with the 
BGB’s business plan and a pipeline of proposed investment activities that could support the 
second GCF disbursement; 
(iii) 
Delivery by the Accredited Entity to the GCF, in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat, of evidence that funding (which may be equity, debt or grant funding) in an 
amount at least equal to the aggregate of (i) the amount of the disbursement being requested 
from the GCF; and (ii) any amounts previously disbursed by the GCF under the FAA, has been 
contributed to BGB by the Co-finaciers or other funders; and 
(iv) 
Delivery by the Accredited Entity to the GCF, in a form and substance satisfactory to the 
GCF Secretariat, of evidence that the GCF BGB Holdings is the legal holder of shares in the share 
capital of BGB, representing not more than 33.33 pre cent of the share capital of BGB.

=== PAGE 91 ===
GCF/B.36/02/Add.08 
Page 87 
 
Reply to the Independent Technical Advisory Panel assessment 
findings 
Proposal name: 
Blue Green Bank 
Accredited entity: 
Pegasus Capital Advisors 
Date 
16 June 2023 
 
Impact potential 
iTAP’s assessment of the impact potential is well noted, particularly regarding the mitigation potential 
and the highly ambitious targets for energy.  
As a way of clarification, you would like to highlight that our assumptions and resulting impact estimates 
are based on: 1) our use of commonly accepted methodologies regarding the specific capacity factors of 
different electricity-producing installations (i.e., actual electrical energy output over a given period 
compared to the theoretical maximum electrical energy output over the same period); 2) Barbados’ 
existing power mix and highly ambitious transition plans; and 3) The land use and grid requirements of 
different electricity sources compared to available land in Barbados – which makes rooftop solar an 
appealing technological choice compared to ground-mounted. Most notably, solar has a considerably 
lower efficiency factor than fossil-fuel-generated power. Therefore, there is a need to install more MW 
of PV than the existing capacity of fossil-fuel plants – which will need to be phased out for Barbados to 
meet its pledge to be a 100% renewable energy and carbon-neutral island-state by 2030 (i.e., Zero 
domestic consumption of fossil fuels economy-wide). This marked difference in capacity factor 
contributes to the targeted PV capacity exceeding existing fossil-fuel generation capacity – particularly 
when factoring in other developments such as the transition to EVs or the electrification of other sectors 
of the economy, all of which will require additional generation capacity from renewable sources.  
Another consideration linked to any potential remaining overestimates is that the SHIFT programme is 
still in the early stages of development, and a detailed feasibility study still needs to be developed prior 
to investment by the BGB. Given that the primary focus of these initial pipeline initiatives is, in fact, 
climate resilience rather than energy generation, the amount of PV per targeted house will be optimized 
to reach the maximum number of houses receiving climate resilience, rather than maximizing energy 
potential. Such optimization will form part of SHIFT’s feasibility study before investment. This will 
mitigate the risk of energy demand constraining resilience efforts. While it is acknowledged that this 
might reduce the total mitigation potential of the programme, the impact will still be relatively large 
given the nature of the country and the size of GCF investment. 
Moreover, there is considerable potential with the growth of BGB to expand and replicate the SHIFT and 
HOPE initiatives beyond Barbados to other Caribbean countries, which will further expand the 
mitigation potential.  
It is anticipated that as the feasibility studies for the programmes supported by BGB are further 
developed, the scale of impact will become clearer, as noted by iTAP in Paragraph 21. The AE and the 
Government of Barbados remain firmly committed to establishing the operational systems of BGB in a 
manner that maintains a strong climate focus, ensuring that systems are in place to not only screen 
projects for their climate impact potential, but also to provide the necessary expertise to support 
intermediaries in optimizing the design of initiatives to maximize the impact potential. 
Paradigm shift potential 
The AE agrees with the views of iTAP on the paradigm shift potential of the BGB, and anticipates that the 
BGB will continue to play a vital role in mobilizing finance for climate investment in Barbados and the 
region, particularly with regard to investments in adaptation initiatives.

=== PAGE 92 ===
GCF/B.36/02/Add.08 
Page 88 
 
The concerns on the risks related to GCF investment being mobilised before all the operational and 
structural elements of the bank are finalized are well noted. This has formed a key discussion point with 
the GCF secretariat around the terms of the GCF investment, and several points have been added to 
mitigate this risk. Further risk mitigation is presented in the potential early investment by USAID and 
GoB, which will be used to initiate the process of establishing the BGB systems once GCF funding is 
approved and the FAA is finalized. The Government of Barbados also notes that this is a standard issue 
for all equity investors, and it is conventionally addressed through the equity investor having board 
representation.  
Sustainable development potential 
The AE acknowledges and agrees with iTAP’s assessment of the high sustainable development potential 
of BGB.  
Needs of the recipient 
The AE acknowledges and agrees with iTAP’s assessment of the high needs of the recipients in Barbados.  
Country ownership 
The AE acknowledges and agrees with iTAP’s assessment of the existing high-country ownership for 
BGB. This ownership stems from the Government of Barbados’s firm commitment to resilience building 
and climate action, as evident in the BGB’s alignment with the Roof’s to Reef resilience strategy and 
Barbados’s NDCs. The proposed new legislation that will underpin the establishment of the bank, which 
is anticipated to appear before the cabinet in the coming weeks (see below), further demonstrates the 
strong national ownership of the project. 
We acknowledge the iTAP’s comment that other green banks often have government board members 
serve in a non-voting capacity.  In this case, however, given how closely we are working with the 
Government of Barbados and the funding being provided by the Government of Barbados, we believe it 
is appropriate for the Government to have a voting board seat, but not the ability to control the Board. 
Efficiency and effectiveness 
The recommendations from iTAP on key factors to consider in relation to the principles of a green bank 
are well noted. These principles have underpinned the proposed structure of the BGB (as presented in 
the operations manual) and are expected to become more apparent as the final operational and 
structural elements of the Bank are defined by its Board. The recommendations from iTAP on this matter 
are, therefore, appreciated and will be taken into account throughout the process of finalizing the 
operational structure of the BGB. Regarding the independence of the BGB, it has been concluded that the 
BGB requires that new legislation be enacted. The first draft of a Brief has already been prepared and 
circulated for consideration. It is proposed that a review meeting be held on Wednesday June 28, 2023, 
to finalize the Brief for submission to the Cabinet. When the Brief is approved it will be sent to the Office 
of the Chief Parliamentary Counsel for the preparation of the draft Bill. Once the legislation is enacted, 
the entity may be incorporated and the Board and other structures will be put in place. 
A central element of ensuring the effectiveness of the BGB is the finalization of the investment criteria 
that will ensure that climate focus remains at the core of the BGB’s operations. While initial investment 
criteria that establish the climate focus have already been defined, these will be further refined to link 
the criteria to their potential impacts, creating a space for prioritising high climate-impact projects.

=== PAGE 93 ===
GCF/B.36/02/Add.08 
Page 89 
 
Overall remarks from the independent Technical Advisory Panel: 
The AE and the Government of Barbados both applaud the decision of iTAP to endorse the proposal, 
acknowledging that the risks can be mitigated through the appropriate use of conditions proposed by 
iTAP, along with those of the GCF Secretariat. It is our firm belief that with the strong commitment from 
the Government to the BGB and climate action in general that the establishment of the BGB will align 
with the best practices identified and that the relatively small investment from GCF will unlock 
considerable climate finance for Barbados and potentially other Caribbean SIDS — for which there is an 
urgent need. 
With respect to the iTAP’s proposed conditions, we agree with the intent of ITAP’s conditions and the 
majority are in line with our intended disbursement milestones. We do feel however that the hiring of 
key management personnel would be better suited as a condition for second disbursement after the 
initial GCF funding has been invested in BGB.

=== PAGE 94 ===
GENDER ASSESSMENT AND ACTION PLAN 
Version 1| GCF Board – June 2023 
ANNEX 8 
Page 90

=== PAGE 95 ===
2     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
Table of Contents 
1 
Introduction .............................................................................................................................................................................. 5 
1.1 
Background and Context .........................................................................................................................................................................5 
1.2 
Objectives of the report ...........................................................................................................................................................................7 
1.3 
Gender-specific considerations ............................................................................................................................................................7 
2 
Gender in Barbados: legal and institutional framework .................................................................................................... 8 
2.1 
Relevant legal framework ....................................................................................................................................................................... 8 
2.2 
Relevant institutional framework ...................................................................................................................................................... 10 
2.2.1 
The Bureau of Gender Affairs ........................................................................................................................................................ 10 
2.2.2 
Non-governmental organisations ..................................................................................................................................................11 
3 
Gender status in Barbados ................................................................................................................................................... 12 
3.1 
Gender overview ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 12 
3.1.1 
Demographics and gender profile ................................................................................................................................................. 12 
3.1.2 
Gender and climate ............................................................................................................................................................................ 13 
3.1.3 
Gender in education ........................................................................................................................................................................... 14 
3.1.4 
Employment and economic empowerment .............................................................................................................................. 15 
3.1.5 
Gender, Health & GBV ....................................................................................................................................................................... 15 
3.1.6 
Enabling environment considerations ......................................................................................................................................... 15 
4 
Sector-level gender considerations .................................................................................................................................... 17 
4.1 
Women, gender equality and energy ................................................................................................................................................ 17 
4.1.1 
Renewable energy .............................................................................................................................................................................. 17 
4.2 
Women, gender equality and water security .................................................................................................................................. 18 
4.3 
Infrastructure and the built environment ........................................................................................................................................ 19 
5 
Gender analysis ...................................................................................................................................................................... 21 
5.1 
Overarching challengese identified from the country and sector assessments ................................................................. 21 
Water security ..................................................................................................................................................................................................... 22 
Renewable energy.............................................................................................................................................................................................. 22 
Infrastructure and built environment .......................................................................................................................................................... 22 
5.2 
Recommendations to reduce gender gaps..................................................................................................................................... 23 
6 
Gender action plan ................................................................................................................................................................ 24 
Page 91

=== PAGE 96 ===
3     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
7 
References .............................................................................................................................................................................. 27 
 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 3-1: Demographic indicators for Barbados (Source: World Bank, Barbados population. World statistical Data) ...................................... 12 
Table 3-2. Gender development indices for Barbados (Source: UNDP 2021/2022) .......................................................................................................... 13 
Table 3-3. Sex Disaggregated Indicators for Education in Barbados, 2021 (Source: USAID. Barbados Gender) .................................................... 14 
Table 4-1. GCF Vulnerabilities and Capacities for Change-Energy and Power Generation ........................................................................................... 18 
Table 4-2. GCF Vulnerabilities and Capacities for Change - Health Food and Water Security .................................................................................... 19 
Table 4-3. GCF Vulnerabilities and Capacities for Change-Infrastructure and the Built Environment ...................................................................... 20 
Table 5-1. Overarching Issues Affecting Women and Potential Interventions for Barbados ......................................................................................... 21 
Table 5-2. Gender issues and potential interventions to attain water security .................................................................................................................. 22 
Table 5-3. Gender issues and potential interventions for renewable energy ..................................................................................................................... 22 
Table 5-4. Gender issues and potential interventions in the infrastructure and built environment ........................................................................... 22 
 
ACRONYMS 
AE 
 
Accredited Entity 
BGB 
 
Blue Green Bank 
BWA 
 
Barbados Water Authority  
CARICOM  
Caribbean Community 
CEDAW  
Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination Against Women 
ESMS 
 
Environmental and Social Management System 
GCF 
 
Green Climate Fund 
GDI 
 
Gender Development Index  
GDP 
 
Gross Domestic Product 
GFP 
 
Gender Focal Point 
GGGI 
 
Global Gender Gap Index  
GHG 
 
Green House Gases 
GII 
 
Gender Inequality Index  
HDI 
 
Human Development Index  
HOPE 
 
Home Ownership Providing Energy 
HR 
 
Human Resources  
Page 92

=== PAGE 97 ===
4     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
ILO 
 
International Labour Organisation 
IMF 
 
International Monetary Fund  
INDC 
 
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution  
NDC 
 
Nationally Determined Contribution 
NGO 
 
Non-governmental Organisation 
NOW 
 
National Organization of Women  
OECD 
 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development  
PPP 
 
Purchasing Power Parity 
PV 
 
Photovoltaics  
R2RP 
 
Roof to Reef Programme  
RE 
 
Renewable Energy  
UN 
 
United Nations 
UNDP 
 
United Nations Development Program  
UNFCCC 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  
UNWOMEN 
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women 
USA 
 
United States America  
USAID  
United States Agency for International Development  
WBL 
 
Women Business Law 
WEF 
 
World Economic Forum  
WHO 
 
World Health Organisation 
 
 
Page 93

=== PAGE 98 ===
5     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
1 Introduction 
1.1 BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT 
The people of Barbados are vulnerable to major climate impacts, which have affected the country’s socio-economic and 
development trajectory thus slowing down economic growth in the past four years (World Bank, 2021). These climate impacts 
are driven largely by the increased frequency and intensity of tropical storms and hurricanes — along with the associated 
impacts of sea level rise and storm surge — as well as decreasing rainfall with longer dry spells, lower soil moisture and 
increased aridity. Urgent adaptation action is, therefore, needed to reduce the wide-reaching impacts on key economic 
sectors and secure a sustainable future for all Bajans. In addition to these core adaptation needs; the country recognises the 
vital importance of global mitigation efforts to reduce the threat of future climate change exacerbating these impacts. To this 
end, despite contributing significantly less than 0.01% of global GHG emissions, Barbados’ resilience strategy includes highly 
ambitious mitigation targets, including a transition to 100% renewable energy by 2030. These ambitious targets are intended 
to demonstrate the country’s commitment to climate action, as well as to serve as an example to the rest of the world of the 
feasibility of the transition when innovative approaches are adopted.  
Unfortunately, despite these commitments, progress has been slow — especially in adopting renewable energies and water 
conservation initiatives by middle- to low-income households. This relates primarily to the structure of ownership of capital in 
the Barbados economy and the financial ecosystem (see Barriers below for more detail). Given the existing fiscal constraints, 
Barbados’ resilience strategy — encompassed in the Roofs to Reefs Programme (R2RP) — recognises the need to partner 
with the private sector to mobilise finance for innovative climate investments that are or can be made, bankable. Such an 
approach will enable the government to direct the limited concessional finance available towards public-good resilience 
measures that do not have direct financial returns.  
There is a discernible gap in the market in Barbados and the Caribbean for a financial institution that can provide 
opportunities for existing financial institutions and capital markets to mobilise funds, whether through conventional bank 
lending or alternative securitisation of revenue streams deriving from climate change mitigation and adaptation activities, 
thereby creating stronger and more diversified capital markets.   
In addition to its climate resilience ambitions, Barbados has also made firm commitments with regards to gender, equality 
and social inclusion - aiming to eliminate all forms of gender discrimination and to ensure that the country attains gender 
equality in all spheres of development. Over the years Barbados has made great strides in reducing gender inequality, 
particularly in education attainment. However, 60% of households are female-headed and women are overrepresented 
among the poor and vulnerable and low-income groups. As a result, these groups are disproportionately affected in accessing 
economic resources, including land, housing loans, and finance, among other resources. These gender issues limit the 
capability of women and low-income groups to own houses and render them vulnerable to climate disasters. When climate 
disasters strike poor women find it harder to recover compared to poor men. An innovative and sustainable finance vehicle 
that targets the low-income groups specifically women is therefore imperative for the development of Barbados and for 
reducing climate vulnerability on the island.  
To address the urgent need for innovative, inclusive finance in Barbados, the proposed project will establish a sustainable 
climate finance vehicle — the Blue Green Bank (BGB) — to stimulate innovation in the financial sector with the goal of 
mobilizing the securities and loan markets to unlock additional funding for climate-responsive initiatives. The BGB will be a 
joint public-private sector effort to create an improved financing infrastructure that works closely with other financing players 
Page 94

=== PAGE 99 ===
6     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
— such as commercial banks, credit unions, pension funds, and insurance companies — to crowd in private capital alongside 
public capital, rather than crowding out the significant investment opportunities offered by these key financial institutions. 
For such institutions to become involved in climate change mitigation and adaptation activities, the leadership should be 
provided by a third party putting the deal together, for which it must establish the appropriate capacities in technical and HR 
terms, as well as appropriate management and institutional arrangements.  
To establish the BGB, the Government of Barbados is applying for an initial injection of funds from the Green Climate Fund 
(GCF). The green climate fund provides finance for climate mitigation and adaptation to transformational and impactful 
projects and programmes that provide co-benefits to both men and women. The GCF recognises that climate change has a 
disproportionate impact on women and that gender-responsive approaches are critical to the success of climate action. In its 
updated Gender Policy, the GCF requires that all projects that it supports implement a gender analysis and Gender Action 
Plan (GAP).  The purpose of this gender analysis and GAP is to identify key gender issues and constraints to be addressed 
through project implementation as a way of ensuring that women and other vulnerable groups are fully included as 
beneficiaries and decision-makers and that their capacities are enhanced in building community resilience against climate 
change risks. For these reasons the proposed Blue-Green-Bank is obliged to ensure that all its operations and those of the 
intermediary partners benefitting from the funds are gender responsive. 
The BGB is designed to become a significant institution for practical and strategic financing of climate change adaptation 
and mitigation policies and measures, supporting the Governments of Barbados to achieve national resilience and emissions 
reduction targets. As a partnership which brings together public (Government of Barbados), private and multilateral 
institutions at the level of equity, the BGB can present a holistic view of the market and the potential for green financing by 
ensuring that new projects align with Barbados’ NDC targets. Because the BGB’s goal is national climate adaptation and 
mitigation, it will seek not to replace other financial institutions but to act as a partner and support system for them in this 
underdeveloped market segment. To this end, the bank will be wholesale in operation, providing support in the form of funds, 
guarantees or other mechanisms to existing lenders, whether banks, credit unions, insurance companies etc to facilitate the 
funding of blue/green programs contemplated by government policy. The BGB will also serve as a conduit between local 
financial institutions and the Government of Barbados, allowing the BGB to identify market opportunities and provide 
feedback and data to inform policy decisions more effectively.     
Once established, the BGB will engage with investors, including private investment firms, development banks, philanthropic 
organisations, and other sources of finance to continue to capitalise the bank over the long term. The bank will maintain a 
debt-finance to equity ratio of 7:1, aiming to mobilise at least USD 620 million over the next 15 years. 
Overall, the BGB will promote a paradigm shift towards investment in resilient livelihoods and low-carbon technologies, with 
emphasis on low-income, vulnerable households and the energy, housing, agriculture and transport sectors. The project will 
also build the wider community's awareness of climate investment opportunities in support of a more resilient and sustainable 
Caribbean. Finally, by focusing on climate resilience and adaptation for middle to low-income households — including a 
specific focus on women and other highly vulnerable groups — the BGB would aim to attract more concessional or 
philanthropic providers of capital, expanding the goals of climate action in Barbados without the need for further injections 
of money by the Government and the Green Climate Fund (GCF). This will create long-term sustainability and scalability in the 
banking sector, with the potential to scale beyond Barbados into the broader Caribbean region over time. Most importantly 
the BGB will establish a climate finance vehicle that has inclusive systems, is gender-responsive, participatory and 
transparent to address gender issues pertaining to accessing climate funds.                                
Page 95

=== PAGE 100 ===
7     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
1.2 OBJECTIVES OF THE REPORT  
The BGB fully adheres to the principle of country ownership, meaning that for each financed activity that receives funding 
from the BGB, a Gender Assessment (Annex 8.1) and Action Plan (Annex 8.2) will be in place and alignment with the 
requirements set out in the GCF updated Gender Policy.  
The project-level Gender Assessments and Action Plans will ensure that each activity financed by the BGB is designed and 
implemented in support of/alignment with other national development strategies that promote equal opportunities, poverty 
reduction and sustainable use of natural resources from a national, regional and sector-specific perspective.  
This gender assessment serves as the foundation for the BGB's gender responsiveness – through its financed activities – to 
support gender equality and women’s empowerment and to monitor the links between gender equality, climate mitigation 
and adaptation, and environmental sustainability. The assessment also informed the formulation of the project-specific 
gender action plan (GAP). 
The Annex is informed by a review of existing literature and secondary databases, ongoing stakeholder consultations as 
well as expert input and case study analyses and is considered a living document that will be regularly updated by the 
BGB’s technical team. 
This gender assessment aims to:  
• 
Provide an overview of existing national policies, strategies and action plans that have integrated gender perspectives, 
especially in national climate change adaptation strategies and legal frameworks related to built infrastructure, water 
conservation and renewable energy technologies for low-income Barbadians. 
• 
Identify gender issues relevant to the BGB, highlighting the socio-political, economic, and cultural aspects of climate 
change adaptation and mitigation. It is anticipated that the identification of these issues will highlight potential gaps in 
the goals of the project that do not align with stakeholder priorities, and that reinforce existing disparities. 
• 
Provide recommendations that will inform the Gender Action Plan, and include specific tasks and activities designed to 
build the capacity of project implementors (i.e. the BGB and its intermediaries) so that they can address climate change 
and provide gender-responsive investments. 
• 
Assess the gender dimensions of the targeted sectors in Barbados, in which the BGB is most likely to channel funding.  
This Gender Assessment will be used by the BGB1, the Accredited Entity (AE, Pegasus Capital Advisors2) as well as project 
owners to ensure compliance with the GCF’s fiduciary principles and standards, environmental and social safeguards 
standards and Gender Policy.  
1.3 GENDER-SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS  
This Gender Assessment has focussed on identifying gender and social inclusion considerations at a national level, as well 
as within the BGB’s three sectors of interest (that is, the energy, water, and infrastructure and the built environment sectors). 
As such, there are two layers of gender-specific considerations that have been found through this assessment.  
 
1 The BGB in this instance will evolve into the executing entity and will oversee that the gender action plans and assessment are submitted, reviewed and 
aligned with GCF’s outcomes.  
2 The AE is responsible for overseeing and monitoring that the BGB is in compliance with the GCF fiduciary principles and standards, environmental and 
social safeguards standards and Gender Policy (all of which are standards for GCF accreditation), and other relevant GCF policies and requirements, in 
accordance with the relevant legal agreements (accreditation master agreements and funded activity agreements). 
Page 96

=== PAGE 101 ===
8     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
 
The first set look at the country’s overarching gender context and provide a useful foundation for conceptualising gender-
responsive measures at a project-level. The most relevant considerations (for the purpose of this project) include: 
• 
Female headed household and other vulnerable groups are disproportionately impacted by the economic 
downturns resulting from climate change. 
• 
There is an imbalance of women in senior management and decision-making roles, as well as a wage gap between 
men and women in the same jobs. 
• 
The country’s policy and overarching enabling environment for gender equality and social inclusion is lacking: the 
National Gender Policy has not yet been ratified; there is an absence of effective gender responsive budgeting in the 
public sector; and there are insufficient monitoring, evaluation, and sex-disaggregation initiatives to inform gender-
responsive decision-making at national, sectoral and industry levels.  
 
The second layer of considerations look more specifically at what challenges / gaps / needs exist from a gender perspective 
within the three sectors and have been used to guide specific actions in the Gender Action Plan. These include: 
• 
Women are not active stakeholders in the country’s energy sector, despite being the primary users of energy at a 
household level. Specifically, access to affordable electricity is currently a challenge for lower-income and vulnerable 
households – the majority of which are female headed; and too few women enterprises are involved in the renewable 
energy sector (i.e., technology development and marketing) due to lack of knowledge and financial resources.  
• 
Extended, and more frequent, droughts have led to major water scarcity issues on the island, which are disproportionately 
impacting female-headed households and vulnerable communities’ socio-economically, physically, and psychologically. 
• 
Due to financial constraints and an inability to secure loans, low-income households (60% of which are female headed) 
are unable to own houses, nor upgrade or build climate resilient housing. 
These findings are elaborated in the sections that follow and culminate in a set of recommendations for the project’s Gender 
Action Plan.  
 
 
 
2 Gender in Barbados: legal and institutional framework 
2.1 RELEVANT LEGAL FRAMEWORK 
The Constitution of Barbados is the Supreme law providing for the rights and freedoms of all its people and outlawing 
discrimination by race, origin, political opinion, colour and sex. Under the Constitution, women of Barbados enjoy equal rights 
and all freedoms and social justice. No formal provision protects against discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation. 
The Government of Barbados (GoB) ratified the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 1994 
and the Kyoto Protocol in 2000. In September 2015, it communicated its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) 
to the UNFCCC Secretariat and six years later its first national Determined Contribution (NDC) in 2021. Barbados signed and 
ratified the Paris Agreement on 22 April 2016. In the 2021 NDC updates Barbados committed to enhancing its climate 
response and increasing its climate mitigation contribution in line with the Paris Agreement (UNFCC report 2021). 
Page 97

=== PAGE 102 ===
9     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
Furthermore, in 2021 the Physical Development Plan and the Roofs to Reefs Programme (R2RP) were introduced as the two 
main national frameworks to achieve Barbados’ climate resilience goals.  
Barbados main international instrument supportive of gender equality is the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of 
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), which it ratified in 1980. The Government of Barbados also ratified the regional 
gender equality instrument, the Inter-American Convention on the Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of Violence against 
Women (known as the Convention of Belem does Para) in 1995 which commits to the elimination of all forms of Violence 
against Women. In addition, Barbados is a party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child. It is also a signatory to the 
United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. In September 2022, it became the 29th country in the 
world to ratify the Violence and Harassment Convention, 2019 (No. 190).  
The GoB is developing the national policy on gender. The goal of the policy is to create an enabling environment in Barbados 
for the achievement of gender justice by inculcating values and practices that will eliminate gender stereotypes and 
discriminatory behavior from all aspects of inter-personal relations and national life. The goal of the policy is to build a culture 
of gender justice which will facilitate social harmony, sustainable economic development and an enhanced quality of life for 
all boys, girls, men and women. Some relevant objectives include: 
• 
Provide an institutional mandate and operational framework to initiate, coordinate, implement, monitor and evaluate 
gender-responsive national development budgets, policies, programmes, plans, projects and activities 
• 
Build awareness and technical competency in gender analysis, planning, budgeting, research, monitoring and 
evaluation throughout the public service.  
• 
Promote gender mainstreaming and best practices in addressing development issues from a gender perspective in 
all sectors of government and civil society  
• 
Provide incentives for the use of renewable energy and sustainable development practices. 
• 
Create/expand employment opportunities for women in all sectors of the economy: value added agriculture, 
alternative energy, new technologies, sustainable micro enterprise. 
• 
Provide adequate financial and technical support from the state and private sectors, in a timely manner, to create 
decent employment in the formal and informal sectors. 
Furthermore, as early as 1992, Barbados made great strides to criminalize gender-based violence (GBV) by enacting the 
Domestic Violence (Protection Orders) Act. The Act was amended in 2016, making it one of the strongest Protection Orders 
in the CARICOM region. The amendments simplified GBV case reporting and most importantly, they provided powers of 
emergency protection orders to the police. The law draws on best practices in the Commonwealth.  
Regarding labour rights, Barbados is a party to 36 International Labour Organization (ILO) Conventions concerning the rights 
and privileges of workers. Among these are the International Labour Organization Employment Policy Convention; ILO 
Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No 111); ILO Freedom of Association and Protection of the 
Rights to Organize Convention, 1948 (No 87) and ILO Right to Organize and Collective Bargaining Convention, 1978 (No 98) 
and Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No 182).  
In terms of sexual harassment, the Employment Sexual Harassment Act 2017 aims to make provisions for the protection of 
employees from sexual harassment in the workplace. This includes making provisions for the protection of employees in the 
Page 98

=== PAGE 103 ===
10     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
public and private sectors as well as offering an avenue for reporting sexual harassment cases. Read with the Sexual 
Harassment Act is the Employment (Prevention of Discrimination) Act 2020 that aids in prohibiting employment opportunities 
based on gender.  
Women and men are regarded as equal within the law in the context of the ownership and use of land (OECD, 2019). Married 
women are protected under the Married Women Act 1978, which enables them to acquire, hold and dispose of by the will of 
real or personal property as their separate property. Women and men also have equal ownership rights to immovable property 
under the Property Act of 1980 and can inherit assets equally under the Succession Act of 1979. It should, however, be noted 
that the lack of sex-disaggregated data in key areas such as ownership of property restricts analysis and evidence-based 
approaches to gender equality (OECD, 2019).  
The Barbados Bureau of Gender Affairs is responsible for the integration of gender in national development policies and 
programs. The BGA operates under the Ministry of People Empowerment and Elder Affairs. A Draft National Policy on Gender 
has been formulated and is presently before parliament for consideration.3 
2.2 RELEVANT INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK 
2.2.1 The Bureau of Gender Affairs 
The Bureau of Gender Affairs (BGA) is a government agency under the Ministry of People Empowerment and Elder Affairs 
(MPEEA) in Barbados, that is dedicated to promoting gender equality and empowering women. Established in 1985, the BGA 
has played a critical role in advocating for the rights of women and girls in Barbados, and in working to eliminate discrimination 
and promote gender equality in all areas of society. Falling under the Ministry of People Empowerment and Elder Affairs are 
the following departments, agencies and related entities: Child Care Board; Welfare Department; National Disabilities Unit; 
National Assistance Board; Bureau of Social Policy, Risk and Planning; and National HIV AIDS Commission. These entities 
promote and support social inclusion and address the social welfare issues to empower all people of Barbados.  
The BGA serves a variety of stakeholders, including women and girls, families, communities, and organizations. Through its 
programs and initiatives, the BGA seeks to empower women and girls by providing them with the resources, skills, and support 
that they need to achieve their full potential. The BGA also works to raise awareness about the importance of gender equality 
and the challenges facing women and girls in Barbados. This includes providing information, training, and support to 
organizations and individuals to help them understand and address gender-based barriers and biases. 
One of the keyways in which the BGA achieves its goals is through the development and implementation of gender-sensitive 
policies and programmes. These include initiatives that promote women’s economic empowerment, such as providing women 
with access to finance, training, and markets, as well as programs that support the elimination of violence against women. 
The BGA also works to ensure that women are fully represented in decision-making processes, including in government and 
the private sector. 
The BGA is made up of several committees, each with a specific focus and responsibility. These committees include the Policy 
and Planning Committee, the Gender-Based Violence Prevention and Response Committee, the Women’s Economic 
Empowerment Committee, and the Gender Mainstreaming Committee. The Policy and Planning Committee is responsible for 
developing and implementing gender-sensitive policies and programs that address the needs of women and girls in Barbados. 
 
3 At the time of writing (April, 2023), the draft policy was unavailable for review as part of this assessment. 
Page 99

=== PAGE 104 ===
11     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
The Gender-Based Violence Prevention and Response Committee is responsible for addressing violence against women and 
girls and for developing programs and services to support victims of violence. 
The Women's economic Empowerment Committee focuses on promoting women's economic empowerment and addressing 
the barriers that prevent women from accessing financial resources, markets, and training opportunities. This committee 
works with government agencies, the private sector, and civil society organizations to ensure that women have access to the 
resources they need to participate fully in the economy. The Gender Mainstreaming Committee is responsible for ensuring 
that gender considerations are integrated into all areas of government policy and decision-making processes. 
The BGA established Gender Focal Points (GFPs) in all the Ministries. The Gender Focal Points play a critical role in advancing 
gender equality within government ministries. Their responsibilities are to lead, coordinate, and advocate that gender 
considerations are integrated into all aspects of policy development, program implementation, and decision-making 
processes for the ministries that they are assigned to.  
In addition to the MPEEA, two other government entities have clear inclusion agendas:  
• 
The Ministry of Labour, Social Security and the Third Sector Promotes opportunities for the provision of decent 
work. Through enactment of employment policies and laws it ensures that employment is decent, offers equal 
opportunities to all citizens, and provides quality social and economic benefits. The Ministry has a gender program 
to address gender-based violence in the workplace. 
 
• 
The National Insurance Department is mandated among other things, to set up and manage a national insurance 
scheme that benefits those who lose their jobs, pensioners and the unemployed. It also formulates strategies to 
reduce unemployment. 
 
2.2.2 Non-governmental organisations 
Barbados has an extensive network of Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), some of which play a significant role in 
advancing gender equality. These organizations work to empower women and girls by providing them with the resources, 
skills, and support they need to overcome barriers and biases and achieve their full potential. Some of these NGOs focus on 
specific issues, such as promoting women’s economic empowerment, addressing violence against women, and advocating 
for even stronger women’s political representation. Other organizations provide services, such as counselling, legal support, 
and job training, to support women and girls. Many of these NGOs also work in partnership with government agencies, such 
as the Bureau of Gender Affairs, to ensure that gender considerations are integrated into government policies and programs. 
Through their efforts, these NGOs play a critical role in promoting gender equality in Barbados and in empowering women 
and girls to achieve their rights and participate fully in society. 
Examples include the National Organization of Women (NOW), which coordinates other women’s organizations, and the 
Barbados Christian Council and the Barbados Council of Evangelical Churches, which are the two umbrella bodies in the faith-
based community. The Barbados Council for the Disabled and the Barbados National Organization for the Disabled (BARNOD) 
are umbrella organizations serving the Disabled Community or Persons with Disabilities and both receive assistance from the 
State.  
Page 100

=== PAGE 105 ===
12     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
3 Gender status in Barbados 
3.1 GENDER OVERVIEW 
3.1.1 Demographics and gender profile  
The population estimates for Barbados is 281,200 (The World Bank , 2021) with women making up approximately 52.1% of 
the population (The World Bank Group, 2021). Barbados obtained a Human Development Index (HDI) value of 0.790 for 
2021, placing the country in the High Human Development Category and positioning it at 70 out of 191 countries and 
territories (UNDP 2021/2022). This high ranking reflects long life expectancy, high levels of school 12enrolment and length 
of education, and high income per capita, all of which improved from 1980. The population growth rate (annual change) is 
currently estimated as 0.18%% (2021 data point) (The World Bank , 2021), and has been falling since 2008 when it stood 
at 0.44% (World Bank, 2023).  
 
Table 3-1: Demographic indicators for Barbados (Source: World Bank, Barbados population. World statistical Data) 
Indicator  
  
Percentage of females in the population  
52.1% 
Sex ratio – Males per 100 females 
94.59 
% of females who live in urban areas  
31.6% (approximately 91000)  
Population growth (annual change) 
0.18% in 2021 
 
According to the World Economic Forum ‘s “2022 Gender Gap Report,” Barbados ranked 30th globally (among 146 countries) 
and was the 3rd out of 22 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean countries on the Global Gender Gap Index (GGGI), 
which benchmarks the evolution of gender-based gaps and tracks progress towards gender parity. The GGGI comprises 
metrics across four fundamental categories (Economic Participation and Opportunity, Educational Attainment, Health and 
Survival, and Political Empowerment). These are notable achievements. In 2022, Barbados’ Global Gender Gap Index value 
was 0.765 (the best score is 1 and the least is 0), reflecting a gender gap of 23.5%between men and women (World Economic 
Forum 2022a). To provide a perspective, Barbados’ ranking was in the same range as the USA and the Netherlands, which 
ranked 27th and 28threspectively, and far better than other developed countries such as Denmark, Australia and Singapore.  
Examining the categories separately sheds more light on the factors that contribute to gender inequality. Barbados ranked 
3rd out of 146 countries in Economic Participation and Opportunity (WEF 2022a). Barbados’s weakest performance in the 
index was on Political Empowerment, scoring 0.27. It should be noted that Barbados still ranked a very respectable 49 out 
of 146 countries (World Economic Forum 2022a). The performance in political empowerment was indeed above a poor global 
average of approximately 0.22. Barbados is also one of the countries scoring well in Education Attainment, closely reaching 
parity with a score of 0.993 and ranking 67 out of 146 countries (World Economic Forum 2022a). 
The Gender Development Index (GDI) for Barbados is 1.034 (Table 3-2) placing it in group 2 countries, with a higher female 
HDI of 0.799 than that of males (0.773) (UNDP 2021/2022). Group 2 countries are those countries with medium to high 
equality in HDI achievements between women and men (absolute deviation of 2.5- 5 per cent) (UNDP, 20221/2022).  
Page 101

=== PAGE 106 ===
13     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
 
Table 3-2. Gender development indices for Barbados (Source: UNDP 2021/2022) 
 
Female 
Male 
Indicator  
 
 
Gender Development Index (Value) 
1.034. Group 2 
Human Development Index (value) 
0.799 
0.773 
Life Expectancy at Birth (Years) 
79.4 
75.6 
Expected Years of Schooling (Years) 
17.7 
13.8 
Mean years of Schooling (Years) 
10.3 
9.1 
Estimated Gross National Income Per Capita 
(2017 PPP $) 
10,235 
14,555 
The Gender Inequality Index (GII) is a measure reflecting inequality in achievement between men and women in three 
dimensions – reproductive health, empowerment and the labour market. Barbados has a GII value of 0.268 (1 high inequality, 
0 low inequality) for 2021 showing no change from 2020 (UNDP 2021/2022). The low value indicates that there is little 
inequality in Barbados.  
The indicators that are used for calculating GII are listed below for Barbados: 
• 
29.4% of parliamentary seats are held by women. 
• 
95.4% of adult women have reached at least a secondary level of education compared to 86.0% of their male 
counterparts (ages 25 and older). 
• 
27.0 women in every 100,000 live births, die from pregnancy-related causes; and the adolescent birth rate is 42.3 births 
per 1,000 women of ages 15-19. 
• 
Female participation in the labour market is 56.1% compared to 63.7 for men (UNDP, 2021/2022).  
These indicators show that there are only a few areas needing further attention, and they should not take away from the 
achievements made by the country. 
The World Bank’s Women, Business, and the Law (WBL) 2022 Index further shows the achievements of Barbados in laws 
that guide/protect gender in the various areas of work life. The indices provide a measure of how conducive the work 
environment is for women on a scale of 1 to 100%. The overall score for Barbados is 80 (out of a possible 100). Barbados’ 
score is slightly lower than the regional average for Latin America and the Caribbean of 80.4. With that said, Barbados 
obtained a perfect score of 100 in 4 out of 6 parameters i.e., Workplace, Marriage, Assets and Pensions indicators. Its lowest 
score was 40 in the Parenthood indicator. 
3.1.2 Gender and climate  
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has noted that “[people who are socially, economically, culturally, 
politically, institutionally, or otherwise marginalized are especially vulnerable to climate change and to some adaptation and 
mitigation responses […] This heightened vulnerability is rarely due to a single cause. Rather, it is the product of intersecting 
social processes that result in inequalities in socioeconomic status and income, as well as in exposure. Such social processes 
include, for example, discrimination based on gender, class, ethnicity, age, and (dis)ability.” By calling for climate action and 
requesting finance from GCF, Barbados is not only required to tackle climate change impacts at an ecological level but also 
recognise the intrinsic link between gender and climate responsiveness. Indeed, the concerns of vulnerable groups and a 
gender lens must be applied across priority cross-cutting themes within planned adaptation and mitigation initiatives. 
Page 102

=== PAGE 107 ===
14     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
Although climate change impacts all Bajans, due to the differing roles of women and men in society, climate change will 
impact women more differently, requiring a bespoke gendered approach to be applied to address the various challenges and 
barriers that women may face.   
A National Climate Change Committee has been established that encourages gender parity in attendance and assigned roles. 
The Committee’s overarching objective is to uphold “capacity building, knowledge sharing and communication, gender 
balance, participation and women’s leadership, the strengthening of the integration of gender within the various bodies and 
provide a gender response to the implementation of the Paris Agreement”. It is also noted that the current administration is 
crafting additional policies that will contribute towards transformative change including a climate change monitoring report. 
Despite these initiatives, the collection and reporting of sex-disaggregated data have been stilted and require improvement, 
however, there are efforts to develop a framework that bolsters the routine collection of sex-disaggregated data.  
The draft National Gender Policy includes similar sentiments on the need for improved collection of sex disaggregated data. 
It also presents several key recommendations focused on climate adaptation and mitigation, which are of relevance to the 
BGB’s areas of interest: 
• 
Increase protection for women and girls in relation to shelter situations during occurrences of natural hazards.  
• 
Continue to lobby the international community for climate change adaptation and resilience-building financing, 
particularly for vulnerable communities across Barbados.   
• 
Increase livelihood protection through micro-insurance solutions for farmers, fisherfolk and other small 
businesspeople, many of whom are women whose livelihoods will be most affected by climate change.    
• 
Provide incentives for the use of renewable energy and sustainable development practices.” (Government of 
Barbados - Bureau of Gender Affairs, 2021) 
3.1.3 Gender in education 
Barbados has a well-established education system, with a strong emphasis on providing equal opportunities for education 
for both men and women. The GoB expenditure on education is distributed among the primary, secondary, and tertiary 
institutions. The country provides free pre-primary, primary, secondary, and tertiary education, as well as technical and 
vocational training programs. As a result, the country has a high literacy rate, with 99.6% of the population being able to read 
and write (Table 3-3. Sex Disaggregated Indicators for Education in Barbados, 2021). 
Table 3-3. Sex Disaggregated Indicators for Education in Barbados, 2021 (Source: USAID. Barbados Gender) 
Indicator 
Male (per cent) 
Female (Percent) 
Both sexes 
Adult literacy rate +15 
99.6 
99.6 
 
Total net enrolment rate, primary 
100 
97.83 
 
Gross enrolment ratio for tertiary education  
40.33 
90.57 
 
School enrolment tertiary (gross) gender parity index (GPI) 
 
 
1.55 
Literacy rate (age 15-24) Youth GPI  
 
 
1 
Completion rate upper secondary  
90.4 
97.7 
 
Total net enrolment in upper secondary  
92.54 
97.32 
 
Average Years of schooling age 15+ 
 
9.69 
 
Primary completion rate  
93.4 
98.76 
 
Labour Force with advanced education 
77.4 
81.46 
 
Youth literacy ratio 15-24 
 
99.9 
 
Enrolment in secondary education 
 
9.5K 
 
Based on the World Economic Forum Global Gender Gap report (see above) Barbados has a very high score for Education 
Attainment and has only 0.07% of the educational gender gap to close. 
Page 103

=== PAGE 108 ===
15     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
3.1.4 Employment and economic empowerment  
The employment sector in Barbados plays a critical role in the country’s economic development and the well-being of its 
citizens. Despite this, women in Barbados face several challenges when it comes to accessing employment opportunities and 
achieving economic security. The USAID Bridgetown Gender Quick Look (2022) found that only 25.4% of firms have females 
in top management positions. Furthermore, 84 days are given for paid maternity but there is no parental leave awarded to 
both men and women (WHO 2022). Women dominate in the service industry, where they occupy middle management jobs, 
clerical and housekeeping jobs.  
Another challenge facing women in the employment sector is the gender pay gap, which refers to the difference in pay 
between men and women for doing the same work (Jackman & Lorde 2021). In Barbados, for the year 2022 the gender parity 
indicator for ‘Economic Participation and Opportunity’ decreased due to loss of incomes and inferring that the woman’s 
earned income dropped by a greater proportion than men’s (World Economic Forum, 2022a).   
Despite the above gender issues there are initiatives underway to support women in the employment sector in Barbados. For 
example, the Government of Barbados is placing strong emphasis on facilitating and supporting women entrepreneurship 
and business development as one way of responding to rising levels of unemployment (Government of Barbados - Bureau of 
Gender Affairs, 2021). The Government is also working to promote gender equality in the workplace by implementing policies 
that prevent gender-based violence, and support women in accessing high-paying, high-skill occupations. Additionally, NGOs 
and civil society organizations are working to provide training and support to women seeking employment, particularly in 
traditionally male-dominated industries, to help them achieve economic security and success.  
3.1.5 Gender, Health & GBV 
In comparison to other Caribbean and Latin American countries, Barbados offers fairly good health services to its people and 
has achieved most of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) targets on health. According to WHO Report 2022 the 
government spent approximately 2.9% of its GDP on health service delivery (WHO 2022). As such, the life expectancy at birth 
reflects the high quality of health enjoyed by Barbadians.  
However, despite achieving most of the SDG targets on health, a few challenges remain in accessing health services as 
reported by the World Health Organisation 2022 report; these include reducing HIV incidence rate and improving access to 
universal health. Gender- Based Violence is another ill affecting the Barbadians, with the Royal Barbados Police Force (RBPF) 
receiving more than one report per day in the period 2016-2018, 
3.1.6 Enabling environment considerations 
The most recent comprehensive gender assessment for Barbados was implemented in 2016 for the Caribbean Development 
Bank.  The issues raised in the report were discussed with government counterparts working to establish the BGB and provide 
a useful framing of some key challenges relating to the country’s broader enabling environment from a gender and inclusion 
perspective. That is, while there is no discrimination in terms of seeking healthcare or employment, or participating in politics, 
there exits intrinsic structural barriers that require intentional affirmative action to address. The gender issues that were 
identified in this assessment are listed below:  
Policy and Strategy: The Government of Barbados committed to the implementation of a National Policy on Gender as a major 
pathway for achieving long-term sustainable development for all Barbadians: boys, girls, men and women. This commitment 
is expressed in a number of objectives, targets and strategies outlined in the Medium-Term Growth and Development Strategy 
2013 -2020 as follows:  
Page 104

=== PAGE 109 ===
16     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
Objectives 
• 
To facilitate the formulation and implementation of a National Policy on Gender in keeping with global developments 
and the current policies of government to realize equality and equity for women and men 
• 
To advise government agencies and non-governmental organisations on matters of concern to and affecting women 
and men 
• 
To develop the capacity of the Bureau of Gender Affairs to inform and coordinate policy dialogue on gender issues 
• 
To expand gender awareness, analysis, and training to build capacity within government departments 
• 
To eliminate violence and abuse as a means of control or influence in intimate partner relationships 
Strategies 
• 
Create a gender policy on crime and violence that will challenge existing notions of masculinity rather than placing 
emphasis on socioeconomic or demographic factors for causes of crime and violence 
• 
Create a gender policy on domestic violence to address the power relations between males and females while 
recognizing that a critical component of the attempt to eradicate gender based and domestic violence lies in the 
compilation of data to inform appropriate strategies 
• 
Reduce the sexual division of labour which limits a large number of women to primarily service jobs - equal 
participation of both male and female in all forms of employment and guarantee equal pay for equal work 
• 
Create a virtual space to provide important information on violence against women and a safe place for victims and 
survivors of violence 
• 
Establish a fund to assist victims of domestic violence 
• 
Undertake gender analysis of the activities of government departments to determine their impact on the pursuit of 
SDG 5, society and the achievement of national goals 
• 
Advocate for the disaggregation by sex of statistical data to facilitate the comprehensive analysis of information in 
order to provide accurate and up to date reports on gender and development 
Evidence Based Policy Practice.  In developing appropriate gender policies, it is imperative to have evidence-based decisions. 
Unfortunately, in a number of aspects Barbados does not collect sex disaggregated data, be it in wages, health targets, access 
to land and finances, etc. (CBD 2016) Only when sex disaggregated reporting is institutionalised will the country effectively 
address all gender issues by putting in place evidence-based policies and strategies.  Sex disaggregated data will also 
facilitate and strengthen monitoring and evaluation of gender outcomes.  
Economic activities: Through literature review and engagements with counterparts in Barbados, a number of issues that 
affect women economically were identified.  The issues include: little and no gender budgeting at national level, significant 
occupational and income gaps between women and men, inflexible working arrangements especially for unskilled and 
migrant labour, barriers to entrepreneurship among women and limited access to skills and resources for entrepreneurship 
(CBD,2016). While Barbados has the smallest gender gap among the CARICOM countries, and with high education attainment 
for women, women still are employed at lower rates than men and earn similar or lower wages than men for the same jobs 
Page 105

=== PAGE 110 ===
17     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
(OECS, 2020). A smaller proportion of women own businesses compared to men and these women have limited access to 
financing (UNWomen 2018). 
Social and cultural issues; Women in Barbados, like everywhere else are saddled with care for children and other dependents 
(CBD, 2016). Social and cultural norms that put responsibilities for care in the women’s domain, without affording them the 
necessary support, impact on their ability to earn and to remain in full-time employment. 
4 Sector-level gender considerations 
4.1 WOMEN, GENDER EQUALITY AND ENERGY 
4.1.1 Renewable energy  
Energy is a critical driver of economic growth and renewable energy (RE) in 17particular is considered a key climate change 
mitigation technology that fosters a more sustainable development trajectory. Women, as primary users of energy are key to 
addressing the climate and energy solutions. As caregivers and users of energy to produce food in the home, they are typically 
most vulnerable to climate change and energy crises, costs, and supply interruptions. And, due to a lack of relevant skills 
women across the globe also face challenges in becoming active participants in the renewable energy sector other than being 
end-user customers. In Barbados (CBD, 2018) very few women were and still are, employed in the energy sector and even 
fewer women have enterprises that deal with RE technologies. Morden energy access is important because women from 
households with access to reliable affordable clean energy are more competitive and more easily access opportunities to 
bridge gender gaps through the ability to study, to access information, to use modern appliances and lessen drudgery and 
even engage in productive work. Energy access is therefore pivotal to economic empowerment.  
Accordingly, the GCF developed one of its key result areas as Energy Access and Power Generation. GCF focuses on energy 
generation from renewable sources, energy efficiency and reliable energy transmission, distribution, and storage. This aligns 
with Sustainable Development Goal number 7 (SDG7) which calls for “affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy 
for all” by 2030. Projects under this area look to: generate energy from renewable sources such as wind, solar, geothermal, 
hydro, and sustainable bioenergy; efficiently and reliably transmit, distribute, and store energy; and promote access to clean 
energy in a way that promotes sustainable development and climate resilience while reducing emissions.  
Barbados is highly dependent on the importation of fossil fuels from Trinidad and Tobago thus costing a significant amount 
of the limited forex available to the country. In turn prices for electricity generation and use are generally higher than for 
countries connected to a continental land mass. Since the 2017 hurricanes Irma and Maria, and more recent ones that 
caused excessive damage to the electricity grid system, the government of Barbados has sought to improve the country’s 
energy efficiency and to build a more resilient energy infrastructure. It also sought to expand the use of renewable 
technologies as well as reduce its energy carbon emissions. One of the areas of development is solar and water heaters for 
housing. As alluded to before, these programs face several challenges that slow down the process of transitioning to 
renewable energy (solar, wind, geothermal). The barriers that inhibit fast transition uptake of these technologies include 
funding, skills and research and development.  
Challenges faced with regards barriers to renewable energy uptake.   
• 
Currently, the cost of electricity is too high for the low-income people of Barbados, and this is attributed to importation 
of fossil energy. As a result, many poor households barely afford electricity. If the bulk of electricity can be generated 
locally – more funds can be available to the government for its other programmes.  
Page 106

=== PAGE 111 ===
18     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
• 
There are few women enterprises involved in the renewable energy sector (i.e., technology development and 
marketing) and this is due to lack of knowledge and financial resources. The draft National Gender Policy therefore 
recommends that targeted effort be invested in creating employment opportunities for women in alternative energy 
sectors. 
Recognizing the gender-energy-poverty-nexus in planning and implementing development programs can contribute to 
meaningful results that benefit women and address gender energy vulnerabilities such as those identified by GCF (along with 
capacities for a change) (Table 4-1. GCF Vulnerabilities and Capacities for Change-Energy and Power Generation). 
 
Table 4-1. GCF Vulnerabilities and Capacities for Change-Energy and Power Generation 
Vulnerabilities  
Capacities for Change 
• 
Share of women who are energy entrepreneurs. 
• 
Share of women-headed households without 
clean energy access 
• 
Impacts women are experiencing due to lack of 
renewable energy access. 
 
• 
Roles of women in the energy sector  
• 
Provide incentives for the use of renewable energy and sustainable 
development practices. 
• 
Create/expand employment opportunities for women in all sectors of the 
economy: value added agriculture, alternative energy, new technologies, 
sustainable micro enterprise; 
• 
Share of women in the energy labour market and type of occupation 
• 
Policies and institutional framework to promote gender equality in energy 
/power generation. 
• 
Share of women households with solar heaters and PV panels on their 
rooftops 
 
Opportunities for the Blue Green Bank 
There are opportunities for BGB to increase women benefiting from climate energy initiatives by ensuring that climate 
change programmes target women-headed households as beneficiaries, that women businesses benefit from RE 
technologies, and by providing targeted training to women on technology deployment and maintenance, access to loans 
etc. Women, as main users of energy in the home, are key stakeholders in deploying and developing energy-efficient 
practices and therefore should be included in designing and planning the relevant strategies.  
4.2 WOMEN, GENDER EQUALITY AND WATER SECURITY 
Barbados is ranked as one of the most water-stressed countries in the world and, therefore, has a pressing need to conserve 
freshwater. Furthermore, frequent drought conditions in the last decade plus ageing water infrastructure have continued 
exacerbated water unavailability, increasing the cost of the water utility (OCHA, 2022). Isaacs, et. Al. 2017, carried out a 
comprehensive gender assessment of the issue as part of their PhD Thesis. In study found that, while Barbados has a 97% 
potable water coverage (Isaacs et al, 2017) it is reported to have experienced unprecedented water interruptions – at times 
affecting the population. In such situations, the gendered differences are highlighted and those in vulnerable groups suffer 
disproportionately. This was made visible during the 2018-2020 drought, where anecdotal evidence pointed strongly to the 
fact that the most significant impacts were felt by female-headed houses with children and other vulnerable groups such as 
the elderly. Impacts included: increased household costs for basic necessities, challenges with food preparation, poor 
sanitation, physical and psychological stress and job insecurity. (Government of Barbados - Bureau of Gender Affairs, 2021) 
Water security goes hand-in-hand with equitable access to safe potable water, and the draft National Gender Policy therefore 
advocates for the importance of ensuring equitable access to safe water and sanitary facilities, particularly for densely 
populated communities in disadvantaged areas, which include many female-headed households.  
Page 107

=== PAGE 112 ===
19     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
Water security falls under GCF’s Health, Food and Water Security results area. The GCF’s vision for water security is to secure 
water resilience and water services under conditions of increased climate change impacts. This vision also aligns with the 
Sustainable Development Goals SDG6 and SDG13. The SDG goals indicate that “water security, induced by water scarcity 
supports fast-tracking climate investment into transformational water projects”. The proposed integrated water technologies 
and conservation align well with the integrated housing infrastructure being proposed for the Blue-Green Bank.  
The overriding challenge faced in Barbados is water scarcity on the island due to climate change-induced drought, which 
disproportionately impacts female-headed households and vulnerable communities’ access to safe and reliable water supply. 
The GCF identifies the vulnerabilities and capacities for change as listed in Table 5 below. 
Table 4-2. GCF Vulnerabilities and Capacities for Change - Health Food and Water Security 
Vulnerabilities  
Capacities for Change 
• 
Share and number of women with 
increased exposure to water or health-
related hazards during water outages 
• 
Lack of access to basic services such as 
safe water and improved sanitation 
• 
Roles of women in targeted communities. 
• 
Share of women and men in relevant labour markets and type of occupation. 
• 
Share of women enterprises benefiting from the reliable water supply. 
• 
Number of women-headed households with houses fitted with water efficient 
technologies. 
• 
Policies and institutional framework to address vulnerabilities. 
• 
Equitable access to essential health services, as well as access to safe water 
and sanitary facilities, must be ensured in disadvantaged areas such as densely 
populated communities  
 
Opportunities for the Blue Green Bank 
The BGB targets integration of housing provision, water conservation and renewable energy technologies ensuring 
efficiency and cost recovery. Opportunities lie, in the future, in facilitating finance for water conservation. 
4.3 INFRASTRUCTURE AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT  
Climate resilience is critical for the sustainable development of Barbados, especially in terms of infrastructure, including 
housing. The country is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, such as sea-level rise, increased frequency of 
natural disasters, and more intense weather events, all of which can cause significant damage to infrastructure, particularly 
housing. This can result in the displacement of populations, decreased economic productivity, and increased poverty and 
inequality. 
Housing is an important aspect of climate resilience in Barbados. Adequate and safe housing is a fundamental human right 
and is essential for the health, well-being, and productivity of individuals and communities. Ensuring that housing is climate 
resilient is crucial for protecting people from the impacts of climate change, such as the increased risk of flooding and damage 
from hurricanes and storms. 
Climate-resilient housing in Barbados can take several forms, such as elevating homes to higher ground, constructing homes 
with reinforced concrete and strong roofs, and designing homes with features that allow for natural ventilation and light. The 
government, in partnership with NGOs and private sector organizations, can also play a role in promoting and financing the 
construction of climate-resilient housing, through programs and incentives that encourage the adoption of best practices in 
building design and construction. 
Page 108

=== PAGE 113 ===
20     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
In addition to protecting residents from the impacts of climate change, climate-resilient housing can also provide long-term 
economic benefits. By reducing the risk of damage to homes, residents can save money on repairs and reconstruction after 
natural disasters. This can help to maintain the economic productivity of individuals and communities and promote 
sustainable economic growth in Barbados. 
Between 2020 and 2021, Barbados experienced infrastructure damage. Therefore, in responding to these climate hazards 
and in line with climate commitments the government of Barbados intends to provide funding for hurricane-resilient housing 
which is integrated into renewable energy and water efficient systems. 
Due to its critical role in climate adaptation and mitigation, Infrastructure and built environment are one of the GCF’s 8 key 
result areas. The goals for this results area are advanced across four “transition” areas, namely: i) built environment ii) energy 
and industry, iii) human security, livelihoods, and wellbeing and iv) land use, forests and ecosystems. GCF aims to build new 
infrastructure and retrofit old traditional infrastructure to climate-proof it.  
This results area aligns with SD 9 “Industry, innovation and infrastructure” and is also linked to SDG 11 “Sustainable cities 
and communities”, SDG 6 “Clean water and sanitation” and SDG 7 “Affordable and clean energy”. Due to its cross-sectoral 
nature, it is apparent that the provision of climate-resilient infrastructure has huge potential in addressing climate change 
and in building climate-resilient communities in the case of Barbados. And since climate-induced disaster events 
disproportionately negatively impact women and the poor, far more than men and the affluent; mainstreaming gender in the 
provision of infrastructure is critical. Moreover, women’s empowerment through ownership of housing infrastructure is also 
flagged as a priority in the draft National Gender Policy. (Government of Barbados - Bureau of Gender Affairs, 2021)  
Examples of vulnerabilities that women and men experience due to conventional infrastructure that is not climate resilient 
are outlined in Table 6. 
The main challenges faced in Barbados with regards to infrastructure are:  
• 
Aging infrastructure, which is not climate resilient4,  
• 
Inability by low-income households (60% of which are female-headed) to own houses due to financial constraints to 
secure home loans,  
• 
Addressing the issue of over 90% hotel rooms that are located within the coastline climate risky zone, which has a 
direct knock-on effect for women given the tourism industry employs a large proportion of low-income workers, many 
of whom are women  
• 
Lack of financing for climate resilient infrastructure, particularly homes for the low-income and the elderly. 
 
Table 4-3. GCF Vulnerabilities and Capacities for Change-Infrastructure and the Built Environment 
Vulnerabilities  
Capacities for Change 
Share and number of women lacking access to 
climate-resistant housing and/or infrastructure 
(efficient water technologies, water heating systems, 
renewable energy access, etc.) 
 
• 
Roles of women in the design and maintenance of infrastructure and the 
built environment 
• 
Share of women and men in relevant labour markets and type of 
occupation. 
• 
Share of women-headed households assisted with home loans to 
acquire green climate housing. 
 
4 Damage to infrastructure affects women and the poor mostly 
Page 109

=== PAGE 114 ===
21     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
• 
Policies and institutional framework to promote equal access to climate-
resilient infrastructure. 
Share of low-income heads of households who would 
lose jobs due to location and quality of employer 
infrastructure (largely hotels); as an aftermath of 
climate disasters 
• 
Policies and building guidelines that prohibit construction in climate 
sensitive zones 
• 
Policies and codes that enforce construction of climate resilient 
infrastructure 
• 
Adequate insurance policies to cover job losses, and home losses to 
climate change. 
 
Opportunities for the Blue Green Bank 
• 
The BGG targets and facilitates access to climate-resilient housing at affordable rates through below-market loans that have a 
quota system to ensure that women and other vulnerable groups benefit equally.  
• 
The BGB and intermediary partners to establish finance packages and lending criteria and processes that are gender responsive 
and user friendly, to ensure low-income groups and women understand the system and easily apply for loans.  
• 
The FIT program to fully integrate with the BGB climate financing to ensure that earnings from solar energy are sufficient to meet 
bank home loans repayment.   
• 
The establishment of a robust insurance scheme to cover loans afforded to climate finance beneficiaries.  
 
5 Gender analysis 
5.1 OVERARCHING CHALLENGES IDENTIFIED FROM THE COUNTRY AND SECTOR 
ASSESSMENTS  
The Table 7 below serves as a summary of some of the most pressing gender issues in Barbados. Interventions proposed in 
the table are not necessarily within BGB’s scope of influence/impact but serve as useful contextual considerations when 
thinking about what gender-specific commitments and actions should be taken by BGB. The tables that follow provide sector 
specific challenges and potential interventions that were considered when developing the project’s Gender Action Plan. 
Table 5-1. Overarching Issues Affecting Women and Potential Interventions for Barbados 
Key Challenge affecting Gender  
Possible Cause  
Potential Intervention 
High vulnerability to climate impacts due to 
economic downturns 
 
▪ 
Limited 
opportunities 
for 
income 
generating projects. 
▪ 
Limited social support 
▪ 
Lack of financial loan resources for the 
low income (both men and women) 
▪ 
Create opportunities for financing the 
low-income 
groups, 
particularly 
women. 
▪ 
Support women entrepreneurship 
Unacceptable levels of Gender Based 
Violence 
▪ 
Poverty and vulnerability 
▪ 
Limited awareness of the impacts, 
both men and women 
▪ 
Limited safe shelters for victims 
▪ 
Community 
awareness 
and 
empowerment women 
▪ 
Programmes targeted at men and 
boys. 
▪ 
Establishment of safe housing for 
victims of GBV 
Page 110

=== PAGE 115 ===
22     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
Few 
women 
represented 
in 
top 
management jobs 
▪ 
Systematic stereotyping in the private 
sector 
▪ 
Gender neutral policies and plans 
▪ 
Inadequate family support systems at 
the 
workplace 
to 
push 
women 
productivity 
▪ 
Incentivise private firms to employ 
women and promote women to top 
position. 
▪ 
Give tax breaks for on-the-job training 
targeting women.  
▪ 
Government interventions, such as 
quota systems 
▪ 
Provision of childcare and parental 
care legislation 
▪ 
Increase affordable day care facilities 
and hours of operation 
Wage gap between men and women in 
same jobs 
▪ 
Inadequate monitoring of wages and 
implementation 
of 
legislation 
determining domestic pay or minimum 
wage  
▪ 
To enact sex disaggregated data 
reporting requirement on wages for all 
firms. 
Limited access to reproductive health for 
girls and women 
▪ 
Impacts are HIV risk, early marriages 
and in some cases large family size 
▪ 
Increase 
efforts 
to 
avail 
health 
services for reproductive health 
  
Water security 
Table 5-2. Gender issues and potential interventions to attain water security  
Key Challenge affecting Gender  
Possible Cause  
Potential Intervention through the project 
Compromised hygiene due to water 
outages 
▪ 
Inadequate water supply 
▪ 
Ensuring reliable water supply through rainwater 
harvesting and water-efficient technologies 
Lack of fair distribution of service among 
the population with the poor being 
disadvantaged (poor maintenance and 
outages) 
▪ 
Gender-neutral planning by 
BWA 
 
▪ 
Maintenance and distribution to be gender 
sensitive and planned to respond to the needs of 
specific groups, including the most vulnerable 
Lack of new initiatives and programmes 
that address technological development in 
water management and conservation  
▪ 
Limited water efficient 
technologies available 
▪ 
Possibly lack of motivation to 
conserve water 
▪ 
Facilitating the financing of a water conservation 
programme  
 
 Renewable energy 
Table 5-3. Gender issues and potential interventions for renewable energy 
Key Challenge affecting Gender  
Possible Cause  
Potential Intervention by the project 
Few women- led enterprises in the RE sector 
▪ 
Limited chances to capitalize 
on the enterprises. 
▪ 
Gender-blind policies in the 
climate financing partners 
▪ 
Encouraging intermediaries to target women led 
Enterprises and creating financing packages to 
meet women entrepreneurship needs 
Few women taking up training in the 
deployment of RE technologies  
▪ 
Stereotypes on the traditional 
jobs for women 
▪ 
Gender blind policies in 
technical colleges or training 
centres 
▪ 
Ensuring that BGB and intermediary partners 
address gender biases by putting in place 
gender policy and guidelines.   
▪ 
Collecting sex disaggregated data of borrowers. 
 
 Infrastructure and built environment 
Table 5-4. Gender issues and potential interventions in the infrastructure and built environment 
Key Challenge affecting Gender  
Possible Cause  
Potential Intervention by the Project 
Few women in the construction and design 
industry 
▪ 
Women peer pressured into 
traditional 
/ 
stereotypical 
jobs. Lack of effort to market 
the field for women  
▪ 
Encouraging 
intermediaries 
to 
incentivise 
women to take up skills training by providing an 
enabling work environment.  
 
Low-income groups unable to secure home 
loans 
▪ 
Banks risk averse 
▪ 
Low-income Barbadians lack 
collateral 
▪ 
Work with intermediaries that structure loans to 
target the lending to low-income borrowers, 
particularly women and the vulnerable 
▪ 
The intermediary partners will provide support for 
applicants to ensure there is financial literacy 
and understanding of available loan packages 
Page 111

=== PAGE 116 ===
23     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
Available housing is not climate resilient 
▪ 
Traditional buildings were not 
designed to be resilient to 
current climate impacts 
▪ 
Provision of climate-resilient housing upgrades 
and new builds. 
5.2 RECOMMENDATIONS TO REDUCE GENDER GAPS  
This gender assessment acknowledges the success and efforts that the Government of Barbados has made to reach gender 
parity in all its economic and development sectors. Some areas will continue to need improvement through the 
implementation of policies, initiatives, and monitoring. These areas include the gender pay gap, domestic and work security 
and violence against women (UN Women, 2022). The recommendations given in this report are within the scope of the BGB 
project.  
It is, therefore, recommended that the BGB project ensures that climate finance is accessible by all including the vulnerable 
and women-headed households who are most in need of homes – which in turn will reduce vulnerability to climate change.  
To avoid biases and ensure that the targeted beneficiaries apply and obtain the loans, the BGB will train their staff in gender 
mainstreaming, develop an internal gender policy and guidelines to support gender equality, and as well as develop 
appropriate financing packages.  The comprehensive list of actions that will support this recommendation is listed below.  
The Blue Green Bank and its staff must have an appreciation of gender mainstreaming and what it entails. For this to happen 
the BGB needs to: 
• 
Create a position for a gender specialist (if not in place already- recruit one) to assist in implementing the GAP and 
ensuring that the BGB and intermediaries have the necessary processes in place. 
• 
Carry out sector-based gender assessments to identify the key barriers to securing finance and use these findings to 
guide how inclusive financing packages are designed and marketed. 
• 
Develop an evidence-based gender policy for staff and intermediary partners. 
• 
Develop as part of the organisation’s code of conduct a Sexual Exploitation Abuse and Harassment Policy for BGB and 
its partner programmes. 
• 
Ensures that all its staff attend gender training /workshops so that there is an understanding and appreciation of the 
importance of reducing the gender gap in climate finance. 
• 
Develop and adopt a gender screening tool that all partners supported by the BGB have to satisfy to obtain finances; 
• 
Agree with the partners to put in place gender-responsive loan/investment products that target both men and women 
equally – and develop a funding guideline that is gender-responsive.  
• 
Carry out an awareness-building program to give confidence to potential customers who may need to apply for climate 
finance. 
• 
Request partners and borrowers to monitor the uptake of financing and collect sex-disaggregated data to measure if 
progress is being made to reduce the gender gap. 
• 
Put in place customer surveys and complaints mechanisms that allow for learning and improvement, and package and 
distribute these lessons from the programme to be used as a basis for adjusting and improvements to services.  
• 
Carry out a mid-term evaluation of the programme, using the Gender Action Plan.  
 
Page 112

=== PAGE 117 ===
6 Gender action plan 
Impact: The vulnerable groups in Barbados (the low-income- Women and men) have an opportunity to own their own houses by accessing affordable home loans that are provided through the 
programme. The resulting climate infrastructure will build climate resilience among the beneficiaries and contribute towards reducing gender gaps.  The beneficiaries will also access renewable 
energy and achieve water security which will improve the health of women and lessen their caregiving burdens.  With additional electricity from FIT the Government of Barbados will save costs 
from importing energy. 
 
Outcome 1: Innovative financial structure operating in Barbados to overcome barriers to climate finance and gender inequalities. The Bank will thus achieve the following gender-responsive 
outcomes: 
1.1 The Blue-Green Bank is established and will weave gender responsiveness into its interventions and systems.  
1.2 Enhanced resilience and improved health for communities, including women and children, through GHG emissions reductions and adaptation measures, relating to both built and 
natural environments. 
1.2 Improved access to clean energy and empowerment of local communities, including women, girls, and vulnerable populations, through renewable energy, energy services, enhanced 
energy efficiency and new technologies. 
1.3 More equitable decision-making between men and women, reductions in gender-based violence, increased access to and control over resources, and economic empowerment of women 
and girls through the GGC’s Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), mandatory project safeguards, stakeholder consultation framework (including expert consultation on 
pressing gender issues, determined on a country-by-country basis), and gender-responsive project design approaches. 
1.4 Strengthened institutional capacity of project owners in the design and delivery of gender-responsive projects, aligned with GCF requirements.  
1.5 Improved livelihoods that enhance the resilience of vulnerable communities, including women and girls, to the negative climate impacts currently affecting the critical system. 
 
Output 1: Develop processes and systems that will enhance gender equity at BGB   
Activities 
Indicator and targets 
Timeline 
Responsibilities 
Budget 
i. Recruit a gender specialist for the programme to oversee the implementation of the 
GAP 
Gender specialist recruited by the time 
the BGB is established  
Prior to project 
implementation 
AE- Human 
Resources  
(Salary TBD) 
ii. Dedicate necessary human and financial resources to strengthen and evolve the 
BGB’s capacity related to gender equality knowledge management, learning, and 
implementation through: 
A. 
the appointment of a dedicated gender resource to oversee all gender-related 
activities; and  
B. 
the ad hoc appointment of gender specialists with in-country and sector-specific 
expertise, as needed on a project-by-project basis. 
Line items are included in the annual 
budgets to cover processes and activities 
that are project-specific and note the 
appointment of a gender expert, as 
required.  
Year 1 
 
Report: Quarterly 
and annually  
Financial Officer and 
Human Resources  
 
BGB budget 
iii. Include gender-responsive elements in the eligibility criteria and post-evaluation 
criteria  
100% of projects and proposals use the 
gender criteria prior to submission to the 
BGB 
Year 1 
Gender specialist 
and BGB 
management team 
BGB budget 
iv. Develop mechanisms to assess gender impacts of projects submitted by 
intermediaries but also to internally monitor, report and verify gender impacts and 
other co-benefits project levels 
Mechanisms and guidelines in place 
Regular reports submitted by 
intermediaries 
Year 1 
Gender Specialist 
BGB Budget 
Page 113

=== PAGE 118 ===
v. Ensure the representation of women in the Board and/or key decision-making and 
advisory bodies of the BGB 
Percentage of women represented in the 
Board 
Management 
of 
the 
BGB 
approaches 50% (based on senior 
management status in the country) 
 
Ongoing basis  
Chief Executive 
Officer and Human 
Resources 
 
BGB Budget 
vi. Develop a BGB Gender Policy and training kit that aids in understanding the nexus 
between gender and climate finance  
Human resources equipped to 
implement.  
BGB Gender Policy and training manual 
developed   
Within the first 6 
months 
Gender specialists 
and Human 
resources  
 
BGB budget 
vii. 
Develop a Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment Policy (including 
complaint procedures)  
BGB- SEAH policy and codes of conduct 
developed 
Within the first 6 
months 
Gender specialist 
 
BGB Budget 
viii. 
Develop a brief, targeted market study to determine the gender landscape in 
Barbados at the time of implementation including understanding the following:  
• 
Identify women’s barriers to access finance about the BGB’s expected sectors 
of operations in its first five years.  
• 
Identify opportunities to engage in policy dialogue activities to address issues 
restricting women’s ability to adopt climate technologies financed under the 
programme, such as access to finance, lack of access to collateral etc. 
• 
Identify opportunities to market and raise awareness of climate finance 
opportunities. 
• 
Identify capacity needs for the BGB, the intermediaries and the borrowers. 
Using the evidence gathered develop a gender policy for BGB   
Developed market studies for internal 
and external publications.  
 
Identified women’s needs and priorities to 
use for developing finance packages 
Year 1 
Gender Specialist 
and consultant 
$10000.00 
  
Output 2: Project-level gender-focused assessments and action plans for financed activities (either directly or indirectly) by BGB are developed  
Activities 
Indicators and target 
Timeline 
Responsibility 
Budget 
I. The BGB will ensure that prior to finance being issued by an 
intermediary or directly from the BGB, a robust gender assessment and 
action plan are developed by the project owner. The gender assessment 
must contain the following aspects before it’s considered complete: 
• 
Women’s organisations working on gender issues in that sector 
are identified and engaged. 
• 
Gender-related baseline data specific to the sector is 
established. 
• 
Project alignment with / support of the country’s SDG, NDC and 
policy gender-related commitments. 
• 
Sector-specific gender vulnerability(ies) are identified. 
At least 2 NGOs working on gender 
identified for partnership and 
upscaling of BGB interventions 
 
Baseline data available for 
benchmarking progress 
 
Revised GAP activities to address 
vulnerabilities and align with SDGs 
In the first year 
 
Reporting in 
the quarterly 
report to GCF 
Project Owner  
 
Gender Specialist  
AE to review the reporting and data 
produced 
Intermediary partners 
 
 
$60000 
Page 114

=== PAGE 119 ===
• 
Opportunities/solutions for the project to address these 
vulnerabilities are well-defined and adequately integrated into 
the project design and delivery processes. 
ii. Establish a gender-responsive environment for staff and borrowers: 
• 
Create financial packages that reflect gender considerations. 
• 
Disseminate materials, use media, community workshops or 
other appropriate means. 
• 
An operating budget is allotted to implement the action plan 
and analyses required every year 
• 
Stakeholder engagement or consultations were undertaken 
and informed the design of the project/programme. 
Guidelines that address gender are in 
place. 
 
Number of people reached during 
dissemination activities and 
indicating number of women and 
other vulnerable groups- Report. 
 
No enquiries from potential borrowers  
 
By the end of 
the first year 
of operation 
Budget on a 
rolling basis 
BGB to appoint GFP 
BGB 
budget 
for 
workshops 
and 
advertisements 
Output 3: Capacity building and knowledge generation  
Output 3a: Capacity building of the intermediary partners’ staff and ensure that they have gender-responsive tools and gender-transformative systems/structures to enable borrowers, both men 
and women to access the climate funds 
I. Produce a gender training manual for staff and train them in gender 
mainstreaming.  
ii. During the early days of operation carry out weekly /monthly sessions 
to discuss progress, and lessons learned from implementing the gender 
programme  
Number of staff trained in line with the 
gender training module.  
 
Number 
of 
seminars 
for 
senior 
management to promote women’s 
access to climate funds. 
 
Databases created that include the 
number and type of programme sub-
borrowers (disaggregated by gender; 
loan 
amount; 
sector; 
residential/commercial use)  
On a rolling 
basis, 
where 
applicable, as 
sub-projects 
come through  
Gender Specialist  
BGB Budget 
Output 3b: Lessons learnt, case studies and product improved based on issues identified. Disseminate information on new products for the benefit of borrowers and programme upscaling 
ix. Document lessons and outcomes through reports or staff briefs 
compiling and presenting lessons learnt and challenges and areas of 
success. 
• 
Carry out customer service surveys to assess and address 
issues.  
• 
Implement periodic staff feedback on new products and 
efficacy. 
• 
Document frequent complaints/challenges and find ways of 
addressing these.   
 
Customer surveys are carried out and 
compiled every month. 
A 
register 
of 
complaints 
was 
maintained. 
Number of staff meetings that discuss 
the rollout of products and focusing on 
gender aspects. 
 
During the first 
2 years 
Gender Specialist  
Intermediary 
partners 
BGB Budget 
ii. Carry out a midterm project evaluation to assess progress in 
implementing the Gap and achieving the outcomes 
Evaluation reports showing trends and 
recommendations  
End of 2 years 
BGB management 
$50000 
  
 
Page 115

=== PAGE 120 ===
7 References 
Barbados Integrated Government, 2023. Demographics https://www.gov.bb/Visit-Barbados/demographics 
Bovel, D.S 2018. "Factors Deterring Male Enrolment in Higher Education in Barbados" (2018). Walden Dissertations and 
Doctoral Studies. 5982. https://scholarworks.waldenu.edu/dissertations/5982  
Cashmen, A; Cumberbatch, J & Moore W.R, 2012. The effects of climate Change on tourism in small States: Evidence from 
the 
Barbados 
case. 
August 
2012. 
Tourism 
Review 67(3):17-29 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/241560094_The_effects_of_climate_change_on_tourism_in_small_states_
Evidence_from_the_Barbados_case 
Caribbean 
Development 
Bank, 
2016, 
Barbados 
Gender 
Assessment 
www.caribank.org/wp- 
content/uploads/.../CountryGenderAssessmentBarbados.pdf 
Government of Barbados (GoB) 2021 
https://reports.weforum.org/global-gender-gap-report-2016/economies/#economy=BRB.      
 
International Labour Organization, 2018. Gender at Work in the Caribbean. The Synthesis report – A summation of the 
findings of a five-country study and review. https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---americas/---ro-lima/---sro-
port_of_spain/documents/publication/wcms_651944.pdf 
International Monitory Fund (IMF) 2022. Barbados Country Report 2022/176. Seventh Review Under the Extended Fund 
Facility Arrangement. 
https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/journals/002/2022/176/article-A001-en.xml 
Isaacs, W. Prouty, C. & Trotz M 2018. Gender analysis for a Water Sector Resilience Nexus for Sustainability in Barbados. A 
GCF Gender Document PF060. https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/document/gender-assessment-fp060-
ccccc-barbados.pdf 
Jackman, M & Lorde, K (2021): Gaps in the (paid) work hours of male and female heads of households: empirical evidence 
from Barbados, International Journal of Manpower, ISSN 0143-7720, Emerald Publishing, Bingley, Vol. 42, Iss. 7, pp. 1321-
1337. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJM-12-2019-0538  
Office 
of 
the 
Coordination 
of 
Humanitarian 
Affairs 
(OCHA), 
2022. 
Barbados 
Country 
Profile. 
https://reliefweb.int/report/barbados/barbados-country-profile-may-2022 
OECD 
2019. 
Barbados 
Social 
Institutions 
and 
Gender 
Index. 
https://www.genderindex.org/wp-
content/uploads/files/datasheets/2019/BB.pdf 
PopulationStat, 2023. Barbados population. World Statistical Data. https://populationstat.com/barbados/ 
SALISES (2012). Barbados Country Assessment of Living Conditions: Volume 1. Sir Arthur Lewis Institute of Social and 
Economic Studies. Full report available at: http://www.caribank.org/uploads/2012/12/Barbados-CALC-Volume-1-
MainReport-FINAL-Dec- 2012.pdf 
UNESCO Institute of Statistics 2021. Barbados Education and Literacy. https://uis.unesco.org/en/country/bb 
Page 116

=== PAGE 121 ===
28     Blue Green Bank | Green Climate Fund Proposal 
UNFCC Report 2021. Government of Barbados, 2021 Update of the first Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC). 
Obligations under the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. 
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-
06/2021%20Barbados%20NDC%20update%20-%2021%20July%202021.pdf 
United Nations Development Program (UNDP), 2022. Human Development Report 2021/2022: Uncertain Times, Unsettled 
Lives: Shaping Our Future in a Transforming World. Full report downloaded https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country-
Profiles/MPI/BRB.pdf at https://hdr.undp.org/system/files/documents/global-report-document/hdr2021-22pdf_1.pdf    
United Nations Development Program (UNDP) 2022. Multi-Dimensional Poverty Index. Briefing Note for Countries on the 
2022 Multidimensional Index. Barbados. https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country-Profiles/MPI/BRB.pdf 
UN Women, 2022. Barbados. Country Summary on Gender Progress. https://data.unwomen.org/country/barbados  
UN Women , 2018. A gender analysis of the labour Force Data and Policy Frameworks in Six CARICOM Member 
States. Status of Women and men report. 
US Department of State Report 2022. Investment Climate Statements: Barbados https://www.state.gov/reports/2022-
investment-climate-statements/barbados/ 
US 
Department 
of 
State, 
2016, 
Barbados 
Human 
Rights 
Report. 
https://www.state.gov/documents/organization/265774.pdf  
USAID 
2022, 
USAID 
Data 
Services. 
Barbados 
Country 
Profile. 
https://s3.amazonaws.com/files.devdata.devtechlab.com/FactSheets/barbados.pdf 
USAID 2023. Barbados Quick Look  https://idea.usaid.gov/cd/barbados/economy 
WORLD 
BANK 
2023 
The 
World 
Bank 
Data 
Barbados 
GDP 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?locations=BB 
World Bank 2021. Barbados. Climate Change Knowledge Portal. For Development Practitioners and Policy Makers. 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/barbados/vulnerability 
World Bank Data, 2021. Government expenditure on education, total (% of Government expenditure) Barbados. 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.XPD.TOTL.GB.ZS?locations=BB 
World 
Economic 
Forum 
2022a. 
Global 
Gender 
Gap 
Report 
2022. 
Insight 
Report. 
https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2022.pdf 
World Economic Forum, 2022. Explainer: How Gender inequality and Climate Change are interconnected. (Article originally 
published by UN Women). https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/06/explainer-how-gender-inequality-and-climate-
change-are-interconnected 
World Health Organisation, 2022. Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights. Infographics Snapshot. Barbados 2021. 
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/349228/WHO-SRH-21.35-eng.pdf 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2015). Country Profiles: Barbados. http://www.who.int/countries/brb/en/. 
Page 117
